In our last lecture, we had begun to address the issue of strategic bombing, and particularly
a shift in American strategic thinking with regard to air power in the assault on Japan
in the spring and summer of 1945, the movement away from what the Americans had called daylight
precision bombing to a campaign of night time area raids.
What I'd like to do in this lecture is to examine the Allied bombing policy during
the war, looking at largely the European case, to talk about the experience of the air war
in Europe and what it meant both to be on the receiving end and also in the planes flying
at 20,000 feet during the course of the Second World War.
It was air power, but particularly strategic bombing that transformed the nature of war
between 1939 and 1945 and rendered the Second World War so terrifyingly different from its
predecessors.
In the First World War, the vast and grisly carnage had been confined largely to the
front, to the soldiers, fortresses and trenches strung along no man's land and to the sailors
and their ships at sea.
The use of air power to smash an enemy's capacity to wage war, to demolish its industrial base,
its energy sources, its communications network, its system of transportation, and ultimately
the will of its people to resist was a radically new departure for military planners on the
eve of the Second World War, and it fundamentally altered the nature of warfare, not simply
in this war, but for all modern war.
Although Hitler, as we've seen, had used the threat of colossal air offensives against
civilian targets for diplomatic advantages in the 1930s, the Luftwaffe was neither equipped
nor trained for such a mission.
Germany, for Germany, air strategy remained tied to land operations and was dominated
by the army.
It was a strategy that served the Wehrmacht well in its Blitzkrieg stage of war in 1939
through 1941, but its narrow focus would come back to haunt German air planners as the conflict
progressed and Germany confronted powers whose air doctrine was quite different.
Among the major powers, only Great Britain in the United States adopted a broad view
of air power which placed strategic bombing rather than tactical bombing at its center.
Political as well as military factors weighed heavily in the decision of both countries.
In Britain, a commitment to a general conception of air doctrine was an alternative to a large
land army which the British did not have in the 1930s and didn't feel they could afford.
Unlike Chamberlain, Neville Chamberlain, who in 1937-1938 had lobbied for international
agreements to actually banish bombing, Winston Churchill had early on shown himself to be
an enthusiastic supporter of Britain's strategic bombing program.
Churchill couldn't find language bloodthirsty enough to satisfy him when it came to talking
about bombing, especially in these early stages of the war when this was the only offensive
option open to the British.
In the United States, the concept of strategic bombing had been worked out in the Army Air
Corps tactical school during the 1930s and would guide its operations during the entire
Second World War.
Their army air corps strategist developed the doctrine that came to be known as high altitude
daylight strategic bombing.
It was a concept based on the premise that a massive fleet of heavy bombers, big four-engine
planes with high-tech aiming devices, this would be the northern bomb site, and flying
at altitudes above effective enemy anti-aircraft fire, that is above 20,000 feet, could identify
and then destroy carefully selected strategic military and industrial targets.
This was the idea.
The concept offered Franklin Roosevelt a politically attractive prospect of American involvement
in the war without heavy casualties.
This is always the lure of air power.
And it was embodied in what came to be known as AWPD-1, Air War Plans Department 1, a statement
of American air power at the very outset of the war.
The plan called for a general air strategy that would not only, and I quote, provide
for the close and direct air support of the surface forces in the invasion of the continent,
meaning Europe, and for major land campaigns thereafter, and a strategic defense against
Japan and the Pacific, but also to conduct a sustained and unremitting air offensive
against Germany and Italy to destroy their will and their capacity to continue the war.
Air planners in the United States actually hoped that this air offensive, quote, might
make an invasion of the continent unnecessary, close quote.
This was always the argument that would be put forward by Hap Arnold, the head of the
Army Air Forces, by major American air planners as well as bomber Harris of the RAF, give
us enough material, give us the priorities, and we will make a land operation an actual
invasion of Europe, not to mention Japan, unnecessary.
This Air Wars Planned Division 1 was replaced after Pearl Harbor with a new document, but
still with renewed emphasis on establishing complete air ascendancy over the enemy as
a prelude to close support operations.
But the United States, like Great Britain, entered the Second World War with a commitment
to the concept of strategic bombing.
The RAF would be the first to test the theory.
During 1940, RAF bomber command attempted daylight bombing of the Ruhr and other industrial
and military targets in Germany on a very limited scale, but daylight operations were
quickly abandoned because it was apparent that the bombers simply could not defend themselves
against either German fighters or against anti-aircraft fire.
In addition, the equipment and technology proved inadequate to the task.
Bombing was carried out in 1940 and 1941 with smaller two-engine planes, the Stirlings,
with very limited bomb loads, and navigational problems were really paramount.
It quickly became apparent to virtually everyone in the command structure that the theory of
strategic bombing clearly outran the RAF's ability to execute it.
This disturbing fact was driven home in August of 1941 when a committee headed by a man
named D. M. Butt issued a report on the performance of bomber command against targets in France
and Germany during the preceding two months.
It did not make happy reading for Churchill or the head of the British Air Arm.
The findings of his committee came as a shock.
Commissioned by Lord Cherwell, Churchill's science advisor, this independent report found
that on any given night, one-third of all attacking aircraft failed to bomb the primary
target third.
Of the remaining two-thirds, only one in three had come within five miles of the aiming point.
On moonlit nights, two of five aircraft bombed within five miles of the aiming point, but
on the far more frequent moonless nights, especially in northern Europe with cloud cover, the ratio
fell to one in fifteen.
The problem wasn't so much one of aiming.
The problem was of navigation.
The crew simply couldn't find the targets.
In addition, the shift to nighttime bombing, which had been in part to get away from the
heavy casualties taken by the RAF in the daytime, didn't solve that problem either.
Losses remained extremely high.
There was one aircraft lost for every ten tons of bombs dropped.
The entire front line of bomber command had been wiped out statistically speaking in the
last four months of the war before the report.
Clearly, something had to be done, and that something was a shift in bombing policy for
the British that came in February of 1942 before the United States had really had a chance
to enter the war in Europe.
A new radar navigational aid had been developed to help the bombers find their way to the
target.
It was crude, but it was an improvement.
It was called GGEE.
But also important technologically was the emergence of the new giant four-engine bombers,
especially the Lancasters.
They were capable of delivering a bomb load of 14,000 pounds.
With the advent of this new radar equipment, it became possible to send the entire bomber
force along the same route, concentrated in both time and space.
It was a great improvement for bombing over the earlier freelance approach in which the
planes were found their way to the target, the individual navigators doing the work,
and hopefully arriving more or less on schedule.
Now a bomber stream could be sent, a bomber stream which was much better for delivering
bombs to the target, but it was also, quite obviously, hardly a way to provide a tighter
close formation such as the Americans would later employ.
Thus rather than abandoning strategic bombing, the RAF merely refined its approach.
The 1942 also brought a very important shift in targeting as well.
The new directive indicated that targets for future operations for the RAF were to be Germany's
large industrial cities.
Though no group commanders would miss the point, Air Minister Sir Charles Portal explained
it to them in a memo that read, quote, reference the new bombing directive.
I suppose it is clear that the aiming points are to be the built-up areas, not for instance
the dockyards or aircraft factories.
This must be made clear if it is not already understood, close quote.
The RAF, in other words, had decided to embark upon a strategy of area bombing.
It was no longer going to be a matter of trying to pinpoint a military or industrial objective
but area bombing.
Just a month later, in March of 1942, a new report elaborated that strategic decision
and provided a means of measuring bomber command success.
The RAF in 1942 would swing over to a new way of evaluating what was a successful raid
and what wasn't.
They came up with a formula, a formula that for every X square miles of urban landscape
laid waste, Y number of Germans would be left homeless.
The point, as bomber command put it, was to dehouse the German working class.
This is the term that was used to dehouse them, to destroy urban landscape.
By concentrating on cities of over 100,000 population, large targets that would be easier
to find and to hit, over a third of the German population could be left homeless.
From 1942 until early 1944, bomber command would measure its success by acres of built
up area destroyed, a correlation between acres of concentrated urban devastation and industrial
man hours lost.
In February of 1944, however, the RAF went over to a new formula, a different one.
It was no longer to be acres that were to be measured, but rather a new labor target
and would replace the area target.
Success would henceforth be measured by a formula which estimated the number of German
workers killed per raid.
So the point, we're not talking now about factories, we're really, by February 1944,
bomber command is talking about estimating the number of German workers killed.
The man who would execute this policy was the new CO of bomber command, Arthur Harris,
who would become the leading champion of area bombing.
During the spring and summer of 1942, Harris gave a terrible hint of what was in store for
the Germans when he launched three monster raids on German cities, using every available
aircraft and all combat crews, trainees and structures, as well as anything that would
fly in order to be able to announce that 1,000 planes had raided a German city.
On May 30th, 1942, 1,000 planes bombed Cologne, 900% to Essen, 1,000 to Bremen in early June.
Harris couldn't sustain these sort of numbers in some ways, I'm not saying they were publicity
stunt, but it was clearly there was a propaganda element in this as well as a serious military
objective.
He couldn't sustain these sort of numbers and subsequent RAF raids would be lighter,
but he certainly had made his point, not only to the Germans, but to the English public
and to the other services, who were very unhappy at this time about the high percentage of
the war budget that bomber command claimed.
There was about a third of the entire British war budget was now being claimed by bomber
command.
But there were still terrific problems.
The radar was reasonably good navigational aid, but it certainly wasn't much of an aiming
device for bombing.
The Germans, meanwhile, had developed jamming devices to frustrate English radar, and advances
in German night fighter defense also raised bomber commands losses throughout the summer
to above the 4% rate, which Harris considered acceptable.
While the RAF was struggling in the summer of 1942 with these problems, the United States
entered the air war in Europe.
The Americans came with their own theories of strategic bombing, and the 8th Air Force
became operational in the European Theater of Operations.
This was the unit charged with executing American strategic bombing policy, and the commander
was General Carl Spotz, 8th who commanded the 8th Air Force, 8th bomber command was
led by General Ira Aker.
During the course of 1943, Aker would assume command of the 8th, and Spotz would then move
on to be the head of all US Army Air Forces in Europe.
Both men were avidly committed to the concept of strategic bombing, but with a major difference
in their approach from the British counterparts.
Both of these men were eager to put American ideas of daylight, precision bombing into practice
to identify key industrial and military bottlenecks, and using the sophisticated Norden bombsite
to destroy those targets.
In other words, they were not at all convinced by Harris' commitment to nighttime area raids,
which killed civilians without, they believe, delivering a decisive blow to German industrial
targets.
The buildup of American strategic presence was slow, and there were a lot of conflicting
priorities just as the 8th Air Force began to build up crews, to get aircraft arriving
to have the facilities in England.
Operation Torch came along, the intervention of the Mediterranean Campaign, and so the
most experienced crews, aircraft technicians and so on were moved off to North Africa to
be involved in the raids there.
The first mission flown by the 8th Air Force had been on August 17, 1942, but by early
1943, thanks to Operation Torch, the 8th Air Force still had fewer than 100 operational
heavy bombers, this at a time when the British were already launching these big thousand
plane raids.
At Casablanca in early 1943, Churchill, the Allied High Command, agreed on what was called
a combined bomber offensive.
There was a lot of pressure on the Americans at the end of 1942.
Raids hadn't gone very well, we didn't have many planes up, the weather was bad.
It's one thing to talk about daylight precision bombing, if what you're doing is bombing
in Alamogordo, New Mexico, or out in Arizona, a whole other matter, if what you're trying
to do is define targets in Northern Europe, which tends to be cloudy, the weather is, even
in a good spell, is not really conducive to this kind of thing.
The Americans were under great pressure to shift their priorities, to swing over as part
of the RAF's nighttime bombing campaign.
The Americans resisted, acre made a plea, particularly to Churchill, and wrote up a
look at Casablanca in which he argued, well, what we need to do is let the RAF continue
to bomb at night, we'll bomb during the daytime, and what we'll do is bomb around the clock.
And I think Winston Churchill, who never met a phrase that he didn't like, if it was a
well-turned phrase, was really taking this idea of round the clock bombing, this sounded
good, the Germans would get no breathing space, the RAF would bomb them at night, the Americans
in the daytime.
He didn't believe daylight precision bombing would work at all, he thought the Americans
were misguided about this, but this gave acre the opportunity to continue with the American
Air Offensive.
What followed the Casablanca conference into 1943 was something called the Combined Bomber
Offensive.
This was to be, this implied cooperation between the RAF and the Americans, this round the
clock bombing.
But the Combined Bomber Offensive was anything but a combined bomber offensive.
It was not coordinated.
Despite the apparent coordination of air operations between the Americans and the British, there
was no genuine coordination, but instead two distinct efforts.
Bomber Harris routinely and maddeningly ignored all pressure to send his planes against priority
targets and ostensibly agreed upon and instead continued to press against the large urban
centers that he was so fond of attacking that he believed would win the war.
He continued to talk about, in private conversation with the Americans, Harris would call these
things panacea targets.
The Americans believed you had to find, you identify some sort of production bottleneck,
ball bearings, for example.
And then what you do is you hammer away ball bearings production, destroy that, you bring
the whole war machine down.
Harris thought this was absolute nonsense, panacea bombing wouldn't work.
And as a consequence, never really followed raids up.
The American idea was we would go over bombs, Feinfurt, let's say, in August of 1943, the
first big American raid in Germany against ball bearing plants.
The plan was for the RAF to come over at night.
They didn't, they bombed Hamburg instead.
Harris just resisted and Churchill and no one else actually called him on the carpet
for this.
He flagrantly ignored demands that he follow the combined bomber offensive target priorities
and in November of 1943 he claimed that 19 German cities had been totally destroyed by
bomber command.
Then he asserted with typical Harris rhetoric, quote, we can wreck Berlin from one end, from
end to end if the Americans will come in on it.
It'll cost us between four and 500 aircraft, 10 men to a crew.
It'll cost the Germans the war.
But Harris's four month long battle for Berlin, it was called the Battle of Berlin, this big
air offensive launched by the RAF with some American participation, not much.
In November of 1943 and March of 1944 it was a failure by his own standards.
The city was relentlessly bombed, but the factories continued to produce and bomber command lost
1,000 aircraft in this period alone.
It was a disaster.
But the spring of 1944, Harris had largely failed and his repeated promises to break
Germany through saturation bombing and his losses at the Battle of Berlin and in an absolutely
disastrous raid on Nuremberg in March of 1944 when bomber command lost 100 planes in
a single night.
Big, we're not talking small planes, we're talking about these larger bombers, had cost
a great deal of his credibility with both Churchill and with the Allied military planners
who are now getting ready to think about D-Day, Operation Overlord, not convinced by Harris.
Harris and the American air commanders continued literally up to, I think, the day of D-Day
to keep saying, this is unnecessary.
We can do this, we can beat the Germans without an invasion if you'll just give us the priorities.
But it was fairly clear to most objective observers, and Eisenhower was one of them,
that they had oversold their case.
For their part the Americans were in no position to embark upon sustained bombing of Germany
until mid-1943.
The first major raid deep inside of Nazi Germany was the so-called Regensburg-Schweinfurt
raid in August of 1943, and it proved to be a disaster.
Planes made it through, they were not turned back, they bombed the target, hit Schweinfurt,
one set of several groups hitting Schweinfurt, some going on to hit Regensburg and the Messerschmitt
factories there, but 60 B-17s were lost in that raid.
Then in October of 1943 the 8th lost 148 bombers during a single week in a series of raids
against targets in Germany, culminating in a second attack on Schweinfurt on October
14th, in which another 60 planes went down in one single day.
It was the absolute low point of American operations in Europe.
The losses during the first year of the American Air War were indeed staggering.
A tour of duty in the 8th Air Force was set at 25 missions, but between August of 1942
when the 8th began flying its missions, and August 1943 only 30% of 8th Air Force bomber
personnel actually survived 25 missions to the continent.
37% were lost before they had completed 5 missions.
Even in early 1944 the life expectancy of an 8th Air Force bomber crew was 15 missions.
In fact the rate of loss for bomber crews was higher than for any other branch of the
American military in the Second World War, comparable only to losses in the RAF, bomber
command and the German U-boats.
All combat is obviously terrifying, but I think there was something about the Air War
and bomber operations that was particularly unnerving.
On the bomb run, the American idea of strategic bombing was that massive formations would
fly in a very tight formation, not quite wingtip to wingtip, but close.
Huge formations of these bombers moving, trying to bomb, hit precision targets meant that
when one began the bomb run, from what was called the IP, the initial point to the target,
the planes had to fly at a set speed, at a set altitude.
They could not take evasive action, they had to fly directly over the target in exactly
this formation.
What this meant was to fly directly into German flak, which began to be radar guided so that
the Germans as the approaching planes, as the approaching formations were seen, could
lock on, there were different kinds of barrages flying through literally seas of flak, flak
so thick as bomber crews used to say, you could get out and walk on it.
The planes themselves were, for the time, absolutely the cutting edge of technology.
The B-17 flying fortress, the B-24 liberator, were enormously successful aircraft, and
they looked enormous as one stood outside them, but inside those aircraft, these were
not aircraft built for creature comfort, they were not pressurized, so that as soon as the
planes went over 10,000 feet, the crews had to go on oxygen, raids into central Germany
would be nine hours or so on oxygen, so you were tethered to your oxygen mask.
The windows of the B-17, the waste and then the liberators, the windows on the waste were
open, the turrets were obviously not sealed, and the bomb bay doors would swing open so
that in the aircraft itself, when the planes reached operational altitude at 20,000 feet,
the temperature inside the planes in northern Europe would be 20 to 30 to sometimes 40 degrees
below zero. To touch anything, any metal object without
gloves at operational altitude meant you lost a finger, sometimes a hand.
The 8th Air Force would lose as many people to frostbite in the first year of operations
as they did to enemy action, and anoxia of simply passing out, people going off of oxygen
valves freezing up, bundling up in clothing of several layers thick with an electric flying
suit underneath it maybe, this was fine as long as the electrical system in the plane
worked, if it didn't and that went out, you were simply stuck.
All crew members had to be tested for claustrophobia.
The losses for the 8th Air Force would remain extraordinarily high and also for the 15th
flying out of Italy where targets in southern Europe, from which targets in southern Europe
were hit. The losses suffered by the Americans in these
daylight raids prompted a fundamental rethinking of the American approach. In the end, American
planners decided that it wasn't so much the strategy that was wrong but the technological
ability to carry it out, that the bombers simply could not fly into Germany without
fighter support. They couldn't defend themselves, this has been the argument they'd made with
all of the machine guns available on a B-17 and a 24.
Now they were going to have to have fighter support and in early 1944 the P-51 Mustang
which had already been developed was now deployed in large numbers in Europe capable
of flying all the way with the bombers to the targets as far away as Berlin and this
marked a major turning point in American air operations.
It allowed the great bomber formations to fly on into Germany to defeat the German Luftfaffe
which was done in the beginning of what was called Big Week in February of 1944 and then
on down to the D-Day invasion. The Mustangs were given now permission to leave the bomber
formation. They didn't have to fly along with the bombers but they could go seek out Luftfaffe
planes wherever they were found. As a result, the Luftfaffe between February of 1944 and
the summer of 1944 had been defeated and the American onslaught against German targets
continued.
In early 1944 from oil and aircraft production submarine bases to transportation to bomb
the access to the D-Day invasion beaches. What at the end of the day did the American
air assault and the English air assault against Germany achieve? What was the effect of strategic
bombing, daylight strategic bombing or the nighttime raids of the British? Did it work?
What was its contribution to the war? Here I think we're confronted by a very odd paradox.
As Allied tonnage of bombs dropped on Germany increased by leaps and bounds during 1943
and into 1944 so too did German war production. Take your pick, tanks, planes, weapons, you
name it. In fact in virtually every category identified as a priority target by the combined
bomber offensive production increased dramatically between 1942 and the fall of 1944. The American
strategic bombing survey which was done right at the very conclusion of the war in Europe
indicates this that ironically the apex of German war production came in the summer of
1944 in July at that point at which the Allies had established air superiority. Thereafter
from July to April 1945 the index for German industrial output plunged. What were the factors
that limited Allied success? First one would have to note the lack of real coordination
as round the clock bombing sounded good but it wasn't a coordinated effort. Second the
theory of strategic bombing as envisioned by the Americans to conduct a sustained and
unremitting air offensive against Germany and Italy to destroy their will and capacity
to continue the war. It simply didn't work. The theory implied a relentless attack on
key priority targets returning to hit them over and over again but this the Allies were
unable to do until the final six months of the war. Indeed only in the campaign against
oil which really began after D-Day was this sort of coordinated sustained targeting carried
out and then it worked. Finally the Allies discovered that theory simply outran operational
capabilities. Even if the Allied air forces could have agreed upon one set of priorities
and cooperating cooperated in attacking them such a sustained assault was simply impossible
until the spring of 1944. Shortages of aircraft and crews remained until 44 and tactically
the doctrine of daylight precision bombing had proven impossible without long range fighter
support available, unavailable until early 1944. And finally the technology of the period
the state of plane based radar to locate targets and the operational problems such as the effectiveness
of anti aircraft defenses continued to make precision bombing the goal rather than a reality.
On the other hand part of the explanation for part of the paradox is somewhat misleading.
You'll recall from an earlier lecture when we talked about the Blitzkrieg strategy that
we indicated that German war production had been based on a Blitzkrieg strategy production
in breadth not in depth. The Germans had remarkably not mobilized their economy not even begun
to mobilize it for total war until late until finally 1943 and into 1944. There was so much
slack in the German economy that the Germans finally under Albrecht Speer were able to
get it out only in the course of 1944. Thereafter then the air offensive really did make a difference.
We saw this in the Battle of the Bulge when the Germans really didn't have the oil necessary.
In evaluating the impact of Allied strategy, strategic bombing, I'm inclined to agree with
the British historian Richard Overy, the economic historian, who's argued that if anything and
I quote, the bombing was much more effective than the Allies believed, the important consequence
of the bombing was not that it failed to stem the increase in arms production but that it
prevented the increase from being very considerably greater than it was. Bombing placed the ceiling
on German war production which was well below what Germany was skillful and more urgent management
of its resources was capable of producing after 1943. Substantial though increases in
German output appeared, they might have been greater still but for bombing. The absence
of bombing would have freed resources held down in anti-aircraft over a million people
were involved in this in 1944 in repair work, would have eliminated wastage caused by bombing
and would have allowed the industrial planners the same freedom as that enjoyed in the United
States to plan, build and operate the war economy without interruption and as near to the
economic optimum as possible.
