Lecture 25, Hitler's New Order in Europe Hello. Welcome to our 25th lecture on the
Second World War. We've been examining in our past few lectures the closing in of Allied
Forces, the American forces on Japan, and looking also at Allied air policy, both in
the Pacific Theater and also in Europe. In the spring of 1944-45, the vice was closing
not only on Japan, but also on Germany, the air war bringing the war home to both the
Japanese domestic population and the Germans, and also in the European Theater. As the Allied
armies began to close in on Hitler's Third Reich, the Russians moving relentlessly from
the east, the Anglo-American forces from the west, the Third Reich began to yield its grisly
harvest. As the Allies broke into Germany proper to uncover the horrors of Dachau and
Buchenwald, the Russians to uncover the truly astonishing and horrific bestialities of Auschwitz
and the German concentration camp system in Poland. In this lecture, I'd like to turn our
attention then to Hitler's New Order in Europe, the fruits of which were yielded up in these last
months of the war, the racial war conducted by the Nazis in Europe against the Jews of Europe.
We talked about in an earlier lecture Hitler's foreign policy, his ideological conception
of an assault against the Soviet Union as being not simply an exercise in geopolitics,
but also an ideological crusade, a crusade against what he considered to be the center
of Judeo-Bolshevism, that the war against the Soviet Union was a war to eliminate communism,
Bolshevism. But in Hitler's thinking, there was no distinction to be made between Jews and
Bolsheviks. The war against the Soviet Union would be a war of annihilation not only against
the Red Army and the Russians, but also against the Jewish community of Europe.
I'd like to look at the evolution of Nazi policy, to look at Nazi racial policy during
the pre-war era, and then to look at the impact of the war itself on Nazi policy. In many ways,
in fact in a crucial way, it seems to me that what we now call the Holocaust, the systematic
destruction of the European Jewish community, is virtually inconceivable without the war itself,
that the war and the Holocaust must be seen together. In 1933, when Adolf Hitler was named
Chancellor of Germany, he came to power with roughly a third of the vote in Germany. He was
hardly swept into power on a tidal wave of mass public support. The National Socialists had received
at the height of their popularity in the summer of 1932, just about 37 percent of the vote.
Part of the Nazi campaign had always been the appeal, the ideological core of the National
Socialist Party, the Nazi Party, had been anti-Semitism, to eliminate the influence of Jews
from German society. In the shorthand version, as Hitler would talk about this and his paladins
would talk about it during the rise to power, it wouldn't simply be to eliminate the influence of
Jews, but to use a variety of ways of saying we want to eliminate the Jews from German life,
to expunge the presence of Jews from German life. We know from studies of Germany in the
period just before the rise to power that the anti-Semitism of the regime was not what drew the
vast majority of Germans to it, but rather its radical nationalism, its determination to undo
the economic woes of the Weimar Republic, and so on. But after 1933, with the regime in power,
it is precisely this aspect of National Socialist ideology that would be translated into reality.
The Nazis, as it turned out, had been deadly serious about their anti-Semitic planks of the
Nazi platform. In 1933, shortly after Hitler's appointment as chancellor, there had been a
boycott call of Jewish businesses in Germany. The boycott was intended to last for months on
end. It was called off after 24 hours. It had been an abysmal failure, unpopular at home,
certainly unpopular abroad. It was bad publicity for the new National Socialist regime.
In these first months of the regime in 1933, the Nazis also introduced a series of laws to
eliminate Jews from jobs in the civil service, to restrict the practice of law, medicine, and so on
by Jews. But between 1933 and 35, a period in which Hitler consolidated his grip on German
society and the German state, the regime seemed to lose momentum in its Jewish policy. There were
no new initiatives. There was a great deal of harassment and persecution of Jews on the local
level. If one were Jewish in Germany, it depended on where you lived. You might be relatively free
from harassment if you lived in Cologne. But if you lived, had the misfortune of living somewhere
in Franconia, Nuremberg, because the local Nazis, they were far more radical in this sense. Your
life might be a living hell. But there was no new initiative from the national regime. It tended
to be local, regional. But then in 1935, the regime would introduce what came to be known as the
Nuremberg laws. These were laws which, in effect, would eliminate Jews as citizens of the Third
Reich. Jews were no longer citizens of Germany with full civil rights, but rather subjects of the
Third Reich. Those laws also introduced a series of strictures against Jewish intermarriage with
so-called Aryans and quotation marks, sexual relations, and so on. The regime after the Nuremberg
laws in 1935 once again seemed to lose momentum in its racial policy. There were no real new
initiatives in racial policy between 1935 and 1938. It was not at all clear that the regime
was pursuing a consistent policy. In this period, the SS, Hitler's elite Schutstaffel, the black
suited SS elite organization with Heinrich Himmler at the head and his trusted lieutenant Reinhard
Heidrich, were certainly pursued Jewish policy, but Nazi policy with regard to the Jews of Germany
in the period before the war was largely to encourage Jews to leave. There's a particularly
ugly German term called Intjudung. It's no less ugly in English. It means de-Jewification. The
German government encouraged Jews to leave, did everything they could to make life unpleasant
at home, so that Jews would leave. It was not a situation like the Soviet Union after the Second
World War where it was difficult for Jews to leave. The regime certainly didn't stand in the way,
but Jews could leave, basically, penniless if they were to go. In 1938, there was a new ratcheting
up of Nazi policy with regard to the Jews. In November of 1938, a pogrom occurred all over
Germany. It was called the Night of Broken Glass, Kristallnacht, or the Reich Kristallnacht in German.
It was a pogrom conducted all over Germany, largely by Joseph Goebbels, head of the Reich
Propaganda Ministry, in response to the assassination of a German diplomat by a young Polish Jew in
Paris. It was presented as a spontaneous reaction of outraged German citizens. In fact, it was a
very carefully orchestrated pogrom carried out by Goebbels' propaganda minions all over the country.
It's important because it really represents the first clearly orchestrated act of violence against
the Jews that was directed from the top. This was not local. This was not a regional phenomenon.
This wasn't the work of local radicals. This was national policy, and it could not be
presented as anything but. The regime, before the outbreak of war in September of 1939, certainly
had pursued an anti-Semitic policy. One can look at it as a steady ratcheting up or escalation
of steps taken against the Jews, first boycott, then made non-citizens in 1935, then this first
act of violence in 1938, in addition to a series of economic limitations on Jewish life in Germany
also in 1938, and then the war. The war would be the major turning point in national socialist
racial policy. And I think it's important, as one thinks about motivation, one thinks about
the evolution of Nazi policy, that on January 30th, 1939, the anniversary of Hitler's appointment
as chancellor, he'd been appointed chancellor on January 30th, 1933, Hitler spoke to the German
Reichstag, the German legislature, the national parliament, and he made the following declaration.
One more thing I would lighten out the state on this day, memorable perhaps not only for us Germans.
I have often been a prophet in my life, and was generally laughed at. During my struggle for power,
the Jews primarily received this laughter in my prophecies that I would someday assume the leadership
of the state, and thereby the entire folk, and then among many other things,
achieve a solution of the Jewish problem. I suppose that meanwhile, the then resounding
laughter of Jewry in Germany is now choking in their throats. Today, I will be a prophet again.
If international finance Jewry within Europe and abroad should succeed once more in plunging the
peoples into a world war, then the consequence will not be the bolshevization of the world,
and therewith a victory of Jewry, but on the contrary, the destruction of the Jewish race in Europe.
This is months before the outbreak of the war, and what we have in the statement is that typical
combination in Hitler's mind, world finance Jewry on the one hand, and bolshevization on the other.
But the invasion of Poland in September of 1939, and even more so the invasion of the Soviet Union
in the summer of 1941, would catapult the Nazis into a position to, as Hitler had put it,
solve the Jewish problem in Europe. Indeed, the invasion of Poland and then the Soviet Union put
Germany in control of Europe's largest Jewish communities, the Jewish population of Germany,
before the war had been one half of one percent of the overall population, and now the Germans,
with the invasion of Eastern Europe, found themselves in control of these large Jewish
communities. In October of 1939, a month into the war, Heinrich Himmler, head of the SS,
was named Reich Commissar for the strengthening of German Fultem, a new title that gave him
responsibility for Nazi racial policy in all of the occupied territories. Himmler delegated that
authority to his trusted Lieutenant Reinhardt Heidrich in the so-called Reich Security Central
Office, where SS specialists were already at work at finding a solution to either the Jewish
problem or the Jewish question. The Nazis used this term, or variations on this term, over and over
again. Immigration, forced immigration, in dieudung, the policy of pre-war Germany would now really
become expulsion, expulsion of the Jews from Germany, expulsion of the Jews from those areas
of Eastern Europe that the Nazis were going to incorporate into this new gross-Deutsch Reich.
In a memorandum drafted in September 19, 1939, entitled The Jewish Question in the Occupied
Territories, Heidrich laid out the foundations of Nazi policy. In those territories annexed to
Germany, all non-Germans were to be expelled. Those territories were to be cleansed of non-Aryans,
both Slavs as well as Jews, in preparation for future settlement by Germans. This meant the
evacuation of Poles, Czechs, and so on to the so-called Government General of Poland, a new
Polish state, a sort of rump Polish state created by the Nazis on October 12, 1939.
This Government General of Poland would serve as the dumping ground for Jews
rounded up all over Europe, and it would ultimately become the killing grounds for the Jews of Europe.
Moreover, all Jews were to be rounded up and concentrated in a few selected urban areas.
Heidrich's memorandum in September of 1939 suggests that ghettoization was not the final aim,
that creating big ghettos in the East was not the final aim, but represented an intermediate step.
These ghettos or concentration centers in the East were to be located near major rail lines, he
indicated, hinting that further transport was being considered. It was at this time that
another idea was circulated very secretly among the top Nazi leadership, the idea of creating
some sort of what they called a Jewish reservation, almost like an Indian reservation in the United
States, somewhere out vaguely in the East, somewhere off in Eastern Europe.
The responsibility for executing this policy, the rounding up, the ghettoization was placed
in the hands of special SS forces, the so-called Einsatzgruppen, special SS commando units
developed for the move into Austria. These were men for the most part with special training
and indoctrination and Nazi racial policy, others were simply police officers, they numbered
about 3,000 men. It's estimated that approximately one million people were rounded up and forced
into ghettos in the government general of Poland in the course of 1939-1940. In fact, by October
of 1939, the SS had begun the deportation of Jews from Austria and Czechoslovakia to the
government general, but problems with this scheme emerged relatively quickly. The army high command
was appalled at the sheer brutality of the Einsatzgruppen who moved in right behind the Wehrmacht
troops, prompting complaints to various Nazi officials including Himmler and to Hitler himself,
that the Einsatzgruppen, the SS were causing difficulty with military operations.
As the war continued and spread to the west in 1940, the German in charge of the government
general Hans Frank complained that his area, the government general of Poland, was simply
being reduced to little more than a dumping ground and he could not be, he was not going to be able
to manage the situation if the trends continued. By October of 1940, Jews were being deported from
western Europe to the government general. Himmler at this point ordered the construction of a camp
at Auschwitz in Poland near Krakow and in early 1941, the commandant was ordered to expect as
many as possibly 30,000 inmates. Still no ultimate solution to the Jewish question had been found.
The SS considered several options at this time. In February of 1940, the idea of a Jewish reservation
somewhere in eastern Europe seems to have been approved by Göring, by Himmler, by Hans Frank,
and then was dropped. We're not quite sure why the paper trail is not at all evident,
but nobody could agree about where the location of this, this should be.
At roughly the same time, another plan was put forward within the SS
that had been discussed off and on really since the outbreak of the war. And this was an idea,
sounds fantastic in a way, of settling all of Europe's Jews somewhere in Africa, in fact,
in the French colony of Madagascar off the southeastern coast of Africa.
In May of 1940, Himmler wrote a memorandum to Hitler entitled Treatment of Foreign Nationals
in the East, in which he stated, and I quote, I hope to see the concept of Jews completely
obliterated with the possibility of a large migration of all Jews to Africa or else to a
colony. In other words, the SS was taking this idea of the Madagascar plan, as it came to be
known, quite seriously. They drafted numerous memorandum on issues of international law,
they considered questions of transport, and so on, in pursuance of this option.
But as 1940 turned to 1941, the National Socialist regime still didn't seem to have a very clear
idea of what a solution to the Jewish question was going to be. The Royal Navy made the idea of
Madagascar fairly unworkable, since transport was not going to be possible. And of course,
by August of 1941, German troops were now deep inside the Soviet Union, and as the war against
the Soviet Union would progress, it would profoundly affect Nazi racial policy.
We talked when we talked about Operation Barbarossa about this infamous commissar order delivered
to German troops going into the Soviet Union, in which they were told that they would face
four implacable enemies, commissars of the Bolshevik Party, partisan saboteurs and Jews,
that these groups were to be eliminated wherever they were found, whether they were engaging in
active or passive resistance. The mistakes of the Polish campaign where there were conflicts
between SS Einsatzgruppen and the German army were now to be eliminated, the German army was
given to understand very clearly that the SS going into the Soviet Union had, quote, special tasks
to deal with, and the army was to give them leeway. Throughout the summer and fall of 1941,
as the German troops dove deeper and deeper into the Soviet Union, the Einsatzgruppen
moving along with them, the Einsatzgruppen conducted what was a massive bloodbath all over
the Soviet Union behind German lines, the major victims of which were Russian Jews,
Ukrainian Jews. They engaged in mass shootings of Jews, partisans, Slavic interventions, sub-humans,
as the Nazis referred to their Slavic enemies. They also began experimenting in 1941. The shooting
of Jews, where whole villages of Jews would be marched out, forced to dig a trench,
and then shot, shot by the Einsatzgruppen personnel, in some cases shot by regular German army troops
who would be drawn into this in one way or the other. Whether or not the army troops were drawn
directly into these sorts of actions or not, they sought. German troops took photographs of this,
sent the photographs home, wrote home about what they had seen on the eastern front with these mass
shootings. And at this point, the SS began to experiment with another means. This sort of
action was too public, it was too sloppy, it was too inefficient. In the summer of 1941,
the SS began experimenting with mobile gas vans, special mobile units that would be drawn up
behind the front and poison gas used. In September of 1941, Auschwitz was used for the first gassing
of victims. The first victims of gassing at Auschwitz were 600 Russian prisoners of war.
It is sometime in the summer of 1941, in this summer when the Germans believe they've won the war,
when all is going well for them in their deep drive into the Soviet Union, when victory over
the Bolshevik seems at hand, that Hitler issued a verbal order to Heinrich Himmler
to seek what was called a final solution to the Jewish question in Europe. The date is uncertain,
we're never going to know, there's no paper trail, but it is quite clear that late in the summer of
1941 that Himmler, as well as Reinhardt-Hydrisch's deputy, began to speak of a furor order. This is
the way Hitler did business anyway, verbal orders, don't write it down, began speaking of a furor
order to find a gesamtlürzung, an intlürzung, a total solution, a final solution to the Jewish
question, and that responsibility was delegated from Himmler to Reinhardt-Hydrisch. He would become
the real architect of what came to be known as the final solution. He drew together several
existing policies and institutions, the concentration camp system, the camps in Germany, I think this
is important that one understand, the camps inside of Germany were not big death camps,
they were horrible institutions, people died there, tortured, beaten to death, starved to death and so
on, but they were largely for political prisoners. The camps now that were going to be created for
the extermination of the Jews were to be built in Eastern Europe and Poland for the most part.
These were to be finishedungslager death camps, different from those inside of Germany.
The Jews of Europe would be, quote, resettled, the Nazis were keen on euphemisms rather than
talking about mass murder, they talked about resettlement or special treatment, and at these
concentration camps, these special finishedungslager, special gas installations, gas bunkers were to
be created so that one wouldn't have mass shootings, but rather the use of poison gas.
What Hydrisch had embarked upon had come to the conclusion that he would do by the late summer,
early fall of 1941, was nothing less than a systematic plan for mass murder. I say Hydrisch
because it's clear that Hitler saw himself as a big picture man, he gave the direction to policy,
it was Hydrisch or Himmler or others who would work out the details of how this would work,
and it seems clear that at some point Hydrisch presented this plan to Hitler who obviously
okayed it. It is clear from testimony in October that Himmler already understood what was afoot.
He told one foreign office official and I quote, the destruction of the Europe of the Jews is being
planned, now the destruction of the Jews is imminent. An invitation was issued to a small
group of Nazi officials, party officials, state officials, to the Berlin suburb of Wannsee
to meet in December of 1941, in which this would be presided over by Hydrisch where he would present
this final solution to those who were gathered. The meeting had to be postponed, it was postponed to
January 20th, 1942, in part because of the Soviet counter offensive before Moscow, the American
entry into the war and so on, and so it was pushed back until January of 1942. At this
Wannsee conference, Hitler didn't attend it, none of the other major Nazi officials, not Göring,
not Gerbils and so on, not Himmler, but Hydrisch presided over the meeting, and he announced to
the SS representatives, state officials and so on, gathered there, a meeting that took a little
over an hour, what the plan would be. A series of death camps would be created in Poland, those
that existed like Auschwitz would now be expanded to handle thousands, hundreds of thousands,
indeed possibly millions of victims who would be transported there. Many he figured would die in
transit, others would simply be worked to death, once they arrived, still others would be liquidated
on the spot. Mothers, small children, the old, the infirm, were on principle deemed unfit to work
and would simply be liquidated as soon as they arrived at these camps. Poison gas would be used.
The need for secrecy was emphasized, the German public, the Nazis felt, was not prepared for
this sort of thing, not this kind of radical, this sort of radical action. They certainly didn't
want foreign propaganda to get hold of this information. And the third thing was that the
ignorance of the victim had to be maintained. People couldn't know, the Jews of Europe weren't
supposed to know what fate awaited them at the end of the long train journey. A series of these
camps were created beginning in the spring of 1942. The process would largely be the same from
camp to camp. There were some variations, but for the most part the procedures were the same.
Approximately 10% of any arriving shipment of Jews would be selected for work. The others
would be instructed to undress. Women and girls frequently had their hair cut. The Germans used
the hair for industrial purposes. They were marched between files of auxiliary police to
what they were told were shower stalls, the big bunker, underground bunker,
with shower heads sticking out of the ceiling. They were told, in many cases, you've had a
long journey, you're going to now have a bath. In some cases they went so far as to issue soap.
The victims were led down from the train platform into these shower installations,
and at this point all pretense was lost. People were rammed into these underground bunkers.
The Germans calculated it one person per square foot, and then gas would be released from above.
The gassing process itself could last anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes before the last person
had finally died. Between 1942 and 19 January of 1945, and the camps
were closed down by the advancing allies in the east, the Russians. Over 6 million Jews would die
in the camps, and millions more Russians, Poles, Gypsies, and others would simply vanish into the
gas chambers victims of Nazi racial policy. In recent years there has been an increasing
discussion about exactly what was known about this. I'm not going to talk about what the Germans
knew. There were rumors. Certainly this was not reported in the German press. The Nazis didn't
talk about it, but there were rumors. People heard things about what was going on in the east,
and of course a great many people were actually involved in the process itself.
The allies also had heard reports about a variety of sources about what we now think of as the
Holocaust as early as the summer of 1941, and it's this I want to talk a little bit about.
Allied intelligence services had begun to receive numerous reports in 1941 and 42 from Poland,
the Soviet Union. There was a series of articles about this in the press over the last year and a
half about disclosures about what was known. In fact, what was known, and this was known at the
time, and talked about at the time, was the activities of the Einsatzgruppen, this mass
pogrom across the Soviet Union. About a million people, probably a million and a half people died
as a result of the Einsatzgruppen. This was certainly known, but allied governments had
a difficult time figuring out what all the pieces of the intelligence added up to. The Soviet Union
provided very little hard information, stressing Nazi brutality and barbarism,
but rarely singling out the Jews specifically. Three so-called Molotov notes of January,
April and October of 1942, about the conditions of German atrocities in the east, mentioned
certainly atrocities, but against all Soviet peoples, not necessarily against the Jews.
Then in December of 1942, now the camps had been up and running since March 42 for the most part.
The Soviet Foreign Ministry's Information Bureau issued a brief unsigned statement dealing with
Nazi plans, quote, to exterminate the Jewish population in the occupied territories of Europe,
and went on to mention that millions of Jews from all over Europe were being concentrated,
quote, for the purpose of killing them, close quote. The international press picked up such items,
but did not emphasize them. These bits and pieces of news from suspect sources, Polish underground,
Hungarian soldiers returning from the Eastern Front and so on, were certainly there.
There's a book by Walter Likour called The Terrible Secret, in which he talks about what
exactly was already published in the newspapers during the course of the war. But this tended
to be swapped by more pressing and clearly documented news from the fronts. Nonetheless,
in June of 1942, the BBC broadcast a report that 700,000 Jews had been killed so far.
But only in the summer of 1942 did the Allied government slowly begin to realize that these
actions were not simply pogroms of a kind of traditional sort, but something far more sinister
was afoot. A Daily Telegraph story in England also in June reported that a million were dead.
There were mass meetings in Madison Square Garden in the United States in July and August,
and in other cities. The World Jewish Congress began to make appeals to the foreign office in
Britain and to the State Department in the United States, encountering tremendous skepticism.
The response, the official response, both in Britain and the United States to Jewish groups
and to others that raised the issue of what was going on, and so far as one was able to
piece this together, was that any sort of effort to, for example, bring the camps under attack
would sidetrack the Allies from military objectives, and to give you some indication
of the lack of sympathy that was frequently heard by Jewish groups. A foreign office official in
England said, and I quote, that such efforts to rescue the Jews would, quote,
waste a disproportionate amount of time in dealing with wailing Jews, close quote.
There was considerable reluctance to publicize atrocity stories. The Ministry of Information
believed in England that public thought, the public thought that people who singled out as victims
were probably a bad lot. There was also, I think, a fear that there had been a lot of
Allied propaganda during the First War about German atrocities in Belgium, most of which
turned out to be untrue, and so there was a reluctance to take this up. And finally,
there was latent anti-Semitism in official circles, both in Britain and in the United States,
skepticism so about what was being told. But here, I think one has to come to the conclusion,
the Allies were getting, by 1944, a considerable amount of information. It was only in 1944 that
we discovered what Auschwitz actually was. But it's also, what policies might have been undertaken?
Bombing, certainly the camps, bombing the railroad tracks leading to the camps were,
these things were discussed. But the Allies felt that while it was theoretically possible,
if you'll recall, that raids deep into Germany were extremely costly to Allied planes, personnel,
and so on, as late as early 1944, mid-1944. And the other thing, the idea of bombing
the railroads, one of the things the Allies had discovered about the bombing transportation in
France, you don't bomb them once, you bomb railroad tracks, you bomb a marshaling yard,
you don't just do it once, you've got to keep coming back and doing over and over and over it
again. The best way to save Jewish lives, the official position was to win the war as quickly
as possible, and this would save lives. I think the other thing, too, is that if one puts one
self in the position of someone to make a decision, do you want to be the person who is
willing to make a decision to say, yes, we are going to bomb the camp at Auschwitz to be responsible
for the death of tens of thousands of Jews? One could say, well, possibly in the long run,
this might have saved lives, but I think it would have been extremely difficult for any
elected official in the West to take on that responsibility. The BBC would broadcast in the
summer of 1944 a warning to anyone in Europe who was participating in the deportation of Jews
that they would be held accountable at the end of the war. Finally, I think one of the problems
for the Allies was that if they could not prevent the murder of the Jews, then to talk about it,
to raise it as a public issue, they felt would simply reveal their own weakness.
All of these things taken together meant that there was a great reluctance on the part of the
Allied governments, even with mounting information. The simple fact was that this was not part of
the war objectives of the Allied cause. To prevent further death, to save more lives,
the Allied governments argued the war had to be brought to a speedy conclusion that anything
that detracted from that would only protract the war and cost more lives. It was a controversial
decision, one that I think looking back, we might dispute. But at the time, I think there was a
growing sense that the horrors, most of which were already in the past by the summer of 1944,
could only be halted by the destruction of Hitler's Third Reich.
