Lecture 26, This Man's Army
Hello.
Welcome to our 26th lecture in this series on the Second World War.
We're going to shift our focus in this lecture and the next to examine two of the most
extraordinary achievements of the Second World War, feats of the Second World War.
One is the creation of the American military machine during the course of the war, something
that had not existed when the war broke out in Europe in September of 1939, the construction
of this enormous military machine both in terms of the personnel as well as the equipment.
And then in our next lecture we're going to look at the United States on the home front
during the war, the arsenal, democracy, the mobilization of the home front, victory gardens,
rationing and so on.
American production would be one of the real miracles of the Second World War, creating
a military machine, an industrial machine of unparalleled proportions.
And the American Army too, considering that on September 1, 1939, that it was the 19th
largest army in the world, that the Poles had a larger military establishment than the
United States at that point.
The juggernaut that we've talked about pushing its way across the Pacific, driving across
North Africa up the Italian Peninsula and onto the continent of Europe in 1944 was a product
of a, it was a civilian army, the citizens in uniform in a creation that had really appeared
from virtually nothing.
It was one of the most astonishing accomplishments of the war.
The army that would storm ashore at Normandy or even Guadalcanal simply did not exist in
1939.
Its creation was the act of extraordinary imagination, organization and will.
Within five years of the end of the First World War, the American Army had fallen to
a strength of 132,000 troops.
The Germans who had complained so bitterly about the Treaty of Versailles with its limitations
of manpower to 100,000 troops had an army virtually as large as that of the United States.
The army of the Depression years was the army at its nadir.
Pay was dismal, promotion was rare, the hard drinking club of officers and NCOs of the
interwar army has captured I think best in James Jones's classic from here to eternity.
Hoover, president of Hoover, would cut officers pay by 15% enlisted men's pay by 30% and Franklin
Roosevelt upon his coming into office threatened to slash the military budget by 51% in the
early days of the Roosevelt administration.
His chief of staff Douglas MacArthur was so infuriated by this that he threatened to resign.
He rebelled and FDR would back off.
Starting in 1935, appropriations for the military began to rise after years, four straight years
particularly of decline.
Still, as we've said when the war broke out in Europe in September of 1939, the United
States Army could muster only 190,000 troops.
Three infantry divisions in the United States, one in Hawaii, one in the Philippines, all
drastically understrength.
Even the outbreak of the war failed to bring significant increases in manpower.
A ceiling was set in 1939 to 227,000 troops for an army that might be able to protect
the frontiers of the United States but not much else.
When General Marshall begged for emergency funds in May of 1940, Franklin Roosevelt refused.
There was still no pressing need.
The turning point as it was for so much else was the fall of France.
For the British and for the Americans, this sense that France would hold out, that there
was time, that one could play for time, now was gone.
Now there was a real crisis and the crisis was that the Germans dominated all of Europe
and there was no room for maneuver.
Roosevelt in the situation relented and the army was actually flooded with funds, nine
billion dollars worth from 1940 to 1941.
It was more than all of the money spent by the War Department since 1920.
Marshall at this point envisioned an army of one million men by October of 1941.
One thinks about this, going from 190,000 to a million by October of 1941, two million
men by January of 1942.
So quantum leaps forward.
Where was all of this manpower to come from?
Who would be the troops?
Well the country's first peacetime draft would be introduced, legislation to that effect
coming in June of 1940.
It was enormously controversial, tremendously unpopular at this juncture as well.
But on September 16th, 1940, FDR would sign the Selective Service Act, instituting the
draft.
The law authorized the induction of 900,000 men for a year, called up the National Guard,
that was 270,000 troops.
It raised regular army strength to about 500,000 troops.
A civilian run system of draft boards began operating within 30 days and every mail from
the age of 21 to 36 was given a number from one to 7,386, which was the largest number
that any one draft board had on its books.
The president himself did the first drawing and the first number pulled was number 158.
So important I think and so etched in memory are these experiences from this period that
all the way through my childhood, the man in my small town just outside of Chattanooga
who had that number and was the first one drafted was Frank Callaway, who ran Callaway's
service station and there on the back all the way through as long as he lived, there
was the photograph of him taking the number saying, Frank says he's ready to go.
I think this was not an untypical attitude, it would become far more typical after the
Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
But would this be enough?
How did Marshall calculate the men and the machines necessary to fight a war?
He relied improbably enough and this is one of the whole series of improbable things in
this.
He relied very heavily on Major Albert Wiedemeyer.
Wiedemeyer had just recently studied at the Kriegs Academy in Berlin.
He impressed Marshall and this I think is also one of the typical things of Marshall
and this is one of the reasons that Roosevelt didn't want to let him out of Washington to
go run Operation Overlords that Marshall was a very, very good judge of personnel.
He impressed Marshall and in July of 1940 Marshall charged him with coming up with a plan to
figure out, to calculate manpower needs and the equipment needed to create the army that
Marshall had in mind.
Any intelligence at this point estimated that Hitler and his allies could field 400 divisions
by the end of 1943.
Since the standard military wisdom of the time insisted that one needed a 2 to 1 ratio
for offensive operations, Wiedemeyer then was charged with coming up with manpower for
800 divisions.
The British had maybe the potential for 100.
The Russians had the potential certainly for hundreds and hundreds, but at this point
when Wiedemeyer begins his calculations it is not at all clear that the Soviet Union was
going to be able to withstand a German attack indeed and as the plans continued it seemed
that the Russians were about ready to fold in the summer and went fall of 1941.
To put a division of 15,000 troops into combat, another 25,000 would be required to handle
supplies, training, communications and so on.
So doing the math, 700 divisions, 40,000 men worked itself out to about 28 million troops.
The American population in 1941 was approximately 135 million.
Since a modern economy, in a modern economy only about 10% of the population could be
spared for military duty without wrecking industrial productivity, the armed forces could
safely take only 13.5 million he calculated.
After making the calculations for the Navy and the Air Corps, Wiedemeyer established
that at its peak strength the United States could field an army of perhaps 8.8 million
men.
This of course would then set off a chain reaction of needs to move 5 million men to
Europe and to supply them would require at least 1,000 ships of at least 7,000 tons each.
To build such a fleet, again starting virtually from scratch, he figured would take two years.
To raise and equip such an army would take also at least two years and planning was necessary
to establish production schedules for everything from GI soap to trucks to tanks.
Bases had to be built.
The army alone was going to require huge camps to house and train troops.
The existing ones had to be expanded and new ones had to be built.
In 1940-1941 there was a land rush by the federal government buying up land, seizing
land all over particularly what we now call the Sun Belt to establish a series of military
camps for training of army personnel.
By May of 1941, so in very rapid fire order, the army had 46 big new camps waiting for
a flood of inductees.
I think what's remarkable to me about this is that so many of these temporary barracks
and buildings, annexes and so on that were built in this land rush era at the very beginning
of the Second World War and were built largely to last a matter of several years were still
in operation, wooden structures still in operation, still being used during the Vietnam era.
So the army was now preparing for a flood of new inductees.
The Army Air Corps always wanted to do things slightly better, at least 100 Miami Beach luxury
hotels for basic training for its men.
What about equipment?
What about munitions?
FDR and others had worked on the assumption, as Roosevelt thought about this in the approach
of war, had worked on the assumption that the United States would simply outproduce its
enemies.
The American economy still had an enormous amount of slack in it as a result of the depression.
We hadn't tapped nearly anything close to the potential of the American economy.
But how was it going to do this?
How was one going to mobilize the economy?
It was quickly pointed out to the President that nothing was inevitable about success
in this.
The United States in 1941 did not have a big munitions or arms industry.
One had to be created.
In the First World War, American soldiers had largely used equipment provided by Great
Britain and France.
As one general wrote in a memo to the War Department, and I quote, it would be unwise
to assume we can defeat Germany simply by outproducing her.
Wars are won by sound strategy implemented by well-trained forces, which are adequately
and effectively equipped, close quote.
Marshall and Stimson reorganized the military and the War Departments respectively.
Stimson believing that the War Department needed a great deal of change, a great deal
of reform.
It's just like the Alamitri Canal, he said.
You feed it at one end and nothing comes out of the other but crap.
Something had to be done to make this an efficient organization capable of handling the monumental
tasks foreseen for it.
One didn't have to start absolutely at scratch, and one of the most foresighted aspects of
American military thinking in the interwar years, the Army had established the so-called
Army Industrial College in 1924, conducted annual surveys of industry, yearly updates
and detailed annexes, thinking about potential needs.
What one was seeing already here is the beginning of what would later be called the military
industrial complex, thinking about needs and the relationship of industry to the military.
Still, the American Army was never to reach Wiedemeyer's projections.
The total number of divisions was 91.
At its peak, 5.9 million soldiers, 2.3 in the Army Air Corps, it was slightly smaller
than the German Army, and only slightly larger than Japan's, it was only half as big as the
Red Army.
Even in 1941, when the Selective Service Act had to be renewed in October, it passed by
one vote.
There was hardly a great commitment to this enterprise at this juncture.
For those who found themselves now caught in the Selective Service System, or for those
who, on the Monday following December 7, 1941, would rush off to join the Army, they would
be introduced into a world of khaki and OD.
It was a time when OD referred to olive drab and not overdose, and a new phenomenon was
born in American life, the GI, the government issue.
The introduction came via a series of steps.
The reception center, the citizen soldier entered another world.
After being inducted locally and given two weeks to settle his affairs, the soldier traveled
by train to one of the vast reception centers that were set up around the country.
Here began the introduction to the Army.
Civilian clothes were shipped home, haircut, GI clothing issued, the usual complaint, does
anything here ever fit, an utter lack, getting used to the utter lack of privacy, the utter
lack of individuality, life in the barracks, the latrine and so on, learning all of the
things that would become the standard sort of approaches to this, that there was the
right way, the wrong way, and the Army way to do everything.
They would be subjected to a series of tests, the general classification tests, the mechanical
aptitude tests, given a social, an Army serial number, and then on to another camp for basic
training.
Seventeen weeks of inculcating Army discipline, then on to unit training, the pro-o process
was expected to take 52 weeks.
What was created was a remarkable organization.
One saw in the Army of the Second World War, the United States really is melting pot.
In an era when people didn't travel very much, when there wasn't a lot of what social scientists
call spatial mobility, something that had also been inhibited by, of course, the privations
of the Great Depression, suddenly the human variety of America came as a revelation to
most young men, especially from rural or small town backgrounds.
One of the things that's very interesting, David Reynolds, a wonderful English historian
several years ago, wrote a book called Rich Relations, The American Occupation of England,
1942-45.
And one of the things he points out is that something like 40% of the American soldiers
who found themselves in Great Britain prior to the D-Day landings, 40% of them had come
from homes that did not have indoor plumbing.
For many people who entered the Army in 1941-42, this was, this was a step up in some ways,
regular food, regular work after the Depression.
And certainly this ethnic and regional kaleidoscope in a period, as I said, when people didn't
travel very much.
If one reads through the letters or gathers experiences of veterans from this period,
many of them have to do with encountering the inevitable person from Brooklyn or the
Texan or hearing the first Southern accent and so on.
One has the sort of the World War II image of the standard bomber crew where there had
to be, there had to be usually the, somebody from Brooklyn had to be on the crew.
I think central casting dictated that every bomber crew in the United States Army Air
Corps and probably naval aviation had to have at least one person from Brooklyn.
Some slow talking Southerner or the big Texan, the sort of Van Johnson peaches and cream
complexion, blonde headed Midwestern guy, all were there.
And in fact, much of the, I think the wartime experience actually does reflect that Hollywood
stereotype that people were thrown together for the first time.
And if one reads letters from servicemen from this time, it's commented on the sort of North
South battles that were fought and so on.
The exception, of course, to this, within all of the ethnic diversity and intermingling
of crews and companies was with black soldiers, with African Americans, who would remain during
the Second World War, as one said, second class citizens, whether in the Army or not.
A 1940 directive set racial policy for the war.
It promised that the percentage of blacks would correspond, and the military would correspond
to the percentage of blacks in the overall population, about 10%.
African Americans would serve in every branch of service, combatant and noncombatant, but
were still terribly overrepresented in the so-called service units.
25% of the quartermaster corps, 15% in engineering, 5% in the infantry, only 2% in the Army Air
Corps, no blacks were to be members of bomber crews.
There was, of course, the first black fighter squadron in the 99th established in 1941 that
would become quite famous during the war.
Separate but equal was the policy.
No blacks were to command white units.
Most black units were commanded not only by whites, but in a perverse twist that I think
defies understanding by white southerners.
No intermingling of black and white enlisted personnel in the same regimental organizations
was permitted.
As General Marshall put it, pragmatist to the end, a policy of integration, and I quote,
would be tantamount to solving a social problem which has perplexed the American people throughout
the history of this nation.
The Army cannot accomplish such a solution and should not be charged with the undertaking,
close quote.
Once this would, this situation was driven home in the war in a number of different ways.
It was a very famous incident written up in Yank Magazine where a corporal Rupert Trimmingham,
who was stationed in Arizona, was traveling with another number of other black soldiers
and had to stop over in Louisiana and had gone into, the only place they could get something
to eat was at the railroad station, had gone into the railroad station, were not permitted
to enter.
The white personnel there refused to allow them to enter.
They had to go around to the back, which was a standard operating procedure in the south
at this time where they would be fed by the kitchen people out back.
While he and his soldier friends were out back eating, a number of German prisoners
of war were brought into the main dining room of the train station.
They sat down, were served, laughed, joked, treated very well, and Trimmingham wrote a
biting letter to Yank, and I'd like to read it.
Here is a question that each Negro soldier is asking, what is the Negro soldier fighting
for?
On whose team are we playing?
Myself and eight other soldiers were on our way from Camp Clairborne, Louisiana to the
hospital in Arizona.
We had to lay over until the next day for our train.
On the next day we could not purchase a cup of coffee at any of the lunch rooms around
here, as you know old man Jim Crow rules.
The only place where we could be served was at the lunch room at the railroad station,
and then he proceeds to tell the story I've just related.
I could not help asking myself these questions.
Are these men, talking about the Germans, sworn enemies of this country?
Are they not taught to hate and destroy all democratic governments?
Are we not American soldiers sworn to fight for and die if need be for our country?
And why are we, they treated better than we are.
Why are we pushed around like cattle?
If we're fighting for the same thing, if we're going to die for our country, then why does
the government allow such things to go on?
Some of the boys are saying that you will not print this letter, I'm saying that you
will.
He certainly did print it, and it provoked a huge outpouring of letters to Yank, the
weekly Army magazine, all registering the same sort of outrage that something like this
would take place.
The Army also was determined during the war.
Well, one of the complaints about the Army during the Second World War subsequently was,
well, there just wasn't enough political indoctrination.
The troops just didn't know what they were fighting for.
This was born over and over and over again in various surveys that were done about troop
morale.
What were we fighting for?
The four freedoms, nobody seemed to know quite what those were, less than 13% of the men
in one survey could identify even two of the four.
The average GI clearly did not have a clear set of ideals for which he was fighting, except
to get the thing over with and go home as quickly as possible.
There was a very famous story written by John Hersey during the war.
He had been, he would subsequently write a number of things, as you know, Hiroshima,
for Adano in 1945, but he was a war correspondent early in the war, and was at Guadalcanal.
He'd been with a group of Marines tramping through the jungle, had been in firefights
and so on, and they'd stopped at a clearing to rest, and he, as they were all sitting
around, he said, you know, what do you think this war is all about?
What are you fighting for?
All of the Marines, I'm sure 18 to 19, maybe 20 years old, all looked down at their boots
embarrassed by this question.
Nobody said anything, he kept looking around, nobody said anything, and then finally somebody
said, Jesus, I'd love to have a piece of blueberry pie.
Then somebody else said, well, I prefer mints.
Then somebody else went on, well, I like apple, crumb, southern style, or whatever it was,
and they went on talking about this for a few minutes.
And Hersey said, you know, well, what this was really about, this was what they were
fighting for, and it wasn't mom and apple pie, it wasn't that, but this was the way
they articulated their war, that this is what it meant to them.
He wrote this up, sent it back as an article that became an enormously popular piece during
the Second World War.
Marshall understood this, and he believed that rather than attempting to indoctrinate
troops, although the troops were supposed to see all of the Frank Capra, why we fight
films, which were, even for Frank Capra, who made such wonderful films as it happened
one night, and oh, the Jimmy Stewart film for Christmas time, it's a wonderful life.
The Why We Fight series is pretty heavy-handed, heavy-handed stuff going.
Marshall understood what troops wanted, it was morale, it wasn't ideals in this sort
of propagandistic sense.
And so much of what Marshall insisted upon was a series of things to make life better
for soldiers, sailors, everyone in the military.
One of those things was mail, and one of the most innovative aspects of the Second World
War was something called the V-mail system, not e-mail, but V-mail, which was to take
a form, an actual letter-sized form, right on it, and then this would be taken and microfilmed
to a much smaller version, which could then be sent.
63 million V-mail letters a month would originally have weighed 400 tons, as V-mail, that weighed
400 pounds, so that it was possible to send massive amounts of mail back and forth from
the most obscure places in the Pacific, not always with great delivery, but or from Europe.
So mail, the USO system with entertainment, movies, though certainly people would complain
that they saw the same hop along Cassidy movie for a year and a half on ships in the South
Pacific, beer was supposed to be three bottles a week per man, I'm sure that some had more
than their quota, some less.
Food was for many people, although soldiers love to complain about everything and food
is one of them, the food was regular pay compared to any other armed forces in the world was
extremely, was extremely good.
Still, the citizen soldier could always complain.
He was, as one author has written, suspended between two ways of life.
Physically, he had left civilian life, yet mentally he never joined the army.
He was in the service, but not of it.
I think one gets a wonderful sense of this in the letters that were written into both
stars and stripes and to yank magazine.
I'd like to read you a couple.
This is from 1945, dear yank and the troop carrier I was on, the PX ration chocolate.
One day I purchased a Hershey bar with almonds as did the soldier in front of me.
It developed upon eating our chocolate bars that his Hershey contained nine almonds on
mine only seven.
Is this fair?
This provoked a response a couple of weeks later in another letter.
Dear yank, in a recent issue of yank, T5 nebling stated that the man preceding him in the chocolate
bar ration line received nine almonds in his Hershey bar, whereas he himself only received
seven.
We feel that we can clearly clarify the situation by pointing out that through some gross and
unpardonable error, the other soldier undoubtedly received an officer's Hershey bar.
Less one think that only letters were the form with which GIs could express themselves.
There was also poetry, the standard feature of yank.
Some of it I'm afraid I can't actually provide you with here, but this is one that I particularly
like dealing with a real source of trouble for all GIs and that was supply.
Back in Texas where I took my training, I had no galoshes when it was raining.
Straight to supply and down on my knees, no soap said the sergeant, it's all overseas.
Then to England we sailed, no supply troubles now I wailed, went to the sergeant with my
song and dance, he asked my boy, it's all in France.
Some day soon I'll cross the Rhine, everything then should really be fine.
The supply angle would be terrific when I get there, it'll all be in the Pacific.
These aspects of day to day life for this new creature, the GI, it would be this institution,
this GI, the service man would become the central figure of the United States during
the Second World War, a new citizen in uniform.
But let's one think that all of the letters and all of the poetry was funny.
There's also a very moving poem that I would like to close with, written by Sergeant Harold
Applebaum at an army camp in North Carolina, also in 1945.
It's called The Death of Private Jones.
Let's say that Private Jones died quietly.
Let's say that when the first wave stormed the shore, a single shot went through his
heart and he slipped lifeless to the sand.
Not one man saw him die, so busy they with lying head and crawling on, yet all men felt
the breath of leaden wings come close, and when they did, it made his passing seem a
public death, so much for Jones.
He died as one of scores and on a distant beach, but when they bring the news to those
who count the costs of wars, a private's death becomes a private thing.
How strange that war's arithmetic discounts the spread of sorrow as the sorrow mounts.
