Welcome to this lecture on the American home front during the Second World War.
In our last lecture we had focused on what was really one of the remarkable achievements
of the war years and that was the creation of an American Army, a gigantic American military
establishment from virtually nothing.
In this lecture we're going to focus on what is an equally remarkable feat, an extraordinary
achievement of the war years and is the transformation of the American economy from largely a depressed
economy on the eve of the war to the most astonishingly productive industrial economy
in the world.
We're going to look at the social changes that the war would bring in its wake and examine
some of both the social tensions, social achievements of the war and also what I would call the
transformation of everyday life to look a little bit at popular entertainment and so
on during the war years.
Yet the outset of the war, the United States was still lingering under the effects of the
Great Depression and yet within a very short period of time, really from 1939 to America's
entry into the war in 1941 and late 1941, one sees already an enormous spurt forward in
production, prodigious feats of wartime mobilization, the numbers are absolutely staggering.
That production rose from less than 6,000 in 1939 to over 96,000 in 1944.
Naval tundra grew by 42% in the same period.
Already during 1942, the United States produced production equal that of all the Axis powers.
In 1943 it was one and a half times as great.
In 1944, the United States was producing twice as much as Germany and Japan combined.
In that same year, the United States would produce 40% of the world's armaments.
The United States had become by 1944 quite genuinely the arsenal of democracy as it was
frequently called at this time.
This drastic acceleration or expansion of the economy was possible in part because at the
outbreak of the war, American industrial facilities were nowhere close to their potential
because of the Depression.
Although the United States produced more steel than any other country already in September
of 1939, we were using only one third of our capacity at that point.
So there was a great deal of slack in the economy.
There were still 10 million men unemployed in 1939.
The new deal had not solved the problem of unemployment.
Wartime production certainly would.
The economy began to accelerate with the war.
Contracts in 1939 and early 1940 acted to jumpstart the economy.
These contracts were not simply American but also French and British, placing orders with
American factories to produce all sorts of armaments for the war in Europe.
It began the crossover for American industry even before the United States entered the
conflict in order to meet these orders from Europe.
With the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, American industry was primed for expansion.
The real turning point, just as it was when we talked in our last lecture about the mobilization
of American manpower, it was really the fall of France that acted as the shock.
The shock that sent virtually a shock wave of warning to the United States that there
was no time.
There was no, there was not going to be a long run up to war.
That France, which had been expected to hold out for some time, had fallen rapidly and
now we were moving very quickly toward the front lines.
Automobile plants, particularly after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, began producing
tanks, trucks, aircraft.
One of the most, I think probably the most famous of all of the various industrial sites
of the Second World War in the United States was Henry Ford's extraordinary bomber site,
27 miles west of Detroit, Willow Run, it was called.
It was by its very proportion staggering.
The main building consumed 67 acres.
The final assembly line to build B-24 liberators was one mile long.
Willow Run would produce 8,564 B-24s over the course of the war at top speed.
This was absolutely astonishing.
At top speed, one B-24 came off the assembly line every 63 seconds.
When one thinks about Hermann Görings, the head of the German Luftwaffe's observation
in 1940-41 about American production, he says, only make good razor blades.
Didn't think that there would be a way for the United States to mobilize its economy
for any sort of major effort in Europe.
This sort of, these sorts of numbers would have been absolutely mind-boggling.
One sees similar sorts of achievements in other fields of industrial production.
In shipbuilding, for example, where Henry J. Kaiser, who had become easily the most famous
industrialist of the war, before the United States entry into the war, Kaiser had not
produced a ship, not laid a hull, not been involved in this sort of thing at all.
But he seemed to, he came to represent the sort of can-do attitude of the war, a captain
of industry who was capable of taking any sort of mission and performing remarkable
feats.
He would become the world's largest shipbuilder during the course of the war, employing 250,000
workers, 12 shipyards.
When he came on board in 1941, it took a year to produce the basic sort of ship involved
in transport, the so-called liberty ships.
Very quickly, Kaiser would accomplish this in a matter of days.
In fact, at one point, produced a liberty ship in fewer than five days.
He would build a third of the liberty ships produced during the Second World War, giving
him the nicknames, sort of launch a lot.
These sorts of entrepreneurial initiatives, achievements, also took place within a context
of economic planning provided by the government.
Franklin Roosevelt would begin with a series of production boards, boards, agencies created
to evaluate martial resources.
In 1939, he had created the War Resources Board.
It would be a war production board established in 1941, an Office of Economic Stabilization,
and then finally the Office of War Mobilization, headed by James Burns, the senior senator
from South Carolina and the Supreme Court Justice to head it.
It would be this Office of War Mobilization that would really coordinate these various
endeavors.
Needless to say, this arsenal of democracy, this transformation of the American industrial
scene produced considerable social change and considerable social tension.
It's remarkable in some ways that the war years would pass with as little labor trouble
as there was.
In part, at the beginning of the war, there was hardly a problem with labor.
There was labor shortage.
There would be strikes, John L. Lewis' United Mine Workers Strike of 1943 being the most
obvious one.
For the most part, the war years would pass with remarkably little labor strife with labor
and management pulling together for the war effort.
The labor shortage at the beginning of the war was so acute that there were signs placed
around in various places, even in restaurants, one which I particularly like.
This is please be nice to our waitresses.
They're harder to get than customers.
That comment, talking about waitresses, actually also points to one of the most obvious changes
in the labor force during the Second World War in the United States and one of the most
obvious changes, social changes, that the war would bring on the home front and that
would be a massive influx of women into the American labor market.
Women would move into the labor market in enormous numbers.
The number jumped from 25% of the workforce before the war to 36% of the workforce during
the course of the war.
Between 1940 and 1944, the number of employed women rose by half reaching a high of 19 million
and for the first time, married women in the workforce without number of single women.
And over 35 in fact accounted for 60% of the increase in women coming into the labor force.
By 1944, at the peak of women's wartime employment, the percentage of the female workforce in
clerical, sales or service jobs had declined to 34% while the percentage increase in the
number of women employed in what were called war industries and metals, chemicals, rubber
and so on, had grown by 460%.
So women were moving out of the traditional sort of women's clerical sorts of jobs into
jobs that had traditionally been held by men.
Although most saw this influx as temporary to be reversed when the boys came home, the
changes wrought in the gender composition of the workforce by the war were indeed historic.
From a relatively small labor force composed largely of young unmarried women to an enormous
force comprised for the most part of older married women over the course of the war.
This is in stark contrast, and I think this is a point that one ought to make, it's in
stark contrast to for example Germany, which during the war did not want to employ women
despite the tremendous strains on German manpower during the course of the Second World War.
The national socialist regime was very, very reluctant to introduce women in significant
numbers into the workplace.
I think we alluded to this in a previous lecture that while American factories, British factories,
certainly Soviet factories were really operating 24 hours a day running shifts, German factories
never would do this during the course of the war.
They didn't employ women to the same degree as certainly we did in the United States or
in the other allied countries, and instead tended to rely on slave labor, which was notoriously
and obviously unproductive, worked in abysmal conditions and so on.
So this introduction of women, a successful introduction of women into the labor force
was a considerable and important change during the course of the war.
Certainly the most potent symbol of this entry of women into the labor force would be Rosie
the Riveter, as sort of becomes a folk hero, folk emblem for women who have taken on now
men's jobs, and it bore some relationship to reality.
Women held 20% of the jobs in the aircraft plants in Detroit.
In Seattle, the home of Boeing, it was 47% of the workforce was female.
There was no wage parity of course in the period, but raises for women during the course
of the war far outstripped those of men in the labor market.
For example, in the aircraft industry over the course of the war, women saw their wages
go by 100%, whereas men's rose by only about a ninth.
So there were very real gains.
The picture of women we have here in the studio, for those of you who are listening simply
on audio, we have here in the studio a picture of one of the most famous posters from the
Second World War, the War Production Coordinating Committee.
We can do it with this woman with her hair up in a kerchief showing her bicep.
This I think was certainly one of the most powerful images of the war going along with
the Rosie the Riveter idea.
Another change in the labor force also needs to be mentioned as one looks at the war years,
and this is the introduction of black Americans, African Americans into the labor force and
the spatial change, geographic shifts that would take place.
Black Americans would leave the South in record numbers during the course of the Second World
War.
One of the things about the war of course was that the entire society seemed to be in transit,
producing enormous strains on the transportation system, the trains for the most part.
One of the greatest migrations was the migration of African Americans out of the South, leaving
for industrial jobs primarily in the Midwest, but also in California along the West Coast.
The army had no plans to utilize black labor, even the black men who were taken into the
army would be underutilized in the military.
There were about five million employed blacks, over one-half male in 1940, virtually none
in well-paying war industries.
So before the war began, even before the war began, there was already the beginnings of
some sense of protest about this state of affairs.
When A. Philip Randolph, the president of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, which
was really the only influential black labor union, the only one with any real clout, called
for a march on Washington in the summer of 1941.
He did this in part, having seen the figures on the low employment of blacks in war industries,
and also having seen a report that indicated that something like 40 percent of all management
personnel in war industries so that they didn't have any interest in employing blacks.
So A. Philip Randolph called for a march on Washington in the summer of 1941.
It was estimated that about 50,000 black citizens would come to join in this march to protest
racial discrimination in both industry and in the federal government.
This was a source of great embarrassment to FDR and to the government.
Randolph's plans were supported by the NAACP, and only four days before the march, President
Roosevelt invited Randolph and Walter White, who at this point was the head of the NAACP,
to Washington.
The upshot of this visit was an executive order.
The president issued an executive order to establish the Fair Employment Practices Commission.
It would prompt employers to break with past practice and to see that certainly the major
war industries would be integrated.
This was considerably, this initiative on the part of FDR was certainly aided by the
labor shortage that would be felt in 1940-41 and into early 1942.
By 1944, blacks held 7.5 percent of all jobs in war industries.
The stalemate blacks were underrepresented, but it represented a vast improvement over
their status at the beginning of the war.
Still racial tensions in the United States were never very far from the surface and they
regularly erupted.
There was a great deal of tension on military bases or in areas where there were military
bases with black population around.
Fights between black and whites, riots between soldiers in El Paso, Texas in 1943, a gunfight
between black soldiers and MPs at Camp Stewart, Georgia left one dead and five wounded in
1943.
Also labor trouble having to do with the integration of the labor force.
When 12 blacks were promoted at a shipyard in Mobile, Alabama, white workers went on
a rampage injuring 20 blacks and easily the low point of race relations during the war
would come in the summer of 1943 in June when a riot broke out in Detroit that would leave
25 African Americans dead, nine whites were killed, the National Guard had to be called
out to restore order.
Over 700 people were wounded and 1300 people put under arrest during what was really a
massive race riot in Detroit.
These kinds of tensions would surface at different points.
Detroit was the worst instance during the war in the summer of 1944 in August, white
transit workers in Philadelphia struck the Philadelphia Transit Company to protest the
promotion of eight black porters to the status of drivers in the Philadelphia Transit System.
So bitter was this resistance to this sort of change that once again the regular army
had to be called out by President Roosevelt to run the transit system in the city of Philadelphia,
this in the summer of 1944.
So while there was enormous unity in the country at one level about the war effort, social
changes brought by the transformation of the labor market would be felt in all sorts of
ways.
The NAACP would see its membership rise tenfold during the course of the war reaching a half
a million by 1945 and although gains by blacks both within the labor market and within the
military were certainly held within bounds.
We talked about the policy of racial segregation really within the military in our last lecture.
The Second World War would act as an accelerating factor in the momentum that would build after
the Second World War for racial integration in the United States.
The low point of wartime domestic affairs however did not come even with the race riots
in Detroit or the labor trouble in Mobile or in Philadelphia but rather had come earlier
in February of 1942 when the President bowed to pressure and approved an initiative to
remove 112,000 Americans of Japanese ancestry and resident Japanese aliens from their homes
along the West Coast and place them in what were euphemistically referred to as quote
relocation centers.
This was executive order number 9066 issued on February 19, 1942.
It was for this great bastion of democracy, a country at war with oppressive regimes
in Asia and in Europe, a shameful violation of civil rights.
It was the result of a widespread hysteria along particularly the West Coast at the
very low ebb of American military fortunes at the end of 1941 beginning of 1942.
There was considerable fear of fivers, fifth columners, Japanese gardeners, barbers and
so on.
If one's ever seen the Frank Capra, why we fight series, there's a film called Know Your
Enemy Japan and there is a passage there where the camera focuses in on the Japanese barber
who doesn't talk as he's cutting Americans hair or the Japanese gardener who while tending
the roses along the sea coast is actually flashing signals to Japanese submarines off
the coast.
This is a film made much later in the war.
On February 23, a Japanese submarine had actually shelled an oil refinery near Santa
Barbara and the next night a weather balloon had gotten loose and strayed over the skies
of Los Angeles.
It was mistaken for a Japanese air raid and in the hyper tense feelings of the period
panic and virtual hysteria swept the West Coast.
Still, it was not until March of 19, March 29, 1942 that the forced evacuation of Japanese
Americans began.
Most evacuations were completed by August of 1942.
Anyone with one Japanese great-grandparent was to be interned.
The FBI, the Office of Naval Intelligence and the Army's G2 had actually done investigations
of Japanese civilians before the outbreak of the war, identifying those Japanese residents,
Japanese Americans who they thought were genuinely subversive, who might be guilty of some sort
of anti-American act.
So there already had been research done, investigations done to actually to arrest or at least taken
the protective custody, those individuals.
So this kind of massive sweep of the Japanese population of the West Coast was by and large
unnecessary.
Earl Warren, Attorney General of California, was very much in favor of this action, indeed
argued to I suppose is everlasting regret that while it might be possible to determine
whether Italian Americans or German Americans were loyal, that these inscrutable orientals
were simply impossible to understand and therefore these measures were going to be necessary.
There were 10 major camps, most of them in barren settings, severe climates, two in California,
two in Arizona, one in Arkansas, one in Wyoming, one in Utah and for reasons that have always
defied my understanding, two in Arkansas, where Japanese Americans from the West Coast
were put to work in the Mississippi Delta over the course of the war.
Beginning in 1943, with the fortunes of the war having changed considerably, Japanese
Americans were allowed to begin to leave the camps, but the relocation centers remained
in operation until January of 1945.
In early 1943, the Army began accepting recruits for an all Japanese military unit.
It came to be known as the 442nd Regimental Combat Team, the NISI.
In all 33,000 Japanese Americans would serve in the Second World War in the European Theater.
The 442nd became an elite unit with the strength of 3,000 men.
By war's end, it counted 9,486 dead and wounded.
It was the most decorated combat unit in the American Army.
One Congressional Medal of Honor and a series of Silver Stars, Distinguished Service Crosses
and so on.
The treatment of Japanese Americans, the racial tensions within the United States represent
many of the problems that one encountered during the course of the Second World War.
There were other aspects of American day-to-day life that were more obvious to the vast majority
of Americans.
The spirit of volunteerism, when always obviously we can talk about rationing in the blackouts,
car production stopped, gas began to be rationed on December 1, 1942, tires became invaluable,
a 35-mile-per-hour speed limit was passed for the country, pleasure driving altogether
was outlawed on the east coast of the United States in January of 1943.
It was impossible to go anywhere without the slogan, is this trip necessary, being seared
into one's consciousness?
Don't you know there's a war on as a comment for anyone complaining about the lack of any
particular item?
Blackouts were slow to come, but dead on both coasts.
The government, it's interesting that during the First World War, the government had sponsored
and been very much behind the idea of victory gardens, that is, private people was growing
small plots of vegetables around.
The government during the Second World War didn't initiate the program, civilians simply
assuming that this had been done during the First War, it was going to be done again,
began to a project to create these victory gardens.
There would be 18 million of them, small vegetable plots all over the country, 18 million victory
gardens as they were called.
In 1943, 8 million tons of produce was grown on 20 million individual plots, from tiny little
backyard gardens to in cities, minuscule little plots.
What couldn't be eaten was to be saved or canned, one of the slogans from the war, eat
what you can and can what you can't, was current about the victory gardens.
It was impossible to get through any particular period of the war on the home front without
seeing children in particular involved in scrap collections of one sort or another, collecting
string, rubber bands, aluminum of all sorts.
At one point the government claimed that there was a shortage of aluminum for aircraft production
and so women voluntarily came forth with all sorts of pots and pans and we discovered
the sort of aluminum necessary for aircraft production was not that kind of aluminum,
the stuff was melted back down and then sold back to women later on.
But it was indicative I think of the spirit of volunteerism that people came without being
asked, volunteered to bring in the pots and pans and so on.
The scrap iron collections, tin cans, tin foil, they said rubber bands, these were collected
in balls, bottle caps, chewing gum wrappers, flashlight batteries, collections particularly
by children would become a part of the everyday scene.
Bond drives, the government was determined to finance some of this enormous expenditure
during the war by selling bonds, there would be eight major bond drives during the course
of the war, smaller ones as well.
Hollywood was mobilized for this, the stars going on big motorcades and train trips around
the country for bond drives, buy bonds, Carol Lombard was actually killed flying back from
one of these bond drives, Dorothy Lamour, the co-star of Bob Hope and Bing Crosby in the
various road pictures was credited with raising $350 million worth of bonds during the course
of the war showing up all over the country.
It was a time, if one thinks about the austerity of the war, it was also a time though of great
nightlife in the United States, nightlife flourished, nightspots, bars all over the country.
One saw this particularly reflected I think in November of 1942 with this awful fire at
the coconut grove in Boston in which 500 people were killed trapped in this nightclub that
evening.
The government certainly tried to mobilize Hollywood, mobilize the music industry in
particular to establish a sort of wartime anthem, there were a number of very patriotic
songs that various government agencies fastened on to as being things that would fire up the
home folks, remember Pearl Harbor was one, this didn't do very well, praise the Lord
and pass the ammunition was somewhat better, we did it before and will do it again, all
of these to inspire patriotism on the home front, but these songs were, there were some
that were a lot less elevated, you're a sap, Mr. Japp was one.
The most popular wartime song by a long shot was actually never played on the radio either
in the United States or in Britain because it was seen as scatological and it was Spike
Jones' Defure's Face in which the chorus was, and it's Hiled, Hiled, Hiled in Defure's
Face, this was just seen as too much, it was a wildly popular song in the United States
and in Britain and yet never ever was actually allowed to be on the airwaves.
The most popular song of all time also came during the Second World War, it emerged in
a film that came out in of all times August of 1942 called Holiday Inn and Bing Crosby
sang it, it was Irving Berlin's White Christmas, it would become the all time leading song.
Hollywood though it churned out a number of propaganda films, war films, by far the
most popular were simple entertainment films, people didn't want to be propagandized during
the course of the war.
By 1944, one could see despite the enormous mobilization and support for the war, overwhelming
support for the war, by 1944 a war weariness had begun to set in on the home front, already
in 1942 the Republicans had scored big gains in congressional elections and in 1944 FDR
had won reelection but by his smallest margin ever.
After D-Day in the summer of 1944 to the assumption seemed to be that the war with its privations
was basically over, that the Germans were on the verge of collapse, that the end was
finally in sight, the German offensive in the Ardennes, the Battle of the Bulge would
change all of that but the public as a whole series of indicators suggested was growing
increasingly restive with the demands of total war.
This would be particularly acute after the fall of Germany and V.E. Day in May of 1945
just as the American policy makers began to confront the daunting task of planning for
the invasion of Japan and possibly a war that would carry on into 1946 or even beyond.
It was against this background that Harry Truman who would become president in April
of 1945 would have to make his decisions about the future course of the war.
Chapter 28, The Race for Berlin
In the spring of 1945 the war in Europe was reaching its final climax.
In this lecture we're going to examine the thrust of the Russians on the Eastern Front
from the aftermath of Stalingrad down to the final climactic battle in Berlin, we'll examine
Western strategy, the controversy over Eisenhower's decision not to press on to Berlin, the role
of Yalta, the political decisions involved in this and then take stock of the final fall
of Hitler's Third Reich.
We had stopped our discussion of the war on the Eastern Front with the German defeat at
Stalingrad.
It had been an enormous catastrophic loss for the Wehrmacht and it did represent the final
offensive thrust of German power in Eastern Europe.
After Stalingrad, after the fall of Stalingrad in the early spring of 1943, there would be
no new major German offensive on the Eastern Front.
There would be a number of what might be called tactical offenses but nothing in the way of
a major offensive along the lines of Operation Barbarossa obviously in the summer of 1941
or the renewed German offensive toward the Caucasus in the summer of 1942.
Instead for the first time in the war, it would be the Red Army that would now begin
to be able to mount a sustained series of offenses aimed at breaking German power in
Russia itself, driving the Germans from the soil of the Soviet Union and then pursuing
the Germans back inside the frontiers of the Third Reich.
The beginning of that Soviet rollback of the German position would begin in the summer
of 1943 and what was the Battle of Kursk in July of that year.
The Red Army had at last marshaled its forces, preparing not so much to counterpunch a German
offensive but was now planning a major armored assault aimed at the German positions.
The Germans too at this point were also planning a minor tactical assault on a Russian salient.
What one had with the Battle of Kursk is two forces both planning an offensive that rushed
literally into one another.
It would become the largest armored battle in history.
At the high point of the battle, 3,000 tanks were employed on the field.
There had been nothing like it, there has been nothing like it since.
Both sides suffered grievous losses but at this point in the war, the Soviet Union, whose
factories were producing on a scale that was not quite that of the United States but still
remarkable production figures, the Soviets could afford to accept those losses the Germans
could not.
The Battle of Kursk in July of 1943 marked the end really of the German ability to launch
Panzer Offensives.
After this, the Panzer forces of the Wehrmacht really never recovered and would be largely
used for defensive purposes.
In November, Kiev in the Ukraine was retaken by Russian forces and by the end of that month
the Soviets had reached the pre-war border of eastern Poland so the Russian offensive
from the summer continues to move across this great line in the east.
It would be the summer of 1944, just as the Allies were beginning there to launch the
great offensive Operation Overlord in Normandy.
The Soviets were also preparing a major offensive in the east.
The two things were to correspond, to put enormous pressure on the Germans, to stretch
them as much as possible.
The summer offensive which would be aimed at Army Group Center, the German Army Group
Center, began in June.
It was an even greater defeat for the Germans than the Battle of Stalingrad had been.
The Russian offensive in June destroyed 25 divisions of the Wehrmacht with a total of
350,000 German casualties and prisoners of war.
It was an absolutely devastating blow.
In some respects, it's hard to imagine how the Germans, that Army Group Center, almost
like a beacon aiming directly into the heart of Germany, with the collapse of Army Group
Center it's almost hard to see why it wasn't the Soviets couldn't simply continue to move
in this juggernaut sort of fashion into Germany itself.
