Lecture 29, Truman, the Bomb and the End of the War in the Pacific.
The war in Europe had come to an end in May of 1945.
It was a bitter disappointment in one sense that the American leader who had led the country
through the war had been the architect of much of the great alliance aimed at National
Socialist Germany.
It was not alive to see the conclusion of the war there.
Franklin Roosevelt had passed away on April 12, 1945 in Georgia and had been followed
as president by Harry Truman.
It would be Harry Truman, a man not terribly well known to the American public who would
be responsible for making some of the most fateful decisions of the entire Second World
War in the spring and summer of 1945.
Looking at the international situation from Washington in the late spring, early summer
of 1945, Truman was faced with some very difficult decisions.
The war in Europe had been brought to a close, but there were ongoing troubles with the Soviets.
The relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union, which had always been
tenuous, always been problematic, now threatened to become even more difficult.
Franklin Roosevelt had always believed that his great charm, his personal appeal would
be enough to continue to draw Stalin into some sort of post-war international order.
But Harry Truman would have less of Roosevelt's idealism, less faith in the powers of his
own personality, and a great deal more skepticism about the Soviet Union in Europe.
But in the spring and summer of 1945, it was not so much the position of the Soviet Union
in Europe that weighed heavily on Truman's mind, but rather the war that was not yet
over in the Pacific.
For months, it seemed that the end of the war against Japan was in sight, and yet the
Japanese had shown no signs of surrender.
There had been peace-feelers, there had been indications of a willingness on the part of
some within the Japanese ruling class to make some sort of arrangement.
No direct contacts with the United States or with Great Britain, but through the Soviet
Union.
But the real power in the Japanese government were not people in the foreign office, but
rather the Japanese military, and there there was absolutely no sense at all that some end
of the war might appeal to them.
In the three months of Truman's presidency, the United States had suffered nearly half
of all the casualties inflicted upon it by the Japanese in three years of combat.
The specter of Okinawa loomed extremely large in Truman's thinking.
Iwo Jima Okinawa had seen, as we've talked about and discussed, tremendous American casualties.
Truman wanted a careful review of American options.
It was estimated, in a discussion with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, that an invasion of
Japan would bring catastrophic casualties.
Truman listened at one of such meetings with the Joint Chiefs, as Admiral Leahy estimated
that an invasion of Kyushu, the southernmost main island of Japan, the 268,000 of the 770,000
participating in the planned invasion, would become casualties.
More casualties, in other words, than in the entire Pacific War to date.
It was estimated that the Japanese possessed 14 divisions on this island alone.
They'd had two reinforced divisions at Okinawa, and that thousands of kamikazes remained
in place and available to the Japanese for a final defense of the home islands.
And of course, looming beyond Japan itself, the Japanese had the largest concentration
of their military forces still in China.
So an invasion now seemed for Truman an enormously high price to pay.
He had been made aware, upon taking office as president, of the progress now of something
called the Manhattan Project.
The Manhattan Project had begun in 1940 as a joint British-American endeavor to find
out about the feasibility of an atomic weapon.
Fear of German engineering and knowledge that the Germans had embarked upon a similar project
certainly acted as a spur to the Americans and to the British.
But all through the early years of American participation in the war, the assumption was
that if the bomb were available, if it were possible to actually develop such a weapon,
that it would be used against Germany if necessary.
The prospect, I think it was particularly haunting to Roosevelt, certainly to the American
scientists, it ultimately became an American project.
Something on this was the prospect of the Germans developing an atomic device, an atomic
bomb, and also the missiles to deliver it.
Although the American government ultimately came to the conclusion that the Germans had
dropped out of the nuclear race, that they had given up on their project to develop a
nuclear bomb, the Manhattan Project, as the American undertaking came to be known, would
continue on in preparation for ultimate use of an atomic weapon should it have been necessary.
Truman's choices at this juncture in the war were all difficult.
War against Japan, an invasion of the Japanese islands were expected to take maybe a year
and a half before the fall of Japan.
Casualty estimates varied enormously, MacArthur estimated over a million, Marshall tended to
agree with this.
Some argued that the casualties would be nowhere nearly as high, a mere 63,000 American dead
for an invasion of Japan.
Hardly, a very happy prospect for Roosevelt or Truman, anyone else thinking about an invasion
of Japan.
The fighting in Iwo Jima in Okinawa led Truman to believe that Japan would resist an invasion
with absolutely fanatical determination, fighting down to the last man, woman and child.
Moreover, the Japanese still had 2 million troops in the home islands, over 10,000 aircraft,
they still had looming across onto the Asian mainland, the Japanese army in China, so the
bomb might prevent the same kind of bloodbath that had been seen on Okinawa and prevent
not only American casualties, but also Japanese as well, certainly reduced them enormously.
Nonetheless, preparations were underway on Okinawa and in the Philippines for an invasion
of Japan set to begin in November of 1945.
It's clear looking through the papers of both Roosevelt and Truman that both men tended
to think of the bomb as essentially a much larger explosive device, a kind of a conventional
weapon only of a much greater scale, and maybe if the weapon were even as remotely destructive
as they anticipated, its use might shock the Japanese into surrender.
There was no real sense looking through Roosevelt's papers or Truman's either that at this stage
of the war that Truman believed that had any understanding of the nature of what one was
talking about with an atomic weapon.
The bomb was tested on July 15, 1945 and it revealed that it was even more terrible than
the scientists or the political or military people believed.
Truman received word about the successful test of the bomb while attending the Potsdam
conference in Germany, and for the first time informed Stalin that the United States possessed
a weapon of enormous destructive power.
Truman was reserved in the way he put this, but he was surprised a bit.
The Americans were surprised that Stalin wasn't more inquisitive or didn't seem more surprised
about this disclosure, some new weapon that had been developed.
Well Stalin already knew about the bomb, he'd found out through the Soviet espionage ring,
and Stalin had some news for Truman.
He informed the president that the Japanese had been making peace overtures to the Soviet
Union for the possible surrender of Japan.
Stalin was a little surprised that Truman was not more interested in this, but of course
Truman already knew this because Truman had been receiving this information through the
code breaks of the Japanese.
Truman insisted at Potsdam on maintaining the policy that Roosevelt had enunciated at
the Casablanca conference in early 1943 of unconditional surrender.
This had been the formula in Europe and it was going to be the formula applied to Japan.
At Potsdam, Truman would push for what came to be known as the Potsdam Declaration signed
by the United States, Great Britain and China.
That Potsdam Declaration demanded of the Japanese that they put an end first to Japanese militarism,
that there would be a punishment of Japanese war criminals, there would be a military occupation
of Japan.
The Japanese would have to evacuate all occupied territories and would have to agree to complete
disarmament.
This was really unconditional surrender.
The Allies on the other hand promised to establish a democratic government in Japan to help rebuild
Japanese industry destroyed in the massive American air raids on Japan and to end the
military occupation of Japan when it was clear that the Japanese had established a quote
peacefully inclined and responsible government close quote.
Should the Japanese fail to accept the Potsdam Declaration, they were warned that they would
face quote complete and utter destruction close quote.
The Japanese response to the Potsdam Declaration was vague and evasive and it convinced Truman
and his advisers that it was tantamount to a rejection.
The Japanese were clearly, the councils of state within Japan were clearly discussing
some form of surrender.
One of the big problems about the formula of unconditional surrender was the position
of the emperor.
The emperor was not immortal but a god in Japanese society, Japanese culture and unconditional
surrender could conceivably mean that the emperor would go and this no one within the
Japanese hierarchy, civilian or military was really willing to contemplate.
So military advocates in Japan for continuing the struggle prevailed at least for now.
The British government at this point gave its approval for the use of the atomic weapon.
On August 7th, 1945, Colonel Paul Tibbetts Jr. at the controls of the Enola Gay took
off from Tinian in the Marianas carrying a 9,000 pound bomb with a destructive power
of 20,000 tons of TNT.
Just before 815, the giant object tumbled from the bomb bay.
The plane had been seen approaching Hiroshima, it was by itself.
The Japanese on the ground thought it must be an observer plane or a spy plane but certainly
not a single aircraft off on an attack.
But the giant object, the bomb, tumbled from the bomb bay just after 815.
It reached a point 660 yards from the ground.
A blinding flash illuminated the sky and a split second later, a gigantic fireball burst
over the unsuspecting city.
Shock waves of colossal force, roiled like a typhoon, of scalding air, leveling almost
everything in its path, a cloud, a mushroom cloud, something that had never been seen
by anyone before, rose to an altitude of 55,000 feet.
In his logbook, Robert Lewis, the co-pilot of the Enola Gay, wrote simply, my God.
Beneath the cloud, 60% of what had been the city of Hiroshima disappeared.
No one knows how many people died in Hiroshima on that day, but estimates range from 80,000
to 100,000 in that initial blast.
The estimates virtually double when one talks about casualties a year later and so a year
and a half later from radiation.
Later on that same day, Truman warned the Japanese leadership that unless surrender
was forthcoming, more cities in Japan would experience the same horror.
He gave the impression to the Japanese leadership that more of these bombs, a stockpile of these
bombs was available and would be used.
On August 8th, the Soviet Union, one week earlier than anticipated, declared war in Japan.
One of the major motivations of the Yalta Conference and much of the motivation of the Roosevelt
administration in its dealings with the Soviets as well as Churchill was to coax, cajole, convince
the Soviets to enter the war against Japan, which the Soviets had not done because of,
for the obvious reasons of its life and death struggle with the Germans.
Now when it became possible for the Soviets to enter the war in Asia, the United States
was far less interested in Soviet participation.
Stimson, Secretary of War at this point, urged Truman to make a concerted effort for peace,
some new overture to the Japanese leadership.
But Truman continued to insist on the Potsdam Declaration and the Japanese at this point
still did not seem willing to accept those stark terms.
Truman was getting different advice.
Stimson, Secretary of War, Admiral Leahy, in fact most of the naval personnel were very
wary of the bomb, not at all convinced that it was necessary.
The Navy leadership in particular argued and argued quite correctly that the American Navy
could blockade Japan was in fact already doing it and doing it very successfully.
A ring of submarines around and surface vessels around the Japanese home islands had effectively
strangled Japanese trade, Japan was slowly starving to death, a blockade, they argued
as well as continued air raids, fire bombings could bring the Japanese to their knees and
it would not be necessary to use the bomb.
Marshall and MacArthur on the other hand had certainly argued in favor, no one was eager
for an invasion, the Army people were certainly not eager for an invasion of Japan.
Among the Army personnel, among the Army leadership, Dwight Eisenhower would really be the only
one who would speak up forcefully against the bomb and that would be in retrospect, not
prior to its use.
What were the options that Harry Truman, this man who had not anticipated being president
certainly had not anticipated being in this position at this juncture, what were the options
he actually had in the summer of 1945?
Was the bomb really necessary?
Why couldn't Truman wait?
Why not accept the idea of a blockade?
Why not accept a blockade in conjunction with additional air raids, conventional air raids
on Japan?
Well, neither an effective blockade which had already been in effect for some time or
terror bombing had worked.
The Japanese military seemed unwilling to accept the realities of this situation.
The Japanese military simply wasn't listening.
They seemed to be willing to go down in a great flame of glory.
It hadn't worked.
Conventional bombing and the blockade Truman felt simply hadn't worked.
How long would this take?
How long would it drag out?
There was some discussion about the possibility of, well, why not a demonstration that is
a use of the bomb on some sort of atoll or off the coast of Japan to demonstrate that
the great explosive power of this new weapon?
The problem with this was that despite the implication of there being a stockpile of
such atomic bombs, there in fact were two.
One that was used on Hiroshima and the one that would be used on August 9th against Nagasaki.
If one of these two had been dropped on some sort of Pacific atoll or off the coast of
Japan, and you had only one other one, then how effective would this be?
What happened if it didn't work?
What happened if the Japanese didn't accept this?
What happened if it didn't go off?
There was always the possibility that it wouldn't work.
That didn't seem to be much of an option.
On August 9th then, a second bomb, a plutonium device this time, was dropped on Nagasaki killing
35,000 people.
The force of this bomb, although it was a more powerful bomb than the Hiroshima bomb,
was reduced by the geographic position of Nagasaki held in by the, the force held in
by the hills surrounding it.
One could might argue that there was some question about, if one could say the first
bomb was necessary.
The Truman really didn't necessarily have the options, hoping that the bomb would have
a shock effect on the Japanese leadership.
I think a more legitimate question could be raised about the use of the second one so
quickly.
Just 48 hours later, it was not at all clear reading through the papers of the Japanese
government.
It was not at all clear that they understood what in fact had happened to them at Hiroshima.
At this point, however, no one in the White House, no one, certainly Harry Truman, was
not willing to wait.
The second bomb coming so quickly would have even more shock effect, hopefully to finally
bring the Japanese military to their senses.
Also I think there is, but in the debate, especially a debate which incidentally was
not much of a debate in 1945 or even 1946, but as time passes has become more of a debate
about whether or not the bomb, this awful weapon, should have been unleashed.
In many ways, I think it's an ahistorical argument in the context of 1945.
To be the president of the United States with a war weary population, facing the prospect
of an invasion of the home islands of Japan, which might take a year and a half, where
the worst case scenario was a million American casualties, who knows how many millions of
Japanese would have perished in such an invasion.
What choice, one might argue, would Harry Truman have?
One of the most unsavory aspects of the debate, I think, about the bomb that had erupted in
the United States over the display of the Enola Gay on the anniversary, the 50th anniversary,
was the argument made to say, well, only 63,000 Americans might have died in an invasion of
Japan rather than a million.
I think as president of the United States, sending telegrams to 63,000 more families would
not have been a terribly attractive prospect in the summer of 1945.
As one military man who was in the White House, served in the White House Map Room at the
time remembers, and I think this is absolutely true, he wrote, quote, Truman made no decision
because there was no decision to make.
He could no more have stopped it than a train moving down a track.
It's all well and good to come along later and say the bomb was a horrible thing.
The whole goddamn war was a horrible thing.
On the day after the second bomb, the Nagasaki disaster, Hirohito, the emperor of Japan, took
an extraordinary step.
He broke a deadlock in the Supreme War Council, overcoming the military's continued opposition
to surrender, even after the second bomb.
The Supreme War Council had deadlocked with the military still resisting surrender.
Hirohito, whose presence at these councils, he never spoke ever at these meetings.
His presence was largely symbolic.
He intervened and he broke the deadlock, speaking in favor of surrender.
He directed the cabinet and the council to consent to the Potsdam Declaration.
There was some hope there would be at least one proviso, that is, that the emperor himself
would retain his position for domestic stability within Japan itself.
On August 11th, a compromise seemed to have been worked out whereby the emperor would
be retained, but under an Allied Supreme Commander.
Still, at this point, the military within the circles of government in Japan resisted
the idea of surrender.
After the war was over, in much of the debate about the use of the bomb, much of the criticism
of Truman has been that, well, he didn't give negotiation a chance.
He really wasn't willing to wait, talk that the Japanese were going to be brought to their
senses by either blockade or by the continuation of the American conventional air raids against
Japan.
There's absolutely no evidence from the internal documents of Japan to support this view.
The Japanese military, who still exerted enormous powers within the policy-making bodies of
Japan, absolutely refused to see reality.
Even after the emperor had intervened, making the historic step of actually speaking in one
of these councils, plans were hatched among junior officers, close to their equivalent
in the sense of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to actually kidnap the emperor, arguing to
tell the Japanese public well that he had fallen under the influence of defeatists, subversive
elements.
A number of conspiracies were hatched in these last, frantic days of August, trying to prevent
the actual surrender of Japanese forces by the emperor.
Nonetheless, Hirohito would once again break a deadlock on August 14th, once again reiterating
his conviction that surrender simply had to come, that Japan could not continue to face
this kind of destruction.
On August 15th, 1945, Hirohito, emperor of Japan, addressed the Japanese nation for the
first time.
No one had heard his voice.
He was a deity and now was speaking to the Japanese nation, announcing that the war at
last was over.
He didn't instantly say that Japan had surrendered, but it was obvious.
The Japanese had failed in their efforts and the war, the suffering, was at last to come
to an end.
August 14th was then to be VJ Day, though the war officially did not end until September
2nd, when the Japanese formally signed the document of surrender aboard the USS Missouri
in Tokyo Bay.
At that signing, historic signing, Douglas MacArthur made the following statement.
It is my earnest hope and indeed the hope of all mankind that from this solemn occasion
a better world shall emerge out of the blood and carnage of the past.
A world founded upon faith and understanding, a world dedicated to the dignity of man and
fulfillment of his most cherished wish for freedom, tolerance, and justice.
The war in the Pacific had come to a close and with that signing, the Second World War,
a war that actually linked these conflicts that we've talked about over the past lectures
finally drew to its bloody conclusion.
