Have you ever been perusing Netflix and looking at all the comedy specials that you don't want to watch?
Until you inevitably try one out and realize how much of a waste of time it is because,
oh my god, this comedy special is made for someone 50 years older than me.
But then, in the 80s, he put the earring in his right ear where,
ELLEN SHOTS GAY!
That's not always a bad thing. Sometimes it's just not your taste.
Sometimes the content's just not made for you.
Sometimes you're just not the target demographic, which is what I tell my parents
when they watch my videos and they don't understand 90% of the references in them.
So I've already established that everyone's comedy taste is different,
and I know the title of this video, you might be like, oh goodness,
she's a snowflake comedy police coming after my favorite guy.
And you know what?
Yeah, kinda.
I'm just kidding.
I understand that comedy is comedy, and we can make comedy out of serious situations.
I really do.
I really don't think every single thing has to be inherently problematic,
and everything's a problem, and oh, cancel culture.
But I do know things age poorly, and sometimes people also age poorly, and so do their jokes.
There are a few comedy specials lately that have been buzzing everyone's cringe radar.
They've been off the charts.
The cringe meter has been breaking lately.
I need to call the mechanic and get that fixed.
The cringe meter was sounding the alarm, and like a fly to dog shit,
I was there to stick my grubby little hands on it and get in there and see what it's all about.
So I have three comedy specials I want to show you today.
And by show you, I mean cringe with you.
So the first one I want to show you today is this beautiful man, Jim Brewer.
Brewer?
I went to their stadium once.
You thought I was gonna say hardly no or hardly ever is that a good joke unless Curtis Conner says it.
That's it.
So I'm gonna be honest, I know nothing about this dude,
but oh boy, are the first six minutes of this comedy special,
everything I need to see, and the only thing I want to see from this dude.
Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to the stage, Jim Brewer!
So we get this really lukewarm intro, and I really wish they like,
the editors took the time to actually put the song in the special instead of just the
recording of the sound going through a shitty microphone,
at going in whatever theater they're in.
So it's a little awkward, but it's fine.
This is how I was imagining it to go.
Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome your oomoo senpai, Jim Brewer!
So yeah, after the classic rock you'd play while you're out fishing with your buds,
he opens up with COVID humor.
This was published four days ago, July 2022.
So yeah, this is already not going to age well in about like yesterday.
And just from this intro, you can tell that this is a guy that goes to like the neighbor's
birthday party in like a suburban neighborhood and thinks he's fucking hilarious.
Oh, you can't say anything anymore.
We're risking our lives to be here.
At this part, I was about to damn near jump out of my chair and crawl under the bed,
because that took me by surprise.
The gain on that was just like plus 10 over what he had before.
So at this point, about 80% of this two minutes has just been him reenacting something.
You'll see that this is a common theme, actually so much so that somebody made a compilation video
of this special, but just the the unintelligible bits and there's a lot of it.
This is like 90% of his comedy is just over the top imitations of a person that doesn't exist in the world.
You hear that?
That's all of your grandpas and problematic uncles at every family gathering cheering for this guy.
The vaccinators, you were real cocky a couple of months ago.
We got vaccinated.
Got my second shot April 19th.
I can't get sick from the corona.
I'm vaccinated.
No one ever said that.
No one ever said that.
See this bucket of virus?
I'm vaccinated.
I'll even lick metal.
I'm not afraid of anything.
See, I told you it's just him unintelligibly reenacting something or someone that maybe one
person has said I would bet you one person thought that, but it's not true.
Not to be a anti-comedy Andy here, but no one ever said you couldn't get sick when you got
vaccinated or, um, I'm sorry, the schmackschismation is just something that would prevent you from
dying or going to the hospital in serious condition is all.
That's it.
That no one said it was gonna make you super man or iron man just battling the virus like
see let me take a let me take a page out of Jim Brewer hardly know where his book here and
and give you a taste of my own taste, my own flavor, my own adaptation of Jim Brewer's comedy.
No one's going out here in a fucking iron iron man suit after getting the schmackschismation
going.
Can't touch me now virus.
That's me in my Batmobile.
Just dodging all the viruses.
Are you laughing?
Thank you.
Thank you.
Yes, uh, that's comedy here.
I don't have to wear a mask.
That's exactly what I did.
As soon as I got my second vaccination, I went, I don't have to wear my mask.
I know this is a joke.
Okay, I obviously know he's not being completely serious, but this is rooted in some truth.
Like he actually kind of thinks this, you know, he at least says it to his buddies behind the scenes.
People vaccinated getting sick.
What?
You need a new booster.
What?
Who wants a shot?
Who wants to see a ball game?
Wave your flipper.
That's for you.
Go see the ball game.
Who wants, who wants to work again?
Who wants to work again?
I have no idea where this comparison even came from.
I had watched this before and I didn't get it.
And I thought upon rewatching it.
I would understand how like, I don't even know who he's imitating.
Is he, are we seals?
Are we seals for, for getting the schmackschismation?
Is that what it is?
Are we just play seals?
Is the point that we just like go along with whatever the authorities are saying?
Is that, is that that I don't understand?
What's in the shot?
It's safe.
Don't worry.
Don't worry.
The ingredients are on the website.
Trust me.
I, I looked up so many, so many different sources for what's in it.
You know, it's new.
It's brand new.
It was coming out really fast.
It was a stressful time.
A lot of friends that I had were nervous about getting the shot,
even though they're, they're for it.
I just, I'm so confused.
So yeah, I've, I looked up extensively what was in it and I can confirm that it is safe.
I didn't die.
I'm here.
I'm good.
I'm confused what the purpose of this is in the, in the good big year of 2022.
You know, like we've, we've gone through this.
Like, I don't feel like getting into this.
I, I mean, when I take all the steps back, I feel like this is going to be a Broadway
play in three years.
You know what I mean?
Like, wait.
Six foot safe.
Don't shoot distance six foot safe.
This bit goes on for way too long.
And I hope by now you can understand why I couldn't stomach to watch any more of this
entire hour long special because I bet you it's, it's more of this.
It's a lot more of this where he's just reenacting something.
That's the whole comedy.
Can we switch it up a little bit?
Like the bit is dead at this point and he just keeps going, keeps killing it.
And you know, they say if you can't, if you can't beat them, join them.
So let's do that.
I'm the grand ma killer.
Six foot safe.
Yeah, six foot safe.
It's not even a good show too.
And like, I can't even build off of that.
Six foot safe.
How am I going to know if it's okay?
How do I know if I can see Aunt Linda today?
Well, I don't know.
I don't know who's gonna show me.
Who's gonna show me how.
And we have to cover our face in the name of grace just to feel disconnected.
Aunt Linda, when am I gonna see you?
Hopefully in a year or two, I can see you and Uncle Jim too.
Curtains close and that's the end of the first musical number.
Scene two opens.
Crazy Uncle Jim Brewer sitting at the family dining table.
No mask alone.
One chair apart.
The family sitting at the rest of the table.
Disappointed.
Listen to the rules.
Here come the governors.
We have no laws and regulations.
We shall determine who is essential.
So at first I thought he was trying to do this like really horrible Chinese accent.
And then I realized it's actually a horrible German accent and he's equating the American
government to a point in history where things got a little crazy.
I know jokes are supposed to be exaggerations but it's just not even funny.
Because the whole bit is just him pacing around making a silly face.
It's like he watched one Dane Cook special in 2008 and was like this.
This is the pinnacle of comedy.
Don't get me wrong I I that's actually that's the whole problem.
I used to like Dane Cook's comedy and you know what else I was also like 10.
So that about says everything you need to know.
It's comedy from 12 years ago and it should stay there.
It was good for its time.
You could leave it just leave it in 2008.
We shall determine who may go at your house and who shall have a muffin.
And remember if you see any children playing ooms outside together report them and their parents.
This is for your safety.
See the bit just goes on for too long.
I also am interested to know what the age range of this theater happens to be.
If we got a glimpse of the audience and what I wonder I just wonder that's all I'm just wondering.
Okay that's it that's eight stop stop two there's two I have I have I've had enough of this bit.
Okay so you've seen all that right that was the first like that was only six and a half minutes.
It felt like 30 and if there was that much like reenactment in just those six minutes
of him like exaggerating and overreacting check this out.
This is Jim Brewer's stand-up comedy but only the unintelligible parts.
I recommend you watch this for yourself.
I'll link this video in the description below.
I'll only show you a little bit.
So that's just 30 seconds of it.
This compilation is eight minutes long and I know for a fact that there's more of it.
I know for a fact this person didn't even get all of the clips.
So that's about all I could handle for this portion of the video.
The next comedian I want to cover here is Brendan Schaub and I know other people have
talked about him and he's actually the most recurring guest on the Joe Rogan podcast albeit
I think they're more of the older episodes that he was on and he also used to be a
MMA question mark fighter.
Yeah he does MMA.
He does Brazilian Jiu Jitsu.
He also has like three different podcasts.
The Fighter and the Kid podcast.
The Below the Belt with Brendan Schaub podcast.
And co-host of the King and Sting podcast with another comedian Theo Vaughn.
The mullet guy you've probably seen clips of him.
So considering that Joe Rogan also went from the UFC to comedy to podcasting.
I'm here looking for guys to suck my dick and there's nothing.
It seems Brendan Schaub wanted to follow in his daddy's footsteps and do the same thing.
And you know from what I understand here not everyone can be good at everything.
Okay I'm not sitting here expecting these people to be like the best comedians on the planet.
Sometimes you're gonna make something and it's gonna flop and it's gonna kind of suck.
Okay that's just the nature of things.
We all have our flop era whether we like it or not.
That's just human nature.
It's nothing to be ashamed of.
Unfortunately Brendan Schaub's flop era also includes um bad racist comedy.
But we'll get to that in a second.
So Brendan Schaub's special is 25 minutes long.
Posted on the Thick Boy channel with three C's.
Granted he's almost 40 but it's fine.
The special is called the Gringo Poppy.
So you see the branding here is already a little um Mexican and um no.
He's not Mexican.
His wife is.
And you can see by the dislike ratio that this was not received very well.
So this is already starting off better than Jim Brewer's uh where they actually overlaid
the song that was playing correctly over the special before he gets on stage.
So Brownie points there.
I also believe this is an original song made specifically for this and um
It goes hard as fuck.
Thick boy squad.
Thick boy nation.
You can catch that cover on my second channel.
So we have this really sad kind of middle school play set here of a city skyline made
with like poster paper from Michaels.
You know it's fine.
It's fine.
You got to make do with what you have.
Okay.
What's up Dallas?
Look at you guys.
I'm not used to this.
Dallas a little different.
There are some ladies in the crowd tonight.
I am not used to that.
They don't have women where you're from.
It's also pretty funny that this is Texas because you have this guy on the left here
with a don't tread on me sweater.
My demo 18 to 36 bros.
That's that's what I specialize in.
Sure I won't argue with that demographic.
Are we vaccinated up in here Dallas?
Everybody vaccinated?
I don't know why these people keep bringing up COVID in their comedy specials in the good
year of 2022 but I'm gonna be honest I'm sick of hearing it.
Can we please stop?
Please talk about something else.
I'm here to laugh, not be sad.
There's always one guy.
No fucking way bro.
That needle's not touching this fucking temple daddy.
As he says that he's taking a nacho dip in a nacho cheese.
Oh my bad Mr. Whole Foods.
So what Brandon's trying to do here is do a little bit of crowd work which is when a
comedian you know picks on people in the crowd and um man it doesn't go very well and I feel
like people are really hard on this guy and hard on all these comedians really.
Not that they don't deserve to be grilled a little bit but it is really difficult.
It's not something that is easy to do and they're just bad at it because they're dumb.
Like it's really difficult and hard to master especially if you're new at comedy which I think
Brandon's job is new at least at stand-up but that doesn't mean that it's immune from cringe
and it's a little cringe.
Like he just made up a guy and like we did not see maybe it's because we weren't there but
we did not see any guy that was like no fucking way bro.
This needle ain't touching this daddy temple or whatever the fuck he said.
This whole vaccination stuff I'm not anti-vaxx man I'm vaccinated but it's uh.
I don't care I'm gonna move on to the juicy part.
I'm married to Mexican y'all I'm married to Mexican.
And that is why it's called the gringo poppy because I'm married to Mexican.
Dallas I don't mean like Taco Bell Mexican no no no I'm talking Guadalajara.
Born and raised came to the states 10 years ago illegally Mexican.
What is a Taco Bell Mexican Brandon?
What is a Taco Bell Mexican?
I um what I am interpreting this statement as is there are.
It's like if we said oh this is a this isn't a a Walmart white person.
This is a Crayton Barrel white person because that's that's the vibe that I'm getting from this.
So we're already putting Mexicans down in kind of a weird way.
You can bring your wife up without insulting other people.
I forget this one of my boys goes dude dude poppy what are you doing bro get with a Latina
bro you know why because they're fun and they're spicy no doubt definitely spicy
girl spicy right girl spicy you know what spicy means they're assholes that's what that means.
We love the stereotypical sassy mean Latina.
Seven nights a week I'm not used to this I was like what the heat is every Wednesday fuck yeah
no dumb ass up the heat is every Wednesday real Mexican dishes y'all real shit from the motherland
I'm talking Wavos Ventil
Yo
Yeah so that's that's the comedy here um boy you can do self deprecating humor like this uh
just because you talk about another race doesn't mean it's inherently racist you can
believe it or not joke about other races without being racist but this is not it this is not it
I guess it just seems like cringy and stupid like I don't know how else to describe it
dude I did that 23 and me I did that shit you spin the cup email your DNA in I did that
they sent me drive mayonnaise back I am white as shit Dallas yeah
yeah my person handout page seven bitch I need a fucking tater tot once a week
with a fucking hot pocket kill you every now and then
every time dinner we come I'm like oh does she really think beans go with every goddamn mail
she's serious so like sometimes it is fun to joke about and see the differences between our culture
and someone else's especially when you're married to that person but when you take that person's
culture and then make it your aesthetic and identity it's a little weird I can only speak
from personal experience but I've seen when um specifically white people will date someone
who's Asian and then they think that gives them a pass to like be an honorary asian you're not
you're not you that doesn't mean you can use stereotypically asian imagery and scenery and
you're like your aesthetics and the way you dress and do your makeup so you look more asian
to make their eyes look longer and look more asian it's okay if you learn another language
because of your significant other I think that's really sweet I think that's cool I don't know
how to put like a hard line in the sand of when it gets weird but sometimes it's weird sometimes
it just gets weird every time dinner come like does it ever occur to her maybe Brennan's not
trying to shit his pants tonight how about that all right so we've hit mainly stereotypes so far
Mexican food spicy Mexican food hard to pronounce oh they have beans a lot Taco Bell all the hard
hitters there every time dinner would come my asshole go like this
we're dying down here puppy it's so spicy bro I've never been thicker since I got with a
Mexican man thick with three fucking seas he said the thing he said the thing he said the thing
everything they eat bean cheese bean cheese bean cheese bean cheese like the hell man
we're just gonna carb load year-round we never tailor off the carbs that's a game plan beans and
cheese aren't particularly known for their carbs but go off I walk in the house last Friday
show enough there's a fucking fiesta my favorite food you know how like feel von
can brown cocaine you know how like he struggles with cocaine like if there was cocaine on the
table right now he'd fucking snort it from right field you feel me god bless him I love that
fucking dude that's I am with fucking plus only I came out of nowhere and on that note
basically TLDR when comedy relies on purely just stereotypes of another race it's just not that
funny I really don't think he's actually racist and I really do think he loves his Mexican wife
and he loves the food and he loves the culture I really do believe that I just think the execution
of this special with these jokes maybe not the best representation of that because there is a
way where you could possibly do that while still showing that you're endearing and you love you
love this culture and but still making some funny jokes about it but this was not that
unfortunately it was neither endearing nor funny so with that I want to show you the last comedy
special which is you know him you know him as the host of fear factor oh you didn't mean either
because I completely did not recognize him with hair I know Joe Rogan has a 2019 comedy special
and I watched the beginning of it and it wasn't terrible I firmly believe that you can dislike
someone or you can like someone but still criticize the piece of media as it is you know you can not
like Joe Rogan that much which I kind of don't but that doesn't mean everything he does is
automatically going to be unfunny and terrible because you know he's a fully dimensional person
as as are we all then again I did not watch the rest of this hour and 15 minutes of this 2019
comedy special so hopefully there's not anything in there that I would want to take back that statement
for um and uh yeah I wrote this down a unicorn is a donkey from the future
what the fuck does that mean it means you need to stop smoking so much weed stupid
yep pretty good anyway if you didn't know that he's actually been doing stand up for a long ass time
actually since 1994 and I did not know people were still alive back then so I want to watch a
little bit of that with you because oh boy when I talk about humor that didn't age well
this is it tonight show features the comedy of Joe Rogan
holy shit these graphics dude I don't know exactly when this specific special was but I can
probably safely say from these graphics this is from the 90s
this is ronda shear no I don't know who she is and I'm not going to tell you
but I do love her hair I've been trying to achieve this style and I do not know how because I do
not own a blow dryer so that's all I wanted to add to this little bit and let's hear it Mark one more
time for the spotlight cafe I also just want to point out that this person on the left here is
playing a key tar first of all coolest shit but also the cherry on top is that they're wearing
sunglasses with it I want to be their friend anyway you ready to meet your first act this evening
you look hot you look ready oh I look hot well
who ronda you know you don't have to gas me up like that you look ready
where did this outfit change come from holy shit she just introduced the show and then go back
and change or did she just rip it off like she looks like she's ready for a wwe match she's about
to damn near jump in the ring here for double cage match featuring Logan Paul I know things about
wrestling put your hands together from Mr. Joe Rogan so enough of the dilly dallying here we're
finally introduced to Joe Rogan from almost 30 years ago
so
so yeah that immediately immediately didn't age well what an introduction these sideburns
killing me too and yeah his voice is like it's like you know that the spirit of Joe Rogan is
in there but I can't find him it's like the spirit of Joe Rogan has overtaken this young man
having a rough week man I've been here the m word too much for my girlfriend and I'm talking
about she brings up marriage a little bit too much and it's uh I can't even hear that word hear
the word marriage my brain just shuts off it's like marriage click everyone after marriage is
I'm like that's that's like a contract I sign this I can't have sex with other girls for the
rest of my life and I gotta buy you a ring yeah it's everything you ever wanted this to be
you got booby jokes booby horny joke you got marriage bad marriage bad and I have to spend
ring money boo marriage bad boobies boobies good so if you date a lot of bimbos that's a problem
okay yeah woohoo okay let's uh and on that note I'm skipping ahead see we don't understand men
because you don't have testosterone that's the big thing you don't have to donkey donkey juice so
you can't appreciate the way guys act okay so now we're into like alpha male podcaster territory
this is the blueprint this was the blueprint joe rogan was laying down for the musty and
dusty podcast boys that's what it is these guys be honest you're gonna be talking to a good-looking
girl but if you and the girl haven't had sex it doesn't matter what you're talking about
does it not matter does it not matter I just want a nice girl to talk to about minecraft is that too
much to ask is that too much to ask what if they just want to talk about the 1.19 update they just
want to talk about the deep dark and how they they died fighting the warden that's I just your
brain simply cannot be that much of a neanderthal it just it just can't right joe also that looks
like a pizza is this not a pizza in the background got him hungry is all you're thinking while she's
talking is donkey donkey donkey you know you have to save the world I don't know how we got into
talking about donkey kong saving the world here Mario's trying to save peach from donkey kong
and there's a floating pizza in the background and I don't understand any of it because I'm so
hungry energize a rabbit run on your brain 24 hours a day go donkey donkey donkey still going donkey
donkey donkey and on that note that has taken every ounce of energy out out of me these three
comedy specials have simply drained me like the villain in sailor moon draining young girl's energy
to keep her young that's me but these three men and um I can't say Amy Schumer is any better
I didn't include her because I just couldn't bear I simply just couldn't bear the tampon jokes I just
can't do it right now something else you can get for free tampons honestly someone will always hook
you up though if you really would want to see me cover Amy Schumer just comment below I don't know
anyway thank you so much for 80,000 subscribers this is very cool we're almost at 100,000 I'm
preparing a 100,000 subscriber special Q&A for my patrons can ask me questions so if you want to do
that before I hit 100k you can sign up to my patreon for as little as one singular us dollar a month
if you want no pressure you guys have helped me and supported the channel thank you so so much
so make sure you subscribe to help me hit 100k I'm gonna go eat some floating pizza now so bye
it's gabby bell gatekeeper squad gatekeeper nation gatekeeper squad gatekeeper nation breaking
down the shop while branding up the paychecks gatekeeper squad gatekeeper nation
