So, Geyom, you have 20, 25 minutes to give your person a question.
Okay.
All right.
So, yeah, I'm going to talk about my thesis today.
It's on probably quantum fields, measurements, and quantum energy teleportation.
Let's go ahead and get started.
All right.
So the relation between information and energy has been of central interest in many subfields
of physics for many years.
The usual context of study are thermodynamics, Maxwell-Thiemann, black holes, area laws,
entropies, cosmologies, and we're working on entropic gravity.
There's holography, theories of emergence, spacetime, ADS-CFT, and today we're rather
going to be focusing on relativistic quantum information.
In relativistic quantum information, one of the main tools is probes.
And we probe the quantum field with a first quantized system, say a qubit or harmonic oscillator,
and that provides a window onto the quantum field's Hilbert space.
And it narrows our focus onto a subsystem in the field because the Hilbert space of the
field is so large, it's kind of unwieldy.
So by focusing on certain subspaces that we couple to with probes, then we could do,
we're more flexible in our analysis of the information-theoretic structure of the fields.
So one caveat is the information that you get from the field depends highly on the type
of probe you use and how you couple.
So today we're going to try to create unobstrucive views using qubits, qubits oscillators,
so that we have a clear window onto the Hilbert space of the quantum field,
and we could do more powerful things than is usual in RQI.
So an overview of what we're going to cover today, and there's a lot of content,
just follow my voice to get lost.
Okay, so we're going to start with different types of probes.
We're going to see there's, you can do analog, quantum analog, quantum digital,
using qubits, qubits, harmonic oscillators,
and then there's a question of which is exactly the subspace of the field we are probing
when we couple via some local smearing to the field,
and we're going to build the Hilbert space, the quantum field, out of a bunch of smeared observables,
and then we're going to express the Hamiltonian in terms of these observables,
and that's going to be very useful for many calculations.
And then we're going to apply these tools and see what we get used them for,
such as measuring the state on a certain subspace of the field,
intangible harvesting, and quantum energy teleportation glass, but not least.
Okay, so canonically in RQI, the typical interaction we use is between a qubit and the field.
It's point-like in space and spread out in time,
but there's a certain time dependency in our coupling,
and because we're temporarily smearing the interaction we have,
we need to perform a time-ordered exponential,
and basically we have to do a perturbative expansion.
And essentially, this is a picture of the coupling it possesses in time,
so the imprint it gathers from the field is kind of as much, so that's not ideal,
and we're going to do theoretical simplifications that are somewhat physically less accurate,
but theoretically they're more practical.
So we're going to use spatially smeared interactions temporarily instantaneous,
and that kills off our time ordering,
and we can do fully non-perturbed interactions and unitaries,
and we're going to do some powerful stuff with that.
Okay, so we effectively coupled a single quantum harmonic oscillator subsystem of the field,
and it's this certain quadrature.
This is a smeared-out field operator smeared with respect to a certain distribution,
we're going to assume they're of compact support very often.
So we could choose what to probe this subspace with,
either a qubit and qubits, which form a qu-dit,
which is like an exponentially large atom, or harmonic oscillators,
which is my personal favorite in this thesis.
So we're going to explore the differences between using these different probes,
first in the context of a measurement protocol,
and we're going to build some jargon that we're going to use later.
Okay, so for a continuous variable measurement, what I want to do,
let's say I want to measure a harmonic oscillator A using a control system C.
I can start my control system in a very narrow, sharp, squeezed state,
and then I can do a controlled displacement, depending on the value of the quadrature of A.
I displace by a scalar multiple of that amount my control register.
And essentially, because we're a very sharp pointer variable,
if I were to project the control register, I get a near-projective POVM, if you know what that means.
And very often we're actually going to skip the projective measurements
and just keep everything coherent, because it's easier with the formalism and its equivalent.
Okay, so every time I use, so sorry, this is an adder gate,
and you add the field, you displace one depending on the value of the other's quadrature.
So we're going to use this very often.
So the analog to digital kind of conversion, the similar kind of gate, is the following.
And this is a very classic algorithm in quantum computing.
It's called the phase estimation algorithm.
So basically we want an adder, but now our control system is made of a bunch of qubits.
So we want our readouts to be a binary kind of readout.
And basically the trick is we start with spin-ups, and then we create, we do a Fourier transform,
which if we consider the virtual qubit that these guys form,
is this state after the Fourier transform is a uniform superposition.
And let's say we expand our target state in eigenstates of the observable we're trying to measure.
Then if you act a certain exponential of an operator out in eigenstate, it becomes a phase.
And the phase, as we all know, kicks through tensor products.
So we call this a kickback.
And so because these are controlled unitaries, they depend on the state of which superposition in here.
Then each different superposition will pick up a different phase.
And then when we inverse Fourier transform, these relative phases get converted
into actually the standard basis 0s and 1s.
So essentially this is like a shift operator, but it shifts the binary value.
It gives us an approximate value, binary readout.
And you could use a lot more qubits, and it converges to a new project of measurement,
like the squeeze state implemented a very large squeeze.
And what's really neat is that we actually use single qubit to oscillator interactions
and pre- and post-processing to form a qubit.
And these are kind of like on a riddle with their sigma z couple to field.
So very often I'm going to use the harmonic oscillator version,
because it's the simplest and the cleanest, but keep in mind that we can always emulate
the harmonic oscillator with a bunch of qubits this way with the Fourier transform.
Okay, so a couple, a bunch of probes, we start with this smeared observable.
So what subspace of the field are we helping do?
Usually we factorize the Hilbert space, factorize, but using a maximum communing set of observables
to field at every point, for example, that's a very typical cartoon we use,
is a bunch of coupled harmonic oscillators being in the quantum field.
And we have a canonical commutation relation, we have phi and phi at every point,
and out of these operators we construct, you know, every other observable.
Okay, so now we would like to, instead of writing a spatially composition,
write it in terms of smeared observables.
So for each phi we can build a pi, which is just a smeared pi with a normalization,
and we obey the canonical commutation relation,
and suppose we have an orthogonal basis for the L squared integral functions,
then we can build out of this basis a maximally commuted set of observables,
and we get a harmonic oscillator for every basis element,
and the Hilbert space factorizes into the Hilbert space of the subspace of each smearing.
And often we're going to just have a bunch of disjoint compactly supported smearing,
and then we're going to assume there exists a basis completion in some sense.
But we don't need to work with these directly,
it's just kind of abstract formalism,
but it's very practical and shortens calculation like tenfold.
Okay, so what's useful about this is that we could rewrite the Hamiltonian.
Usually we write the Hamiltonian like this, we have the derivative coupling,
if you expand the derivative as a finite difference approximation,
then you get a nearest neighbor like quadratic coupling.
Usually we decouple, we diagonalize the Hamiltonian,
we take Fourier transform, right?
And so the Fourier transform is like the kind of the eigenbasis of the,
it's like the meto eigenbasis of the Hamiltonian.
So in terms of smearing observables, it's not diagonal, it's more like the space,
but we have something like this, and we have a quadratic coupling here,
and if we assume that our basis is made of compactly supported functions,
then the derivatives are also compactly supported,
and these guys only couple to a handful of other guys,
maybe uncountable, whatever.
And so it's like a virtual lattice, just like this is a lattice of harmonic oscillators.
So we could use this to pour it over some calculations
from actual lattice calculations later on.
Okay, so a quick review of Gramscian states, lightning review.
So Gramscian states of quadratic Hamiltonians are Gaussians,
Gaussian states are fully specified by where they are and how they're squished,
and the phase space grows linearly in the number of oscillators.
So it's really nice, you could do nice detailed calculations of energy
and entropy and whatnot, that's what we use.
And any quadratically generated unitary, like the one we use for the aggregates,
preserves Gaussianity.
So we're going to be working the Gaussian state formalism,
the formalism that allows for our calculations to be very attractive.
Okay, so the ground state of this quadratically coupled Hamiltonian
is Gaussian in terms of the smeared observables.
So that's very practical.
So more or less the central theme of the thesis
is what I call the local versus non-local duality.
So the ground state is unattangled in the Fourier factorization, right,
the Hamiltonian is diagonal, so it's a product state of ground states.
But when you have couplings, you have entanglement across tensor factors.
And that's what we use for entanglement harvesting,
the entanglement between the different smears.
And conversely, if I do a local operation when I, that's compactly supported,
when I take a Fourier transform, it's non-local in Fourier space.
Something that's local in space is non-local in kind of the metaheism basis of energy.
So energetically, local action is non-local.
That's kind of what we use for quantum energy teleportation.
We use both this formalism and Fourier modes for the calculations of the thesis.
Okay, so entanglement harvesting, that's our first application of probing.
We've done a lot of background now.
So the goal of entanglement harvesting is you want to swap entanglement
that's living between these subspaces of the field onto certain probe.
I choose harmonic oscillators because they're the most compatible,
in some sense, and easy to work with.
And I do a continuous variable swap gate because it exists.
And basically, if you know quantum computing, this is extremely familiar.
This is how you build swap gates with usual qubits, qubit adders,
but in this case, it's harmonic oscillator adders.
And essentially, we swap the state locally, here and here,
and whatever entanglement we have between these two subspaces
gets transferred onto the probes.
And you can harvest all the entanglement that was in between these two subspaces
for the ground state or whatever state you really want.
So Gaussian interactions are easily computable,
computing a thesis, and again, you can swap it onto a digital registry if you want it,
and using n-rid with interactions.
Okay, so quantum energy teleportation, a different application.
So this is the basic protocol.
Usually, we use a single qubit, and we couple to a certain subspace.
And basically, we want to harness the correlations between these two subspaces
such that once we measure here, we gain some level of knowledge about the fluctuations over here
because we don't know much about here.
It costs energy.
When we couple, we create fluctuations, we inject energy.
And then when we transfer over the information to Bob,
because we have some knowledge of B, we can suppress these fluctuations.
And what kind of gate do we do?
It's just an adder gate, but we tune the coupling in the right way.
And basically here, I do a fully coherent protocol,
and there's a theorem that says you could do this.
You could skip, instead of measuring the qubit after Alice does her interaction
and sending classical information, you could just send quantum information.
And it's theoretically the same protocol.
So just for formalism, it's easier to stay coherent.
Okay, so this is the calculation I did.
It's the same protocol, but on steroids in some sense.
You have multiple sites where you measure and multiple target sites,
and you use harmonic oscillators.
And we want to use the correlations between every pair of sites between A and B.
And we want to do this in a smart way.
So again, we use adder gates to do a measurement using squeeze states, as we saw.
And then we carry over the information, and then we couple each to each.
And then we suppress the fluctuations.
So it's one to one here and all to all there, but you could split up the interactions.
And here's a circuit representation using our adder gates we mentioned.
And you have a coupling, you have to tune for each, a coupling matrix.
And then the calculations, I found the optimum for energy teleportation.
What you want is to create negative energy density at the target site,
which means you have lowered the energy from the vacuum energy density.
Okay, so we could calculate this using our formalism.
This is one of the cleaner answers I was able to copy from the thesis.
In the limit of very large squeezing, we get the optimal energy,
while this is changing energy, so it's negative, is a correlator,
in the case of the distance, divided by some variance and some norm.
And basically, the self-variance of this is basically Alice.
That's considered as noise.
It's like fluctuations that are not from correlations with Bob.
Okay, so for numerics, we could port over all our formalism
to actually use an actual finite discrete lattice and write it on a computer.
And we could, well, it's not showing very well,
but we could compute entanglement entropies and we have more freedom that way
because we have the power of Gaussian state formalism and numerics.
So here are some plots, there are many more,
but the most basic thing we're to expect is that this is,
you want this to be negative for more energy extraction,
but you extract more energy as the mutual information increases.
Something more surprising is on the right,
is that you actually, when you extract energy at site B,
you increase entanglement entropy of B with its complement.
And that's interesting because a good measurement actually breaks entanglement, right?
If a certain subset is entangled with a bunch of other things
and you perturb it with a probe, then you break the entanglement it had.
And you inject energy by doing so.
But when you extract energy, you actually increase the entanglement.
So there seems to be a nice little relation there,
and there may be some deeper implications.
Maybe I'll talk about that later.
Okay, so other calculations, this is just the laundry list.
Measurements, so yeah, for the multi-point measurement,
computed energetic cost information, gain, broken entanglement,
qubits, qubits, harmonic oscillators,
for general multi-point measurement,
it's an entanglement harvesting,
calculated the energetic cost of swap gates using formalism,
it was a clean calculation.
Then for quantum energy, the overtation,
information gain versus entanglement breaking for the measurements
and all the energetics for the multi-point continuous variable case,
which we saw, the finite discrete harmonic lattice,
which was in collaboration with Jason for that mention, the numerics.
And for clock-like qubits, which I didn't mention,
but it was a paper with Eddie Onakim.
But I don't have time to talk much about that.
Yeah, and numerical analysis.
Okay, so this is the bonus round.
This is some of the cool stuff
that I've come up with towards the end of my thesis,
but I had time to finish.
So the best measurement for quantum energy palpitation
is about breaking entanglement.
So I wonder how could we break all the entanglement
of a certain region with its exterior?
Well, in general, if I have a certain entangled pure state,
I have a Schmitt decomposition,
and say I measured A in the Schmitt basis,
then I go from an entangled state and a product here
to a GHC entanglement,
and that breaks the entanglement between A
and its complement completely.
Well, it breaks a big chunk.
So now let's say we have a spherical region
and its causal diamond,
and there must exist a Schmitt decomposition
for the bipartition between the whole space of this
and its complement,
and the Schmitt basis is necessarily the eigenbasis
of the modular Hamiltonian.
If you have something like this, you take a trace,
you know, it's going to be a sum like this.
The modular Hamiltonian is like the log
of the reduced density matrix.
So when you do a singular value decomposition theorem
for your Schmitt decomposition,
it's like optimizing the local Bogoliubov transformations,
and in quantum field theory,
Bogoliubov transformations are like coordinates
and they're a change of basis of modes, right?
So I was wondering, can you construct a set of Schmitt basis modes, right?
Because when you have a basis for a quantum field,
it's a bunch of modes.
So working backwards from some recent work by Jacobson,
constructed some modes,
and this is an example.
So usually in the Rindler case,
we have a horizon, we have a chirp near the horizon,
and then it's red shifts,
but since here we have kind of two horizons,
I have a double chirp.
That's interesting.
I have actually some geometric intuition
using path integrals and stuff.
Maybe somebody could ask me about that later.
I have an extra slide.
So the next steps are to compute Bogoliubov transformations,
Bogoliubov coefficients,
and then compute energetics,
like when I break all the entanglement,
and could I use this for some ultimate QT protocol?
What's interesting with these modes
is that basically when you optimize over local unitaries,
when you find the Schmitt basis,
you kind of filter out the self-correlations
with an A and with an A bar.
You only keep the correlations that cross A and A bar.
So when we were sampling a bunch of points,
if I sample a bunch of points in this region,
if they're neighboring, then they're highly correlated.
So my information would be highly redundant.
But in this way, if I sample this way,
it's kind of diagonal.
It's like the Rindler decomposition of the state
in terms of random modes.
So I get completely uncorrelated information.
So instead of having to process the information in QET,
we did some optimized over couplings
to undo some self-correlations with an A.
This just gives you the perfect raw information.
Okay.
So in conclusion,
some key messages.
You can collect quantum information,
or classical, about a certain observable,
about subspaces of the field by some probes.
And you can record this information on quantum digital,
or quantum analog, and digital analog,
kind of in a certain limit there equivalent.
You could collect quantum information at multiple locations,
and the entanglement of the field gets swapped onto the probes.
You could perform an optimal quantum energy
interpretation protocol that harnesses
multi-point correlations.
And in terms of our main theme of energy
versus information, we've got something interesting.
Measurements seem to cost energy,
measurement of the vacuum.
We seem to cost energy and break vacuum entanglement.
And when we extract energy from the local volume,
the vacuum it reinforces the vacuum entanglement.
Okay, so that's it.
Thank you very much.
