I'm very happy to have you here, especially to see this new setup of our Marenny Waite collection.
This is a piece of furniture that I think you'd be well acquainted with.
The wardrobe from Lewis' home.
And actually, by some strange circumstance, this was bought at auction at Banbury.
And this coat, which I take it was Warren's coat.
Major Warren Lewis's coat.
Or possibly C.S. Lewis's.
It's a big, heavy, solid, moral coat.
I don't know if it might well be, but it's more likely Warren's, I think.
We had paint. It looks a little unclean, but it's clean.
Anyway, we're so happy to have this wardrobe, which children come to see.
And I think you know that it was handmade, hand-carved by Lewis'...
No, I didn't know that, actually.
My name was an heir to a father family.
By Lewis' grandfather, or his great-grandfather, we'd never been able to ascertain which.
But it came across from Belfast to Oxford, and then out to the kilns.
And we're very, very happy about that.
Quite an acquisition. I'm sure you'll be congratulated, I think.
I'm getting it. It took a good deal of chasing, didn't it?
Well, yes.
But we don't mind the chase.
Would you like to come down and take a look at other things?
Well, on here is our collection of your books.
We're very proud of them.
We have first editions of all your books.
What an impressive.
And also editions of paperbacks and such.
We have as complete a collection of your works as of any one of our seven writers,
of our other six writers.
Either way, sometimes children come here to see the wardrobe, Lewis' wardrobe,
and talk about the Narnia books.
If I talk to them, I always tell them something about the silver trumpet,
which we're happy to have.
And it's always a little surprise to scholars who study you
to find out that you did a children's book.
Did you intend this as a merely a children's book?
Yes, it was the first book I ever wrote and was unpublished.
And I simply wanted to do a children's story.
Certain emotional attitudes of one's own came out to some extent in a symbolized form.
I think the silver trumpet, I suppose in my imagination,
was a kind of symbol of a feeling element that I felt was admitted too much
from social and family relations.
But the old point really was the children's story.
Quite a number of children do seem to have been really taken with it.
I think I told you, Lewis told me that Tolkien's children,
for a time, regardless of the kind of Bible,
many of the characters were kind of catchwords in the family.
Now, shall we sit down?
Well, Owen, it's going to be a little while before your lecture.
And I've been curious for a long time to know a little bit about your early relations with Lewis.
We do have a great deal of material about the Great War
and some of the philosophical and metaphysical subjects that you discussed
with Lewis in those early days.
But I'm rather ignorant about your early relations with Lewis.
You graduated from Waterham College at Oxford in 1921,
and Lewis graduated in 1922.
Did you meet at Waterham or University?
No, we met first of all at Waterham.
Actually, the college was crowded then,
and they were building just across the road
as part of the college accommodation.
And a mutual friend, Leo Baker, invited us both to tea.
Undergraduates used to invite each other to tea quite a lot then,
and other other meals sometimes.
That was when we first met.
Now, I think there is a certain amount of misconception
about my friendship with Lewis in those very early years.
While we were still both undergraduates,
we didn't see each other all that often.
We'd meet occasionally and go for a walk
or meet with this friend or put other friends.
But we were in different colleges.
We were, of course, busy and had our own groups of friends.
And I didn't see him all that often.
We were gradually, I think, feeling our way towards each other,
and we went for a walk together
and we were discovering some mutual areas of interest.
But after we left Oxford, quite shortly afterwards,
my wife and I had a house in a village called Long Crandon,
about 15 miles from Oxford.
Oh, yes.
The newest by then had, well, I think he was,
when we were first there, he was hanging about
hoping to get a job as a don.
And then, because he got one in Maudland.
And during that period, the second half of the 20s, really,
was when I saw most of him,
I would go and stay with him in his rooms at Oxford.
And he came quite often and stayed with us in our house.
It was a farm, actually,
because we were using it as a house in Long Crandon
and I would stay two or three days.
How far was that from Oxford?
15 miles.
Thank you very much.
Pirate's famous question,
what is truth,
can be interpreted in two different ways,
two very different ways.
It can be taken as asking,
what is the truth about this or that question,
and how are we to ascertain it.
Or it can be taken much more underminingly
as asking, what does one mean by truth?
Is there such a thing?
Is there really any difference between truth and error?
And I think it's true to say that
the world into which C.S. Lewis grew up,
and in which he lived out his life,
was one in which the second interpretation
was insidiously asking the first.
Moreover, that it was tending more and more
to be answered by a few deliberately and consciously,
but by an ever increasing number,
only half consciously, in the negative.
What sceptical or peronist philosophy
of one kind or another was doing for the few,
the popularization of a psychology
that presupposed the Darwinian concept
of an exclusively biological evolution
was doing for the many.
