Hello, as we saw in our last lecture, early Chinese history followed a similar pattern
to other parts of Eurasia.
Humans migrated to East Asia about 100,000 years ago and for the next 90,000 years lived
as hunter-gatherers or foragers.
From 8,000 BCE onwards however, population pressure and the adoption of semi-sedentary
life ways led to the emergence of agriculture and this in turn led to an increase in the
amount of resources produced by early farming communities which goes on to explain the emergence
of more sophisticated early cultures like Yang Shao and Long Shan.
Out of these cultures grew full-blown states and then dynasties which as we will see as
this course unfolds were eventually consolidated into huge civilizations and empires that rivaled
those in West Asia in size and power.
Now our task in the next two lectures on Eastern civilization is to consider the origins, the
history and the cultural legacy of the powerful Shang dynasty, the first really significant
Chinese dynasty and the first for which we have indisputable evidence.
In this first lecture on the Shang, I want to focus on some of their distinctive cultural
traits and achievements because these all went on to become important foundational pieces
in an emerging concept of Chinese and indeed Eastern civilization.
Until the late 1920s the Shang were just as shadowy as the Xia, there were no excavated
cities for example and no written records but in that decade the first tangible evidence
for the dynasty began to emerge, surprisingly on fragments of animal bones and shells that
were discovered in Henan province in northern China.
These fragments specifically on the shoulder blades of oxen and the under shells of turtles
had been dubbed the dragon bones by 19th century apothecaries who had been grinding them up
and selling them as medicinal potions.
But as scholars began to look at these bone fragments more closely late in the 19th century
they realized that the dragon bones were covered in small symbols.
These symbols we now know are glyphs and these are very special glyphs indeed for these were
the precursors of Chinese writing.
Now for reasons that we'll actually cover in our next lecture these bone fragments have
come to be known as the oracle bones.
In addition to providing the first material evidence for the existence of the Shang oracle
bones have been incredibly important to scholars as they seek to understand the development
of ancient Chinese writing and religion which became very influential on the writing systems
and ideological beliefs of Eastern civilization more generally.
But we'll explore all that in more detail in our next lecture.
For now let's turn instead to some of the other material evidence for the Shang that
has emerged in the last 50 years or so and in particular let's explore some of the extraordinary
Shang tombs that have been brought to light by the work of archaeologists.
In fact dozens of these enormous tombs of Shang kings and other Shang nobility have
been discovered since the 1960s and they have provided rich evidence and frankly profound
insight into Shang society and the power of the dynasty.
One of the most intriguing insights we've gained from these tombs is that the Shang
sacrificed both animals and humans to royal ancestors and to nature gods.
As I mentioned in a previous lecture it is quite probable I think that the animistic
and spirit worshipping belief systems of the Paleolithic human communities that occupied
the river valleys and plains of eastern China might have established some of these foundational
ideas of eastern civilization thousands of years earlier.
Was this Shang practice of the sacrifice of humans and animals in the tombs of their
kings perhaps an echo of the spiritualism of these earlier Paleolithic societies to
create spirit consorts and companions who would accompany the king and other high officials
into some sort of an afterlife?
The reason behind these sacrifices was probably the same as it was for hundreds of other civilizations
to make offerings to deities for help, to feed the best food, the best resources, even
the best humans to the gods of your civilization in order to keep them strong.
Whatever the reason the Shang king sacrificed dozens up to hundreds of people at a time
to their gods.
Subordinates to the king would also be sacrificed but often voluntarily as servants and family
members apparently chose to accompany their superior into death.
One of the tombs excavated at the Shang capital of Anyang known to archaeologists simply as
tomb 1001 was that of a late Shang king who reigned sometime around 1200 BCE.
Inside archaeologists found the remains of 90 sacrificed family members and retainers
who had followed their regent into death plus the remains of 74 other humans, 12 horses
and 11 dogs who I'm quite sure had been sacrificed non-voluntarily.
Archaeologists theorized that these non-voluntary sacrificial victims were probably either
prisoners of war or convicted criminals that they had and that they had been buried alive
in the funeral ritual.
Indeed early in the Shang all these sacrificial victims were probably either buried alive
or murdered before the funeral but later many were expected to commit suicide before or
during the ritual.
The methods used to kill sacrificial victims which are described clearly in the oracle
bones were brutal.
Beheading, splitting the body in two halves, dismembering, beating to death, chopping to
death and so on.
But each method had a particular ritualized significance and was thought to appease the
gods in different ways.
So in other words the frequency and the methods used to sacrifice victims demonstrates both
the cruelty of the kings towards their subjects but also ironically their extreme religious
piety.
These great burials including the human sacrifices took place as part of an elaborate ritual
accompanied by music, by mass chanting, by the sounding of hundreds of bronze bells
which were often buried in the tombs afterwards.
Thousands of labors must have been required to dig the impressive tombs, many of which
required holes up to 40 feet deep plus to construct the vast wooden burial chambers
inside and to carry in the hundreds, sometimes thousands of bronze, jade and other artefacts
not to mention then filling up the tomb afterwards.
Such was the awesome power of the Shang dynasty which replaced the semi-mythical Xia sometime
around 1600 BCE and which went on to establish several of the core foundations of Chinese
and Eastern civilization including writing, advanced bronze metallurgy and ancestor worship.
Now the Shang ruled a substantial region of northern China for the next 550 or so years
until about 1050 BCE.
The Shang state was never huge certainly not when compared to the vast dynastic empires
that will follow and was limited to parts of five northern provinces of modern China
but their cultural influence extended far beyond the borders under their direct political
control.
We know for example that many of their artistic motifs and technological innovations were
adopted by people living far to the south in the Yangtze River Valley.
We also have indisputable evidence and by that I mean inscriptional and archaeological
showing that the Shang were responsible for the development of Chinese writing, for the
creation of a much more complex social structure and for the construction of the first large
cities in all of East Asia.
The Shang also institutionalized the practice of ancestor worship and the use of fortune
telling as a way of regulating government which also went on to become two of the foundational
ritual practices of East Asian culture.
For all these reasons the Shang exerted tremendous influence on the emerging concepts of Eastern
civilization.
Now I say Eastern rather than Chinese here because as we will see as this course unfolds
Chinese culture came to exert an enormous degree of influence over all the other states
and civilizations of East and South East Asia including obviously those in Korea, Japan
and Vietnam during the period of Shang rule by the way were themselves just beginning
to emerge from out of the Neolithic era.
So as we argued in the very first lecture China was the great cultural giant of East
Asia which is why we're spending much of our time in the early part of this course focused
on early Chinese civilization.
Amongst the political influences that flowed out of the Shang dynasty was this idea of the
absolute power of the king, a power that was based firmly on their military superiority.
All the evidence suggests and again we're talking about archeological and inscriptional
evidence here, materials and artifacts discovered in Shang tombs and of course the rich treasure
trove of inscriptions from the oracle bones.
All this evidence suggests that the Shang kings engaged in regular warfare against a
wide range of foes sending out well-organized armies of up to 5,000 men on quite bloody
campaigns.
These armies were kept pretty busy fighting almost constantly to subdue rival clans and
also to keep the peasants and other commoners under control.
The Shang system of government was essentially futile based on clan birthright and a system
of vassal relationships with local leaders.
But often vassals revolted and became enemies, often formerly bitter enemies became allies.
So as we would expect in this age of frequent warfare, military technology made considerable
advances in terms of weapons, infrastructure and of course tactics.
This of course is one of the absolute maxims of world history I think.
The most significant technological innovations in all of world history have generally been
the result of the most intense conflicts.
Putting on my world historians hat for a moment, this is even one of the arguments made by
world historians to explain why the small competitive war-like states of Europe leapt
into a position of global hegemony in the 17th century using the innovations derived
from intense competition to eventually challenge and defeat some of the great traditional empires
with serious ramifications for China as we all see.
The Shang armed forces were composed of horse cavalry, horse-drawn chariots and foot soldiers.
The latter were relatively untrained farmers that served their conscripted time in the
army when the king needed people to take the brunt of an attack.
The Shang military innovations included equipping soldiers with bronze tip spears, bronze tip
arrows, bronze swords, composite bows and horse-drawn chariots.
Some soldiers also began to wear heavy body armor for the first time made of bamboo and
wood padded with cloth.
Probably the most important innovation was the appearance of horse-drawn chariots which
made their appearance during the last two centuries of the Shang reign around 1200 BCE.
The appearance of the chariot in China is another of those vexed questions of world
history.
Some scholars argue that chariot technology was not a Shang invention at all but was
rather a result of technological diffusion from western Eurasia where the chariot had
been used by the Hittites in their invasion of Mesopotamia in the 14th century, so two
centuries before the chariot appears in China.
But other historians and archaeologists note that in the absence of any evidence of such
cultural diffusion, particularly evidence that pastoral nomadic peoples, and remember
this is the only foreign peoples with whom the early Chinese had any contact, used chariots.
So it's much more reasonable to assume that chariots emerged in China independently as
a product of Chinese military innovation.
As was the case in other parts of the ancient world where chariots were used, Shang chariots
varied quite considerably in size.
Sometimes they were pulled by two horses for example, sometimes by four.
The chariot gave a number of advantages to the side that possessed them.
In campaigns the chariots gave commanders the opportunity to closely observe battle
and supervise their troops for example, and of course chariots also provide a fast moving
mobile but still relatively stable platform for archers and spear throwers to operate
from.
When they were not being used in campaigns, chariots were also used in royal hunts which
doubled as extensive military training operations.
These hunts would sometimes last for months as the king and his followers tracked bears,
tigers, boars, elephants, even rhinoceros through the then very extensive forest cover
of northern China.
As we pointed out at the beginning of the lecture, amongst the most impressive sites
in all archaeology are the great burial tombs of the Shang kings and I have entered several
of these tombs who were buried not just with their retainers and other sacrificial victims
but also with collections of their chariots and the horses to pull them in some after
life battle.
But the king's power was not based only on his military prowess.
Like his Long Shan and Sha or Urlatau predecessors, the king also functioned as a priest or shaman
playing a critical role in the worship of the supreme god of the Shang Di.
We know from the oracle bone inscriptions and also from references in later Zhou dynasty
texts that the king used the bones to communicate with his dead ancestors and that they in turn
communicated with Di.
Because of this a royal ancestor worship cult emerged, sponsored obviously by the state,
which led to the idea that a patrilineal system of succession had to be maintained to allow
kingship to be passed from elder to younger brother and from father to son to keep the
lines of communication open with the dead ancestor spirits and thus with Di.
Apart from their intercession with ancestor spirits, we know from the royal tombs that
Shang kings amassed a great deal of wealth through war, booty, tribute and agricultural
resources, taxes, tribute, which they used to construct the first real cities ever seen
in East Asia.
Although these cities were never as large and densely populated as the early cities of Mesopotamia,
some of which by the way like Uruk had a population density equivalent to that of Manhattan today,
they were nonetheless impressive.
Archaeology suggests that the Shang may have had five successive capital cities during
their half millennium or so of reign and archaeologists have been unlocking the secrets
of these cities for the past 50 years now.
The most impressive early archaeological evidence for the Shang comes from the site of Anyang
in Nan province, which became an important cult center and which can justly lay claim
to being the first capital city of eastern civilization.
At the heart of Anyang and indeed at the heart of each of the Shang cities were the royal
palaces, the enormous temples and gigantic altars built up on rammed earth foundations,
the largest of which measured 26 by 92 feet in area.
Rammed earth construction by the way is one of the most ancient building techniques known.
Essentially large quantities of earth are brought into place then hammered into shape
using heavy log hammers, creating a structure that is surprisingly strong.
Interestingly enough this technique is so environmentally sound that many building companies
even today are advocating for the use of rammed earth construction in places like New Mexico
right here in the USA.
Surrounding the central residential and ceremonial core of the cities were industrial and craft
production zones where bronze workers, stone and jade carvers, potters and all sorts of
other artisans lived and worked.
From this zone were suburbs full of smaller houses, most probably the homes of the agricultural
workers and at the very edge of the city were the burial grounds and then beyond that again
were the farming fields.
Earlier Shang cities like Al which is frankly located so close to the modern city of Zhengzhou
that this is seriously hampered archeological efforts shows us that the Shang kings had the
ability to mobilize vast resources of labor even before Anyang, the much larger city,
was constructed.
Our mandate had been built by the 10th Shang king, King Zhongding who reigned between 1562
and 1549 before the common era.
The walls of our was 60 feet wide, 30 feet high, still even today 13 feet high and some
2385 feet long.
These archeologists estimate it would have taken perhaps 10,000 laborers somewhere between
10 and 20 years to move and compact the vast quantity of earth required for this job.
But the most famous capital is certainly Anyang where the size and layout of the city is even
more impressive.
Anyang and each of these bronze age cities also provides evidence of Shang production
of some of the most sophisticated bronze objects in all of ancient history.
Despite the cities, the military and the chariots, the wealth of the Shang is most impressively
demonstrated in the sheer volume and the quality of its magnificent bronze objects.
As is the case with the chariot, no surprise here perhaps, archeologists continue to debate
the origins of bronze metallurgy in China.
Now some argue that the techniques were another example of cultural diffusion and that they
must have been brought to China by early Indo-European migrants coming through Central Asia.
But understandably this argument is dismissed as Eurocentric by many Chinese and also many
Western archeologists and historians who note that the existence of many earlier transitional
examples of bronze artifacts, particularly those we discussed last time produced by the
char culture, that this demonstrates that the Chinese independently discover the secrets
of bronze metallurgy perhaps through experiments with high temperature kilns that were being
used in pottery production.
As we noted in our last lecture, the first bronzes in China were made at Erlertowl perhaps
under char dynastic patronage perhaps.
And even these first attempts demonstrate a wonderfully sophisticated technique.
But under Shang government patronage, the scale of bronze production increased dramatically
and quite massive volumes of bronze artifacts were produced.
Individual pieces, some of them as heavy as 200 pounds.
Now when considering the scale and quality of bronze production under the Shang, it has
to be concluded that the Shang had by far the most highly developed metallurgy industry
anywhere in the world during the second half of the second millennium before the common
era.
The quality and quantity of production achieved by the Shang required a large labor pool and
a very careful coordination of activities.
And this is obviously true at all stages of production.
You needed a well-organized mining operation, a transport operation, all the way through
to the manufacture of clay models and molds for the shaping of these bronze artifacts
down to the final smelting and then the superb artistic engraving of the finished objects.
Much of the latter stages of production took place in those special industrial and artisan
zones I mentioned within these carefully designed cities.
One Shang dynasty bronze foundry discovered at the Miao Pu by-site south of Anyang covered
an area of 100,000 square feet.
The bronze vessels that were being produced were exclusively reserved for the ruling elites.
It's important to note that the peasants continued to use stone tools right throughout
the Shang period.
The beautifully wrought and decorated cups, goblets, cauldrons and bells were all used
in sacrificial rituals and burials.
In some individual tombs hundreds of superb bronze objects have been discovered.
There are evidence of the amount of state resources that the elites were devoting to
this large-scale bronze manufacturing.
As I noted earlier, although the area of Shang political control was never enormous, at its
height Shang cultural influence extended over a huge part of modern China.
We know this particularly because of the spread of the so-called Shang bronze sphere, a term
that describes the extent of Shang influence bronze artifacts that have been found widely
dispersed throughout modern China.
In the absence of any unified Chinese people at this stage or any homogenous culture, this
meant that Shang culture was spreading into areas that were culturally and ethnically
alien.
Archaeologists have discovered evidence of several of these alien cultures contemporaneous
with the Shang that were clearly influenced by Shang bronze production.
One of these is particularly intriguing.
At the site of Sanxingdui in far southern Szechuan province, life-size bronze heads with
large eyes and sharply angular facial features were discovered which may have been used as
best as we can speculate as substitutes for human sacrifice.
Now there's one final example of Shang cultural history that we need to consider before we
wrap up this lecture and that is the insight provided into political and social life during
the Shang by the tomb of Lady Hao.
The tomb was discovered by Chinese archaeologists in 1976 when they were probing in the ruins
of the Shang city of Yin.
Their long probe shovels came back to the surface with traces of red lacquer attached
and this led them to further excavations that eventually revealed the tomb of Lady Hao.
This is one of the very few Shang tombs so far discovered that was not robbed sometime
in the ancient past.
So it has provided a rich treasure trove of archaeologists.
Now Lady Hao is a fascinating woman.
She lived around 1200 BCE.
She may have actually been one of the wives of King Wu Ding because she's mentioned
in several of his oracle bone inscriptions.
Just to remind her more about these intriguing bones in our next lecture.
These oracle bone inscriptions tell us that she was an exceptional woman in what was frankly
a very patriarchal age.
We read for example that she supervised huge state rituals, that she had her own private
estate outside of the capital, that she personally led several military campaigns including leading
an army of 13,000 troops that was sent by the king against the Chiang barbarians far
to the west.
The tomb was only small and intriguingly was not located within the confines of the royal
cemetery but it was filled with an astonishing array of artifacts.
Sixteen humans had been sacrificed at the burial including men, women and children but
the tomb also contained 460 superb bronze objects including the most complete set of
ritual bronze vessels ever discovered.
Along with 750 jade objects, 70 stone sculptures, 500 hairpins and nearly 7000 kauri shells
which surely must be evidence that these shells were being used as money during the Shang dynasty.
So in every way then here is evidence of an extraordinary and powerful woman.
Now as I've mentioned in the previous lecture one of the critical themes that we need to
consider as we explore the rich foundations and evolution of eastern civilization is the
role of women and the evolving nature of gender relations.
So the tomb of Lady Hao and also the fact that of the 700 or so personal names recorded
on the Shang oracle bones, 170 of them are women's names surprisingly right?
This evidence might suggest that this was a relatively gender egalitarian society.
The context in which all these names appear also shows us that elite women like Lady Hao
were supervising religious rituals, paying valuable tribute to court, were responsible
for the harvests and as we just noticed were even leading armies into battle.
Yet despite the lady's wealth and eminence, what are we to make of the meaning of one
of the oracle inscriptions about Lady Hao?
Which notes that she was unlucky in childbirth because she gave birth to a girl.
This is how the oracle bone inscription describes her bad luck.
Quote, Lady Hao shall have a fortunate birth.
The king prognosticated saying if she gives birth on a ding day it shall be fortunate.
If on a ding day it shall be greatly auspicious.
On the 33rd day Lady Hao gave birth, it was not fortunate, it was a girl.
Attitudes towards women, often contradictory, often ambiguous, will constitute a crucial
theme in many future lectures.
But in our next lecture we will continue our investigation of the Shang and their important
influence on an evolving East Asian civilization by returning to these intriguing oracle bones
and to the insights they provide on the development of Chinese religion, more particularly on
the origins and development of East Asian writing which will go on to become the dominant
writing system for all of East Asia.
Thank you.
