So far in this course we have traced the evolution of Chinese and East Asian civilization from
the first farming communities through to the emergence of impressive dynasties like the
Shung.
We have seen how villages and towns grew into great cities like Ao and Anyang and how powerful
leaders learned to use a combination of sacred and secular power to rule over their people.
Already by 1100 BCE many of the foundations of East Asian civilization were in place to
facilitate the system of government, including a patrilineal order of succession, the use
of ancestor spirits to intercede with the gods, a fairly rigid social hierarchy which
mirrored that in heaven, well equipped standing armies, bronze metallurgy and of course a
complex writing system.
Now we need to see how the successors of the Shung, the Zhou dynasty, introduced a new and
very durable concept of government to justify their seizure of power, the mandate of heaven.
China has long since abandoned traditional dynastic rule of course, just as most Western
democracies have abandoned absolute monarchy.
But whereas few in the West would call upon the divine right of monarchs today, in contemporary
China a solid belief that leaders have to justify their legitimacy by holding themselves
accountable to high standards of ethical behavior continues to underpin government.
Time around the year 1050 BCE the powerful Zhou tribe rose up in the Wei river valley
of western China, invaded the central plains and attacked the Shung.
The last Shung king was defeated by the leader of the Zhou, King Wu, at the battle of Muya
around 1045 BCE.
According to a description in the Zhou dynasty text, the classic of documents, the battle
was so violent that blocks of wood floated in rivers of blood along the streets of the
capital.
But this was a strategic as well as a military victory.
The Zhou had built a coalition of partners amongst disaffected states that were all tribute
paying subjects of the Shung and they used this effectively to destroy Shung power.
To justify their seizure of power, the Zhou accused the late Shang kings of corrupt rule,
condemning the last Shang ruler as, and I quote, a criminal fool given to wine, women,
tyranny and greed.
In contrast, the Zhou was seen by later historians as a dynasty based on fair rule and on the
humane treatment of subjects and conquests, founded on an almost utopian agrarian form
of government.
But of course we have to be very careful how we interpret these written arguments, which
as is so often the case in history, were written by the victors.
Yet the interpretation persisted.
For many later Chinese thinkers, the victory of the Zhou was seen as no mere coup d'etat,
but rather as a momentous event that expressed the very will of heaven itself.
Two centuries after their destruction of the Shang, arguments began appearing in the
Book of Odes, suggesting that the shift in power that saw the Zhou replace the Shang was
because the Zhou had been granted this thing called the mandate of heaven.
The theory is that the gods have the ability to take power away from any earthly group
that has become unfit to rule, such as the Shang, and pass this power to another group
that was more morally suited to rule, in this case the Zhou, who was seen to have had many
virtuous and ethical men to lead the state.
But as we'll see if the early Zhou leaders did indeed have a mandate of heaven to rule,
that mandate did not last.
Within three centuries of seizing power, the Zhou state had fragmented into a bitterly
divided feudal kingdom characterized by almost endless warfare.
Despite this historical reality, the Zhou seizure of power has passed into myth as the
heroic conquest of a corrupt government by a more morally suitable one, a conquest not
just supported but actually commanded by an impartial heaven.
This concept of the mandate of heaven continued to resonate in Chinese political history for
three thousand years, remaining in effect until the fall of the last dynasty ever to
rule China, the Qing in 1912.
And to a certain extent this idea is still in the background of government arguments
about legitimacy today.
This is another of the core foundations of eastern civilization and as we will see it
has played a significant role in the political philosophy of virtually all the states of
East and Southeast Asia.
So who were the Zhou anyway and how did they come to so deeply influence the course of
Chinese history?
In the rest of this lecture I want to address that question beginning with the rise of the
Zhou and their very successful first three centuries of rule during what's known as the
Western Zhou dynasty period.
We call this first period of the Zhou Western because during this period the Zhou rule from
their Western capital of Hao near the modern Chinese city of Xian.
Even today scholars disagree about the origins of the Zhou.
They are mentioned certainly in the Shang oracle bones but in many sort of conflicting ambiguous
capacities as foreign enemies of the Shang, sometimes as imbitted allies of the Shang
and then as a truly formidable and powerful foe of the Shang before they disappear completely
from the bone inscriptions.
So this suggests that the Zhou might have been an alien people, perhaps culturally quite
distinct from the Shang, perhaps connected to other Western alien tribes that placed
a greater emphasis on military ritual.
After the Zhou seized power from the Shang the king ruled the core homeland in the Wei
Valley while the brothers and nephews of the king defended and managed the territories
to the north.
The early kings ruled from the Zhou capital of Hao near Xian or Chang'an as this great
capital city was called for many, many centuries consolidating their power through military
and commercial expansion.
At the height of Western Zhou rule between the late 10th and late 9th centuries the kings
had power over a huge territory that ranged from the Gansu region far out in the west
on the edge of the Gobi Desert to the Beijing region in the northeast all the way down to
the Sichuan province in the southwest and the Yangtze River Valley in the southeast.
This was the first Chinese state to unify the two great river valleys of China.
The first three Zhou kings are given great credit in the Zhou texts for establishing
this stable and successful state and facilitating this quite spectacular expansion.
The first king, King Wen forged the critical alliances that were necessary to defeat the
Shang.
His son King Wu built the capital and then defeated the last Shang king at the Battle
of Muya in 1045.
But Wu died young only six years later and it was his son the Duke of Zhou who conducted
the successful campaigns of conquest that created the vast Zhou state.
The Zhou kings soon began to monopolize certain valuable resources and used these to establish
a system of political loyalty through tribute taking and gift giving.
All the valuable objects of Shang religion and tribute, I'm thinking here of bronze of
jade and cowery shells with us used by the Zhou elites as a means of acquiring and maintaining
political control.
The sophistication of Zhou craftsmanship, the magnificent bronze vessels, the carved
jade even superb musical instruments that their craftsmen created is evidence of just
how successfully the dynasty controlled the valuable resources needed for their production
over large areas of modern China.
The system of using valuable resources to enhance political power also influenced changing
Zhou notions about religion.
In the beginning of the dynasty the Zhou kings worshiped the Shang gods but by the mid 10th
century, so a century or so after seizing power, Zhou ancestor spirits had become the
new objects of state veneration.
As the Zhou began to reward their loyal supporters with these material gifts we've just been
discussing which also included lavish clothing, wine and gifts of agricultural land, the recipients
were expected to use many of these same items in feasts and sacrifices to the Zhou ancestor
spirits.
The Zhou kings themselves prayed directly to heaven or dian as it was known which they
regarded as a model of how the world should operate.
Now like the Shang, Zhou religious practices linked the hierarchy of heaven with hierarchical
society here on earth, each was essentially a reflection of the other.
So the kings prayed and sacrificed to d remember the lord on high who dwelt in dian and also
to their ancestor spirits.
During the western Zhou something new occurred, something else happened to validate leadership.
The king began to be called the son of heaven and claimed that only he had the right to
make sacrifices to dian, to heaven, in the capital.
The lords of the territories and the vassals of the Zhou were allowed to pray to the local
nature gods and to the gods of agriculture as well as to the Zhou royal ancestor spirits.
Human sacrifice as we saw a rich part of Shang dynasty burial practice declined under
the Zhou and while the practice of voluntary sacrifice to accompany the king in his death
continued this also did so on a much smaller scale.
The use of oracle bones also declined under the Zhou to be replaced by a new divination
system outlined in the book of changes, the famous the classic I Ching that I'm sure many
of you have heard of which involves the interpretation of randomly selected sets of lines broken
and unbroken.
The book of changes was one of the five classics of the western Zhou dynasty literature that
went on to become the core canon of Chinese and East Asian philosophy and literature for
the next 3000 years.
We'll come back to the book of changes when we talk about the great Han Emperor Wu Di
who used the book to interpret an extraordinary dream he had about the heavenly horses, more
about that in the future.
But along with the book of changes, the five classics included the book of odes that we
discussed last time, the book of documents or the book of history as it's also called,
the book of rights and the spring and autumn annals which was composed during the later
Zhou dynasty period.
As we'll see in our very next lecture, these were the books later selected by the great
sage Confucius to become the text books of his emerging philosophy.
These books became the literature that all educated and ethical men were expected to
master.
These became the core canon of Eastern philosophy.
Confucius is also said to have personally selected 300 poems from the book of odes and
edited them into their current form.
Although as with so much in the life of Confucius, this is pretty difficult to confirm.
Whatever, whoever composed it, the book of odes is one of the greatest works of world
literature and certainly one of the towering monuments of Western Zhou culture.
The odes were meant to be read aloud and learned by heart and they may also have been set to
music and sung.
Confucius himself is a great musician.
The poems in the book of odes depict people from all layers of society, from the kings
and the high priests down to the peasants.
We read poems about ordinary men and women going about their daily work, sowing and harvesting,
feeding mulberry leaves to the silkworms, spinning thread.
Other poems tell us how to make millet wine, how to thatch a roof and describe the joys
of a full granary.
But returning to politics, the practice that developed amongst the early kings of having
their relatives govern parts of the state set the pattern for later Zhou dynasty rule
and in many ways directly contributed to the collapse of Zhou central power.
The kings originally charged their relatives with the role of governing and defending territories,
often commemorating these arrangements if you like with bronze inscriptions that were
set up in the regional cities.
But over the centuries, the bonds of blood and family were stretched thinner and thinner
until many of these vassals were only nominally ruling in the name of the king, but were
actually ruling these territories for themselves.
As Zhou central power eventually weakened, vassals more and more began to pay lip service
only to their liege and the state fragmented into a series of regional kingdoms only loosely
affiliated to the Zhou central court.
The Zhou domain was now so large that a political system that was based on the idea that the
exchange of materials between monarchs and vassals to ensure the maintenance of a power
relationship became less and less effective.
The kings continued to give their authority to increasingly powerful nobles who over time
became less closely related to the royal family.
Now these nobles theoretically held their lands at the king's will and were required
to provide troops and fight for him and under the powerful early Zhou kings who were successful
in war and politics, this system worked very well.
But after the two centuries, the first two centuries of the Zhou dynasty, a series of
weak and complacent kings along with increasingly powerful independent vassals lessened the
power of the throne.
Scholars debate whether it's appropriate to describe this political structure as feudal,
right, like the relationship between lords and vassals in medieval Europe.
Now it's always dangerous applying European labels, European systems to East Asian labels,
East Asian systems.
But one striking difference between the two I think that we can point out is that this
Zhou system was based on the bonds of kinship in that these vassals were theoretically directly
related to the ruling family, although as we've just said this stretched more and more
thin over the centuries.
Another significant difference I think between European feudalism and Zhou dynasty feudalism,
if we want to call it that, is that there was no deeper system of subordination where
vassals of the king in turn had their own vassals.
An arrangement that in medieval Europe extended all the way down to a single knight who swore
his allegiance to his immediate liege.
The Zhou system of political allegiances was nowhere near this deep or extensive.
The death knell for the western Zhou came in the year 771 BCE when King Yao decided
to replace his legitimate queen with his favorite concubine, a woman named Bao Si.
The legitimate queen's father was the powerful Marquis of Shen.
He was so outraged that he attacked and sacked the Zhou capital.
The queen's son was now proclaimed the new king by the nobles from four other states
including the Marquis of Shen.
The capital was moved eastward to a new capital near Zhengzhou in present day He Nan province
in China and it's because of this shift from the western capital to the eastern capital
that the Zhou dynasty is divided by historians into the western Zhou which lasts to remember
until 771 and the eastern Zhou which picks up a year later from 770 and lasts to 256 BCE.
So what we need to do now is turn to this more than 500 year long eastern Zhou era which
is further subdivided just to complicate things even more into two sub periods.
The first of these which lasted from 770 to 481 is called the spring and autumn period
after a great historical chronicle that was compiled throughout this period.
The second is known as the warring states period named after another great chronicle
that was written during this era.
The warring states lasted from 480 to 256 BCE although it would not be until the year
221 that the Qin dynasty would restore order and unity to China.
I should say by the way that all these dates can be overwhelming they're really not that
important.
The key thing that I hope to communicate with you is what happened, the extraordinary stories
that unfolded through this long history of fascinating ancient China, the dates are really
not that important.
Throughout all this period the Zhou royal family managed to hang on although they now
ruled in a ceremonial capacity only.
Real power now lay elsewhere in the hands of the former vassals, regional kings, warlords
with their own armies and alien tribes including militarized nomads.
The formerly powerful Zhou kings were now puppets of the forces of these various regional
factions and states which jockied for control in a fragmented and hostile environment.
During the spring and autumn period we read in the great chronicle that over 150 kingdoms
coexisted with the Zhou including the seven most powerful states of that time, Qi, Lu,
Jin, Yan, Qin, Zhu and the Wu state.
These strong states launched wars to expand their territories, forcing the smaller states
to accept their hegemony.
From the annals we learned that during the spring and autumn period at least 36 kings
were killed, many were murdered, many died on the battlefield and 52 vassal states were
demolished.
The constant conflict and this annexation of one state by another hastened social and
economic change in China and had the effect of more deeply integrating people of the different
tribes and ethnicities into a more homogenous Chinese culture.
Indeed despite war and political instability the later Zhou was one of the most culturally,
socially and technologically creative eras in all of China's enormous history.
It was during the spring and autumn period for example that China entered the Iron Age.
I'll have more to say in a later lecture about the extraordinary extent of the iron industry
that developed in ancient China particularly during the Han dynasty.
But the discovery of iron during the later Zhou period driven for sure by military innovation
also led to the appearance of the iron tip plow drawn by an ox.
Now this allowed much rougher ground to be plowed for the first time, it increased agricultural
output significantly, this allowed for rapid population growth despite the regular destruction
that was being caused by incessant warfare.
The earliest defensive walls that would later become part of the Great Wall of China were
also erected during the last centuries of the Zhou.
As you would imagine I'll have a lot more to say about this in a later lecture.
This expanded despite this conflict during the period with carousels, remember the carousels
that we found in the tomb of Lady Hao, with spade shaped money cast from bronze with bales
of raw silk with ingots of gold and silver all now being used as mediums of exchange
in this increasingly commercialized environment.
As Zhou dynastic power weakened after the 9th century the formerly rigid social hierarchy
also began to change.
Land could now be purchased by those with money rather than just inherited by the nobility
or bequeathed to you by the king, allowing for the possibility at least that members
of lower social orders might begin to achieve quasi-elite status for the first time in China's
history.
As commerce expanded during the spring and autumn period a wealthier middle class did
indeed emerge for the first time in the history of China.
We know this because of the value of artifacts that archaeologists have found in merchant
homes from this period.
But of course this barely affected the elites who grew more and more aloof from the masses
and of course the peasants at the other end were excluded from any possibility of social
mobility.
The peasants were tied to villages where they worked as tenant farmers for landed gentry
on plots so small they could not even produce a crop surplus.
As a result of this in an important reform in the state of Lu in the year 594 BCE the
ruling house began to require that peasants start paying land rents directly to them rather
than to local landlords.
This is the first example we have from China of a system of direct taxation on the peasants.
A system that went on to become a major source of revenue to each of the warring states during
the last bloody centuries of the Zhou and frankly to most subsequent Chinese governments through
to the present day.
As a result of this period of drastic upheaval what had been several hundred smaller states
were now reconstituted into a handful of megastates and the Zhou dynasty ended its end game the
warring states period the aptly named warring states period.
Some formerly powerful states were utterly destroyed during the warring states but others
like Qin and Chu who occupied regions outside of the heartland of the central plains became
increasingly formidable.
The Qin were based in the northwest centered on the fertile Wei river valley where they
enjoyed several strategic advantages.
They regarded themselves as culturally superior and the people of the central plains including
the Zhou royal dynasty as only quote semi civilized.
Now the Chu were located much further to the south in the Yangtze river valley not surprisingly
given their environment their diet was based on rice and fish and their language was said
to have been almost incomprehensible to the people of the central plains.
During the warring states Qin and Chu fought each other and the other megastates of China
on a scale frankly hitherto unseen in human history.
We read in the great annals of the warring states that armies as large as 600,000 infantry
fought massive campaigns massive battles in campaigns that lasted between one and five
years although these figures must surely be exaggerated new and deadlier weapons were
developed such as the crossbow which fired iron bolts with brutal force and deadly accuracy.
This was total war all segments of society from the top down participated in these pitch
battles.
Is it any surprise that this was also the age in which one of the greatest books on military
strategy of all time was written Sun Tzu's The Art of War.
In 13 very pragmatic chapters the author offers quite brilliant analyses of virtually every
tactic that might gain a warring state the upper hand in a campaign including the use
of spies and deception.
But although a superb military strategist clearly well versed an experience in the art
of war Sun Tzu repeatedly argued that war should be avoided at all costs.
He wrote and I quote no long war ever profited any country 100 victories and 100 battles
is simply ridiculous.
And their attempts to gain a competitive advantage several of the warring states were quick to
adopt strategies used by the militarized nomads who remember were very active in the steps
to the north including arming archers and putting them on horseback.
We know of a famous debate that took place between Joe government officials it's there
in the annals on whether it was appropriate for a culturally superior people like the
Joe to adopt the weapons and tactics of low barbarians like the nomads.
Now the rulers of the Chin state which being located in the north was close to the stepland
homes of the nomads anyway had no qualms about adopting their stratagems.
Barbarian or not if these help them to conquer their rivals.
So the Chin under the guidance of some of the cleverest political advisers of the late
Joe dynasty men we will meet in a lecture very soon abolished the estates of the nobility
introduced near universal military conscription and also a system of direct taxation to increase
their revenues all of which strengthened the power of the central government the power
of the state.
By the late fourth century the Chin were politically and militarily very strong and were poised
to take on all their rivals.
As we'll see fairly soon in fact the next chapter in the history of the country we now
call China would be written by the Chin but let me conclude by briefly following the fortunes
of the now powerless Joe dynasty through to its ultimate end.
In the year 316 the Chin defeated the state of Shu one of the modern megastates in modern
Sichuan.
Four years later they defeated the second most powerful state of Chu at the bloody battle
of Danyang more about that in a later lecture.
Despite this Chin victory the Joe dynasty kings managed to hold on to some remnant of symbolic
power for another half century or so until the year 256 before the common era when the
last King was deposed.
This state marks the official end of the extraordinary 800 year long rule of the Joe the longest
dynasty to ever rule China although it would be another 35 years before the Chin King was
powerful enough to establish his own dynasty and crown himself not just King now but emperor
the first emperor of a unified Chinese state.
These chaotic late centuries of the Joe dynasty brought political and military confusion as
we've seen culminating in the aptly named warring states period but it was this very
disunity and conflict that led to great advances in Joe literature in sort of social structures
the emergence of a middle class for the first time enhanced economic activity and great
technological innovation.
The chaos also helps explain why incredibly rich schools of philosophy emerged in the later
Joe dynasty also as a direct product of a profound reflection on the nature of society
the role of the individual the role of government in trying to establish re-establish really
harmony in the state.
Three of these schools have gone on to dominate Chinese political and cultural traditions
right up to the present day.
I'm talking of course about Taoism, legalism and Confucianism as we will see subsequent
Chinese rulers were faced with the decision of whether to adapt adopt Confucianism, Taoism
or legalism as the guiding principle and philosophy of their dynasty.
Now we're going to join these leaders in their deliberations as we consider these cornerstone
foundational ideas of Eastern civilization in our next group of lectures.
See you then.
