Last time we noted that the political instability of the later Joe dynasty was responsible for
the emergence of rich streams of thought between the 6th and 3rd centuries BCE during
a period of great political and military unrest and major social upheaval, a series of great
Chinese thinkers profoundly considered the nature of society and government, even the
very purpose of human existence.
The philosophies they created on how humans should live in a social and political context,
notably Confucianism, Taoism and Legalism, have substantially shaped Chinese culture
ever since.
And because these philosophies were exported to all the other states and regions of East
and Southeast Asia, they are of fundamental importance for any understanding of Eastern
civilization more generally.
Of these three major ideologies, and indeed the hundreds of other schools of thought that
emerged during this later Joe period, the most enduring by far has been Confucianism, whose
beliefs continue to resonate in China to this very day.
The extraordinary growth in China's economy over the past couple of decades has been clouded
somewhat by problems such as an increase in crime rate, rising unemployment, corruption
and a widening wealth gap.
These social problems have sent many Chinese thinkers back to the teachings of the 6th
century BCE philosopher Confucius in a search for possible solutions.
Recent public statements made by senior social policy advisors like Kang Xiaoguang, advisor
to the former Chinese premier Zhu Rongjie, have argued that it is vital China rediscovers
the Confucian values he believes have been lost.
This message that only a recommitment to Confucianism can rebuild China's moral and social standards
resonates almost as strongly today amongst intellectuals and policy makers as it did
more than 2,000 years ago.
Indeed for the past two and a half millennia, the guiding philosophy of China and much of
East Asia has been Confucianism.
Other ideologies have certainly challenged Confucianism over the centuries, particularly
Daoism, Legalism and Buddhism, each of which we will certainly be exploring in this course.
From the early Han dynasty through to the 20th century, Confucianism has been recognized
by the majority of Chinese governments as the official ideology of the state.
Its emphasis on ethical leadership, moral behavior and the acceptance of one's proper
place in society is seen by many as providing the sort of ethical integrity that has been
eroded by China's rapid recent growth.
Not that there is universal agreement in modern China on the wisdom of re-embracing Confucianism.
Former Chinese Premier Hu Jintao's administration made several pronouncements arguing that officials
should dedicate themselves to the interests of the public they serve.
And this is a clear Confucianist illusion, but at the same time academics like Professor
Hu Xindao of the Beijing Institute of Technology have argued that Confucianism is no longer
appropriate for modern China, which instead should embrace more tangible systems of accountability
amongst officials, such as the Western rule of law and democratic elections.
But for many the debate over whether to re-emphasize Confucianism is over, for them the question
is rather how this re-incorporation of its ideals should be done.
Should Confucianism be built into the national education curriculum, for example, should
be emphasized as a political ideology or even promoted as a new national religion?
Even the media has embraced this Confucian revival with a host of modern television dramas
focusing on good Confucian emperors from many of China's pre-Republican dynasties.
Now all of this is quite astonishing when we think of Confucius himself, a member of
the lower nobility in an insignificant state, a man who never had a real job and who left
none of his own writings behind, but his ideas have certainly survived to become one of the
foundational cornerstones of all of Eastern civilization.
They remain just as influential, just as relevant in East Asia today as Socratic philosophy
is in the West.
In this lecture, I intend to consider Confucius and his philosophy from four different perspectives.
First, let's look at what we know about the life of Confucius, which frankly is not a
great deal.
Next we need to consider the Anilex, the book that is purported to be the sayings of Confucius.
Then I want to try and clearly delineate and describe the important social and political
innovations that Confucius introduced into East Asian culture.
And finally, let's try and get at the heart of Confucian philosophy.
What are its core beliefs?
What are its core values?
First then, what do we know about the life of the man we in the West call Confucius?
For many scholars, perhaps the single most significant event in the 800-year-long history
of the Zhou dynasty was the birth of Confucius, which probably occurred in the small northern
state of Lu.
I say probably because for a man of such towering influence, surprisingly little is known about
his actual life.
According to most accounts, Confucius was born in Lu to a good family, part of the lower
level aristocracy, and he spent much of his life trying to find a decent job as a political
advisor.
As he traveled from state to state, looking for an influential post, he attracted a group
of disciples who recognized in him a great teacher.
But there are alternatives to this standard biography.
For example, was Confucius actually a great author who composed the famous Spring and Autumn
Annals, which as you might remember from our last lecture, gave its name to this important
period of the late Zhou dynasty.
Perhaps he was a prophet.
Was he an uncrowned king?
Was he a fatherless child unaware of his own illustrious birth, the offspring of a fleeting
sexual encounter between two strangers in the wild?
We really can't be sure.
Even the meaning of his philosophy is widely interpreted.
Some see Confucius as a radical egalitarian because he accepted students from all the
classes.
Others see him as an arch-conservative clinging to outdated feudal institutions in the midst
of a period of dramatic social and political change.
Will the real Confucius please stand up?
We can say that Confucius was probably the first Chinese thinker to address the problem
of political and social order in a systematic way.
Because of this, he has become the most famous Chinese philosopher of all time.
His Chinese name was Kong Fuzi, by the way, which means Kong the Sage, but he is much
better known in the West as Confucius, which is the Latinized version of his Chinese name.
Most scholars agree that Confucius was born around the year 551 before the Common Era
as a member of the lower aristocracy of this minor northeastern state of Lu.
After his education, of which we know nothing, he spent several years seeking an influential
post as a political advisor in the Lu court.
When none came his way, he set out on an epic journey all around Zhou Dynasty China and
spent the next 10 to 12 years seeking employment in some of the other courts during this violent
spring and autumn period.
But again, he had no success and in 484 he returned to Lu, a bitterly disappointed man,
to die there five years later.
Such are the bare details of what appears to have been the failed life of a man frustrated
by lack of opportunity who died in relative obscurity.
But the Confucian legacy is anything but obscure or inconsequential.
Although Confucius never obtained the powerful political position that he so desired, he
did serve as a respected educator and mentor throughout his career and this gave him the
opportunity to reflect very deeply on life and society.
Now before we explore these reflections, it's worth reminding ourselves that the period
during which Confucius lived was an extraordinary age for philosophical thinking right across
Eurasia.
Indeed, Confucius' life roughly corresponds to the lives of some of the greatest thinkers
of all time during a fertile intellectual period between the 7th and 5th centuries before
the common era that the 20th century German philosopher Carl Jasper called the Axial Age.
These near contemporaries of Confucius include the great Iranian prophet Zoroaster who founded
the most important pre-Islamic religion of Central Asia, Zoroastrianism.
It includes the Indian prince Siddhartha Gautama who became the Buddha and it includes the
ancient Greek philosopher Socrates who was born only a decade or so after the death of
Confucius.
As Carl Jasper's famously put it, during the Axial Age, the spiritual foundations of
humanity were laid simultaneously and independently in China, India, Persia and Greece and these
are the foundations upon which humanity still subsists today.
Jasper's also pointed out that all these foundations were laid down by individual thinkers within
a framework of a dramatically and rapidly changing social environment.
We have seen of course in our last lecture that the later Joe dynasty, particularly the
spring and autumn period in which Confucius lives, was very definitely an environment
characterized by rapid social change.
Like Siddhartha, like the Greek philosophers, Confucius was most interested in defining
the essential duties and obligations of correct living during a time of social and political
upheaval rather than in any spiritual or religious response.
So Confucius was not interested in offering spiritual stories about the origins of the
cosmos or in devising some new religious faith for his contemporaries.
Confucianism was a genuine philosophy that was never intended to be a religion.
The main source for both the life of Confucius and his philosophy is an ancient text known
as the Anelex.
So let's turn to that now.
Most scholars agree that the Anelex was not actually written by Confucius himself but
pinning down the real author or authors is not easy.
Some sections were undoubtedly written down during Confucius' lifetime but others appear
to have been written some time later because they contain references to events that occurred
well after Confucius had died.
The traditional view of the Anelex is that they do contain the teachings of Confucius
as they were transmitted verbally by the sage and faithfully written down by his disciples.
So any statements that were made by Confucius, the teacher, were collected and transcribed
often in the form of answers or sayings to specific questions posed by his students.
This means that the Anelex does not provide a clear statement of Confucian philosophy
in the way that, for example, the works of Plato, the Republic, obviously, lay at a carefully
argued philosophical agenda.
Instead, the Anelex read as a collection of seemingly disconnected conversations, purportedly
between the sage and his disciples, that include terse cryptic pronouncements that
are open to all sorts of interpretation.
The endless interpretations that the Anelex have been subjected to in ever-changing intellectual
and social contexts for the past 2,500 years has meant that pure Confucianism, if there
ever was such a thing, is very hard to pin down.
This has also meant that Confucianism has never fallen out of favor, because every age
has been able to find something inside the Anelex that is relevant to their own time,
their own place, and to the problems that all societies must face, particularly during
periods of rapid change.
What we do learn from the Anelex is that, as the great Confucian scholar Frederick
Moat notes, Confucius was responsible for three great innovations in his life.
The first of these was the creation of his own occupation as a private teacher.
Now, Confucius was a lifelong scholar, and yet the Joe dynasty had no institutions in
place for formally transmitting knowledge attained by sages like Confucius, particularly
to potential members of the governing class.
These positions, as had been the case since the beginning of Chinese civilization, were
filled exclusively based on the nobility of birth, rather than on the degree of knowledge
or political skill an individual possessed.
As the most learned man in the new court, even though he had not been born amongst these
highest ranks of society, Confucius must have been consulted regularly by many others, seeking
his knowledge, seeking his opinions, which means that Confucius may have sort of slipped
into this role of teacher without ever really intending to.
And because he was actively involved in the contemporary and very real problems of his
day, even though he never quite gave up the hope of becoming something more, he established,
as Moat puts it, and I quote, the pattern of student-teacher relations and the model
of the professional teacher so effectively that they quickly became standard throughout
the society and were never challenged by any subsequent competing models.
Critical to the transmission of Confucian philosophy were the many students and disciples
I think is not too strong a word that Confucius attracted throughout his life and travels.
So in a second, quite radical innovation, Confucius collected these disciples from all
different social classes.
In fact, of the several disciples whose lies we actually know something concrete about,
only two appear to have been from the aristocracy.
All the rest appear to have been of more humble birth.
Confucius thus insisted that the title of juntsa, or princeling, which up until then
had only been applied to the sons of the aristocracy, should now apply to superior
men who had achieved a high level of ethical and intellectual cultivation.
And this was a revolutionary redefinition of the criterion for assigning status in Chinese
society, which some scholars interpret as a conscious attempt on Confucius' part to
encourage social mobility.
With the acceptance of his role as professional educator and this building of a core of students
from various social classes, Confucius turned his attention to the core content of his evolving
curriculum, to the material he would need to create the juntsa, the princelings.
And in so doing, he completed his third innovation.
Well, just as there had been no professional teachers before this, so there was no educational
curriculum.
Confucius believed in a broad liberal arts curriculum, the sort of curriculum that has
been at the heart of the best education systems in both Western and Eastern civilization for
the past two millennia.
What the juntsa needed was a knowledge of poetry and of art, of history and ethics, of science
and government, and of music and athletics.
In the absence of any established education system or curriculum, Confucius and his disciples
began to study the great works of poetry and history produced during the Zhou Dynasty,
the works that we discussed in our last lecture.
They carefully read and considered which of these books offered the most profound insights
into human nature, and also which of these literary works would be the most instructive,
the most useful in imparting the sort of skills required by future administrators.
As a result of Confucius's influence, the Zhou literary classics selected by the Confucians
went on to become the core curriculum in traditional Chinese education for the next 2,500 years.
These included, of course, the book of odes, the book of history, the book of changes,
and the book of rites, the core canon of Eastern philosophy.
Now, I have left our most difficult task in this lecture to last, an attempt to reconstruct
a systematic Confucian philosophy.
But let's try to do this now.
Confucius chose to articulate his ideas around certain key words whose definitions then and
now are vague.
An additional problem is that Confucian thought is fundamentally moral, ethical, and political
in character.
So unlike the work of other thinkers of the axial age who are clearly trying to work out
a more systematic, rational, metaphysical philosophy, and one thinks of Plato, of course, as an
obvious example, Confucian thought is a lot more practical.
So it doesn't deal with sort of obscure, abstruse, hypothetical, philosophical problems
or with religion.
Rather, in response to the violence, the disunity of his time, Confucius seems to have attempted
to try and build into the prevailing social hierarchy and ethical framework based on the
behavior and the interpersonal relationships of officials in an age when bureaucratic institutions
were not fully developed, he argued.
The best way to promote good government was to fill official positions with individuals
who are well educated, conscientious, and ethical.
To do this, one needed to concentrate on creating junsu, this core of superior individuals
who could be created that is made not just born through the sort of effective educational
pedagogy and curriculum that he and his disciples were in the process of working out.
So what the Confucians were offering here was a practical way of improving statecraft
that had the potential to create a better life for all.
They were offering a way out of the mess of the late Joe period.
There are certain values and qualities that Confucius believed it was critically important
for an ethical man a princely to possess.
And these values and qualities could be acquired through effective education.
The primary virtue, the core characteristic of a junsu was ren, ren, which can be translated
as kindness, as benevolence, as possessing a sense of humanity.
The practice of ren required officials in particular to be courteous, respectful, diligent,
and loyal to express concern for others and a deep understanding of the human condition.
Confucius felt that a sense of ren was urgently needed amongst the government officials of
his day.
Is this something that we in the West consider when evaluating our officials, I wonder, and
voting for the candidates of our choice?
How much do we value a sense of humanity and a deep understanding of the plight of humanity
when we select our officials?
The second most important quality of a junsu was qi, qi, qi, which can be translated as
intelligence or wisdom.
But Confucius this meant having intelligence and knowledge certainly, but also the ability
to apply this in an appropriate manner.
And also to be able to decide which was the correct action in all situations.
That is, the ability to make accurate judgments and to act upon them in a practical way.
Now qi also implied the possession of another important characteristic, that of yung, which
means courage.
And essentially by this he means the courage to act upon one's judgments no matter how
high the stakes.
Confucius espoused two other values that have gone on to become cornerstones of Chinese
and Eastern civilization, li and xiao.
Li was understood as having a sense of propriety of being dutiful in carrying out the essential
tasks of a junsu, particularly a government official.
Such officials would always behave in the appropriate manner, treat their subjects with
courtesy and show respect to their elders and superiors.
Evidence of corruption amongst public officials in China today reveal for example when shoddy
building practices result in a collapsed bridge or schoolhouse would still be very much seen
as an absence of li.
The final primary virtue of a junsu was xiao, which meant filial piety, a reflection of the
great significance of family in Chinese society that we've discussed several times in the
course already.
Children were obliged to respect their parents and other family members, to support them
in their old age and as we've discussed to remember them and other ancestors with the
appropriate rituals after their deaths.
There was obviously a practical point to this emphasis on xiao I think.
Officials with a sense of filial piety would also respect their seniors in government and
treat the state as an extension of the bonds and values of family.
Ultimately Confucius and his followers believe that individuals that possessed ren, qi, li
and xiao would be so esteemed by their colleagues and contemporaries that they would gain influence
in wider society as mentors, teachers and government officials.
These moral, wise, courageous and self-controlled junsu who resemble in some respects the notion
of the philosopher king espoused by Plato would lead others by their noble example.
Only through the enlightened leadership of ethical leaders such as this was there any
hope for the restoration of political and social order in fragmented late Zhou dynasty
China.
So let me just stress again that Confucius' goal was not to use his system of advanced
education to create junsu as some intellectual exercise or for their own personal gain or
benefit.
Rather, only with leaders like this could order and stability be restored to society
and the chaos of the spring and autumn period be resolved.
Confucius believed in restoring a sense of moral responsibility in the ruling classes
which he felt had been lost in his own times.
So we find in the Analects which were specifically directed at this learned ruling class of men
a clear concern for the rights of all other humans.
We find a sort of reverse version of the golden rule and I quote from the Analects never
do to others what you would not like them to do to you.
Despite this ethical quality Confucianism has often been interpreted as essentially
a justification of the hierarchical society into which Confucius was born.
So there is another famous saying in the Analects which feeds into this which might be read
as even a put down of merchants of the middle class if you like or as an argument that junsu
need to seek wisdom with no intrinsic gain in mind.
Again I quote from the Analects the noble man understands what is right the inferior
man understands what is profitable.
However we interpret this Confucius was trying to use the education system he and his followers
had devised to create the superior man a superior man who might not necessarily be an aristocrat
but someone from any strata of society who had attained intellectual and ethical superiority
through his acquisition of the primary virtues.
This great ethical philosophy this blueprint for the explicit use of education to create
superior human beings which by the way is at the heart of what I try and do every single
time I walk into my classroom might actually have been lost to Eastern and to human civilization
had it not been for the work of two later Confucian thinkers.
These two philosophers one named Mencius who lived we think from roughly 371 to 289 BCE
and his later successor Suntsa who lived from about 312 to 221 BCE are the great Confucians
of their own travel times in the even more brutal warring states era and it was their
work that ensured the deeper penetration of Confucian philosophy into the Chinese psyche
into the psyche of all of Eastern civilization.
It is these two men with their almost diametrically opposed interpretations of the master's intentions
and indeed of human nature who are the subject of our next lecture on the intellectual products
of the later Joe dynasty.
See you soon.
