As we've seen in the last two lectures, at the heart of Confucianism was a sense of optimistic
activism. Confucians placed a very high value on education, on politics and on direct intervention
in public affairs. So men like Mencius and Sunsa actively sought government positions
in which they could use their education to solve the political and social problems of
their times. But this was a vibrant age of ideas and discussion, and not everyone agreed
with the Confucian's approach. One group in particular, the Daoists, answered the problems
facing their society in a completely different way. Rather than actively engaging with the
cares of everyday life, they believed the best action was to withdraw from them. Only
through non-action, they argued, would real change occur. In what may have been an intentional
counter-argument to Confucianism, the Daoists urged people to, and I quote, give up sainthood,
enounce wisdom, and it will be a hundred times better for everyone. And was this next statement
also an intentional and deliberate response to the well-travelled Confucians who spent
their lives wondering about the landscape? Let me quote again. Without going outside,
you may know the whole world. Without looking through the window, you may see the ways of
heaven. The farther you go, the less you know. Thus the sage knows without traveling. So
we're obviously talking here about a very different approach to attaining knowledge
and wisdom to that espoused by the Confucians. What would the articulate and influential Confucians
have made of a statement like this, for example? Those who know do not speak. Those who speak
do not know. The philosophy of Daoism remains as enigmatic and difficult for us to pin down
today as it must have been to the Confucians more than 2000 years ago. But Daoism has been
profoundly influential on Chinese and East Asian civilization and is universally recognized
today as the second great intellectual product of the Warring States era. Before turning
to the origins and meaning of Daoism though, it occurs to me that it might be a very good
idea to pause for a moment here and discuss an issue that might be perplexing you, those
of you who have always known this philosophy by the name Taoism and its great text as the
Tao to Qing. Are we talking about two different philosophies here or two different books?
So although not specifically related to Daoism, it's important that we try and clear up any
confusion you might have about these different spellings now because this discussion will
be relevant, I think, to much of what follows in this course. So the first thing we need
to consider in this context is a major change in the romanization of Chinese characters
that has taken place really just over the past few decades in the way Chinese characters
are rendered into the English language. From the late 19th century until as recently as
1979, Chinese characters were romanized mostly by using a system worked out by two 19th century
British academics and diplomats, Thomas Wade and Herbert Giles. The Wade Giles system they
devised replaced the older Nanjing romanization style and was widely used in pretty well all
European language monographs and textbooks for frankly most of the 20th century. Now Wade
Giles was a brilliant system but it was complex and quite clumsy to use because it depended
heavily on apostrophes and hyphens. But an even greater problem, I think, is that the system
is not at all intuitive. It gives no real guidance for how words are to be pronounced. So if you
were not taught how it works, you would almost inevitably get the pronunciations wrong. This
meant that only those completely familiar with the system could use it with proficiency.
Some scholars only half jokingly actually accused Wade and Giles of deliberately setting
up their system in such a way that it would automatically separate the scholars, that is
those who had immersed themselves in the system, from the rest, those who hadn't and as a consequence
floundered with pronunciation. Now following the declaration of the People's Republic of China
in 1949, the government announced that they wanted to devise a new system for a new China. So an
alternative romanization system called Pin Yin was created and championed by a very interesting man
called Zhou Yu Guang. Now Zhou had actually migrated to America with his family and then left his
very good New York banking job to return to the People's Republic of China to help rebuild his
country. In 1954 he was given the job by the Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China
to develop a new romanization system for Chinese characters. He studied several systems that had
been in use during the Qing dynasty, that is during the 18th and 19th centuries particularly,
and he came up with a hybrid which he called Pin Yin, which literally means to spell the way it
sounds. In 1958 Pin Yin was introduced into Chinese primary schools. 20 years later it became China's
official romanization system in 1979 and Pin Yin was cemented into law with the passing of the
national common language law in the year 2001. Those of you who have traveled to China recently
will know that Pin Yin is now ubiquitous on street signs, shop fronts, one sees it almost
everywhere. The main advantage of Pin Yin is that unlike the Wei Jial system it is highly intuitive.
The spellings used to transliterate the Chinese characters give much better clues about pronunciation
than any of the earlier systems. In addition Pin Yin is much cleaner. The apostrophes and the hyphens
have all disappeared. But of course all this can be very confusing for the poor student of Chinese
history and culture. So depending on whether the book you are reading was written before or after
the 1980s you are likely to see the Chou dynasty, that's C-H-O-U, or the Zhou dynasty, the H-O-U.
It's the same dynasty. The great Han dynasty historian Sima Qian in Pin Yin was rendered as
Su-Hai-Fen-Ma-Chi-Apostrophe-Yen in Wei Jials. Mao-Ci-Hai-Fen-Tung is now Mao Zedong and his
successor Teng-Hixiao-Hai-Fen-Ping is now Deng-Xiao-Ping and the Tao is now the Dao.
So now that we understand why we regularly encounter different spellings while exploring Chinese
history let's turn to what we know about the origins of Daoism. What do the Daoists believe? Where
do their fascinating and frankly enigmatic ideas come from? For most of Chinese history as I've
been arguing Confucianism has been the official even the orthodox system of thought that has
underpinned most intellectual, social and political life. Governments indeed entire dynasties have been
organized as Confucian states and because Confucianism was exported to and adopted by a host of East
and Southeast Asian states it has remained the dominant ideology of all Eastern civilization.
But the optimistic, activist and essentially rationalist ideas of Confucianism have never
encompassed the entire spectrum of the Chinese collective psyche. There have always been
alternatives particularly legalism and Daoism. Daoism runs counter to Confucian rationality.
It mocks ritual and philosophical discussion. It urges individualism rather than the Confucian
ideal of working collectively for the good of the state and of society. It seems to appeal to the
other side of the Chinese mind. This is not to suggest that Confucianism and Daoism are mutually
exclusive, far from it, but rather that they offer complimentary views of life. They're more like two
sides of the same coin but it is very difficult to determine how Daoism was actually understood
during the late Zhou dynasty period, how it was articulated by its founders, how it was understood
by its adherents. Some scholars believe that Daoism was always a quasi-religious movement based on
meditation. Others see it as an alternative political ideology that aimed at creating a unified,
successful state through methods very different to those of the Confucians. Philosophers see
Daoism as a genuine metaphysical philosophy that encourages its practitioners to discover the
eternal and really the alternative reality that they believe exists at the heart of the cosmos.
Its original meaning is still further clouded by the fact that no unifying authority was imposed
upon the ideology in the way that as we've seen the great Confucian thinkers we've been discussing
were able to work out a clear interpretation, a clear agenda for Confucianism. This means that
the philosophical strand of Daoism became very different than the religious strand which in
turn differed considerably from the more practical political notions of Daoism. Confucians tended
to be highly critical of the religious version of Daoism, particularly those adherents who engaged
in fortune telling or magic. But Daoism nonetheless quickly became the principal form of daily
religious expression in the lives of the Chinese people and centuries later, as we will see,
it proved flexible enough to blend well with the imported Indian ideology of Buddhism.
Interestingly, this flexibility also ensured that a blend of Buddhism and Daoism found
ready acceptance in East Asia, certainly, but also in parts of Southeast Asia,
where both philosophies merged in a fascinating syncretic belief system, particularly as we'll
see in a later lecture in Vietnam. Confucians, however, although accepting, I guess, some aspects
of the philosophical elements of Daoism derisively rejected the religious aspects in a way that pointed
out the serious differences between the two philosophies, where Confucianism focuses on
the psychology of the individual human and the sociology of our constructed culture
and political structures. Daoism is principally concerned with the natural world.
As we noted in a previous lecture, Confucianism is human-centered. It is a system through which
humans can learn to live in harmony with other humans. Daoism, on the other hand, is nature-centered.
This is a system whereby humans can learn to live in harmony with the natural world around them,
and indeed with the entire cosmos. It is this profound difference of focus that is at the
heart of the intellectual gulf between Confucianism and Daoism. Confucians were optimistic about
humans' ability to live in harmony with each other, but also with nature. Daoists were essentially
pessimistic about the ability of humans to construct effective, harmonious ordered societies,
and these societies would essentially be at odds with nature. So the Daoists feared government,
they feared law, they feared education, because each of these are artificial devices destructive
to nature. Both these philosophies emerged at the same time, as you know, in the same chaotic
context of the Later Joe dynasty, and both became immensely influential responses to this same place
and this same time, but also both became great universal ideologies that transcended their particular
place and time. The main difference, I think, is that where Confucianism focused on the preservation
of culture and social order, Daoism rejected society and focused instead on the preservation of
life itself within the context of the natural universe. Let's see how this is clearly articulated
even in the complex and ambiguous language of the two great Daoist texts. I'm talking about
the Dao De Jing and the Zhuang Zi. These two texts have been enormously influential on Eastern
and also surprisingly Western civilization. Now scholars are reasonably certain that the Dao De
Jing, which can be translated as the way and its power, is the older of the two texts, but its
purported author Lao Tzu remains an enigma. So it's worth taking just a moment to consider
what we know or really what we don't know about him before we take a closer look at the text itself.
Even the great Han Dynasty historian Sima Chan, who's already been our great guide through early
Chinese history, writing in the first century BCE could not separate fact from legend, was Lao Tzu's
mother really pregnant with him for decades so that by the time he was born he already had a long
white beard. The Lao Tzu really lived to be 135 years old before disappearing into the deserts
of Central Asia, writing in ox. If he did actually exist, he must have been a near contemporary of
Confucius and would also have lived in the sixth century BCE like Confucius. One legend even has
it by the way, that Confucius personally visited and consulted Lao Tzu on certain historical records.
As fascinating as these legends of Lao Tzu may be, the more reasonable assumption is that Daoism
had many contributors in its formative stage and that all these various contributors have gathered
around the name of Lao Tzu who might have been both an historical but also a semi-mythical figure.
The Dao Djing consists of 81 chapters and uses some 5,000 Chinese characters. So this is a difficult
and enigmatic text to read, although it remains to this day the most translated Chinese text of all
time. Much of it is in beautiful poetical form and some scholars speculate that it might have
originally been conceived of as a series of chants for meditation. The verse itself is often
cryptic, ambiguous, contradictory and certainly inscrutable. But of course it is this very
inscrutability that has left the Dao Djing open to a wide range of interpretations and this in
turn has kept Daoism in favor through 2,400 years of changing social and political history.
The language is also incredibly powerful, full of mysterious messages that have resonated both
with the conscious and subconscious minds of millions of readers for thousands of years.
That is, the language is immensely appealing at a conscious level because of its obvious wisdom
and beauty but also at a subconscious level because the meaning of the words cannot always
be immediately grasped but requires deeper reflection. The character for the Dao is translated as
the way but the way of what is not entirely clear, the way of nature, the way of the cosmos.
The first lines of the text immediately demonstrate the elusive power of the Dao Djing and I quote,
the Dao that can be named is not the eternal Dao. The name that can be named is not
the eternal name. The nameless is the beginning of heaven and earth. So from this we immediately
understand, I think, that it is impossible to name, to codify, to quantify in any way the essence
of the Dao. These lines also make clear that it is not humans who are at the center of the cosmos
where Confucians would, I think, certainly place them but this great nameless force of the way.
The Dao Djing goes on to suggest that anything we can name or categorize is inherently trivial
and I quote, the named is the mother of 10,000 trivial things. So give up naming, give up chasing
these 10,000 trivial things and instead pursue that which cannot be named, the invisible, the
indivisible, the non-material force or energy that is the source of everything that has ever existed
or will ever happen. Being divine, you will be at one with the Dao. Being at one with the
Dao is eternal and though the body dies, the Dao will never pass away.
Even more enigmatically, the Dao Djing suggests that this original force of the cosmos,
this eternal, this unchanging principle doesn't actually do anything. It is imagined as
supremely passive and yielding. It therefore is essentially negative. It does nothing,
yet it accomplishes everything. So there are implications in this understanding for how to
live one's life. Let me quote again from the Dao Djing, the softest thing in the universe
overcomes the hardest thing in the universe, that without substance can enter where there is no space.
Hence, I know the value of non-action.
Again, some of this appears to be a deliberate refutation of Confucian activism, an attempt
to offer a profoundly different vision of what it means to be a sage. Quote, the sage experiences
without abstraction and accomplishes without action. He accepts the ebb and flow of things,
nurtures them, but does not own them and lives but does not dwell.
Once the nature of the Dao is understood, all humans, that is both the sages and the rest of us,
need to modify and tailor our behavior to the way. We need to detach ourselves from our immediate
concern with a tedious and ultimately trivial 10,000 things. To truly live in harmony with the
cosmos and with other humans in civil society demands that we retreat from engagement in the
world of politics and society. It was human striving, human ambition, human activism that
had brought the world into the chaotic warring states period. So the proper response is to cease
driving, to live as simply as possible. As I mentioned a moment ago, despite or perhaps because
of this inscrutable language and the fact that Daoism regards language itself as inadequate for
deep reflection, the Dao De Jing is the most translated Chinese book of all time and it remains
incredibly popular in the West today. I have seen many students over the years profoundly
moved by their reading of the Dao De Jing and I have at least one good friend who starts each
day of his life by reading this text aloud. But there is another great Daoist text we also need
to consider, one that uses slightly less enigmatic language in an attempt to offer a more fully
worked out and clearer version of this fascinating philosophy and that is the Duang Tu.
The Duang Tu takes its name from its again semi-legendary author Duang Tu or Master Duang.
Now some scholars see him as a genuine historical figure who lived between maybe 369 and 286 BCE
but others doubt that he ever actually existed. Either way that text of the Duang Tu does not
appear to be the work of a single author but is rather a compilation of essays, of dialogues,
parables and descriptions of encounters with other famous philosophers. These encounters even
include several witty tongue-in-cheek parodies of Confucius and his disciples.
Two of the major themes explored in the Duang Tu are the importance of keeping everything in life
in some sort of perspective and also the sheer uncertainty of human knowledge. Remember only
the Dao, the force or the way at the heart of the universe is absolute and unchanging.
Everything else in the cosmos including everything humans can ever possibly know,
the 10,000 things, must be considered relative to the Dao. So in order to be happy we need to
recognize this this relativity of human concepts in relation to the absolute. We can only ever
obtain relative happiness, relative truth, relative freedom once we recognize this fact
we will stop trying to achieve perfection and be happier.
In the Dao Du Jing Lao Tzu offers a formula to preserve and appreciate human life through
intuition and non-action, through the use of powerful almost meditative language. The Duang
Tu goes further and attempts to articulate a vision of the place of humans in the cosmos
that once properly understood will allow them to become reconciled to death.
In order to do this the Duang Tzu first questions the possibility of ever attaining
absolute knowledge. This is beyond our grasp so why even try? This pointless striving is never
more obvious than when we consider the question of death. We can never know if life is better than
death, the Duang Tzu argues. So why do we worry so much about our mortality?
Now thinking again about this philosophy in the context of the axial age and the flourishing of
brilliant philosophy all across Eurasia during this same period, I think there's an echo here
of Socrates' argument that he makes with his accusers in Plato's wonderful The Apology.
Socrates, I'm sure you remember, is on trial for his life and having had the death penalty
pronounced upon him says that, quote, either death is a state of nothingness or utter unconsciousness
or there is a migration of the soul from this world to another. If there is no consciousness
death is an undisturbed sleep and thus an unspeakable gain. But if death is a journey to
another place where all the good men reside, then what good can be greater than this?
Both Duang Tzu and Socrates argue therefore that the fear of death is pointless. But just think
for a moment of the intellectual capital, the emotional energy that has been invested over the
fear of our mortality. For both these philosophers, but particularly for Duang Tzu, the fear of death
is just one example of our excessive concern for the tedious affairs of the world and with
pointless striving for perfection. The chief virtue we should be trying to perfect is a concept they
name as wu wei, wu wei, a term that implies a disengagement from the affairs of the world.
Refrain from advanced education, I don't tell my students that bit,
which concentrates on the abstruse trivialities of the 10,000 things and is thus pointless.
That's a hard thing for an educator to say. Refrain from personal striving and ambition
which indicates excessive concern with the tedious affairs of the world and is thus pointless.
Live simply, unpretentiously, live in harmony with nature. The notion of wu wei had important
implications for the structure of the state and of society. Essentially, the Daoists were arguing,
the less government, the better. So the Daoism envisions this world of tiny,
self-sufficient communities, smaller than villages, where there was no desire to conquer or even to
trade with one's neighbors. We see here, I think, the influence of the Daoist concept of simple living
in harmony with nature on some of the counterculture movements that have appeared in the west,
particularly over the past 50 or 60 years. In fact, it was something like this possibility of wu wei
at the heart of the hippie movement in the 1960s. This idea of dropping out of tedious society with
its 10,000 cares to live simple, unpretentious lives in small, self-sufficient communes as close
to nature as close to the principles at the heart of the cosmos as possible.
By encouraging the development of a reflective and introspective consciousness, Daoism offered an
intellectual, spiritual, and even political alternative to the Confucians. But Daoism also
encouraged the type of intuitive self-knowledge that did appeal to the Confucians because
neither Confucianism nor Daoism are exclusive belief systems. Over the centuries, many thousands
of scholars throughout Eastern civilization have learned the core principles of the Confucian
curriculum and used this in their senior government positions, while at the same time spending private
hours in personal Daoist reflection. That is, many, many thoughtful Chinese have been Confucians by
day and Daoists by night.
Ultimately, however, neither Confucianism nor Daoism could bring Zhou Dynasty China
out of the long night of the spring and autumn and warring states period. While the Confucians
studied and debated while the Daoists meditated and withdrew, the wars continued, powerful states
crushed the weaker and the people suffered deprivation and death. It was, in fact, the third
great product of the era, the much harsher and more pragmatic ideology of legalism that finally
brought an end to 500 years of fragmentation and chaos. Legalism will be the subject of our next
lecture, the final in this series on the great philosophies of the later Zhou Dynasty.
But before you listen to that next lecture, please allow me to remind you of that enigmatic
Daoist warnings, particularly someone who sort of talks for a living. Those who know do not talk.
Those who talk do not know. Despite this, I hope you'll join me again for our next lecture
on the foundations of Eastern civilization.
