The Chin Kingdom was one of the relatively new states that had emerged during the later
Joe dynasty and by 260 BCE it had become the most formidable.
The Chin people who lived in the region of the northern modern province of Shanxi were
formidable warriors who had honed their skills through regular conflict with the nomadic archer
warriors beyond the Great Bend in the Huanghe.
An additional advantage the Chin possessed was that the region was rich in iron ore,
a resource that had allowed the Chin state to amass enormous stockpiles of iron weapons.
And as we saw last time it was also in the state of Chin that the legalist ideas of Shang
Yang and Han Faitse had found their reddest acceptance, allowing for the direct application
of the philosophy of legalism to practical matters of social and political organization
and in turn laying down another powerful foundation of eastern civilization that we will be following
all the way through to the present.
The well-organized Chin government had abolished feudalism, they had given land to the peasants,
they were taxing them consistently and proportionately and they had introduced a law code that favored
no particular class.
Using these geographical and ideological advantages the Chin annihilated their rivals in the last
decades of the warring states and emerged supreme as the sole great power.
With most of central China now under their control they were able to proclaim the new
Chin dynasty.
Although this dynasty was destined to last for only 15 years it unified China under strong
centralized control and established a model of government that became the template for
all succeeding dynasties for the next 2,000 years.
And because Chinese ideas about government and political organization bureaucracy soon
began to spread to other east and southeast Asian states this template became one of the
core political foundations of all eastern civilization.
Given the breadth and depth of their influence it's no surprise that it was the Chin, a word
that used to be translated in the old Wei Jial system as C-H apostrophe I-N who ultimately
gave their dynastic name to the country known to the world today as China.
The rise of the Chin also marks the beginning of the great imperial age of Chinese history.
Although the Chin's reign was brief their achievements made it possible for their successors the
mighty Han dynasty to rule an enormous Chinese empire for 400 years utterly transforming
Chinese and indeed East Asian society.
We'll spend the next few lectures looking at this imperial age.
In this lecture we begin by exploring the world of the Chin through some of their extraordinary
achievements.
Let's first follow the rise of the Chin King Yin Zheng as he became the first emperor of
China and renamed himself Chin Shuo Huang Di.
He is a monumental figure in Chinese history with an astonishing range of achievements.
It is quite extraordinary just how much this man was able to achieve in just 11 years of
rule.
During this final decade of Chin military success between 230 and 221 BCE the rival
Yan state in its desperation sent assassins to try and kill Yin Zheng.
The most famous of these assassins was the legendary Jing Ke a brilliant scholar, a
brilliant swordsman who accepted the hospitality of crown prince Dan of the state of Yan.
Together with an assistant Chin Wu Yang who had committed his first murder at the age
of 13 by the way the two plotted to murder the Chin King with a poison dagger.
The attempt failed at the last minute and the King survived needless to say both failed
assassins were subsequently killed.
If some of this story sounds familiar it's because this assassination attempt has been
the subject of several great Chinese movies including the emperor and the assassin and
the hero which starred Jet Li.
This was only the first of several attempts to assassinate Yin Zheng by the way but he
survived all both as the last King of the Chin and as the first emperor of China.
In 221 the victorious King Yin of Chin having finally defeated all his rivals and having
emerged supreme amongst the warring states proclaimed himself Xue Huang Di the first
August Emperor.
This was a title he adopted for himself from two other words Huang which means August and
Di which means Lord.
Now this conjunction of August Lord now became the honorific for emperor so Xue Huang Di
in essence means the first emperor.
Until this moment of Chin victory these words had only ever been used to refer to the legendary
sage kings who as we saw in an earlier lecture had founded China in the great ancient oral
accounts.
The honorific Huang Di now became the official title used by all of China's emperors from
the accession of the first in 221 BCE until the abdication of the last in 1912 of the
common era.
Having established this title and this prestige the first emperor undertook a stunning series
of reforms in his short reign of only eleven years many of which went on to become new
foundational ideas in eastern civilization.
His first task was to somehow try and amalgamate the various divided states regions and peoples
of China that for the past 500 years now had been bitter warring enemies to somehow try
and bring them together into some type of uniform entity.
In order to achieve this the emperor first had to weaken the power of the old feudal
nobility and he did this by moving its leading members perhaps as many as hundreds of thousands
we read to the Chin capital at Xianyang and then formally abolishing the ancient noble
houses.
In place of the Zhou feudal structure China was now divided into 36 commanderies provinces
really each under the control of administrative bureaucracies rather than feudal lords.
To guard against local rebellions he ordered the civilian population to surrender all the
weapons they had amassed during centuries of warfare in fact private possession of arms
now joined a prohibited list in the new Chin law codes.
This rigidly legalist code was soon promulgated throughout the empire and in line with the
core beliefs of legalist philosophy it attempted to regulate all aspects of society.
The collective responsibility component of legalism which we noted in previous lectures
meant that those who reported crimes by their family members or neighbors would be rewarded.
The law breakers on the other hand including those who failed to report them was subject
to the types of harsh punishment we outlined last time hard labor mutilation including
foot amputations and death by various means.
What was not quite in keeping with the impartial and theoretically objective spirit of legalism
however was the fact that harsh punishments were often handed out to those who happened
to have gained the emperor's personal disapproval whether they had broken the law or not.
Indeed the emperor and his advisors would not tolerate criticism of the government.
After Prime Minister Lee Sir complained that scholars were using past records and ancient
philosophical texts to criticize the government's policies the emperor passed a law banning
most manuals and quote unquote dangerous books.
This meant that all texts other than those written on relatively innocuous subjects like
divination, medicine, forestry and farming had to be collected by the state and burned.
He did order that a single copy of each ban book be kept in his personal library but unfortunately
this was burned to the ground by invading hand forces in the year 206 and all those
copies of the texts were lost.
Fortunately for us enough private copies of these seminal texts of classical Chinese literature
and philosophy survived otherwise there would be no material and therefore no need for a
course like this.
In this brave new totalitarian world the new cultural elite now consisted of state appointed
teachers who used state approved texts based on Qin interpretation of history.
As an ultimate act to try and end dissension the emperor is also reported to have had 460
scholars buried alive although this has never been proven.
After introducing these political and legal reforms aimed as we have seen at political
amalgamation Xuehuangdi turned to language and commerce.
The writing system was reformed by the introduction of a new style called Xiaoduan which means
the small seal script which now is to be used by law throughout the Qin Empire.
For weights currency and measurements were standardized any attempt to maintain local
measurements or local writing systems was decreed to be an act of treason by the law.
The Qin also introduced reforms that allowed for private ownership of land by the peasants.
Now in theory this could have transformed Chinese society by freeing the peasants from serfdom
but in reality the peasants lives remained little better than those of serfs.
Their lot was made worse by the various massive building projects started by the first emperor
which required huge drafts of conscripted labor.
The most impressive of these projects resulted in the construction of two of the great wonders
of the world the emperor's own tomb and the Great Wall of China.
Let's look at each of these achievements next as we continue our exploration of the quite
extraordinary world of the Qin.
Now the structure that later became the Great Wall of China originated during the Zhou dynasty
as a stamped earth military fortification built against intrusion by nomadic tribes
who were dwelling along the northern borders.
Another example of the ongoing tensions that as we have seen had characterized border relations
between nomads and sedentary Chinese states for millennia.
During the warring states period in particular the northern states of Qin, Wei, Qi and Zhao
had each built their own smaller walls, many for defense from the nomads but also frankly
for defense from each other.
But it was the first emperor who ordered that these small local walls now be connected together
to form a single defensive system along the entire northern border of the new empire as
defense against the dangerous nomadic confederation of the Zhongnu of whom we will hear much more
in the future.
Needless to say this was a massive undertaking.
The first problem was to transport the huge quantities of materials that were required
for construction and wherever possible the builders tried to use local resources.
So where the wall was built across mountain ranges for example, the builders used local
stone quarried from the nearby mountains but for those sections that traversed the great
northern plains rammed earth was used for construction.
Unfortunately no historical records have survived that indicate the exact length or course of
the Qin dynasty walls and frankly many of these ancient walls have long since eroded
away so that very few sections remain for archaeologists to explore and measure today.
Nor is the exact human cost of the construction known but estimates by historians of the number
of indentured peasant workers that died during the building of the wall range from hundreds
of thousands to as many as one million men.
Of course subsequent dynasties kept repairing, rebuilding and expanding sections of the great
wall to defend themselves against northern nomadic aggressors.
The Qin wall took about 10 years to finish and it eventually stretched from Lingzhou
in the west which is in the eastern part of today's Gansu province all the way to Liaodong
in the east in today's Jilin province.
This wall not only served as a defense in the north but it also symbolized the awesome
power of Qin Shuo Huangdi which may have been the real intention behind its construction
in the first place.
Certainly the Qin dynasty did mark the beginning of frequent and serious raids by this powerful
new militarized nomadic confederation the Xiongnu which constantly harried the northern
borders of the country.
As we'll see next time during the Han dynasty Emperor Wu Di sent three powerful expeditions
to fight against the Xiongnu in 127, 121 and 119 BCE and these did succeed in temporarily
driving the militarized hordes into the far north of the Gobi Desert.
To maintain the safety of the Hexi corridor and to protect the silk roads caravans which
as we will soon see began to make their ponderous way through Central Asia during the early
Han dynasty the Han extended the wall far to the western end of today's Gansu province.
Further construction and extensions to the Great Wall were made in the success of northern
Wei, northern Qi and Sui dynasties.
But the present Great Wall near Beijing those sections that many of you, certainly most
visitors to China see today was mostly constructed during the Ming dynasty which ruled China
from 1368 to 1644.
Under the Ming bricks and granite were used in construction and sophisticated designs
and passes were built in the places of strategic importance.
Ming authorities divided the Great Wall into nine different zones and placed each zone
under the control of a Zhen or a garrison headquarters.
The total length of the wall is around 8,850 kilometres or 5,500 miles making it one of
the most extraordinary examples of monumental architecture in all world history.
But the Great Wall was not the only of Xue Huangdi's monumental building projects.
The other was his own tomb.
Now from everything we read we know that this emperor was obsessed with the possibility
of attaining eternal life.
To this end we know that he sent thousands of young Chinese men on a voyage to search
for the legendary Islands of Immortality rumoured to lie somewhere in the South China Sea.
He personally undertook several long journeys to sacred Mount Tai where he performed rituals
in the hope of achieving immortality.
And he employed alchemists to concoct all sorts of extraordinary potions that might
be the secret elixir of youth.
Ironically his death in the year 210 BCE was probably caused by drinking one of these
extraordinary potions which apparently contained dangerously high quantities of mercury.
The emperor was buried in his own vast mausoleum just east of the modern city of Xian in a
tomb so extraordinary that it is often referred to today as the eighth wonder of the world.
The tomb was eventually lost to history for almost 2,000 years and was only discovered
comparatively recently by accident in 1974 by a group of local farmers who were digging
wells for their farms.
The area around the tomb is riddled with underground springs and watercourses and over the centuries
there had been rumours of terracotta figures and tiles being dug up by farmers.
But the 1974 discovery prompted Chinese archaeologists to take a much more serious look this time
and the vast underground mausoleum was discovered.
One of the farmers who made the discovery is now a local legend in the area who spends
most of his days in the visitor's centre at the tomb.
I actually had the pleasure of seeing him there in August 2011 signing copies of his book.
Excavations at the site are ongoing and thus far only a small part of the massive complex
has been excavated but the scale and dimensions of this imperial tomb seem perfectly matched
to this larger than life individual.
The complex measures about a third of a mile north to south and a little over a quarter
of a mile east to west.
The mausoleum is then divided into an east and west vault surrounded by thick walls with
guard towers.
While the west vault is still to this day largely unexcavated it was when archaeologists
started working in the east vault that they discovered royal chariots with bronze horses
and then an awesome terracotta army of thousands of life-size soldiers.
The soldiers were created with a series of mix and match clay moulds each was then individualised
by the artist's hands so in fact no two terracotta soldiers are identical.
Each man was built with solid legs and a hollow torso and each was then sculpted wearing
the uniform and carrying the weapons of their particular branch of the military.
So there were infantry, there were cavalry, there were charioteers, 600 clay horses and
100 life-size working wooden chariots have so far been discovered and there were standing
and kneeling archers and of course officers housed in their own headquarters building.
All the standing warriors were attached to clay plinths that rested on the tile floor
which still to this day resembles a modern pavement so this massive army was lined up
in regular formation ready to march out upon some other worldly campaign.
The purpose of the terracotta soldiers must have been to protect and fight for the emperor
in the afterlife because this was an emperor remember who had spent much of his life on
the battlefield and who had amassed untold numbers of revengeful enemies that might be
waiting for him on the other side.
These sculptures represent a standard of art that prior to the discovery of the term experts
had thought to be far beyond what the craftsmen of the Chin Dynasty were capable of.
The tomb like the Great Wall is at least the equal of any of the mausoleums, the fortresses
or the defensive walls constructed by other great ancient civilizations including the
Egyptians, the Greeks or the Romans.
Now Sima Chan our great historian guide who wrote just a little over a century after the
death of the first emperor includes a fascinating description of the emperor's personal tomb
deep inside the mausoleum in his wonderful book the Sh'e.
Sima noted that the tomb was under construction from 245 to 210 BCE which means that from
the moment the teenage King Ying became king of the Chin state right up until his death
this tomb was being built.
Three thousands of laborers were conscripted to work on the mausoleum most of whom were
worked to death.
Estimates by modern historians of the size of this labor force range from an implausibly
low 16,000 men to a probably exaggerated 700,000 men.
Sima Chan goes on to say that all surviving laborers were killed and buried with the emperor
to keep the tomb's location a secret.
Now Chinese archaeologists have been meticulous in their work of excavating the site over
the past 35 years or so and the central tomb containing the emperor has yet to be opened.
There is great hope that it remains intact and that it wasn't robbed.
Magnetic scans of the central tomb have revealed that a large number of coins appear to be
lying in the unopened tomb along with other treasures and this has led archaeologists
to speculate that perhaps the entire royal treasury of the Chin was also buried with
the emperor.
Sima Chan concludes his account by offering an astonishing description of the emperor's
personal tomb.
According to the historian there is a huge central chamber topped by a ceiling studded
with pearls and precious stones to represent the moon, the sun and the stars.
Exact representations of the mighty Huanghe, the Yellow River and also the Yangtze run
across the floor in rivers of flowing mercury that flow into a mercury ocean.
Whale oil lamps, the longest burning substance known at that time, were set up to light the
scene while the doors were then sealed with molten copper.
And finally Sima Chan warns us armed and primed crossbows were set up as booby traps
for any who dared to enter the first emperor's tomb.
Thus ended the life of I think one of the most extraordinary rulers in all of world
history, the sole surviving ruler of the brutal warring states period, the champion of legalism
and the first emperor not just of Chinese but of all East Asian civilization.
But of course it appears to be one of the absolute maximums of history that leaders
with this much charisma, this much power, personality and sheer ability are often followed
by successes who lack these same attributes.
Such was certainly the case with the first dynasty of China whose rapid fall we need
to trace now by way of conclusion.
Upon the emperor's death in the year 210, a deadly power struggle broke out in the Qin
court between advisor Li Sur and a powerful, unique Zhao Gao.
In the end Zhao Gao prevailed and Li Sur, the former student of Sun Sur, the classmate
of Han Faitse, the great champion of legalism was executed.
Zhao Gao soon forced the emperor's oldest son and legitimate heir known as Qin Er Shui
to commit suicide because we read of his incompetence.
Now a nephew of Er Shui, Zi Ying then ascended to the throne as the second emperor and immediately
executed the unit Zhao Gao.
During his short reign, Zi Ying had to deal with increasing civil unrest and also the
fact that several local officials had declared themselves as rival kings.
Zi Ying clung to his throne by declaring himself the one true king among all the others but
he was unable to deal with a large-scale popular revolt that broke out in the year 209 BCE.
The true king was defeated by rebel army near the Wei River in 207 BCE and after surrendering
he was promptly executed by the rebels.
The Qin capital was destroyed by the rebel army the following year and for most historians
this destruction of the capital in the year 206 marks the end of the Qin dynasty.
The shortest lived yet perhaps most remarkable in all of China's long history.
The rebellions against the Qin started I think with a fascinating story.
When a group of conscripted peasants were delayed by heavy rain they realized they would be
late arriving for their service on the northern frontier.
Now under the strict and of course very harsh rule of the Qin this would certainly mean
they'd be executed as punishment.
Rather than face execution they became outlaws instead and much to their surprise thousands
of other peasants and conscripts flocked to join them.
Other revolts soon broke out all over the empire as people became desperate to escape
the crippling burden of Qin labor and military conscription.
As the power struggle continued in the palace Qin generals defected to the rebels and the
warring state's noble houses again took up their arms.
The eventual victor in this real power struggle outside of the palace was Liu Bang a man
of lowly background who had been a minor local official for the Qin.
In the year 206 he declared himself king of the Han state and then defeated his bitter
rival the brilliant general Shang Yu.
Liu Bang later changed his name to Emperor Gao Zhu made a new capital at Chang'an close
to the Qin court which had been burned to the ground by the stage and so the Han dynasty
was born.
And so ended the extraordinary dramatic and turbulent Qin dynasty but as we'll see their
legacy will certainly endure.
The Han who succeeded them consolidated the empire that the Qin had created and they
firmly established a political entity that would last for over 2,000 years making this
this model of governance of imperial dynastic governance the longest lived in all world history.
So in our next two lectures we'll visit the extraordinary world of the Han.
