Hello.
Imagine if we in the West still called ourselves the Greek people or the Roman people today.
Even considering the towering influence these cultures had on Western civilization, it would
seem strange to us to refer to ourselves in this way.
But the Chinese still call themselves the Han people to this day and this gives us some
sense of the profound influence of the Han dynasty.
What made this empire such an enduring part of Chinese history and how did it lay down
important foundations for Eastern civilization?
The Han were able to build upon the achievements of the first Qin emperor, Xue Huangdi, to
create one of the great empires in world history, the equivalent of what the Romans were able
to achieve at the opposite end of Eurasia at the same time.
The Han established what can be understood as a second stage in the history of this durable
East Asian political structure begun by the Qin and would go on to rule China for the
next four centuries from the year 206 before the common era to the year 220 of the common
era.
As I mentioned in the last lecture, the Han dynasty began when Liu Bang emerged as the
eventual victor in the power struggle between rival rebel forces at the very end of the
Qin dynasty.
Liu Bang was born into a peasant village in a village in present day Jiangsu province.
His birth was so lowly that his parents' names have not even been recorded by history.
But legend has it that one night before Liu Bang was born, his mother was forced to shelter
from a fierce storm under a bridge.
Her husband went out to find her but in a flash of lightning he looked up and saw a
huge dragon towering above the bridge and the frightened woman.
Even after this incident, Liu Bang's mother gave birth to the infant.
As he grew to manhood, his high nose and thick whiskers gave him something of the appearance
of a dragon and the legend of his conception was also said to explain the 72 strange dark
spots on his left leg.
Liu Bang was later put in charge of escorting convicts to work on the Great Tomb of the
First Qin Emperor.
But during the journey, many prisoners escaped, which meant that Liu Bang would certainly
have faced a mandatory death penalty according to the legalist code.
So he became a fugitive and then a great rebel leader who was the first to lead his
army into the Qin capital at Xianyang.
After defeating his jealous rivals, Liu Bang, whose reign name was Emperor Gao Zhu, constructed
a new capital at Chang'an close to the former Qin court and proclaimed the Han dynasty
in 206.
The Han presided over a four-century-long period of political consolidation under strong
central government with a superbly well-organized and highly educated bureaucracy.
This was a great age of imperial expansion.
Under the Han, China grew into a very large empire indeed, eventually stretching from
Vietnam in the South to Korea in the North and from the China Sea in the East deep into
the heart of Central Asia to the West.
This dramatic expansion of the Chinese polity had major world's historical implications
because it was under the Han that East Asia began to engage for the first time with the
rest of Eurasia.
Eventually, by the first century of the common era, all of the vast Afro-Eurasian world zone
was connected together through a network of trade routes, and this facilitated such
extraordinary levels of material and cultural exchange that Afro-Eurasia became the most
dynamic region on the planet.
These exchanges are so important that following these lectures on the imperial age, we planned
to present a series of five lectures on the Silk Roads and the major exchanges that took
place along them.
In particular, I want to show how many of these foundational ideas and inventions that
we've been investigating that emerged in China began to spread westwards into Central Asia
and beyond.
But at the same time, we'll also trace the spread of the Indian philosophy of Buddhism
into China and eventually all of East Asia, a process that had dramatic implications for
Eastern civilization.
But first, let's explore the Han dynasty through its political developments, its cultural legacy,
and particularly its technological achievements to better understand why their influence was
so profound on the core foundations of Eastern civilization.
During the first of the two periods of the Han dynasty, the early Han rule from the Western
capital of Chang'an, located at the site of the modern Chinese city of Xian.
As they rule from this Western capital in Chang'an, historians also refer to the early
Han as the Western Han.
The later Han dynasty was forced to relocate its capital in the eastern city of Luoyang,
and therefore the later Han dynasty is also known as the Eastern Han.
We've seen something similar with the Western Zhou and the Eastern Zhou.
Let me offer a quick political overview of the early or Western Han first.
Here I think we can say the Han succeeded where the Qin failed because they were far
more moderate in their approach to government.
So the Han reduced taxes on the peasants, and they set out to enlist the support of
Confucian scholars and Daoist philosophers, essentially replacing Qin legalist terror,
if that's not too harsh a phrase, by reviving intellectual life.
In general, throughout both the early and later Han, the government genuinely attempted
to keep taxes on the land as light as possible.
The tax on agricultural production, for example, was only about one-thirtieth of the autumn
harvest, which was a benefit to both peasants and landed nobility.
The Han also created a very large bureaucracy staffed by skilled, salaried administrators
to rule their empire.
During the first century of Han rule, the decision was made to employ men to staff
this bureaucracy on the basis of an examination system that demanded a deep knowledge of
Confucianist philosophy.
Now this was a masterstroke because of the Confucian insistence on ethical behavior and
loyalty to the state through the idea of filial piety.
Not that all these political innovations happened at once, of course, they were introduced
by different emperors during the first century of the dynasty.
The state inherited by Liu Bang retained initially the administrative structure that had been
put in place by Qin Shi Huang Di, but the new emperor retreated somewhat from the Qin
experiment in strong centralized rule by establishing some vassal principalities in certain areas.
Actually Liu Bang had little choice in this.
Immediately after proclaiming the Han dynasty, he was essentially forced to divide the country
into several quasi-feudal states to satisfy some of his wartime allies.
But ever conscious of the ambition of the nobility and the potential for the country to slip
back into a warring states mentality, as his reign progressed, Liu Bang attempted to regain
control of much of the land he had given away by reincorporating it back into the empire.
But Liu Bang retained a much more decentralized administrative structure than the Qin had
done and this proved a constant source of trouble throughout his reign when ambitious
nobles and Liu family members often competed with each other to gain more power.
Liu Bang's successes were able to introduce more of a provincial form of administration
in which the country was divided into commanderies, really provinces again, and also kingdoms.
We fortunately have a complete list of all these provincial units from a major census
taken of the state in the year two of the common era, by which time we know that there
were 83 commanderies and 10 different kingdoms.
Now the commanderies were each governed by a grand administrator like a provincial governor
appointed by the central government.
The kingdoms were governed by kings who were usually close relatives of the emperor but
these kingdoms theoretically had more autonomy than the commanderies.
We do know from historical documents however that the central government was often able
to manipulate the succession of kings.
So this along with the fact that the government appointed the senior political advisors to
the kings meant that in reality these kingdoms were almost as directly controlled by the
Han government as were the commanderies.
Now in this extremely sophisticated administrative structure the commanderies were further divided
into prefectures of which again we have precise numbers here of which there were 1587 in the
year two of the common era.
Now the prefectures in turn were divided into districts and the districts into much
smaller units known as wards.
As you can tell this was far and away the most sophisticated and best organized imperial
administrative structure that had been seen in world history to this point and of course
it required a vast and equally well organized bureaucracy to administer it.
So after the death of Liu Bang the first emperor Gaozhu his successors from Emperor
Hui to Emperor Jing tried to rule this complex Chinese state by combining legalist methods
with Daoist principles as extraordinary as that sounds.
Some of the early emperors in fact were not at all partial to Confucianism and Emperor
Wendy in particular who ruled from 179 to 159 BCE was actually a very devout Daoist.
So during what is often called this pseudo Daoist era a stable centralized government
was established through revival of the agricultural sector and this gradual erosion we've just
been discussing of the power of the formal feudal states and their lords.
But during the long reign of the very competent very vigorous emperor Wu Di which means the
martial emperor who ruled from 140 to 86 BCE the Han government formally adopted Confucianism
as the official philosophy of the state.
Many scholars many historians to this day describe this policy shift as quote the triumph
of Confucianism and as the major reason why Confucianism remained at the core of Chinese
government for the next 2000 years.
Certainly Han emperors from Wu Di on recognized the advantages to government of core Confucian
values such as self restraint and loyalty to the state and so they supported and promoted
Confucian scholars in government.
Wu Di also established a large state educational system based on the great Confucian classics
topped by an imperial Confucian Academy in the capital to train future officials.
Particular policy initiatives aimed at promoting the core Confucian value of filial piety were
advanced by the state and emperor Wu and his successors made frequent calls to recruit
filial sons into the bureaucracy.
Filial piety you might remember meant being loving respectful and dutiful to the needs
of family elders which the Confucians had meant mostly parents and grandparents.
Under the Han this notion was extended considerably but because men could be promoted partly on
their reputation for filial piety some resorted to greatly exaggerated acts of piety such
as mourning the death of one's parents or grandparents for an inordinately long period
of time.
Now I think we have to acknowledge that it's the Confucian scholars themselves who deserve
credit for this triumph of Confucianism in that they were able to adapt this flexible
philosophy to the specific mood and need of the times.
Remember this is one of the great advantages of Confucianism.
So Confucians began to see the world around them as something like a self-sustaining organism
in which the balance of Yin and Yang and the associated five elements of the universe were
used to interpret and predict political cycles and dynastic successions.
The cosmology that emerged legitimized the Han dynasty and elevated the status of the
emperor as the only person capable of linking heaven, earth and humanity into a harmonious
whole.
Actually I think we can see elements of both Taoism and Confucianism in the concept of
power and the role of the emperor that emerged during this period.
We see this particularly through the work of an important philosopher Dong Zhongshu who
lived from 179 to 104 BCE.
So the Taoist influence emerged in the argument that the ruler ruled best through non-action,
through Wu Wei, through disengagement by keeping out of and above the 10,000 matters of tedious
everyday government.
The Confucian influence was more moral arguing that a ruler who did not do his job properly
would disturb the balance, the Yin Yang between heaven and earth thus opening up the state
to a range of natural disasters.
All of the evidence we have suggests that most Han emperors did genuinely support the
Confucian ideal that these highest officials of the state should be men of intellectual
and ethical ability rather than just noble born.
Indeed a government edict from as early as 196 BCE, this is barely 10 years into the Han
dynasty demanded that provincial and local officials seek out men of promise in their
district and send these to the capital where they would be subjected to some type of examination.
The official adoption of Confucianism by Wu Di 60 years later enhanced this civil service
nomination system and also strengthened the examination by now basing it squarely on
the knowledge candidates possess of the Confucian classics.
This meant that candidates for high office needed to have a considerable training as
scholars before they could even attempt to take up their administrative positions and
these Confucian scholar bureaucrats now gained prominent status as the new elite in court.
Not that these Confucian bureaucrats became yes men for the government, they remain committed
to a type of principle loyalty which demanded that they retain a stance as critics of government
policy if they believed this was warranted.
So we know that scholars opposed government monopolies of commercial products for example
more about that shortly and also that they criticized aggressive and expansionist foreign
policy if it placed great demands on the people and they were also fierce watchdogs against
unnecessary expenditure and imperial extravagance.
The Confucian scholar bureaucrats were particularly active in resisting the increasing power of
the eunuchs particularly during the later Han dynasty.
Now I'll have a lot more to say about the role of eunuchs in Chinese government as the
course progresses but let me just remind you here that these were men who had been castrated
at an early age so that they could fulfill specific roles in Chinese society as we'll
see because eunuchs could be trusted with concubines and also because they could never
start a rival family many rose to positions of great power in Chinese dynasties.
The result of this coupling of Confucianism with Chinese bureaucracy was to paraphrase
a very noted Chinese scholar Patricia Buckley a sort of balance of power between the inner
court of the emperor which included the emperor's family and the eunuchs and the outer court
of the Confucian trained and highly educated bureaucracy.
As we'll see this major role played by Confucian scholars in government lasted with some interruptions
right through until the establishment of the Republic of China after 1912 making it one
of the absolute political foundations of East Asian civilization.
But in case I'm painting too idealized a picture here we do need to remember that in the real
world of politics and government Emperor Wudi like his predecessors still combined legalist
methods with these increasingly orthodox Confucian ideals.
Although traditionally Liu Bang has received credit from historians for abolishing the
Qin law code quite recent discoveries by archaeologists of Han official documents in tombs reveal
that the Han also had very harsh laws and punishments in place like the Qin the Han
government also demanded conscripted labor service from its population.
To facilitate this every man woman and child had to register with local authorities failure
to register or any refusal to perform conscripted labor was severely punished.
The duties of the conscripted labor force also included increased levels of military service
particularly after Wudi instigated a period of aggressive imperial expansion late in the
second century BCE.
Before long the powerful Han armies were advancing northeast towards Korea west as far as Dunhuang
on the edge of the Gobi Desert and south into Vietnam under Wudi the Han Empire reached the
heights of its power and size.
In a future lecture we will follow a brave young envoy of the Han named Zhang Qian who
was dispatched by Wudi on a mission deep into Central Asia to seek allies against the
Zhongnu nomads.
Indeed Wudi justified these expansionist policies particularly to the west in terms of self-defense
against this most dangerous of China's foes.
It was by seeking an alliance with another nomadic confederation the Yuei Cha against
the Zhongnu that China ultimately became involved in the Silk Roads trade and will certainly
be investigating that very soon.
In the south interestingly armies pushed into Fujian and Guangxi provinces and then further
south again into Vietnam.
This marks the beginning of a long Chinese engagement with Vietnam.
Since the military garrisons were in place merchants and settlers moved into these newly
opened up regions.
So if we compare figures taken in that two CE census with another taken in the year 140
CE so 138 years later we see that as many as 10 million people had migrated from northern
China south into the Yangtze Valley and indeed further south again during this period.
To finance these expensive imperial expansion campaigns Wudi was forced to find new sources
of revenue including minting new coins confiscating some land back from the nobles selling titles
and high offices and increasing taxes on business activity.
To further increase its revenues the government also decided to monopolize the highly profitable
salt and iron industries and we actually have documents from the period that outline
an intense debate actually several debates that took place amongst scholar bureaucrats
about the ethics of this.
On one side of the debate there are officials who are defending Wudi's policy.
On the other side scholar officials who in the best Confucian style argued that the pursuit
of material profit should never appear as a motive for government.
These expansionist policies eventually led to fiscal crisis and to peasant unrest and
ultimately to the end of the early Han dynasty.
So in the final section of this lecture I want to show you how the early Han was brought
to an abrupt end by a well intentioned Confucian government official before we then follow the
fortunes of the later Han dynasty through to the end in the year 220 CE.
In what seems to be a standard pattern in East Asian history the powerful Emperor Wudi
was followed by a succession of weaker emperors and as fiscal problems continued to mount
the government was eventually overthrown in the year nine of the common era by a Confucian
chief minister named Wang Meng.
Now as Wang Meng saw the problem the peasants were struggling to pay their taxes and were
finding themselves increasingly enslaved through debt but at the same time the number
of tax-free noble estates was increasing.
So Wang Meng seized power from an increasingly inept Han government in an attempt to redress
this situation.
He immediately abolished debt slavery and attempted to portion the land out to the peasants through
what he called a well field system.
He also tried to stabilize the prices of basic commodities by establishing government agencies
to buy and stockpile surplus commodities when prices were low and then sell them at a subsidized
rate when scarcity forced prices to rise.
Now if you permit me to put my world historians hat on again similar experiments had been
tried at the opposite end of Eurasia by the Romans.
The Gaius Gracus the younger brother of Tiberius Gracus was elected Tribune of the People
in the year 123 BCE so during the same period as the reign of Wudi he introduced legislation
in the Senate to try and protect against wildly fluctuating grain prices in Rome.
Grain distribution to the people was placed in the hands of government agencies which
purchased grain when it was cheap and then distributed at a subsidized price when it
was scarce.
Although Gaius and 3,000 of his followers were killed in rioting two years later the
grain doll he introduced remained in place to be regularly used by politicians to buy
votes during the late Roman Republic.
In Han China Wang Meng's reformers program eventually failed because his policies were
so resented by powerful landlords.
The Liu Siu a descendant of the Han dynasty founder Liu Bang assembled the force of rebellious
peasants and attacked Wang Meng in the capital of Chang'an.
Wang Meng and 1,000 of his followers made a valiant last stand but he was killed in battle
in October 23 CE.
Two years later in the year 25 CE Liu Siu whose reign name was Guang Wudi declared the
later Han dynasty which went on to rule for almost another two centuries until 22 CE.
Although the later Han were initially wealthy and powerful they frankly never attained the
heights of the early Han.
After Chang'an the capital of the early Han had been sacked in the aftermath of Wang
Meng's rule Liu Siu re-established the dynasty in a new capital further east at Luoyang.
Guang Wudi, his son Emperor Ming and his grandson Emperor Zhang are generally considered
by historians to have been pretty able emperors whose reigns were the high points of the later
Han dynasty.
But after the reign of Hurti from 89 to 105 CE the next ten emperors all came to the throne
very young between the ages of three months and sixteen years.
With this series of child rulers in place the dynasty suffered from corruption and political
infighting between three groups of powerful individuals, the palace eunuchs, clans of
the emperors and the Confucian scholar bureaucrats.
But none of these, none of these three groups was able to improve the harsh lives of the
peasants.
Then in 153 CE China was beset with a series of natural calamities including massive locust
swarms and devastating floods along the Huanghe, clearly the balance of yin and yang was off.
Hundreds of thousands of people were forced off the land and took to the roads in a desperate
search for food but the government could do little to help them.
Confucian students were so disgusted by the conniving and increasing corruption in court
that they organized mass protests against the court eunuchs.
The eunuchs responded by imprisoning Confucian official Li Ying and the protesting students
on the charge of treason.
Then in 166 CE and again in 169 the eunuchs orchestrated purges of the out-of-court officials
who were exiled, jailed or killed.
And while all this is going on Emperor Huang ignored the growing economic and political
storm by hosting thousands of young women, thousands of concubines in his harem.
By the late 2nd century Taoist ideals of equal rights and equal land distribution had spread
throughout the peasantry.
The peasant insurgents of the Yellow Turban Rebellion swarmed across the North China Plain,
the principal agricultural sector of the country.
In 184 a massive rebellion led by radical Taoists led to widespread attacks on government
officials all over the country.
The power once held by the Liu royal family now fell into the hands of local governors
and warlords such as Dong Zhou who attacked and burned the hand capital to the ground
in 190 CE and also the ruthless and ambitious Cao Cao.
As we will see in a later lecture, three of these warlords eventually succeeded in taking
control of most of China, ushering in the so-called Three Kingdoms Period.
Big Ahead Han Emperor Xian managed to hold on until 220 when Cao Pi, the son of Cao Cao
the warlord, forced his abdication, bringing to an end the Han dynasty era of Chinese history.
In our next lecture we will leave the world of politics and warfare behind to consider
the impressive cultural and technological achievements of the Han dynasty.
Some of these, the invention of paper being just one obvious example, were destined to
have a profound impact not just on eastern civilization but on the subsequent history
of the entire world.
