Many scholars over the centuries have been very critical of Han scholarship as somehow
lacking in originality, as being too focused on reinterpreting the more impressive cultural
achievements of the Joe dynasty. Interestingly, the Romans, to whom the Hanna often compared
in terms of size, power and influence, are also often subjected to the same criticism.
You may well have heard the argument that Roman culture was unoriginal, that it simply
picked up and developed the wealth of original ideas left behind by the Greeks. 20th century
commentators in particular were harsh in their condemnation of Han culture, finding it lacking
in intellectual rigor and somehow inherently unscientific. But these criticisms of Han
and Roman culture are, I think, unjustified and unfair. In the case of the Han, the reason for
this critical interpretation is rooted in the revival of Confucianism as the orthodox ideology
of Han government, a decision that was inevitably accompanied by a revival of interest in the literary
classics of the Joe dynasty. In the preceding Qin dynasty, you will remember, the first emperor
and his advisors had become so sensitive to criticism that they decided to destroy all
books that might contain some ideological justification for this criticism of the government.
The only texts that were regarded as safe were those written on innocuous subjects,
medicine, forestry, farming, for example. All the rest had to be collected and burned.
You'll remember that Xia Huangdi did order a single copy of each banned book, be kept in
his personal library, but that was burned to the ground when the capital was sacked by invading
Han rebel forces in 206, and all those copies of the texts were lost.
But fortunately for us, a handful of copies of these seminal texts of classical Chinese,
classical Eastern philosophy and literature remained in private hands, and after the success
of the Han, any pre-Han texts that had survived the Qin burning became greatly valued, even revered.
And this was of course particularly true of the five classics. You'll remember the core canon
of classic Chinese literature that we first discussed in our lecture on the Joe dynasty,
the book of changes, the book of documents, the book of odes, the book of rites, and the spring
and autumn annals which may have been written by Confucius, or some scholars argue that.
To help ensure the survival of the five classics, which had so nearly been eradicated from human
memory, the Han government in 175 BCE had each of the texts carved in stone using the style of
master calligrapher Kai Yong. Fifty years later, these stone slabs were erected in the new Imperial
Institute, which as we noted last time, was founded by Emperor Wu Di in 124 BCE. This
institute was the pinnacle of the new state educational system, which was based almost
exclusively on mastery of these Confucian classics. This Imperial Institute, university
might not be too exaggerated a word, was staffed by leading professors who specialized in each of
these five classics, and their job was to use this material to train candidates for government
office. Scholars and students attending the institute would make copies or rubbings of the
engraved stone slabs, which led to the development of the idea that there is a definitive version
of each of the texts. So part of the reason for this condemnation of Han culture as unoriginal
clearly has to do with what might appear to be an obsessive focus on the preservation of texts
and ideas from the ancient past. As I pointed out last time, however, although the texts might
have remained the same, the practical application of Confucianism proved itself remarkably adaptable
to the new political reality of the Han dynasty, and was not simply some sterile reproduction
of older thinking. Another innovative result of the dynasty's focus on education and literature
was the creation by the Han of what has often been described as the world's first dictionary,
the Shuo Wen Jiu Tzu, which literally translates as explaining simple and analyzing compound
characters. Now this compilation was completed by a Confucian scholar Su Shen in or about the
year 100 of the Common Era, but because of an anti-intellectual attitude that prevailed within
the government at that time, the work was not actually presented to the emperor until the year
123 CE. In 15 chapters, the Shuo Wen lists the meaning, pronunciation, and sometimes the etymology
of 9,431 characters and 1,279 variants, a staggering reminder of just how complex Chinese
writing had become during the 1300 years since its first appearance on the Oracle Bones.
Similar criticisms are equally unjustified, in my opinion, have been made of Han visual art,
that it was unoriginal and simply built upon the achievement of earlier, more innovative periods.
But Han artists, Han craftsmen were in fact highly creative, and we see this demonstrated in their
in magnificently engraved bronze mirrors, and particularly in magnificent jade burial suits.
One of the triumphs of Chinese pottery is porcelain, which is made from a hard paste of
kaolin clay mixed with a feldspar. Now later in this course, we will see the impact porcelain
had on the world when it began to be exported from China, first along the Silk Road's land
and then by sea. Is it any coincidence that your finest tableware is still called Chinaware to this
day? The great centre for porcelain production throughout most of China's history has been the
city of Jingdezhen in Jiangxi Province, and this city first became renowned for its porcelain
production during the Han dynasty. Now there are many superb examples of just magnificently glazed
Han dynasty pottery in all the great museums of the world today. I'm sure many of you have seen
these pieces, perhaps the beautiful miniature ceramic models of watchtowers along the Great War
or houses or farm yards complete with tiny humans and tiny animal figures.
These so-called ceramic spirit models are actually miniature representations of everyday life,
and scholars interpret their production as a reflection of changes that were going on
in thinking about the afterlife, a new belief that somehow these everyday activities would
continue after death. This explains why the tomb of early Han emperor Jingde, for example,
which I've had the pleasure of visiting, is full of models of cattle, models of pigs and
chickens and dogs and other animals, all accompanied by thousands of dull-sized human figures.
It's quite an extraordinary sight. It was also under the Han that a special type of bronze
mirror emerged, highly polished on one side to provide a reflective surface and beautifully
engraved on the other. Most enigmatic are the so-called TLV mirrors, which feature various
dragon motifs, but also the initials or shapes corresponding to the letters T, L and V engraved
upon them. Scholars are frankly uncertain of the meaning of these fantastic engraved figures
or of the purpose of the TLV symbols. Some interpret the symbols as having cosmological
significance, but we really have no idea what. Others that the TLV shapes were used in a popular
board game of the day called Liubo, so you would flip the mirror over and it would double as a board
game. Han art is also justly famous for the creation of magnificent jade burial suits
in which members of the royal family were often buried. These suits, incredibly expensive to make,
consisted of many small squares of jade wired together. The composition of the wire varied,
but was often itself made of gold or silver. Some of the suits discovered by archaeologists
consisted of close to 2,500 individual pieces of solid jade joined by two and a half pounds in
some case of gold wire. Again, archaeologists are uncertain whether because of their great cost
jade suits were rare and perhaps exclusively reserved for the the burials of monarchs or families of the
elites or whether they were quite common during the wealthy Han dynasty, but of course most have
been lost over the millennia to grave robbers. But there is no doubt that these jade suits remain
some of the most extraordinary funerary costumes ever discovered in all of archaeological history.
Now before we leave this overview of just a few of the Han cultural achievements,
let me also remind you that it was Han scholars who wrote the first real history texts of East
Asian civilization. Obviously of great importance to a historian like me. Early Han dynasty historian
Sima Chan deserves to be recognized not only as the father of all history writing in East Asia,
but as one of the finest historians who ever put pen to paper or in his case brush to bamboo.
He lived from 145 to 90 BCE, so virtually the entire reign of the great emperor Wu Di
and he inherited from his father Sima Tan the rather formal position of grand historian of the
emperor. But Sima also took over from his father the much more ambitious task of writing the first
ever complete narrative history of China. As an educated 20 year old scholar he undertook an
extensive journey around China accumulating a great deal of documentary but also oral evidence
speaking to people. After his father died in the year 107 Sima Chan formally took up the post
of grand historian and from the year 104 to his death in 90 BCE he was wholly devoted to compiling
a massive 116 chapter manuscript known today as the shi jie or the records of the grand historian of
China. All previous Chinese dynastic histories had simply been collections of official records
recorded by scribes on a daily basis and used to compile a really a survey of a particular reign.
These were very impersonal chronicles and before Sima Chan it was in fact regarded as highly improper
for an historian to put forward a particular interpretive view or to offer an analysis of events.
But Sima Chan valued his independence as a historian and was not afraid to criticize poor
decisions made by recent emperors. Because of this independence of spirit Sima Chan
suffered personally and terribly at the hands of Wu Di. After a failed military expedition
against the Xiangnu in the year 99 BCE the Han general who had been leading the expedition Li
Ling was captured by the Xiangnu. The emperor was furious with Li Ling and all the court officials
tried to appease Wu Di by openly condemning the failed general and recommending his execution.
The only individual to speak up in support of Li Ling was his friend Sima Chan who respected the
general as an honest Confucian official who had been sent on a poorly considered campaign
without the necessary logistical support from the emperor. Now you can imagine Wu Di who was
already angry with Sima Chan because of several uncomplimentary remarks he had written about his
father in the shi zi was so incensed by this that he gave Sima Chan the appalling choice
of death by suicide or the humiliating legalist punishment of castration. Sima Chan chose to
be castrated at the hands of the emperor's henchmen so that he could finish his history
but he then had to live for the rest of his life with the shame of not having taken the
honorable path of suicide. In a letter to a fellow historian and colleague Ren An he wrote
but the reason I have continued to live dwelling in vileness and disgrace
without taking leave is that I agree that I have things in my heart that I have not yet
been able to express fully and I am ashamed to think that after I am gone my writings will not
be known to posterity. In the shi zi the historian produced the first great history of the peoples
of China from the pre-dynastic era through all the early dynasties of the shi the shang the joe
and the chin including with an account of the great dynasty of his own time the Han. Sima Chan
introduced numerous important historiographical innovations in this monumental work such as
the idea that a single historical event can actually have different meanings in different contexts
and also that individuals can have multiple intentions for their actions. As noted Sima
Chan scholar Grant Hardy points out the shi zi went on to become one of the foundational texts
of all of eastern civilization. Let me quote professor Hardy Sima wrote a universal history
and in so doing he defined what it meant to be Chinese.
So I hope I've convinced you that the Han left a deep and vibrant cultural legacy that would
significantly shape Chinese and eastern civilization for the next 2000 years but perhaps the Han
deserve to be even better known for their extraordinary innovations in technology and science.
Let me give you something of a list first far from complete the Han were responsible for the
development of the world's first padded horse collar to assist with plowing the world's first
wheelbarrow to assist with farming and bureaucracy. I'll explain that strange link in just a moment
the first water mill to facilitate the grinding of grain a type of seismograph that measured the
strength of earthquakes a recognition of sunspots and the creation of the most accurate calendar in
world history to that point the piston bellows to assist in the manufacture of really high quality
iron and the invention of paper and that is quite a list. Exploring all these in detail is obviously
beyond the scope of a single lecture so let me just focus in on two of perhaps the most important
of these innovations the Han iron industry and the invention of paper.
As we have seen already iron making actually started late in China much later than in many
other parts of Eurasia yet it floured very quickly because in less than three centuries the Chinese
advanced from their first tentative experiments with smelted iron to a position of undisputed
Eurasian leadership. Around 500 BCE driven no doubt by the intensely competitive environment of
the warring states era iron smelters in the southern kingdom of Wu developed a technique that would
not be seen in Europe for another half a millennium. Using sophisticated bellows and very high quality
coal the smelters of Wu achieved a temperature close to 1130 degrees celsius hot enough to be
considered the equivalent of a blast furnace even today. At this temperature iron when combined with
a small amount of carbon essentially liquefied which meant that it could be poured and cast into
molds. This was a much less laborious method than the individual forging of each piece of iron from
a bloom although it was this latter forging technique that remained the standard practice
all over the rest of Eurasia until well into medieval times. By the advent of the silk roads
iron iron working was taking place on a scale on a level of sophistication that would not be seen
in the west and this is no exaggeration until the industrial revolution of the 18th century.
To increase their revenues the Han government monopolized the production of iron as indeed it
did of salt, silk and copper and built around 50 huge blast furnaces each of which could produce
several tons of iron every day. Han metallurgists also worked out through experimentation that wrought
iron and cast iron could be melted together to create an extraordinarily strong alloy of
intermediate carbon content which we would call steel today. Chinese iron was highly prized in the
Roman Empire for its exceptional hardness and after silk iron became the most valuable of all
Chinese exports along the silk roads as we'll see in a lecture or two. Yet perhaps the most
remarkable invention of all that appeared during the Han dynasty was the first paper
in world history made of a composite of natural fibers like hemp and bark with textile fibers
like silk. For 2000 years now the Chinese have attributed the invention of paper to an otherwise
obscure court eunuch of the later Han dynasty named Kai Lun. Western scholars have often dismissed
Kai Lun as a legendary figure but there is actually plenty of documentary evidence that Kai Lun not
only existed but that he indeed greatly pleased the emperor when he presented him with his
invention of paper in the year 105 of the common era. This invention can be seen I think as yet
another example of necessity driving innovation as the bureaucracy reached the height of its size
and sophistication in the later Han so the sheer volume of official records that needed to be kept
grew staggeringly large. We read that transporting even a small number of official documents which
remember were transcribed on traditional bamboo strips that were then bound together would require
the use of a wheelbarrow. So the invention of paper must have come as a huge relief to the court
and the bureaucrats that were wheeling these massive documents around.
We also know that Kai Lun was rewarded by the emperor with a promotion and the title of an
aristocrat but later sadly he got caught up in some deadly palace power struggle and ended up
committing suicide by drinking poison while taking a bath. By the third century paper was in common
use in China and the invention had made its way across Eurasia into the Arab world by the seventh
century but it was not until the 12th century that paper making spread to Europe making it possible
for printers like Johannes Gutenberg to begin to mass produce printed books. In his fascinating 1978
book the 100 a ranking of the most influential persons in history author Michael Hart ranks Kai
Lun as number seven ahead of Gutenberg. Hart argues that the invention of paper allowed Chinese
civilization to surge ahead of the west throughout the first millennium of the common era as we'll
see in coming lectures. Knowledge was more rapidly disseminated literacy became more widespread
and government bureaucracy was run much more efficiently because of the invention of paper
only in the late middle ages and really particularly after the renaissance
would the west begin to close the knowledge gap on the east a process we will also follow later in
this course. Let me conclude this lecture now by returning to the theme of women's roles and
gender relations by introducing you to Ban Jiao and her concept of the ideal woman.
Ban Jiao is a fascinating figure from the Han dynasty. She lived between 45 and 116 of the
common era. She was the first ever female court historian in Chinese history that same position
that Sina Chen and his father had occupied during the early Han dynasty. She came as you'd expect
from a very distinguished family of scholars and soldiers and she inherited this position
of court historian from her brother Ban Gu who was executed in 92 CE. She then devoted the rest of
her life to scholarship. She never married but preferred to explore her extensive interests
in history in astronomy and mathematics. By far her most famous work was lessons for women
lessons for women. I'm sorry a short book of only seven chapters that outlines the proper
behavior expected of good Confucian women. Now this book has been widely and variously
interpreted. Some argue that this book supports the subjugation of women by men. Others that it
actually is a very useful guide to teach women of the court how to avoid scandal and survive long
enough to achieve venerable dowager status. Yet others argue that this is a subtle plea to the
emperor for equal access to education for women. Ban Jiao focuses on the essential qualities and
duties of a woman in a series of admonitions such as the following. Let a woman retire late to bed
that rise early to her duties. Let her not dread tasks by day or night. Let her not refuse to
perform domestic duties. Let a woman be correct in manner and upright in character in order to
serve her husband. Let her love not gossip and silly laughter. So Ban Jiao argues that successful
women need four, four specific qualifications. Womenly virtue, womenly words, womenly appearance
and womenly work. To paraphrase this great historian womenly virtue does not require
particularly brilliant ability. Womenly words don't need to be clever necessarily.
Womenly appearance does not require a perfect face and form and womanly work does not need to be
worked on more skillfully than that of others. Instead, womanly virtue requires that a woman
carefully guards her chastity, behaves circumspectly and exhibits modesty at all times.
Womanly words require that she chooses her words with care, avoids vulgar language, speaks only at
appropriate times and does not weary others with excessive conversation. Womanly appearance means
to keep clothes and ornaments fresh and clean, to wash the head and bathe the body regularly
and to keep the person free from, quote, disgraceful filth. And womanly work demands a
whole hearted devotion to sewing and weaving and the avoidance of gossip and silly laughter.
Now all these ideas would go on to profoundly influence women not just in China but as we'll
see in Japan and in Korea for the next 2,000 years. In fact, many would argue that these words
still resonate powerfully in East Asian societies today. But having said that Ban Jiao's message
remains just as enigmatic today as it probably was during the Han dynasty, she seems to accept
that men are superior and that women should know their place and perform their duties in what sounds
like a subservient manner. Or at least she's arguing from a yin yang perspective that their
essential roles are different. But somewhere in the middle of this fascinating little book,
she slips in a powerful argument to the emperor in favor of equal educational opportunities
for boys and girls. Because these ideals of right living, these ideals of yin and yang harmony,
can only be passed down through the generations by education.
This is how Ban Jiao puts it and let me quote, yet only to teach men and not to teach women
is that not ignoring the essential relation between them? According to the book of rights,
it is the rule to begin to teach children to read at the age of 8 years and by the age of 15 years
they ought then to be ready for cultural training. Only why should it not be that girls' education
as well as boys be according to this principle? As this course progresses, I promise you we will
return to the ambiguous message that this very important document and many others we'll discuss
seems to contain about the status of women because these clear distinctions of gender roles
remain one of the most significant foundational beliefs of eastern civilization.
Okay, it's time to wrap up this lecture now. But let me just remind you that it was also
during the Han dynasty that China and indeed all of East Asia began to engage
for the first time with the rest of Eurasia. As the Silk Road spread across Central Asia,
the Han found themselves part of a vast trade and exchange network that eventually encompassed
much of the vast Afro-Eurasian world zone. These connections were destined to have
profound consequences for world history, so profound in fact that this first great Silk
Roads era will become our focus for the next five lectures. I look forward to seeing you soon.
