Hello, folks, and welcome to this series within a series, the first of five lectures on the
Great Silk Roads.
Now, the Silk Roads got their name obviously because of the Chinese silk that was traded
along the route.
They comprised one of the greatest trade routes of the ancient world, linking all of
Afro-Eurasia together into a single interconnected system of exchanges.
Though silk was certainly the major trade item from China, what made the Silk Road so
extraordinary was the resulting exchange of ideas.
The impact of these exchanges along the Silk Roads was so significant to Eastern and indeed
to global civilization that that's why we'll spend the next five lectures talking about
them.
The establishment of these routes allowed the foundational ideas and inventions of Eastern
civilization that we have already identified to start to diffuse westwards for the first
time in history.
But this was also the moment that East Asia began to open itself up to cultural influences
from other parts of Eurasia, particularly to the great Indian spiritual philosophy of
Buddhism which was destined to have such a profound impact on Eastern civilization.
The Silk Roads could be seen as the forerunner of the globalized village in which we live
today, the moment that diverse peoples, their languages, their beliefs began to mingle and
synthesize with each other in such a dynamic manner that it set human history careening
down a path that ultimately led towards modernity.
And all of this because wealthy aristocratic women in far off ancient Rome decided that
to be truly fashionable, they had to be seen in the streets wearing the latest thing in
textiles, a gorgeous, sensuous see-through material that came from somewhere exotic far
away across the deserts, a material called silk.
It was the patrician women that provided the demand then, and the silkworms of course
that are creating the fabric, but it was the merchants of China and Central Asia plus their
camels that made the trade practical.
And it was the enigmatic and mysterious Kushan empire, the great lost civilization that lay
at the heart of Central Asia that made these exchanges possible.
So in the next five lectures then, as we follow the caravans along the fabled Silk Roads, together
we will meet the women of Rome and the merchants of China.
We will follow the fortunes of a brave young Chinese envoy Zhang Chen as he penetrates
the geographical barriers that have sealed China off from the West and journeys deep
into the wastelands of Central Asia and back again.
Are we going too far to suggest that this envoy was almost single-handedly responsible
for dragging China out of millennia of isolation?
We will also ride the two humped Bactrian camels, I can tell you from personal experience.
It's a great pleasure to ride these wonderful bees through the deserts of the Gobi.
We'll meet the weavers of the silk that the camels carried slung on their sides through
some of the harshest environments on earth.
And we'll also join the formidable hand military in its life and death struggle with the vast
hordes of militarized shengnu to protect the camel caravans and to ensure the continued
operation of the greatest trade and exchange network of the ancient world.
In this first lecture, I hope to accomplish four things.
First, I'd like to expand on this argument I am making about the fundamental significance
of the silk roads to world history.
Second, let's explore the world of the pastoral nomads, often neglected by historians, but
without whom none of these exchanges would have been possible.
Third, I plan to zoom in on two of the great pastoral nomadic confederations of ancient
Eurasia.
We've already met the formidable shengnu and also the weichu.
Let's follow their critical role in this story.
And then we will conclude by considering the dramatic circumstances surrounding the
defeat of the weichu by the shengnu and the series of events that this set into motion
that made the silk roads possible.
Okay, let's begin this fascinating journey by taking a wide angle view here, by making
a few more observations about the significance of the silk roads, both to eastern civilization
but really indeed to all world history.
In order to do this, we really do need to step back and think about human history from
the broadest possible perspective on the scale of big history.
Now big history reminds us that unlike the history of every other species on our planet
which is essentially captive to slow processes of biological change, human history is characterized
by a very small number of episodes of quite extraordinary cultural change.
Here are a few of the most profound, I think, of these human cultural revolutions we'll
call them that big historians like to focus on.
Now the first occurred some 50,000 years ago, the so-called revolution of the Upper Paleolithic,
the revolution of the late Stone Age, when in response to bitterly cold conditions at
the height of the last Ice Age, humans invented a complex range of technologies and survival
strategies that probably also included symbolic language.
It certainly included symbolic cave art.
The second great revolution in human history was the appearance of agriculture beginning
about 11,000 years ago as a direct product of the waning of the Ice Ages.
Now humans began to settle down with their domesticated animals and plants, radically
altering our fundamental way of life.
And this led eventually to a third cultural revolution, the appearance of the first cities
and states some 5,000 years ago in Sumeria, in Mesopotamia, when large numbers of humans
that have been living in small villages around the Delta regions of the Tigris and Euphrates
rivers now moved into large, densely populated cities.
It is this handful of revolutions, these episodes of profound technological and life-way changes
that fundamentally separates human history from the history of all other life on Earth.
Now of course, big historians look for the major causes of these cultural revolutions.
We call them the prime movers, particularly the role of climate change and population
pressure.
But every single region in which these changes first took place was also characterized by
very high levels of intercultural exchange.
So clearly, contacts between different groups have also been an important prime mover in
instigating change on this sort of macro scale.
And the more diverse the participants in these exchanges, the more profound the change has
been.
As I've just argued, the most significant exchange network of the pre-modern world was
the Silk Roads, along which unparalleled levels of diverse intercultural communication
and exchange occurred.
And this fundamentally I think is why they are so important, not just because they helped
transform eastern civilization, but because they radically affected the future course
of world civilization.
As we unfold the story of the Silk Roads then, we also explore one of the great cultural
revolutionary moments in the history of humanity.
Now, the tracks and pathways of the Silk Roads have functioned as migration and exchange
routes for a very long time, for tens, perhaps hundreds of thousands of years, even millions
of years, in that these are probably the same paths that those hominids we met back in our
third lecture migrated from Africa all the way to East Asia.
But in this series of lectures we need to focus in on a much shorter period, from roughly
200 BCE to 300 CE, a period that might be termed, I think, the first Silk Roads era.
During this 500-year-long period, cultural exchange took place on an unprecedented scale,
between all the key players of Eurasia, between the Chinese, the Japanese and the Koreans,
the Indians and Kushans, between Iranians, Greeks, Romans and Celts, and all of it made
possible by the pastoral nomads.
Trade and exchange on this sort of macro scale only became possible at this moment in history
because of the appearance of great agrarian civilizations, like those we've just been
investigating of the Han, but also the Kushans, the Parthian Empire and the Roman Empire.
These powerful expansive states established law and order over enormous areas of Afro-Eurasia.
They engendered political and military stability, they minted and used the first coinage in
human history, and they constructed sophisticated roads and maritime infrastructure, conditions
with us ripe for exchange on an unprecedented scale.
Just think about this idea for a moment.
In the year one, for example, of the common era, just four men, the kings or emperors of
the Roman, Parthian, Kushan and Han empires, controlled the vast breadth of Eurasia.
I could have walked from Korea to Scotland in that year and just crossed three political
borders.
Now seriously, imagine trying to do that today.
Now many historians spend their entire professional lives studying these great civilizations as
though they existed in isolation.
But we should remember that for most of human history, states and civilizations were never
really separated from each other.
From the very beginning of history, civilizations interacted with each other in various ways.
They traded with each other.
They fought wars with each other and they exchanged ideas and diseases with each other.
But we can also say, I think, that until the first century before the common era, one key
civilizational player was missing in these Eurasian exchanges.
And that was China and all the other regions of East Asia, sealed off by the formidable
geographical barriers we discussed in the second lecture of this course.
But all that changed with the advent of the Silk Roads.
Once China and thus indirectly Korea and Japan became involved, material and non-material
exchanges ratcheted up to an unprecedented level.
Before long, an enormous range of physical, intellectual and biological goods were being
synthesized and disseminated throughout Afro-Eurasia and, quite frankly, the world would never
be the same again.
The critical group of Eurasian people that made all this possible was the pastoral nomads,
the great unsung heroes of world history.
Again, please allow me to take a big history perspective here too, just for a moment.
For the vast majority of the 200,000 plus years or so that humans have been on Earth,
we survived as foragers, which meant living off the natural fruits of the land and eventually
also learning to hunt animals for their meat and hides.
The archaeological record shows us that from about 7,000 years ago, however, some communities
of humans living in the grasslands of Eurasia learned more efficient ways of using certain
types of animals than just killing them.
These animals were part of what the great historian Andrew Sherritt dubbed the Secondary
Products Revolution.
This is when humans learn to use the secondary products of animals while they are still alive.
Their wool, their milk, their blood, their traction power to haul carts and plows.
Think about what horse power means for a moment, but also their mobility as a means of rapid
transportation through horse riding.
In essence, these humans had discovered more efficient ways of using animals to turn grass
into energy that they could use.
And this discovery led directly to the emergence of a brand new life way for humans, pastoralism,
which can be defined as nomadic livestock herding.
So pastoralism is a hybrid life way then.
It's somewhere between nomadic hunter gathering and sedentary farming.
Pastoralists are essentially nomadic, although we know they also practice farming when the
environment facilitated this.
But it was this mobility that was so important to the establishment of the Silk Roads.
Because these pastoralists were now able to take their food, clothing, their tools, their
dwelling materials with them as they migrate across the landscape, they were able to move
into and colonize the great steppe and desert regions of Africa and Eurasia.
Pastoralists were able to thrive in regions where humans had thus far been unable to survive
and to use their mobility to move backwards and forwards between the border regions of
these great agrarian civilizations.
It was as a direct result of the emergence of pastoralism then that these enormous expansive
civilizations of Afro-Eurasia became linked together into a single system of exchange
for the first time.
Now there are two pastoral nomadic confederations that are of particular interest to me but
also particular importance to the story of this first Silk Roads era.
And it is to their histories that we need to turn next.
I am referring to the mighty hordes of the Xiongnu and the Ouicha.
Now these might sound like difficult names to pronounce, really they're not, but they
are very important names to remember.
Both were neighbors of ancient China and both were destined to play a role in world history,
frankly at least as important as their much later and better known nomadic successes like
the Mongols.
Now we've mentioned the Xiongnu several times in previous lectures, obviously.
The powerful confederation that controlled the steplands to the north of the Great Bend
in the Yellow River.
The Xiongnu make their first appearance in written history in a superb account of their
life way in Sima Chun's great history.
And where would we be without Sima Chun in this course?
He describes a life way that seems purely nomadic.
He says the Xiongnu move about with their herds of horses, cattle, sheep, goats and camels
in migrations that range from short excursions amongst hilly pastures to much longer trips
deep into the Gobi Desert.
In battle Sima Chun tells us that the highly skilled Xiongnu mounted archers used composite
bows.
These are bows made of strips of wood, hide and animal horn or laminated together that
could fire arrows with sufficient force to penetrate armour.
And they were also very adept with swords and spears.
Interestingly, modern archaeological evidence shows us that the Xiongnu were not always nomadic.
At sites such as Noinula and Ivolga in Mongolia today, we see evidence of farming activity.
We see evidence of fixed dwellings, even fortified settlements.
Certainly of advanced craftsmanship, including rug weaving, leather making and the crafting
of fine gold, iron and bronze implements and works of art.
These discoveries have frankly altered our previous impression of the life way, not only
of the Xiongnu, but really of pastoral nomads in general, who clearly followed a far more
sedentary life way than that outlined in the histories of the Han dynasty or, by the way,
in the work of the great ancient Greek historian, with whom I'm sure you're familiar, Herodotus,
when he discussed in great detail the life way of the Scythians.
The Xiongnu reached the peak of their power during the reign of their most feared leader,
the Xiongnu, or supreme ruler, Mo Du, who reigned from 209 to 174 BCE.
Under Mo Du, the Xiongnu became a potent and dangerous force, numbering, we read, perhaps
as many as, 300,000 archer warriors.
They were superbly adept at warfare.
They would use feigned retreat, sudden surprise attacks, constant harassment of weakened enemies,
an exceptional discipline to defeat their enemies.
Now, Mo Du's rise to power is a compelling story that begins with an attempt by his father,
Tauman, to get rid of his oldest son in order to promote, as his successor, a younger son
from a more favored consort.
To do this, Tauman first sent Mo Du as a hostage to the Uaicha people.
These were the Xiongnu's great rivals.
After Mo Du had been accepted as hostage by the Uaicha, Tauman suddenly attacked them,
knowing, indeed, hoping that the Uaicha would kill his son in retaliation.
But the courageous and resourceful Mo Du managed to steal one of the Uaicha's best horses
and escape.
His father was so struck by his bravery that he put Mo Du in command of a force of 10,000
cavalry.
But after this incident, Mo Du was relentless in his attempt to kill and replace his father.
Let me quote Sima Chan here as he picks up the story.
Mo Du had some arrows made that whistled in flight, and he used them to drill his troops
in shooting from horseback.
Shoot wherever you see my whistling arrow strike he ordered, and anyone who fails to
shoot will be cut down.
Accompanying his father, the Xiongnu Tauman, on a hunting expedition, he suddenly shot
a whistling arrow at his father, and every one of his followers turned without hesitation
and fired their arrows in the same direction and shot the Xiongnu dead.
Then Mo Du executed his stepmother, his younger brother, and all the high officials of the
nation who refused to take orders from him and set himself up as the new Xiongnu.
During 35 years of frankly quite brilliant rule as Xiongnu, Mo Du was able to extend
Xiongnu power far beyond its traditional heartland, conquering his pastoral neighbors and incorporating
them into a great confederation before turning to confront the Han dynasty.
As Sima Chan puts it, when Mo Du came to power, the Xiongnu reached the peak of their
strength and size, subjugating all of the other barbarian tribes of the north, and turning
south to confront China as a rival nation.
The most powerful of all the nomadic neighbors of the Xiongnu was another great rival confederation,
that of the UHR.
The ancestors of the UHR were pastoralists who during the Bronze Age had migrated long
distances across any Eurasia, probably all the way from some ancestral homeland in the
Caucasus region of southern Russia, to eventually end up on the western borders of ancient China.
And here they dwelt for many centuries, growing wealthy and powerful through trade and military
strength.
Their prowess was such that they became well known to many ancient Eurasian peoples who
mentioned them in various texts, Chinese texts, Tibetans, Turkish texts, Persians, Greeks,
even the Romans knew about the UHR.
So even though they left no written records of their own, it has been possible for historians
like me, this is a field that I'm absolutely fascinated in, to piece together their history
because of this range of references in many contiguous sources.
The principal settlement of the UHR was in the Gansu corridor on the edge of the Gobi
Desert, where melting snows from the high mountains on either side sustained numerous
oasis settlements such as Dunhuang, a quite extraordinary oasis city that I have so enjoyed
visiting.
We learned from Sima Chan that the UHR had a force of 100,000 trained mounted archers
and before the rise of Shengyu Moldau, they treated the Shownu with disdain.
This enormous UHR force of horseback archers was made up of contingents from many subordinate
groups that all probably followed a range of different life ways, from farmers to full
time nomads and everything in between.
So in fact, when we use names like Shownu or UHR, we are really referring to the ruling
clan that gave its name to these stable associations or confederations of different tribes, which
would have varied substantially in their cultural practices, probably even their languages.
Before the rise of Moldau, the UHR appeared justified in their dismissive attitude towards
the Shownu, but the moment the great Shengyu appeared on the scene, the UHR were in trouble.
As Moldau began to authorize or personally lead various raids upon the UHR, it was also
launching wave after wave of attacks against the Chinese Han, who for several decades despite
the Great Walls were hard pressed to keep them out.
During the early decades of the Han dynasty, the emperors decided to adopt a strategy of
negotiated peace treaties with Moldau and his successors, who accepted valuable Chinese
tributes, including beautiful and very forlorn Han princesses, while still sending disdainful
letters to the emperors demanding even more.
It was through such letters that the Han court heard of the devastating attacks upon the
UHR, which culminated in a final disastrous defeat.
During the ultimate route of the UHR, around the year 162 BCE, the King's skull was turned
into a drinking cup for the Shownu, and the UHR confederation was left with no alternative
other than to migrate far away from their homeland.
It is this migration and its consequences that forms the final topic for this lecture.
The UHR left their homeland and initially travelled just a few hundred miles to the north into
the fertile valley of the Ili River.
Today, this is a beautiful region.
It's cultivated with purple lavender, wheat, maize, hops, vegetables, sunflowers across
the hillsides.
So, this must have been a really desirable resettlement site for the UHR.
Indeed, for the next three decades they occupied this valley, some groups pursuing farming,
lose pastoralism, or the ruling dynasty probably extracted tribute from other sedentary farmers
in the region.
Enjoying this peaceful existence, they even seemed to forget about their old enemies,
the Shownu.
But the Shownu had not forgotten them, and sometime around 133 BCE, a powerful contingent
of Shownu and allied Wusan horsemen suddenly appeared, routing the no doubt utterly dismayed
UHR and forcing them to resume their migration.
This time their journey was long.
It took them thousands of miles to the west, deep into the heart of Central Asia, until
in or around the year 130 BCE, they finally settled down again in fertile river valleys
that drained into the Amu Daia.
The Amu Daia is one of the great rivers of Central Asia.
The Amu Daia forms the northern border of Afghanistan, separating that nation from Uzbekistan.
This river has been important for thousands of years.
The ancient Greeks knew it as the Oxus, the Han Chinese called it the Gui.
Now when the UHR arrived, they were forced to fight a bitter battle against a powerful
group of resident Scythians, who they eventually defeated and evicted.
This victory gave them control of the fabled Kingdom of Bactria, which even by the time
the UHR took over, nearly 2200 years ago, had already been part of several previous
major empires, those of the Achaemenid Persians, those of Alexander the Great, and then those
of his successors, the Seleucids.
Bactrian resistance to this UHR takeover is dismissed by the Han historians, but frankly
few sedentary kingdoms would have been able to withstand an invasion by this powerful
militarized nomadic confederation with still some 100,000 skilled archer cavalry.
So the UHR conquest of Bactria is just one example amongst many we could point out in
world history of the conquest of an agrarian society, no matter how powerful, by pastoral
nomads.
We will see this time and again in this course.
This particular invasion, however, represents something more, particularly for historians.
This invasion needs to be recognized, I think, as the first recorded event in the history
of world history writing, because this was the first ever incident that was commented
upon by both Western, that is Greco-Roman sources, and also Eastern, as in Chinese Han
sources.
This is a point of tremendous interest for the development of world history historiography.
In the years following their conquest of Bactria, the UHR consolidated their position in the
region.
The Bactrians, a very sophisticated people already, were allowed to keep their own local
rulers because pastoralists generally preferred to rule through subordinate chiefs of the
regions they had conquered.
We'll see that the same would be true of the Mongols 1200 years later.
The Bactrians also continued to conduct their lucrative markets in the great capital city
of Bactria, and this helped the UHR recognize the value, I think, of mercantile activity.
Remember, these people were of a pastoral nomadic background, had no real experience
with trade, and here they were settling in one of the great trade crossroads of the ancient
world already by that point.
And so we're going to take leave of this mighty UHR confederation in or about the year 130
before the common era.
They're occupying a strongly fortified position, they're well-established as farmers and as
pastoralists, and the ruling elite, of course, also as tribute-takers, and they are in complete
control of the wealthy region of Bactria.
This was the situation that an extraordinary young Chinese ambassador named Zhang Qian
discovered when he turned up in Bactria a couple of years later after his own epic journey
from the Han capital of Chang'an.
It's no exaggeration to suggest that the expedition of Zhang Qian, you'll want to remember that
name, I think, change the course of world history, but you'll need to wait until the
next lecture to hear all about it.
Thank you.
