In our previous lecture, we introduced the Silk Roads, the most important exchange network
in all of ancient world history, and one of the keys to our understanding of the transmission
and transformation of many of the foundations of Eastern civilization.
We looked at the emergence of a new human lifeway, pastoralism, and the critical role
pastoral nomads played in creating these trade routes by making interactions between the
great agrarian civilizations of Eurasia possible.
We focused particularly on the Shungnu and the Uecha, and followed the Uecha on their
30-year-long epic migration to the fabled Central Asian Kingdom of Bactria, which is
essentially modern Afghanistan.
We left the Uecha sometime around the year 130 before the common era, dwelling in comparative
luxury in a strongly fortified position north of the Amudair and in complete control of
Bactria.
This was the situation a Chinese ambassador named Zhang Qian found when he turned up in
Bactria a couple of years later, after his own epic decade-long journey from the Han
capital of Chang'an.
In this lecture, I'd like to look at how Zhang Qian, this courageous Chinese envoy who left
China at the head of an expedition of only about 100 men, led the way to developing
the Silk Roads and through remarkable perseverance, changed the course of world history.
Zhang Qian was sent by the great Han Emperor Wu Di to follow the migrating Uecha in the
hope of convincing them to return to China and join the Han in an alliance against their
common enemy, the Shungnu.
The expedition that followed is indisputably a classic tale of adventure.
Zhang Qian had to breach the formidable geographical barriers of western China and also the military
barrier established by the Shungnu.
He had to cross thousands of miles of deserts, steppes and the highest mountain ranges on
earth, visiting places no Chinese individual had ever heard of before, let alone seen.
But when he finally returned to the Han court and presented his report to Emperor Wu Di,
the Chinese became aware for the first time in their history of the world beyond their
western borders and of the diverse cultures and belief systems that existed there.
Hearing this report also led them to realize the trade and strategic opportunities that
were available to the Chinese were they to expand their interests into Central Asia.
It was as a direct result of this expedition then that the Silk Roads began to flourish,
enticing China out of millennia of cultural and geographic isolation and into active engagement
with the rest of Eurasia, including the Greco-Roman world.
Let's begin this fascinating story with a question.
Why was this expedition so important to Emperor Wu Di in the first place?
Now, after the reign of the great Shen Yu, the Shungnu were powerful enough to control
a vast steppe empire that functioned as a very effective intelligence barrier between
China and the rest of Eurasia.
So one of the motives of this mission called for by the vigorous and young Emperor Wu Di
must surely have been to simply obtain information about the world beyond the western regions
and beyond the Shungnu Empire.
At the same time, Wu Di may also have genuinely hoped to forge an alliance with the UHR against
their common Shungnu foes after he became aware of their defeat and eviction, although
frankly it is doubtful that the Chinese had any real idea where the UHR had gone.
Both these motives required the recruitment of an envoy who would attempt to pierce these
barriers and pursue the migrating UHR.
In the year 139 BCE, just one year into his reign, the teenage Emperor Wu Di moved to
put his plan into action by recruiting the appropriate man for the job.
Now, unfortunately for Asta, the Han sources provide very limited biographical information
on the early career of Zheng Qian, who appears to have been an obscure member of the lower
nobility, but we do have a few details about his recruitment.
According to Sima Qian, Wu Di sent out a summons throughout the land for men capable
of undertaking such a mission.
It was Zheng Qian, an otherwise undistinguished palace attendant who answered the summons
and was ultimately appointed by Wu Di as envoy to the UHR.
Now we have two great sources that we'll use to guide us as we follow the events of this
journey.
The first, no surprise here, is the great Sima Qian, the magnificent Chinese historian
who's been so important to us many times in this course already.
The other is Bangu, who wrote his own superb history of the early Han.
So with the help of our guides, let's join Zheng Qian and follow along with him in this
fascinating adventure over thousands of miles of inhospitable and as far as any Chinese
traveller was concerned, uncharted territory.
The expedition departed the Han capital of Chang'an in probably the year 138 BCE and
headed west through the Gansu Corridor and into the Gobi Desert, regions now firmly
under the control of the Zhongnu.
Not surprisingly, he and his party were almost immediately captured by Zhongnu forces.
Most of the party were killed and Zheng Qian and his closest retinue were transported far
to the north of the Gobi Desert to the headquarters of the Shan Yu.
The Shan Yu of the Zhongnu was singularly unimpressed by Zheng Qian's attempt to pass
through his territory, declaring as Sima Qian puts it, the U.H. people lived to the north
of me.
What does the Han mean by trying to send an envoy to them?
The Zhongnu decided to retain Zheng Qian as hostage, keeping him in what the sources
describe as gentlemanly detention, but Zheng Qian was not to be deterred from his mission.
Historian Bangu describes what happened next to paraphrase.
For over 10 years, the Shan Yu detained Zheng Qian, giving him a wife with whom he had children.
But Zheng Qian secretly retained the Han emblems of authority and he eventually found an opportunity
to escape with his handful of followers, including his wife and children, and set off in the
direction of the U.H.
For the next several weeks, it may have been months, he sped westwards, passing through
the Gobi Desert and into a region the Han sources called Da Yuan, which is the rich Fergana
Valley of the modern nations of Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.
But after 10 years in detention, by the time he arrived in Fergana, the U.H. had already
passed through two or three years earlier as they had continued their migration further
west after their eviction from the Ili Valley.
According to Zheng Qian's later report to Wudi, the people of Da Yuan had heard of the
wealth and power of the Han, which is frankly a lot more than could be said about the Han's
knowledge of Fergana.
Upon being presented to the King of Da Yuan, Zheng Qian was able to explain his mission
and promise the King rich rewards from the Han if he would help him on his way.
The exact enticement he made, or so we read in the Han Shu, is that, and I quote, the
wealth and goods which the Han will present to you will be beyond description.
The King of Da Yuan knew exactly where the U.H. were because they had passed through
this same territory within the past couple of years and he happily provided guides to
Zheng Qian to help him on his way.
As the envoy moved on through Da Yuan, Zheng Qian noticed something quite amazing, herds
of extraordinary horses grazing freely upon the rich grasslands of the valley.
These horses had short legs, powerful chests and round, barrel-shaped bodies, but it was
not these features that astonished the Chinese envoy.
As he watched them gallop, the horses appeared to sweat blood that appeared as thin strips
of red parallel to the horses' ribs.
To Zheng Qian, this appeared quite extraordinary, even magical.
Now modern scientists have proposed two different ideas about these ancient blood-sweating horses
of Fergana.
One is that small, subcutaneous blood vessels between the ribs may have burst as the horses
pushed themselves on a hard gallop.
The second and more widely accepted theory is that some sort of a parasitic nematode
probably burrowed into the subcutaneous tissues of the horses, causing the skin nodules to
bleed often and copiously, particularly when galloping.
Now when Zheng Qian eventually made it back to the Han court, he included an account of
these blood-sweating horses in his report to Wu Di, who was enthralled.
By sheer coincidence, the Emperor had recently divined through reading the Book of Changes.
You remember the Ai Qing, the great Zhou dynasty divination classic that we've discussed
in a couple of previous lectures.
The Emperor had divined a prophecy that, and I quote, divine horses will soon appear
from the Northwest.
When he heard of the blood-sweating horses from the Fergana, he immediately made the
connection and named them the heavenly horses of Dayuan.
Now if I can jump ahead here a little bit of the story.
In the year 104 BCE, so that would be 11 years after the return of Zheng Qian, the Empress
sent an army of 40,000 men on an extraordinary epic 3,000 mile campaign back to Fergana,
with the express aim of acquiring some of the horses.
But stretched to the limit of their supplies, after months on the road, the desert roads,
and a very long way from home, the army was defeated by the powerful forces of Dayuan.
Undaunted and perhaps now obsessed with these heavenly horses, Wu Di sent another army
of 60,000 men the following year, under the command of the great Han general Li Guangli.
After another epic campaign, the general did manage to acquire, but this time through negotiation,
3,000 horses, although only 1,000 survived the brutal journey back through the deserts
to China.
This began a long obsession with the horses of Central Asia for the Chinese elites.
Another fascinating aspect of Eastern civilization that I'll be picking up at various places
as the course unfolds.
But let's return to Zheng Qian as he continued on his journey.
Now we read that with the help of the guides provided by the King of Dayuan, the Han envoy
was led to the neighboring state of Kangzhou, which most scholars identify with a region
known as Sogdia.
Most Western authors particularly identify this as part of Uzbekistan today.
In his report, Zheng Qian described Kangzhou as powerful enough to be not easily defeated
by Han forces.
So this was a serious military state.
But at the same time, and I quote again, it was constrained to serve the Xiongnu in
the east and also to acknowledge nominal sovereignty to the Uaicha in the south.
So despite their formidable military strength then, the Sogdians found themselves as the
meat in a militarized nomadic sandwich and had wisely adopted a conciliatory position
towards both the Xiongnu who now controlled the vast depths to the north and east and
the Uaicha who you remember were now in control of Bactria to the south.
The Sogdians were apparently only too happy to also assist Zheng Qian's passage through
their country and they led him south to the stronghold of the Uaicha.
So Zheng Qian probably arrived at the court of the Uaicha ruling dynasty in or about the
year 128 BCE, a full 10 years after he had set out from Chang'an.
But after such a long and arduous journey, how would he fare in his mission to persuade
the Uaicha to return with him and join the Han in their mortal conflict with the Xiongnu?
Sima Qian, no doubt paraphrasing from Zheng Qian's later report, provides almost an eyewitness
account of the attitude of the Uaicha king as he met with Zheng Qian.
So let me quote again from our great guide Sima Qian.
Since the king of the Uaicha had been killed by the Xiongnu, his son had succeeded him
as ruler and had forced the kingdom of Bactria to recognize his sovereignty.
The region he ruled was rich and fertile and seldom traveled by invaders and the king thought
only of his own enjoyment.
He considered the Han too far away to bother with and had no particular intention of avenging
his father's death by attacking the Xiongnu.
So he was a serious blow to our brave adventurer.
The ruler of the Uaicha, despite the fact that his father's skull had been turned into
a drinking cup for the Xiongnu, had no intention of entering into an alliance with the Han,
let alone returning to confront their former enemies, the Xiongnu.
And who can blame him frankly?
This is hardly surprising considering that the devastating defeat the Xiongnu had inflicted
upon the Uaicha back in the Gansu, not to mention the trials of a 30-year-long migration.
Being finally settled in a wealthy and fertile region and having established hegemony over
the entire wealthy state of Bactria, it is no wonder that the Uaicha ruler had set his
mind on a life of ease and given up all thoughts of exacting revenge upon the Xiongnu.
Now undaunted, Jiangchuan decided to remain in the region for about a year, we read, and
accumulate as much information as he could about Bactria and other contiguous regions,
thus fulfilling, I guess we could call it, the intelligence gathering component of his
mission.
The information he collected and the reports he compiled are of incredible importance to
East Asia and indeed to world history because these are the first Chinese reports ever made
on any region with the exception of parts of Korea and Northern Vietnam on any region
outside of China.
This was the discovery of a whole new world but until this moment the Chinese and indeed
all the peoples of East Asia had no idea even existed.
Now let me give you some idea of the sort of information that Jiangchuan was able to
assemble.
He describes Bactria, for example, ancient Afghanistan, remember, as a large state with
a population numbering some one million or more persons and the hospitable inhabitants,
he says, were happy to provide supplies for him, for the Han Envoy.
The population consisted of farmers who cultivated the land but also many urban dwellers including
many merchants.
In the great market in the capital city of Bactria he was utterly astonished to find
for sale goods from southern regions of China, including some bamboo canes and some cloth
that the merchants said they had purchased in the markets of India.
So this shows that even before the Silk Roads had begun to operate, somehow small quantities
of trade goods from the remote southern regions of China, frankly areas that were largely outside
the control of the Han dynasty, had somehow made their way into India.
We can only imagine how perhaps by rough overland tracks through the mountains of Burma into
Bangladesh perhaps then all the way up the Ganges and eventually up the Indus River over
the Hindu Kush and into Bactria.
Intrigued, Zheng Chan sought more information on India which the Chinese called Shendu.
He was informed that the kingdom is hot and damp, that it's located along a great river,
which river we're not sure, the Indus or the Ganges, and that the soldiers ride elephants
into battle.
Now the Han Envoy also found out something about the powerful Iranian Empire of the Parthians
dwelling to the west, which five years later would come under the control of the greatest
Parthian king, Mithridati II.
I've had the pleasure of visiting Mithridati's great fortress city of Nisa in Turkmanistan,
an extraordinary site demonstrating the sheer power of this great empire.
Parthia we learned was large and intensely urbanized with what he describes as several
hundred cities of various sizes in which again merchants were extremely active.
He learnt that Parthian farmers grew rice and wheat and also an extraordinary vine they
called the grapevine from which they made wine.
Now the Chinese knew about wine of course but only the sort that was made from rice.
This was their first knowledge of a plant that would become one of the most important
silk roads imports into China, the grapevine.
After his year-long intelligence gathering sojourn in Bactria, Jiangchuan went back to
the UHR court to make one last attempt to persuade them to return with him to China.
But again, as Sima Chan tells us, in the end Jiangchuan was never able to interest the
UHR in his proposals.
Alright, let me start bringing this lecture gradually to conclusion by initially following
Jiangchuan on his return trip to China.
Now wisely, given the experiences of his outward journey and his captivity of ten years, he
decided to try and return to Chang'an by a different route, a more southerly route hopefully
avoiding Zhongnu territory in the steps of the north.
So he headed firstly east from Bactria and then south and east through the southern mountains
that separate the great Taran Basin from the Tibetan Plateau to the south.
But even though he had chosen this return route in the express hope of avoiding his enemies,
Jiangchuan was once again captured by the Zhongnu, the Zhongnu were everywhere.
This time he was detained for over a year and who knows how long this detention may
have lasted, but fortuitously the reigning Shen Yu of the Zhongnu Confederation died
at that critical moment, plunging the entire Confederation into turmoil.
Jiangchuan grabbed this window of opportunity and probably in the year 125 BCE give or take
he made his weary way back to the no doubt utterly astonished Han court in Chang'an
who must have long ago given him up for dead.
Accompanied so we read only by his Zhongnu wife and child and his loyal slave Gan Fu.
Now immediately upon his return, Jiangchuan was promoted to the position of supreme councillor
of the palace by Wu Di, a very senior position.
The envoy then delivered his report in person to the emperor, an event most probably personally
witnessed by the great Han historian Sima Chun who remains our most important source
for this entire story.
The critical part of the report was Jiangchuan's descriptions of all the places he had visited
or heard about that had been previously completely unknown to the Chinese.
Just imagine the knowledge of the furgana valley with its heavenly horses, this powerful
kingdom of sogya between the two great nomadic confederations, the great mercantile state
of Bactria, pathia with its hundreds of large cities, powerful kings, great finds, India
where the soldiers ride elephants into battle.
He described them to paraphrase Sima Chun as large states with many rare goods but which
prized Han wealth and goods.
If they could only be won over either through alliances or conquest it would be possible
to extend the Han empire for 5,000 miles until the emperor's might would be known to all the
lands between the seas.
This was an argument no emperor could refuse.
Over the next couple of years Wu Di employed Jiangchuan on several subsequent missions.
These included an attempt in 124 BCE to try and find a different route to Bactria following
the same southern paths from Sichuan through Burma that those trade goods must have followed
to end up in the market in Bactria.
But this expedition was thwarted when the Kunming tribes of the region murdered most
of the envoys and Jiangchuan barely escaped with his life.
The very next year Jiangchuan was employed as special envoy and guide for General Wei
Qing on an aggressive campaign north against the Zhongnu.
He read that because Jiangchuan knew where water and grazing pasture was for the Han
army's horses because of his experience being a captive in Zhongnu territory he was able
to save the army from hardship.
As a result of this successful campaign he was promoted again by Wu Di to the title
of Broad Vision Marquis thus making him a member of the highest nobility of Han China.
But the very next year as envoy for General Li Guang in another expedition against the
Zhongnu the enemy ambushed and destroyed most of the Han army.
The emperor as we've seen renowned for his bad temper blamed Jiangchuan for the disaster
and reduced his ambassador to the rank of commoner.
But once the emperor had calmed down Jiangchuan's reputation and rank was soon restored.
Jiangchuan did not live to see the ultimate success of his attempts to establish closer
relationships between Han China and the states of Central Asia.
The great envoy died probably in the year 119 or 118 BCE a year or so after receiving
his final promotion to the title of Grand Messenger.
He was buried somewhere in Shenzhi province.
The two Han historians are nothing but positive in their assessment of the achievements of
the envoy.
Sima Chan says let me quote again, Jiangchuan was a man of great strength, determination
and generosity.
He trusted others and in turn was liked by the barbarians.
I often when I think about Jiangchuan see someone who seems to espouse the highest ideals of
a Confucian gentleman.
In the decade following Jiangchuan's death between roughly 118 and 108 BCE Han Wudi had
the Great Walls extended deep into the deserts of Western China.
He also began to send out numerous large sort of follow up missions back into Central Asia.
In fact we read in the Hanshu that so many of these large missions numbering several
hundred members each now were sent out that the Hanshu tells us the envoys were often
inside of each other on the roads.
Imagine these numerous vast expeditions.
The frequency of these missions was also frankly astonishing.
The sources tell us that up to ten of these large missions a year were sent to the Western
regions and that quoting again, those travelling to distant lands required eight or nine years
to complete their return journey.
Sima Qian was in no doubt that the courageous and as I said ethical Jiangchuan was personally
responsible for this massive and incredibly rapid expansion of Chinese interests now
into Central Asia.
This is how he puts it.
It was Jiangchuan who opened the way for the establishment of relations between the lands
of the Northwest and all the envoys who journeyed to the lands in later times relied upon his
reputation to gain them a hearing.
As a result of his efforts the foreign states trusted the HAN envoys.
Now you know I love what it's in history.
We can never say for sure how differently events might have turned out had Jiangchuan
not been the type of man that he clearly was.
Had he for example never escaped his Zhongnu captors in 128 he and the many parties that
followed in his footsteps might never have visited Furgana or Sogdia or Baptria might
never have heard of Parthia or India and the Chinese may have remained ignorant for many
more decades of the world beyond their Western borders and of the trade and strategic opportunities
it afforded them.
Jiangchuan also had the ability to compile and deliver a compelling report that so be
guiled Emperor Wudi with the possibilities of imperial expansion to the West that it
was this report that was largely responsible for enticing China out of millennia of relative
isolation and into active engagement with the rest of Central Asia including ultimately
the Romans for the first time.
But there is even more to this story as we will see.
We are to be grateful that in a way Jiangchuan was less effective in his interviews with
the King of the Uaicha because if the Uaicha had agreed to return to China and form this
alliance with the Han maybe there would have been no Kushan Empire.
And as we'll see in one of our remaining lectures on the Silk Roads the extraordinary
levels of trans-cultural, trans-Eurasian cultural exchange which occurred along the
first Silk Roads during this era were very much facilitated by the mighty Kushan Empire
that was founded by the Uaicha and which controlled the crossroads of ancient Central
Asia.
But let's conclude by thinking about Jiangchuan who reminds world historians and big historians
like me that despite being largely subject to inevitable forces and processes of cultural
evolution often beyond the influence of mere individuals history does on occasion still
seem to hinge upon a series of almost accidental decisions, coincidences, chances and astonishing
personal endeavours.
Next time we will see how these personal endeavours bore extraordinary fruit as the great caravans
laden with silk and other Chinese goods began to make their ponderous way from China towards
the west following in the footsteps of the great Jiangchuan.
