In the year 53 BCE, as Chinese silk was flowing across Eurasia along the silk roads, Roman
consul Marcus Crassus and his legions were famously defeated by the Parthians in the
Battle of Cahai. This was one of the worst defeats in Roman history, but more importantly
to our story on the foundations of Eastern civilization, it is said to have been the
first time Romans had ever seen silk. Now the story has it that during the battle the
Romans were holding their ground well for some time and were even anticipating victory,
but then the Parthians made a surprising move. They charged the Romans with their drums
beating and their arrows flying and as they charged they opened large silk banners to
strike fear in the hearts of the Roman soldiers. It is said that the banners were so bright,
so brilliant, so shocking to the Roman soldiers that they broke rank and fled in terror and
this battle was lost. Now to be honest, whether the Romans really lost this battle because
of the brilliance of the silk banners or because of incompetence amongst their leadership,
or whether this is just a tale to explain away a terrible defeat, this story has a certain
resonance with the way silk has been seen in the Roman world. On the one hand it is
a beautiful shining and radiant material that would quickly become a prized symbol of luxury
for the wealthiest Romans. On the other hand some would see its darker side, one that could
blind people in excess and immorality and lead Rome to its ultimate destruction. And
that's part of the story we're going to tell today.
You might remember I concluded our last lecture by observing that most Romans had no idea
that silk derived from the spun cocoon of a small worm. Roman authors, great authors
like Seneca and Virgil, knowingly informed their readers that silk grew on trees. But
the superb Roman geographer and statesman Pliny the Elder knew better. Although we've
got no real idea about the source of his more accurate information. Writing of the silk moth
in his book Natural History, Pliny makes the following observation, which I quote,
the silk moths weave webs like spiders that become a luxurious clothing material for women
called silk.
So as we can see, in the Greco-Roman world silk was mysterious and exotic, evoking responses
of both wonder and suspicion. This Western attitude leads me nicely into the topic I'd
like to explore with you today in this lecture, namely the operation and impact of the silk
roads from the Roman perspective. I noted earlier in the series that it was during the first
silk roads era between roughly 100 BCE and 300 CE that many of the technological and
cultural innovations of Eastern civilization began to slowly percolate out of the region
into central and eventually Western Eurasia. So while the focus of our course is very much
on cultural developments within East Asia, one of the important themes we also need to
explore, I think, is the impact of Eastern culture on the West. This transmission, this
dissemination of Eastern civilizational ideas and achievements all begins during the first
silk road era. So let's try and explore this topic by asking four linked questions. Firstly,
what political and social changes in the Roman state were necessary to allow for this Roman
engagement with Central and East Asia? Secondly, how did traders from the Mediterranean organize
their end of the exchange network? What challenges did they face and how did they circumvent them?
Third, what impact did silk and other luxury commodities from Asia have on the culture
of the Greco-Romans? And finally, what do we know about other significant conduits of
silk roads trade during this period, like the maritime routes? Before I address our
first question, I should just say this lecture is really like an academic journey for me
as well. I began my undergraduate studies as a Roman historian. I had planned to do
a PhD in Roman studies, but I gradually became more and more interested in the spread of
Roman culture into Central Asia. One of my colleagues then said one day, and I can remember
the day well, have you ever heard of the Kushans? And that short sentence literally changed
my life. I became a Kushan specialist, then a UAC chair and Shownu specialist, and that
drew me inevitably into East Asian culture more generally, ancient China, ancient Korea,
ancient Japan. So this lecture is sort of important for my own academic development,
I think. Back to that first question, the change political and social structure that
emerged in the Roman world during the late Republic, which made possible these intense
and new connections between the Mediterranean basin and Central and eventually East Asia.
The active engagement of the Romans in the Silk Roads can be directly attributed to the
political circumstances surrounding the advent of one man, Octavian, who is better known to
world history by his later title of Augustus. To understand why this was so important, we
need to take a brief detour into the fascinating but very messy politics of late Republican
Rome during the same period that the early Han dynasty in China was constructing its
own bureaucratic state. Now following the devastating war with Hannibal, the second
Carthaginian War, and the subsequent rapid Roman expansion that followed into Greece
and Asia, by the mid-second century before the common era, Rome was facing critical economic
and social problems. The small farms of Italy had been destroyed by Hannibal, who had rampaged
undefeated for 16 years up and down the peninsula. Many of the farmers, of course, had been
recruited as soldiers into the Roman legions, and after the wars were over, these now unemployed
veterans flocked to the city of Rome to join the ranks of the unemployed and the discontented.
This gave wealthy patrician farmers the opportunity to buy up much of the abandoned land and then
use slaves to grow profitable commercial crops like olive trees for olive oil, grapes for
wine instead of much-needed grain to feed the urban population. At the same time, Roman
governors sent to administer these new provinces generally behaved in a corrupt manner, viewing
their appointment as an opportunity to enrich themselves and provide their business cronies
with lucrative government contracts. The Roman government was still a senatorial oligarchy,
and the tribunes who were theoretically elected directly by the people to look after the people's
concerns were mere puppets of the Senate. Governments seemed focused on protecting the
rights of the rich and the powerful. They had no solutions for poverty, and they had
no idea how to govern the large quasi-imperial state that Rome had almost accidentally become.
With the gulf between rich and poor rapidly widening, the sprawling city of Rome seethed
with discontent. These political and economic conditions led ultimately to the collapse
of the Roman Republic and its replacement by the Roman Empire but only after a century
of bloodshed and civil war. Attempts to introduce much-needed social reforms
by well-meaning tribunes such as Tiberius Gracchus and his younger brother Gaius were
confounded by the Senate and defeated often by direct violence. Tiberius was accused by
the Senate of acting like a king and was murdered. His younger brother Gaius took up
the cause and as I noted in a previous lecture, in order to protect against fluctuating grain
prices, he legislated for the government to take control of grain distribution to the
urban masses at half the market price. Remember, this was the origins of the doll. But Gaius
and 3,000 of his followers were killed in rioting a year later in the year 121 BCE.
So the Senate remained in control and the immediate outcome was a series of bruising
civil wars as ambitious, patrician men and their private armies competed for ultimate
power. The first of these wars was fought between Gaius Marius, champion of the people,
and Lucius Cornelius Sulla, champion of the Senate, which Sulla won. Sulla then served
as a dictator for the Senate until he retired fabulously wealthy in the year 79 BCE and
in a veritable reign of terror, he was probably responsible for historians estimate the murder
of up to 10,000 individuals. But his success at exercising virtual absolute power fueled
the ambitions of other young patrician men. One of these, Gaius Pompeius Magnus, better
known as Pompey, was elected consul in the year 70 BC. Another Julius Caesar was elected
consul 11 years later in 59 BCE. He immediately left Rome and spent the next nine years campaigning
in Gaul, accumulating a personal fortune and training a highly skilled and deeply loyal
personally committed army. When Caesar returned to Italy, he famously crossed the Rubicon River
and returned to Rome, having refused to obey the orders of the Senate to disband his army.
At that point Pompey and most of the Senate fled to Greece. Caesar pursued them and routed
Pompey and the Senate's army, bringing to an end this second civil war. By 46 BCE, the
victorious Julius Caesar was master of the entire Roman state and he assumed the title
of dictator for the administration of public affairs.
We have some very extraordinary statistics, by the way, which demonstrate the sheer size
of the urban poor in Rome after more than a century of frankly ineffective government.
Legislation Caesar passed reduced the number of people on the dole in Rome from a staggering
320,000 people to 150,000 people out of a total population of about 500,000 people.
So that's to say that before this legislation was passed, almost 65% of the population
of Rome was on the dole. It's easy to understand why during this period of bitter civil war
and widespread poverty, serious trade with Asia was virtually impossible. The demand
wasn't there, nor was the infrastructure in place to support large-scale, long-distance
mercantile activity.
Caesar started to argue publicly that the Old Republic was unsustainable and essentially
dead. Now, some other form of more stable government was needed in its place.
But, and you know this story, after being accused of acting like a tyrant by his rivals, Caesar
was assassinated in the Senate on the Ides of March, that is, March 15, 44 BCE, by Brutus
and others claiming that they were attempting to restore Roman liberty and to restore the
Old Republic. After the murder of Caesar, his teenage adopted son, Octavian, decided
to avenge Caesar's murder by marching on Rome with his loyal legions. Of course, as soon
as news of this came to Rome, the assassins fled, but Octavian pursued them throughout
the Eastern Mediterranean, hunted them down and defeated them in this third civil war
and then seized power in Caesar's name. This was the moment around 27 BCE that the Republic
effectively gave way to an empire, and this was also the moment that Rome was able to
turn from an internal focus on bitter power struggles and civil wars and begin to expand
its outlook, its political interests and its commercial reach deep into Asia.
For the next three decades, Octavian governed as a virtual dictator, although he carefully
appeared to rule with due deference to the Senate and to observe the old Republican rituals
and institutions. It was the Senate in gratitude that named him Augustus, the revered one, the
August one, because he had ended the civil wars and restored stability at last to the
Roman state. With total control of the army, he was also hailed as imperator, which literally
means victorious general, from which the more generic term emperor would soon evolve.
This 30 year, I think we have to say, very successful reign of imperator Augustus as
the prinkeps or first man in Rome ushered in a golden age known as the Pax Romana, the
Roman peace. Augustus enlarged the empire. He built new roads throughout the empire to
consolidate these gains. He reduced government corruption, including in the administration
of the provinces. He created a permanent professional standing army that now swore loyalty to the
Senate and people of Rome, not to individual powerful men. And then he established colonies
for its veterans to retire to. Social relations between the classes improved in Rome. The
economy revived. This helped give rise to a new era of peace and optimism that was
celebrated in the brilliant literature of poets like Virgil, who's a neared, you may
well have read, and Horace, who's superb, Odes, you may also be familiar with. With
peace reestablished in the empire, with a vibrant growing economy in place, there was
now a natural increase in the demand for the import of luxury goods. And this led
Roman and Greek traders to feel confident enough to begin to invest in long distance
trade. So after tracing the treacherous paths of merchants around the Taclo Macan Desert
through the Parmia Knot across the Karakorum in our last lecture, let's turn now to the
activities of these Roman and Greek traders who began to open up the Silk Road routes
from the edge of the Mediterranean now into Asia. And we fortunately, we actually have
surprisingly good details about the major Silk Roads routes out of the eastern Mediterranean,
partly because of a very detailed account left behind by one very active merchant named
Isidorus of Sharax. Isidorus was a Parthian Greek heavily engaged in Silk Roads trade.
In the year one of the common era, oh close to it, he produced an account of the western
routes in a text entitled The Parthian Stations. Although not facing as many geographical challenges
as Chinese merchants, the route to and from the Mediterranean was certainly no picnic.
From the Greco-Roman metropolis of Antioch, traders would first have to cross the harsh
Syrian desert via different caravanserias, of course, and also the great trading cities
of Palmyra and Ctesiphon, the latter being one of the great capitals of the formidable
Parthian Empire. And now the route began to climb through the rugged Zagros Mountains,
heading east to the cities of Ekbetana, and eventually towards Merv, sometimes called
the mother of all cities, beyond the edge of the high Iranian plateau. From Merv, one
branch turned north via Bukhara and the Furgana Valley, the same valley, remember where Jiang
Chan had first seen the heavenly horses some 130 years earlier by this stage, and then
eastern to Mongolia before dropping down south towards the capital of Han China. The other
route continued eastwards and led directly into the great Kushan Heartlander Bactria,
and then through the Palmyres, as we've seen, and on into the Han Empire via the Taklamakan
desert routes. Of course, no Greco-Roman trader would have followed this complete route, however.
Like their Chinese counterparts, the Mediterranean merchants passed their goods onto Parthian
and Kushan middlemen somewhere along the way, perhaps near the city of Merv.
In the 1920s, a very fine English historian named John Charlesworth, probably one of the
first modern historians to really understand the significance of the Silk Roads, tried
to imagine the sort of atmosphere that must have prevailed in the Central Asian trading
cities, where merchants from so many cultural and linguistic and ethnic traditions came
together inside the caravan sorries. I'm just going to try and paraphrase Charlesworth
as he tries to paint the scene. These cities constituted the very heart and center of all
commerce for the old world, and were amongst the most ancient meeting places on the whole
earth. Along the Yakan Valley, the way ran eastwards to China. To the southeast, another
route lay open to the Indus Valley. Westwards, there is a way to the Mediterranean and Europe
by way of Samarkand, as well as the route through Parthia and Asia. In these lonely outposts,
three civilizations, those of China, of India, and of the Greco-Roman world, met and gave
an exchange, their products, their wares, and their painting and art. Charlesworth makes
it really clear, I think, that what was at the heart of these exchanges, and really this
is the key point as to why the Silk Roads were so significant. It's not so much the
commodities themselves as important as they were, but rather the degree of cultural cross-pollination
that's going on. So let me turn to another intriguing question now. What was the impact
of the import of silk and other luxury commodities and the ideas that came with them out of Asia?
What was the impact of these on Greco-Roman culture? Behind this question is the general
and obvious point. A critical result of all this trade was a two-way cross-cultural fertilization.
As the Han expanded into Central Asia, many of China's new neighbors became, we can use the
modern word, cyanotized. This resulted directly from the diffusion westwards of some of these key
foundational ideas, political structures, technologies, and so on, devised by eastern civilization.
Many of the states of Central Asia soon found themselves bound to the Han in a complex tributary
relationship in which Chinese goods and ideas spread out of Chang'an and into the courts and
societies of these cities and kingdoms. I'll have more to say about this, the way this tributary
relationship worked in a couple of lectures time, but at the same time Chinese culture was being
transformed also as different crops like the grape, as we mentioned, different technologies,
new ways of farming, even new musical instruments, new harmonies, new songs, new words, different
diseases like the bubonic plague, and of course different ideas like Buddhism also moved into
China. By far the most important of these cultural imports, I've made this point several times,
but it's worth making again. The most important cultural import for eastern civilization,
generally for Japan, for Korea, for Southeast Asia, was Buddhism, a topic we will explore
in more detail in a lecture coming up very shortly. During the Han dynasty, there was genuine
concern amongst Chinese intellectuals at the unwholesome effect all this cultural borrowing
was having on the core beliefs of eastern civilization. On the dilution of Confucian values
by Buddhism, for example, Taoism proved itself remarkably flexible and was able to adapt to
and create a genuinely syncretic religion, I think, for the Chinese people. But as we will see
intense debates on how to preserve the core foundations of eastern civilization in the wake
of this cultural barbarization from the West would occupy philosophers, poets, historians,
and government officials for millennia after this First Silk Road's era was over.
Now, it's no surprise that similar concerns were being expressed by cultural conservatives in Rome,
and there are many references in Roman literature to the unpleasant shock that Roman authors felt
at walking through the streets of Rome and hearing some exotic Asian music coming out of
somebody's window or smelling the cooking of bizarre foreign foods or hearing Asian languages
being spoken, not just Latin and Greek. Now, it's interesting, I think, that Rome proved
more adaptable to this diffusion from the East than China was to ideas from the West.
The Roman acceptance and adoption of so many foreign gods, for example, and belief systems
demonstrates this. The Romans weren't about to upset anybody's god. Every god was welcome
in the Roman pantheon. Of course, this question of cultural flexibility is it's somewhat academic
because whatever the attitudes of conservatives, the demand for silk in Rome was unstoppable.
As the textile penetrated the Roman Empire, a veritable mania for silk clothing developed
even by late Republican times before the full flowering of Silk Road's trade,
patrician women had become convinced that their most fashionable garments had to be made of silk.
But by the age of Augustus, we've got poets like Tibulus, Propersius,
Horace, and Ovid all adorning their verses with allusions to the elegance and, frankly, even
exotic and erotic texture of silk. They describe silk garments as thin see-through,
often colored by fine and brilliant purple dyes made from sea mollusks and with transverse
stripes of gold. Once the obsession spread to men, however, the Roman Senate felt compelled to issue
edicts prohibiting the wearing of silk on both economic and moral grounds, not that these edicts
did any good. Writing during the first century of the Common Era, Seneca the Younger displays his
moral horror at the nature of the garments Roman women were now wearing in public. Let me quote
Seneca, this is a classic quote I think. I can see clothes of silk if materials that do not hide the
body nor even one's decency can be called clothes. Wretched flocks of maids labor so that the adulteresses
may be visible through their thin dresses so that her husband has no more acquaintance
than any outsider or foreigner with his wife's body.
The massive imports of Chinese silk also cost the Romans, no surprise here again, a fortune.
We've got some really direct evidence of this because of a speech given in the year 77 CE in
the Senate by the great statesman, the great geographer we mentioned earlier, Pliny the Elder,
which clearly demonstrates the astonishing cost of silk roads trade. An angry Pliny
funded in the Senate and by the lowest reckoning, India, China, actually he would have said the
land of the series, and Arabia take from our empire 100 million cisterns every year. That is
the sum which our women and our luxuries cost us. So now we've looked at the overland routes from
both the Chinese and Greco-Roman merchants' perspectives, but let's start to wrap this
lecture up by saying something else. Although the overland trade routes were by far the most
significant during this first grade flowering of the silk roads, maritime routes, trade routes by
CE became increasingly important as well. Indeed, CE routes became even more attractive as the political
relationship between the Roman and Parthian empires deteriorated, particularly as we saw
with the disastrous defeat of Crassus by the Parthians at the Battle of Kahai in 53 BCE.
That battle is just an example of the tense relationship between these two states that
made the opening up of maritime routes between Roman Egypt and the ports of Arabia and India
a top priority. And once again we are so fortunate to have an incredible insight
into this expansion of maritime trade during the period in the form of another fascinating
ancient document that somehow survived the ages. This is a sailor's handbook written sometime in
the first century CE, we think, known as the Periplus of the Erythrion Sea. The Periplus shows
us that sometime during that first century, probably actually much earlier, sailors had
discovered the secrets of the trade winds, which led to a dramatic increase in the volume of maritime
trade between Roman Egypt and the west coast of India. Mariners had learned, whether by accident,
whether by trial and error, we will never know, that they could use the shifting seasonal wind
patterns to move away from the coast hugging routes that sailors had thus far been accustomed
to following for thousands of years before this and instead begin to chart a course across the
deep waters of the Indian Ocean, confident that the monsoon winds would blow them eastwards onto
the west coast of India in one season, then stick around for a few months, pick up some more trade
goods, the same winds will blow you westwards back to the coast of Africa a few months later.
Before long, a network of sea routes linked the incense ports of southern Arabia and Somalia
with ports in the Persian Gulf, all along the Indian coast and Sri Lanka, by the way, and with the
Roman and Arabian ports of the Red Sea, from where merchandise would be transported overland.
An amazing port of Spazanu-Sharax on the Persian Gulf became sort of the great center
of seaborn trade during this period. An emporium, a great clearinghouse for the diverse goods that
were now criss-crossing the Indian Ocean. The goods mentioned in the Periplas that were being
carried in now large ocean-going trade ships, including silk of course, but precious stones,
cotton, wine, metals, pepper, glass, and large quantities of Roman coins. The reference to these
coins is highly significant because, as we've just noted, we know that the huge volume of silk
roads trade both by land and by sea was incredibly expensive to the Romans. Remember Pliny the Elder's
comment that by 77 CE, trade with East Asia was draining 100 million Cisterci, which is the equivalent
of about 6 million gold denarii every year from the Roman Empire. Now many of these Roman coins
have simply disappeared into the deserts of Central Asia, and historians have long pondered
what might have become of them. One theory, the strongest I think, is that they were melted down
and used by the Kushans for their own glorious gold coinage. For at the heart of the silk roads
world system lay the Kushan Empire, perhaps the greatest lost civilization in all world history.
For almost three centuries, the Kushans maintained friendly relations with China,
with India, with Parthia, with the pastoral nomads, and with the Greco-Roman traders,
growing fabulously wealthy because of their successful role as middlemen. The Kushans,
the great facilitators of the silk roads, will be the subject of our fifth and final lecture
on this subject. I very much look forward to joining you next time as we explore this fascinating
and mysterious civilization which was so influential on the evolving culture of East Asia.
