Welcome to our final lecture in this series of five on the Silk Roads, our series within
a series if you like, on the great trade networks of the ancient world.
Taking our consideration in previous lectures of the crucial roles played in this story by
pastoral nomads, by the Han dynasty obviously, the Parthians and most recently the Romans,
it's time now to introduce the one remaining key player in these exchanges.
I'm referring to the Kushan Empire, one of the great lost civilizations in history.
The role of the Kushans in all this can most easily be understood, I think, if I describe
them as the great facilitators of Silk Roads exchanges, as the ultimate middlemen in the
movement of luxury goods and important ideas across Eurasia.
During the first two centuries of the common era, the Kushans dominated a huge area of
Inner Asia, stretching from modern Uzbekistan in the north to central India in the south,
from the Iranian Plateau in the west to the Tarim Basin in the east.
Their empire thus included all of modern Afghanistan and most of modern Pakistan.
So the Kushans created a stable political entity at the heart of Central Asia and this
allowed for the great flowering of Transurasian mercantile and cultural exchange that took
place along the Silk Roads.
With the bulk of trade between Rome and China passing through their territory, the veritable
crossroads of Asia, the Kushans became one of the key powers of an era in which much
of Afro-Eurasia was controlled by just four dynasties, those of the Han, the Romans, the
Parthians and the Kushans.
Although the role of the Kushans is often underestimated, I think, and in fact remains
virtually unknown outside of specialist circles, it's my intention in this lecture to show
you just how crucial they were, not just to Eastern civilization but to world history.
And they are especially important to us as we explore the foundations of Eastern civilization
because of their role in the dissemination of both Eastern and Western culture across
Afro-Eurasia.
As we'll see throughout much of the rest of this course, several key foundations of
Eastern civilization, Buddhism, one of the obvious examples, actually came from outside
the borders of China and East Asia and during the first Silk Roads era it was the Kushans
who made this cultural transmission possible.
But of course I can almost hear you asking me now the obvious question, if the Kushans
are so important, how come no one has heard of them?
And this is really a great question to ask.
The main reason is a frustrating lack of clear evidence about their history.
Almost uniquely amongst ancient civilizations, the Kushans produced no literature of their
own and only a few fragmentary stone inscriptions of theirs have been found.
Yet both our friends, the Uecha, the tribal confederation from which the Kushans were
descended and the Kushans themselves are frequently mentioned in the literature of
many surrounding societies, including those of China obviously, but also India, Tibet,
Persia, Sogdia, the Arab speaking world and a number of Greek and Roman sources.
It's from this often incidental and fragmentary evidence that their history has to be reconstructed.
Another problem is that few examples of Kushan architecture have survived into modern times,
even though many ancient Chinese sources describe the Kushans' construction of impressive palaces
of gigantic Buddhist stupas of dynastic temples, many of which have since been lost to the
sands of Central Asia.
We are on much firmer ground with coins however.
By far the most substantial evidence for the Kushans is numismatic.
Kushan coins have been discovered in their thousands throughout the great extent of their
territory.
I'm honoured to have a few of these coins in my own possession.
These coins provide evidence in so many ways, evidence of the early cultural influences on
the empire, of military and political expansion, of the line of Kushan royal succession, of
the religious and ideological beliefs of the kings, of Kushan economic domination of this
huge region of Inner Asia and of the eventual dissolution of Kushan territory in the mid-3rd
century of the common era, soon after the collapse of the Han dynasty in China.
So it's this combination of indirect literary evidence, of some inscriptions, of archaeology
and most importantly of coins that allows us working like historical detectives to try
and reconstruct the Kushans.
So come with me now as we visit the world of the Kushans, as we examine their role in
Silk Road's trade and their role in the story of the foundations and evolution of eastern
civilization by outlining their political history which falls neatly into four distinct
periods.
The first of these follows directly on from the story of the U.H.A. who you might remember
we left in a previous lecture very comfortably ensconced in bacteria, refusing to return
to China with Jiangzhan and join a Han alliance against the Zhongnu.
The Kushans are in fact the direct descendants of the U.H.A. whose crushing defeat by the
Zhongnu in roughly the year 162 B.C.E. had sent them off on their 30-year migration deep
into Central Asia.
As we've seen, although Jiangzhan was unsuccessful in eliciting support from the now happily resettled
U.H.A., the information he brought back to the Han court persuaded Emperor Wu Di to adopt
an expansionist policy that led directly to the incorporation of much of Central Asia
into the Han tributary empire by the early first century B.C.E.
And this in turn brought Han commercial interest into contact for the first time with the traders
of India, of Parthia and eventually of Greece and Rome.
So this much of the story we have already explored.
Let's go on.
The U.H.A. remains settled north of the Amudaya.
This is the great Oxus River of ancient civilizations.
For the next half century or so, until perhaps the year 80 B.C.E., I mean this is speculative
but around about the year 80, when they seem to have left their strongholds in northern
bacteria across the great Amudaya and occupied bacteria proper.
For reasons we really don't understand, at about the same time they fragmented, they divided
into five tribal subdivisions, which the Chinese sources call yabgu.
Each of them then occupied its own strategic region of bacteria, which again you remember
is essentially modern Afghanistan.
More than a century later, sometime around the year 45 of the common era, a prince of
one of these yabgu was able to reunite the tribes into one powerful confederation again
and begin to build what would become the Kushan's empire.
This prince's name was Kujula Khedfasees, head of the Kuei Shuang yabgu, and it's from
this tribal name Kuei Shuang that the term Kushan is ultimately derived.
With the advent of Kujula Khedfasees, Kushan history enters its second phase, which was
dominated by three strong, mighty kings.
Kujula Khedfasees, the first king of the Kushans, began the dynasty and probably reigned
from 45 to roughly 85 of the common era.
His rise to power is described for us very fortuitously in the annals of the later Han
dynasty, the Ho Han Shu, or later Han annals.
We read that in response to the occupation of the Kabul Valley by an Indo-Pathian ruler
named Gondofarees.
Kujula united the forces of the five yabgu and led them over the Hindu Kush conquering
the Kabul Valley, driving Gondofarees out, then moving on to invade Kashmir, Peshawar,
and the Swat Valley.
The Ho Han Shu tells us that Kujula died aged over 80 and was succeeded by his son who
continued his father's expansionist policy and conquered much of northwestern India.
As an indication of his power and ambition, Kujula Khedfasees described himself on his
coins as Maharaja Rajarajasa Deva Putra Kujula Kara Khedfasees or Great King of Kings, son
of divine being King Kujula Khedfasees.
Kujula was a contemporary of several Roman emperors and numismatic evidence shows us
just how influential Roman coinage was on early Kushan coins.
One series of coins issued by Kujula features a bust clearly modeled of that on that of
the Emperor Augustus, remember, the first man in Rome, with the Roman Carul chair, a
very traditional senatorial chair on the reverse.
As we saw in our last lecture, by the mid first century CE, the Romans are already heavily
involved in and spending a fortune on the silk and luxuries trade with India, Central Asia,
and China.
And of course, the Kushans now in control of a substantial empire straddling most of
the major east, west and north, south trade routes were ideally positioned to benefit
from the trade.
Kujula and his successes were also exerting Kushan influence on the western borders of
the now greatly expanded Han Empire.
In fact, in the year 32 CE, the later Han dynasty administration appointed General Ban
Zhao to the position of Protector General of the western regions in response to renewed
Zhongnu raids on the Silk Road's caravans.
Ban Zhao appears to have sought Kushan assistance against the Zhongnu during Kujula's reign
and even permitted the Kushans to exercise some form of economic control over the major
trading city of Kashgar and perhaps some other Taran Basin states in return for this help.
In the year 88 CE, however, the Kushans apparently went too far when they tried to send an envoy
through to the Han court in Chang'an, proposing a formal alliance and seeking the hand of
a Han princess.
Ban Zhao, apparently affronted by the barbarian's impudence, refused to allow the envoy safe
passage through the Taran Basin to China.
In response, probably in the year 90 or so, the Kushans sent a formidable force of 70,000
archa warriors across the high palmia passes to attack Ban Zhao.
But the Kushan army, exhausted by the difficult crossing and by the scorched earth policy that
Ban Zhao followed, which effectively denied their many supplies, was eventually forced
to withdraw without offering battle.
Now Kujula was succeeded by his son Vima Taktu around the year 85 of the common era
and later by his grandson Vima Cadfices, about 15 years later, perhaps in the year 100 of
the common era.
Very interesting that the Hohan Shu had mentioned only Vima Cadfices as Kujula's successor.
But numismatists had long suspected the existence of a third member of the dynasty because of
some ambiguous coins and coin references.
But the positive identification of Vima Taktu as a king was the result of an extraordinary
and very lucky discovery made in war-torn Afghanistan as recently as 1993.
The site known as the Kaffirs Castle in Rabatak, northern Afghanistan.
Local people dug up a stone inscription in Bactrian script in the name of Kanishka who,
as we will see in a moment, was the successor of Vima Cadfices.
This Rabatak inscription was photographed by a local aid worker who was able to send
images onto the British Museum in London where they were deciphered by experts in the field
to colleagues of mine, in fact, Nicholas Sims-Williams of Cambridge University, who was the world's
leading specialist in the Bactrian script, and Joe Cribb of the British Museum, who was
curator of Central Asian coins at the BM and the world's leading specialist in ancient
Central Asian coins.
The inscription refers to the first year of Kanishka's reign and it clearly lists the genealogy
of his royal line as Kudjula Cadfices great-grandfather, Vima Tacto grandfather and Vima Cadfices father.
Kudjula Cadfices and his son issued coins largely based on the Greek and Roman monetary
practices that were already in place in Bactria, but with the accession of the third king,
Vima Cadfices, Kushan coins began to take on their own distinctive character.
Vima minted the first gold Kushan coins and also started the practice of engraving an image
of the king on the obverse and a deity on the reverse.
As I mentioned at the end of our last lecture, the gold used in the extensive gold coinage
of Vima Cadfices and his successors might well have come from the millions of gold Roman
coins which Pliny the Elder had lamented were disappearing into Central Asia.
This is certainly our best theory anyway.
So the Kushans would have collected huge numbers of Roman gold coins.
Imagine the tariffs they were charging through their rollers middlemen in this lucrative silk
and luxuries trade and then possibly remitted these coins as their own Kushan gold issues.
Since the 1950s, a number of fragmentary inscriptions on stone have also been discovered throughout
Kushan territory.
Many of them using what has come to be called Bactrian script, the same script that was
on that Rabatak inscription.
The Bactrian script is incredibly interesting, I think.
It combines the Indian Karashti alphabet but with classical Greek letters.
But the actual language appears to be some sort of Indo-European or Saka Scythian variant
that must have been spoken, apparently spoken, by the Kushans.
This is really an extraordinary and perhaps quintessential example of the mixing of cultural
ideas that was going on all along the silk roads.
This is cultural syncretism at its best.
So the Kushans, whose ancestors the UHR, we know, spoke the Indo-European branch variant
language of Tokarian, appear to have adopted this Saka Scythian dialect, then they expressed
it in an Indian Karashti grammatical structure and then they inscribed it in ancient Greek
characters.
This is truly extraordinary.
With the accession of Canisca the Great to the Throne in probably the year 127 CE, Kushan
history entered its third and most significant phase, that of the Great Kushans.
Canisca, who reigned until about 153 of the Common Era, introduced a new dating system
engraving his coins and inscriptions from the year 1 of the New Caniscan Era.
Now understandably this practice had led scholars to conclude that Canisca was the founder perhaps
of an entirely new dynasty, but the Rabatak inscription clearly shows that his reign represents
a continuance of the family line begun by his great-great-grandfather, Kujula Cadfaces.
A continuing uninterrupted line of succession can also be traced between Canisca and his
successes down to at least the second quarter of the third century CE.
This means that the Kushan family dynasty established by Kujula was able to provide stable
hereditary rule for about two centuries, a huge part of the reason for Kushan success.
Canisca presided over a vast, wealthy, multicultural and relatively peaceful empire that straddled
all of the major Silk Road's roots in an era that many scholars have called the Golden
Age of Ancient Central Asia.
Canisca and his successes continued to issue the full range of copper and gold coins established
by Vima.
Here again that the remarkable weight and denomination consistency maintained by the
Kushan coin minters is further evidence of economic stability and strong central government.
The coin images depicting Iranian, Greek and Indian gods seem to suggest that the Kushan
kings had a tolerant and broad-minded approach to religion and that all the religions being
practiced within their great multicultural, multi-ethnic state were worthy of support.
But having said that, the overwhelming preponderance is of gods from the Iranian Zoroastrian Pantheon
and the standard Caniscan royal portrait is commonly of the king standing over a small
Zoroastrian fire altar sacrificing some herbs to the flames.
Yet intriguingly, Canisca is also recognized in many ancient Chinese sources as a great
patron of Buddhism and the depiction of the Buddha on some of his gold and copper coins
is amongst the first ever physical representations of the Buddha ever created.
Canisca is actually venerated in Chinese Buddhist tradition for having convened a great Buddhist
conference, a council in Kashmir at which the various and often competing strands of
Buddhism were debated and refined by all the leading spokesmen.
We read about this meeting so critical to the subsequent spread of Buddhism into China
in the account of a wonderful 7th century Chinese Buddhist pilgrim named Xuanzang who
we will meet again in our lectures on the Tang Dynasty.
Xuanzang's epic journey from Chang'an to India and back is captured beautifully in
one of the classic Chinese novels, The Journey to the West, that we'll be talking about shortly.
Xuanzang informs us that the council Canisca convened was directly responsible for the
composition of, and let me quote here, 300,000 stanzas and 660,000 words which completely
explain the scriptures.
The great meaning of the scriptures has once more become clear and the subtle words have
once again been elucidated.
Xuanzang also says that Canisca had these new scriptures translated into Sanskrit, a
much more accessible language than Khorosti by the way, and then transcribed on copper
plates which were in turn housed in stone coffers and deposited inside a tremendous stupa,
a tremendous tower over 400 feet high.
The new version of the Buddhist scriptures, now written as I say in this much more accessible
popular language of Sanskrit, was partly responsible for a great surge in the popularity of Mahayana
or great vehicle Buddhism which was then carried across Central Asia into China by pilgrims
following the Silk Roads.
For this reason alone, the Kushans are critical to the story of the foundations and evolution
of Eastern civilization.
It was Canisca's patronage of Buddhism that facilitated its spread out of India into China
where as we will see its impact was to be profound.
In addition to their tolerant approach to coinage, to language and to religion, the great
Kushan kings were wonderful supporters of art.
In fact, excavations of the Kushan royal palaces near Begram in Afghanistan and near
Royal Pindi in Pakistan have earthed an array of magnificent art objects including Syrian
and Egyptian glassware, steppe nomadic gold jewelry, carved bone and ivory from India,
bronze owls from Rome and Chinese lacquer bowls.
Scholars debate whether this collection was part of some Kushan royal museum, royal collection
or perhaps a collection of high value trade goods that were abandoned in a warehouse with
the collapse of the Silk Roads trade in the third century and somehow escaped being robbed
in the centuries that followed.
But the great Kushans were also patrons of very important art schools, sponsoring major
sculpture workshops in the regions of Gandhara in Pakistan and Mathura in India.
The output of both these schools, whose sculpture is on display in all the great art museums
of the world today, not only reflects a cultural synthesis almost unique in art history but
also profoundly influenced the subsequent development of all Asian art.
The religious sculpture of both Gandhara and Mathura created by the combined talents of
the Bactrian, Indian and Hellenistic Greek artists who placed themselves at the services
of Buddhism created for it a whole new image.
Prior to this moment in history, the Buddha had never been represented in physical form
but only through symbols like a footprint or an umbrella.
But now these artists, perhaps probably presumably acting under direct Kushan royal instruction,
created a physical representation of the Buddha that was a synthesis of these Bactrian,
Iranian, Indian and Greek cultural influences.
This image quickly spread along the trade routes penetrating India as far south as Sri
Lanka and then through China into Japan, Korea and Southeast Asia as we will see.
So let me say this again, the spread of Buddhism and in this case also of glorious Buddhist
art and sculpture into East Asia profoundly affected the evolution of Eastern civilization.
And this diffusion was directly facilitated by the Kushan monarchs.
This might well constitute the greatest legacy of the Kushan Empire to world history.
Following the death of the last of the great Kushans, King Vasudeva in about the year 225
of the Common Era, Kushan history entered its final phase, which we historians call
the later Kushans.
A formidable new power had just appeared in Iran early in the third century, King Arta
Shia of the Sasanians and he soon began raiding into Kushan territory.
By 262 the great Kushan palaces had both been destroyed and the northwestern areas of the
Kushan Empire were now incorporated into a new Sasanian state named Kushan Shah in
an ironic reversal of roles.
When we consider the original mission of Zhang Chuan to the UHR, now 400 years earlier, one
of the last Kushan kings, a direct descendant of the UHR, sent an embassy back to China,
back to the Wei dynasty court in China in about the year 230 seeking alliance with the Chinese
now against the Sasanians, but to no avail.
One indication of the powerful legacy of the Kushans is that Sasanian kings explicitly
emphasized a Kushan connection on their coins by using battery and script to proclaim themselves
as Kushan Shah or King of the Kushans, this validated their power.
In India meanwhile, the rise of small, militarily vigorous states gradually undermined Kushan
power there.
The cultural development of these northern Indian states was also strongly influenced
by their Kushan heritage.
Even the powerful Gupta dynasty that emerged in the fourth century to reunify India was
still being influenced by the Kushans.
We know this because of an inscription from Allahabad, dated to the year 335 CE, which
lists foreign kings who paid tribute to the Guptas.
This also uses Kushan titles to describe the Gupta kings, evidence of the pervasive legacy
of the Kushans in India.
So while the political disintegration of the Kushan empire occurred quite quickly, I think,
and brought to an end the so-called golden age of ancient Central Asia.
The cultural, political and economic achievements of the Kushans continue to influence all of
their regional successes for centuries afterwards.
The evidence for the Kushans might be sparse and it's certainly inconclusive, but it is
sufficient to demonstrate the importance and cultural legacy of this powerful civilization
which dominated Central Asia for more than two centuries and which influenced the world
around it more than any other people before the rise of Islam.
For this reason alone, the Kushan empire deserves its place in our Silk Road series
because frankly, had there been no Kushan empire, perhaps there would have been no Silk
Roads.
The Kushans are fundamental to any understanding of the extraordinary levels of transuration,
cultural exchange that occurred during the first two centuries of the Common Era.
We've been describing this moment in world history as the first Silk Roads era, but I
think it would be perfectly valid to also call it the Kushan era.
Let me conclude this lecture now by noting something from a world historian's perspective.
The disintegration of the Kushan empire in the mid third century of the Common Era was
just one in a series of calamitous political collapses that occurred at more or less the
same moment right across Eurasia during a cycle of civilizational contraction.
The later Han dynasty as we know officially ended in 220 CE after warlords succeeded in
taking control of most of China.
The Parthian empire was replaced by the Sasanians at more or less the same time and the Roman
empire now found itself in trouble in the midst of the so-called crisis of the third
century during which 26 different emperors reigned, most of them ineffectively, most
of them dying a violent death.
With political instability all along the Silk Roads, particularly in the regions that
had generated both the supply and the demand for silk, long distance trade dried up and
almost disappeared.
Of course I don't want to over-exaggerate this.
Some trade by land and sea did continue but at nothing like the volume and intensity that
had characterized this first Silk Roads era.
Our task now is to return to China and trace the trials and tribulations of Eastern civilization
through the next three and a half centuries of fragmentation and instability.
Not surprisingly I think in a pattern similar to what we observed during the turbulent warring
states period, rich news streams of thought emerged in China to offer solace to intellectuals
and the common people alike.
But what was radically different this time is that it was not homegrown ideologies like
Confucianism, Taoism or Legalism that appeared but rather the exotic and imported spiritual
philosophy of Buddhism which was destined to become one of the most important foundations
of Eastern civilization and to exercise a powerful influence on the vast Eastern regions
of Eurasia from its arrival all the way through to the present.
The origins of Buddhism and its extraordinary impact on Eastern civilization will be the
subject of our next pair of lectures.
See you soon.
