As we have seen, after the fall of the Han dynasty, China suffered 350 years of division
and fragmentation until it was reunified in the year 581 of the common era by the short-lived
but very successful Sui dynasty.
In something of a parallel to the role that the Qin dynasty had played 800 years earlier
for the Han, the political and governmental institutions established by the Sui laid
the foundations for the growth and prosperity of the succeeding Tang dynasty.
The Tang rule for the next three centuries reorganizing China into a powerful, prosperous,
unified and culturally most sophisticated society.
Much of the Tang dynastic era is marked by strong and benevolent rule, successful diplomatic
relationships, economic and military expansion, and a rich cosmopolitan culture.
It's no exaggeration to suggest that, under the Tang, China emerged as the greatest empire
and the most powerful and wealthy state of the pre-modern world.
For this reason alone, the Tang dynasty deserves to be the subject for the next pair of lectures
in our series, but of course there's even more reason to spend some time talking about
the Tang.
In this first lecture, we'll return to the critical foundational ideas of Eastern civilization
about government and administration as we explore the sophisticated political innovations
of the Tang.
We'll see how they strengthen the Confucian bureaucracy, restore the Confucian examination
system and we'll meet some of the extraordinary emperors and one empress who ruled China during
these three centuries.
I'll also try and situate events in China during this period in the broader context
of Eurasian history and culture to show how the Tang interacted with the world around them.
In the second lecture, I have four related topics from the Tang dynasty to explore with
you, high culture, the fortunes of Buddhism, the golden age of Chinese literature and attitudes
towards women.
You'll certainly recognize several of our key themes here.
Through both lectures, I hope to show that the foundational elements of Eastern civilization,
any which as we have seen emerged thousands of years earlier, remains strong under the
mighty Tang and continued to powerfully influence the world around them through to the end of
the first millennium of the common era.
I also mentioned last time that these will be our last lectures on China for quite some
time.
It's time to widen our exploration of these foundations to show how their resounding impact
on other East Asian societies help not only embed these ideas as the cornerstone for most
of the other states in the region, but also how they led to the creation of something
we might call the Eastern Hemisphere, something we identified in our very first lecture, a
vast geographical and cultural zone unified through common beliefs, common religions and
common values.
So get ready because very soon we'll begin to take a deep look at the history and culture
of Korea, Japan and Vietnam and much of Southeast Asia as we move into the second half of our
course.
But let's begin our exploration of the Tang now by looking at how the dynasty began and
how their political innovations helped them lead China into an age of power and prosperity.
The Tang emerged out of the political squabbles that blighted the last few years of the Sui
dynasty, although the transition between these two dynasties was actually relatively seamless.
The founder of the Tang, Li Yuan, had actually been a governor under the Sui and was related
personally to the Sui ruling house.
He eventually rose up in rebellion against the last Sui emperor after being urged on
by his second son, Li Yuan, who became first emperor of the Tang and who ruled under the
imperial name of Gao Zhu.
Now Gao Zhu was initially reluctant to proclaim a new dynasty and so installed a puppet child
emperor of the Sui.
But in the year 618 CE he removed the child and declared the Tang dynasty.
Gao Zhu only ruled for eight years until in 626 his ambitious second son Li Xiumin forced
his father to abdicate and claimed the throne himself, once in control of the dynasty and
ruling under the imperial name of Tang Taizong, the new emperor vigorously and successfully
directed China's fortunes for the next quarter of a century.
Americans agree that much of the success of the Tang was very much due to the energy,
the ability and the policies of Taizong.
Although ruthless early in his reign he came to see himself as a good Confucian leader
who had his people's best interests at heart, so much so that today he remains one of the
most admired rulers in all of China's long history.
With the assistance of brilliant Confucian advisors like Wei Jing, in fact the Tang
is another of those dynasties that clearly represents the triumph of Confucianism, Tang
Taizong embarked upon a series of much needed political reforms.
He was determined to solve internal problems within government, the same types of problems
that had constantly plagued past dynasties.
In essence these key problems, the same problems faced by all great civilizations were how do
we administer a huge imperial structure?
How do we improve our infrastructure to aid communications within a great state?
And how do we solve the problems of land ownership and equitable taxation?
To oversee these reforms he created three separate ministries within his administration,
one to draft, one to review and a third to implement government policies.
The ministry charged with implementation was further divided into six departments each
with its own specific set of responsibilities.
What the Tang achieved here was truly remarkable.
There had been nothing in previous experiments in government anywhere in world history that
even came close to the sophistication of Tang administration.
Initially Taizong had to deal with powerful regional aristocracies but the administrative
reforms he put in place meant that by its mature period Tang government was able to
shake off regionalism and become highly centralized.
As I said this is the most complex bureaucracy that had ever existed anywhere in the world
organized into this sophisticated structure of specialized councils, boards, ministries,
departments.
It sounds more like Whitehall or Washington DC than the government structure of some
ancient ruling civilization.
One ministry was put in charge of the National Land Registry to check the growth of larger
states and to guarantee land to the peasants.
To further undermine the power of the regional nobility local government was managed by 15
provincial governors and there were also military commanders installed in each province
that collected state tribute.
Thus ensuring that the governors could not use their positions to corruptly enrich themselves
the way we saw many Roman governors had done.
As had been the case during the Han dynasty it was critical to staff this large and complex
bureaucracy with officials deeply imbued with Confucian ideals of ethical behavior,
of filial piety and of loyalty to the state.
Tang predecessors the sway had reintroduced written examinations for government candidates
based of course on their knowledge of the Confucian classics.
But the Tang now expanded this system by establishing state schools.
Just think for a moment how long it would be before state schools were introduced in
the West not until after the Industrial Revolution a thousand years later and also by issuing
standard authorized versions of the classics that would be taught in these state schools.
Now some idea of the demands of this examination system only 30 or so men passed the final
imperial exam each year but even though this number is small this gradually built up a
core of elite brilliant ethical officials within government and it also opened up these
higher positions to men of lowly rank if they possessed genuine talent at administration.
The system for recruiting only the most talented men into the civil service worked so well
that it remained essentially intact for the next 1300 years disappearing only after the
collapse of the Qing dynasty in the 20th century.
Now armed with this this core of capable officials the government was able to turn to the critical
problems of administration that had plagued all previous dynasties as we've seen.
Throughout its reign the Tang worked hard to construct and maintain an extensive communications
network to facilitate trade and also the movement of armies but also to help unify what had
been for so long now a fragmented China.
The new transport system relied on well constructed roads and canals on a horse career system
and also on teams of thousands of fast human runners.
The government built and maintained a network of ins and stables along the main routes which
provided rest and refreshments for travellers, couriers and of course their horses.
Evidence of the effectiveness of Tang communication reform can be seen in the speed that letters
and material goods could be moved throughout what becomes a very vast empire indeed.
Using couriers travelling by horse for example the Tang court was able to communicate with
the most distant parts of this vast Chinese entity within a maximum of eight days.
We also have some amazing records which show that relayed teams of thousands of human
runners were able to keep the Tang court at Chang'an supplied daily with seafood delivered
fresh from the coastal town of Ningbo over 600 miles away.
So the next problem that Tang turned their attention to was the system which covered
the allocation of agricultural land.
The Tang continued and improved the Equal Field System that as you might remember from
the last lecture was instigated by the Northern Way Dynasty back in 485 CE that was based
on the premise that all land was ultimately owned by the state.
So the purpose of the Equal Field System was to ensure equitable distribution of land and
to avoid the concentration of property that had caused so many problems during the later
Han Dynasty.
Government decrees now insisted that land will be allocated to individuals and families
according to the land's fertility and the individual family's needs.
One fifth of the land became the hereditary possession of the recipients.
The rest of the land, four fifths, remained the property of the state meaning it was available
for redistribution when the original recipient's needs had changed.
This system worked very well during the first century of the Tang Dynasty but during the
early 8th century it started showing signs of strain.
Part of the problem was that a rapidly increasing population placed enormous pressure on available
land and also that through bribery, through favours, influential families inevitably were
able to retain more than their fair share.
An additional problem was that large parcels of land continuously fell out of the system
when they were acquired by Buddhist monasteries, a cause of further accusation and criticism
by the Taoist by the way.
But this of course is just further evidence of the virtually unstoppable spread of Buddhism
throughout China during this period.
But the equal field system undoubtedly provided much needed stability during the first half
of the Tang era.
Emperor Taizong's ninth son became Emperor Gao Zong who reigned for over 30 years from
650 to 683 CE.
Gao Zong's rule is marked not just by solid government but also by the rise to power of
one of the most extraordinary women in the long history of Eastern civilization, Wu
Zaitan.
Her rise to political and historical prominence is even more remarkable because she did not
begin life as a member of the royal family but rather as an adolescent concubine to
the emperor.
She quickly gained so much influence over Emperor Gao Zong that within a few years of
arriving in the palace at the age of just 13 Wu was already ordering the officials
about.
While still a young woman and despite the objections of the emperor's Confucian advisers,
do you remember the legalist Han Faitse's admonition right back in the Qin dynasty
more than a thousand years earlier that, and I quote, a ruler is easily beguiled by lovely
women and charming boys by all those who can fawn and play at love.
Despite these warnings, Wu Zaitan convinced the emperor to oust the legitimate empress
and install her in her place.
Once installed, she used frankly brutal tactics including murder and exile to eliminate all
opposition so that when the emperor suffered a stroke in the year 660, Empress Wu was
able to move swiftly to take complete charge of Tang China.
After the emperor died in 683, she initially maintained control through her two sons before
eventually proclaiming herself Empress of all Tang China in the year 690 CE.
For the next 15 years, she proved herself a very effective ruler indeed.
First, she weakened the power of the old aristocracy by physically removing many of them from court.
She strengthened the examination system by recruiting more men of merit from all ranks.
In foreign affairs, she attacked and defeated Korea more on this in the future.
And within the highly cultured circle of the court, she frequently demonstrated her expertise
at music and at literature, and she also sponsored the writing of biographies about famous women
from China's past.
Eventually in 705, she was forced to abdicate and the Tang dynasty was restored by her son,
Zhongzong.
You know, later historians have been hostile towards her because of her ruthlessness, but
she remains without doubt one of the most extraordinary women in the history of all
Eastern civilization.
Now, I'd like to say something next about Tang foreign relations.
But before I can do this, I think we need to pull back and offer a brief overview of
the political situation right across Eurasia at the time of the Tang.
In the first few decades of Tang rule, a large part of Central Asia was under the control
of the third and last grade Persian Empire of the Sasanians, who you might remember had
been responsible for the destruction of the Kushans in the third century.
But with the rise of Islam, the Sasanians were destroyed in the early seventh century.
Most of Western Inner Asia, not to mention of course all the Middle East, all of North
Africa, even up into Spain, now became part of the great Islamic caliphates ruled first
by the Umayyad dynasty, which ruled out of Damascus between 661 and 750, and then by
their successors the Abbasid dynasty, which ruled from Baghdad between 750 and 1258.
Along with a powerful and rest of Tibetan Empire to the Southwest and an increasingly
troublesome Turkic-speaking nomadic empire emerging in the Northwest, this was the geopolitical
situation facing the expansionary Tang dynasty.
Very soon after it was established, the powerful Tang began to flex its military muscles.
Turning first to the North, Tang forces quickly brought Manchuria under Chinese control, and
then forced the Silic Kingdom in Korea to acknowledge Tang hegemony, events we'll certainly
see in our early lectures on Korea very soon.
Turning south next, the Tang conquered the northern part of Vietnam, more about this
too in the coming lecture.
Next, Tang armies were dispatched west along the old Silk Roads, where they established
a strong Chinese presence deep in Central Asia, as far west as the Aral Sea.
As part of this move into Central Asia, Tang forces also headed southwest into the forbidding
high-altitude landscape of Tibet to bring the dangerous and rest of Tibetan forces under
their control.
I often ask my students to imagine these battles being fought at high altitude, these running
battles in the high, rarified air of Tibet, extraordinary.
To help control what was now by far the largest Chinese empire that had ever resisted, the
Tang revived the old Han dynasty tributary system and began to promote a fascinating
new theory about China's place in the world, a theory I think that continues to resonate
somewhat even today.
This new political theory articulated the idea that China was the middle kingdom of the
earth, whose responsibility it was to bring order to all the subordinate lands through
a system of tributary relationships.
So as neighboring lands recognized the middle kingdom's power and its almost ordained role,
they were expected to bring gifts and tribute to the court and kowtow, which means to ritually
prostrate themselves before the emperor.
In return, these tributary states had their authority recognized and received lavish
gifts back from the Tang, actually usually far more valuable than the tribute they had
brought themselves to the court.
We'll see later in the course just how well this new foundational idea of eastern political
governance of diplomacy, if you like, worked out for the Koreans, who actually benefited
enormously by acknowledging their tributary status to the Tang.
This institutionalizing of relations between China and its neighbors had important implications
for trade and stability across much of the eastern hemisphere, with Tang China now in
control of an enormous Eurasian empire and at the center of a complex system of tributary
and exchange relationships, Silk Road's trade revived.
Indeed, the era of Tang rule is widely recognized by world historians as the second great Silk
Road's era.
Goods from distant regions now flooded back into China.
Foreign horses, jewels, musical instruments, games, new textiles became sources of endless
fascination to the elites of the court in the great capital city of Chang'an.
Foreign fashions in hair and clothing were slavishly copied and foreign amusements like
the Central Asian game of polo, which you may know is derived from the sport of buzkashi,
a sport that involved horsemen attempting to grab the body of a dead sheep and toss it
through a goal.
These became favorite pastimes for the world to do.
The caravans that arrived with increasing frequency in the great cities of the Tang,
coming in from Central Asia, became as much a part of Tang life, that pottery representations
of camels and their exotic foreign grooms were amongst the objects people frequently
placed in their tombs.
You can see these magnificent Tang ceramics of bactrian camels and horses and their grooms
in all the great art museums of the world today.
Foreign religions also, Islam of course, Judaism, Manichaeism, Zoroastrianism and Nestorian
Christianity also traveled along these roads to be practiced in the churches, the synagogues,
the temples and the mosques by the thousands, the tens of thousands of foreign merchants
who'd taken up residence in Tang China.
And yet although all these religions were tolerated, even appreciated by the elites,
none of them penetrated into the Chinese psyche, the Chinese population, the way that
Buddhism had done several centuries earlier.
This is a key theme that we're going to return to several times in the second part of the
course.
Essentially, none of the monotheistic religions could gain any traction in China because they
were so exclusive.
Only Buddhism proved itself adaptable to the ancient ideologies of classical China.
Indeed, by the time of the Tang dynasty, Confucianism and Taoism were viewed as now being compatible
with Buddhism, which continued to gain adherence even though the court, with the exception of
Empress Wu, largely embraced Taoism.
In our next lecture, I want to introduce you to an extraordinary Buddhist pilgrim, Xuanzang,
whose 16-year pilgrimage to India gave a great boost to Buddhism in Tang China and also inspired
one of China's most famous, most beloved novels, The Journey to the West.
More about that in our next lecture.
In terms of foreign relations, eventually the Tang overreached itself in its relentless
expansion to the West, coming up against an equally determined and expansionist Muslim
world.
The result was a very important conflict known as the Battle of Talas.
This is arguably one of the most important yet least well-known battles in all world
history.
Fought in the year 751, the Battle of Talas was an indecisive and scrappy conflict fought
between forces of the Islamic Abbasid Caliphate and the Tang Dynasty, essentially for the
control of Central Asia.
The Chinese army was eventually defeated after several days of fighting following the routing
of their infantry by the Abbasid cavalry, somewhere along the reaches of the Talas River.
The commander of the Tang forces, Gao Shanjie, realizing that utter defeat was imminent,
needs to escape with some of his regulars and retreat.
But although Gao was able to rebuild his forces within just a few months, he never again gained
the confidence of the local tribes residing in the area, so China lost its chance for
lasting influence in this region.
To be honest with you, the exact location of this important battle has never been accurately
confirmed.
It was most likely fought on the Talas River, somewhere near Taraz in present-day Kazakhstan,
many, many thousands of miles away from China.
The great Russian historian on Central Asia, indeed the father of all ancient Central Asianists,
Vasily Bartol, had no doubt about the ultimate world historical significance of this battle.
As Bartol put it, and I quote, the Battle of Talas determined the question, which of
the two civilizations, Chinese or Muslim, should predominate in the lands of Central
Asia?
It's one of those fun what ifs to ponder, what might have happened had the Chinese won
the battle and not the Muslims.
How far might Chinese expansion westwards have continued?
Would Islamic expansion have stopped forever in Kazakhstan and not continued on deep into
Central and South Asia?
Let's turn finally to the surging economy of China under the tongue, which in every
way was a product of their successful internal and external administrative policies.
In an idea borrowed from previous Chinese dynasties like the Han, the tongue government
paid for much of its expansion by monopolizing the salt, liquor and tea industries.
We'll see in a later lecture that the receipts the tongue government started issuing to merchants
actually evolved into the first paper money in human history under their successes, the
Song.
With enormous demand for Chinese products stimulated by Silk Road's trade, crafts like
paper making, iron casting, porcelain and silk processing flourished.
Much of this trade took place by sea as well as by land.
In fact, a recent extraordinary discovery of a sunken 10th century Arab dowel between
two small Indonesian islands has given us great insight into the extent of maritime
trade between the Islamic world and Tang China.
So this was an Arab ship, think how far it had come from the Arabian Peninsula, an Arab
ship filled with tens of thousands of carefully packaged tongue ceramic plates and bowls along
with many beautiful gold and silver objects.
The bowls themselves were actually quite functional.
They look almost mass produced but they were painted with motifs from a whole range of
different cultural traditions, Buddhist traditions, Iranian and certainly Islamic, proving that
these ceramics were being manufactured and shipped off to very specific markets.
This is a very modern export system.
Inside the Tang State, economic development of the South was aided by the convenient water
transportation that was available along the rivers and the streams and the great canal
systems of course of the Yangtze Valley system.
In fact, river traffic grew so heavy in the South that storms at Yangzhou in 721 and again
in 751 led to the destruction of over 1,000 commercial boats each time or so we read in
the annals.
Tea native to the South was no longer looked on as some medicinal herb used primarily to
those trying to stay awake but was now being drunk all over the country, turning it into
a very lucrative commodity indeed.
The great southern port cities of Canton, Guangzhou and Fuzhou grew in size as maritime
trade along the coast and throughout Southeast Asia expanded greatly, much of it as we've
seen in the hands of Arab merchants.
By 742, when a census was taken, the proportion of the registered population living in the
South had increased from only a quarter in the early 7th century to nearly a half.
So let's begin to bring this lecture to a close now with China experiencing massive
population growth with the economy surging internally and externally and with Tang armies
trampling over half of the Eurasian continent.
But let's pick up the story next time with the mighty Tang at the height of its success
and brilliance during the reign of Emperor Xuanzong and explore the fascinating cultural
achievements of the high Tang period.
See you next time.
