Welcome back to the glittering world of the tongue.
In this second lecture on one of China's greatest dynasties and the contributions it made to
Eastern civilization, I want to focus on life during the high tongue period when the dynasty
was at the peak of its power and wealth.
In particular, I want to take you into the court of Emperor Xuanzong who reigned for
more than 40 years between 713 and 756 CE.
The emperor is also known as Minghuang, which means brilliant emperor, a reflection not
so much on his intelligence, but on the splendid and glittering court he kept.
We must begin our visit, as all foreign parties did, by entering the city through the splendid
southern gate of the great capital city of the tongue, Chang'an, perhaps the most extraordinary
planned city in all of world history.
Remember that even before the tongue came to power, Chang'an had been one of the great
imperial capitals of China for more than 2,000 years.
This was the capital city of the Shang dynasty, of the Western Zhou, of the Qin and early
Han dynasties, and for so many others during the Age of Disunity.
But it was under the tongue that Chang'an became the most splendid city in the world.
This was a superbly planned metropolis, laid out on a grid 30 miles square, one of four
tongue cities that had populations in excess of one million people.
But as well as the million people living inside the walled central part of the city,
Chang'an was home to another million who lived in the suburbs just beyond the city walls.
So this city boasted a total population of two million people.
By way of comparison, demographers estimate that the next largest cities in the world
around this time were Córdoba in Morris, Spain, with perhaps 450,000 people, and Constantinople,
the capital of the Byzantine Empire, with around 300,000 people.
London and Paris would have had populations of less than 50,000 people each during this
same period.
So Chang'an was not only the greatest planned city of its time, it was the largest city
ever seen in world history to this point, and it was perfectly and purposely constructed
to be the capital city of a great empire.
After 30 square miles of city was surrounded by outer walls made of pounded earth, 15 feet
thick and 35 feet tall, which extended over five miles north to south and nearly six miles
east to west.
These walls are still incredibly impressive today, by the way, and I speak here from personal
experience.
In accordance with tradition, the emperor's palace was located in the north, so the emperor
always faced south towards his subjects.
The residence homes were built inside 108 rectangular wards each enclosed by walls and
gates patrolled by centuries.
The gates would be closed at night so that access between these wards was difficult in
the evenings, but this was, after all, an imperial capital, so security was always tight.
So here we are.
It's the year 740 of the Common Era.
We are a delegation of foreign dignitaries come to pay our tribute and our respects to
the great emperor, Xuanzong.
Now whether we've come from Korea or Tibet or one of the many tributary states of Central
Asia, we enter through the Great South Gate and begin to make our way north up a broad
boulevard four miles long heading for the imperial city.
The avenue we process along is an astounding 500 yards wide, bordered by glorious gardens
full of shrubs and trees.
The homes of great aristocratic families line the streets for all of the leading members
of Tung Society sought to live in the glittering capital.
As we walk north, we quickly become aware of the large numbers of foreigners living in
the city.
A group of Buddhist pilgrims from India are making their way down a side street, perhaps
heading for the famous temple complex at the Great Goose Pagoda that still stands today.
I can vouch for the fact that the view from the top is still magnificent.
Just ahead of us, hundreds of Korean students are hurrying along the busy streets, making
their way to and from the Imperial Confucian Academy.
Records tell us that as many as 8,000 Korean students were probably residing in the city
at any one time during the Hightung.
These students had come to Chang'an with the support of their government in order to
immerse themselves in Buddhism, Confucianism and so many of the other key foundations of
Eastern civilization that were already leaving such an indelible imprint on Korea.
These were the future leaders of Korea being groomed in the arts of the Confucian scholar
bureaucrat.
And of course, foreign merchants are everywhere.
Persians, Syrians over here, Saudians, Arabs bustling to and from between the many huge
markets that have been built in special commercial quarters throughout the city.
So many foreigners are living in the city that it has become one of the world's most
diverse religious centers.
As we walk up the Broad Central Avenue, we stop to admire the many elaborate Daoist temples,
the Buddhist pagoda-shaped stupas and the numerous exotic churches of the Manicheans,
the Zoroastrian and the Nestorian Christian faiths.
Interestingly, very recently a mud and plaster nativity scene dated to the Tang period was
recently found by archaeologists in one of the abandoned pagoda complexes of the Great
City.
In the heart of this city lies the oldest Islamic mosque in China, which still today
is an extraordinary place of peace and prayer surrounded by the bustling, crazy, exciting
Muslim markets of the Hui district of the modern city of Xian.
As we draw closer to the administrative city and the imperial complex beyond, we enter
the most fashionable part of Chang'an, where the Confucian scholar bureaucrats and their
families live in lavish mansions.
Stylish, tongue-elite women, now much fuller in figure and rounder in face than the skinnier
fashionable women of the Han era, walk by sporting foreign hairstyles influenced by
the latest fashion from Arabia.
The women are adorned with jewels from all over Eurasia, but of course their flowing
gowns are made of gloriously dyed Chinese silk.
On the balcony, musicians are performing on instruments that have traveled far across
the silk roads.
Well, their audiences sip tea and wine in silver cups decorated with Persian designs.
We have arrived at last at the court of the emperor himself, ready to pay our respects.
The high point of the tongue arrived in the first half of the eighth century during the
44-year-long reign of Xuanzong, whose court was arguably the most fashionable and cultured
in the entire world.
Xuanzong conducted state ceremonies on a grand scale, both inside his own palace and
in the nearby hibiscus gardens and the purple cloud pavilion.
As we have seen throughout this course, ritual has long been a critical aspect of Chinese
civilization, and under Xuanzong a great codification of state-sponsored rituals took place.
And of course we know that through the rigorous Confucian exam system, the bureaucracy attracted
men of the highest learning, the highest culture.
But while government service obviously attracted elite scholars, so too did the arts, and cultured
men were esteemed for their skill at calligraphy and painting, both of which flourished under
the tongue.
Calligraphy, of course, is the execution of lettering done with Russian ink, done generally
with single strokes.
This art has been revered in China since well before the imperial age, because it combines
art, it combines written language, and the vigorous and aesthetic movement in one superb
process.
It is part of the great tradition of Confucianism, of course, that elite men were expected to
be adept at a wide range of intellectual and artistic skills.
In every way, the tongue Confucian system focused on the finest traditions of what we
would call a liberal education today, on creating men who are skilled at philosophy and calligraphy,
at oratory and music, at mathematics and dancing, and at visual and literary art.
Every educated man in the emperor's court will be expected to write an occasional poem,
for example, so much so that poetic composition became one of the skills tested in the most
prestigious, the most rigorous of the civil service examinations.
To continually improve the quality of the poetry being written in his court, Emperor
Xuanzong established an academy for poets in Chang'an to try and create new types of
poems, experiments in poetry.
The great poet Li Bai served in this academy for a few years, writing his light sensual
poems celebrating the beauty of the imperial parks and the beauty of the ladies in them,
and more about this wonderful poet in just a moment.
Now, Xuanzong also enjoyed music and dance, and in keeping with a long imperial obsession
that we have seen emerge particularly under the Han Emperor Wu Di, his obsession with
the heavenly horses, Xuanzong had a real love of horses, particularly horses from Central
Asia.
The emperor even kept a troop of dancing horses, which, if we are fortunate enough,
might perform for the court's amusement during our visit.
In reflecting the tolerant, the cosmopolitan nature of tongue society generally, Buddhist
and Taoist clerics were equally welcome here at the court.
We know, for example, that Xuanzong even invited teachers of the new Tantric School
of Buddhism to visit the court in 726 when he called upon the Javanese monk.
So this monk's come from Java and Indonesia, Vajrabodhi, to perform Tantric rites to try
and avert drought in the land.
You folks know there is a long tradition behind this religious tolerance and the welcoming
of important religious figures to court.
The first great emperor of the Tang Dynasty, Taizong, had been fascinated by the monk Xuanzong,
who lived between 602 and 664.
Between 645 and 660 he had undertaken this long and arduous journey from China through
Central Asia down into India and eventually returning to Chang'an.
Xuanzong was born into a scholarly family and lived a relatively long life before his
death.
His most famous though for this 15-year-long trip to India where he studied with many great
Buddhist masters.
When he returned to China he brought back with him some 657 Sanskrit texts which he was determined
to translate into Chinese.
With the emperor's support he set up a large translation bureau at the Great Goose Pagoda
in Chang'an which drew in students and collaborators from all over East Asia.
By the end of his life Xuanzong was credited with a translation of 1,330 lengthy Buddhist
scriptures.
Xuanzong's epic journey to India later became the inspiration for another of these beloved
novels in East Asian history.
This novel, Journey to the West, was also written like The Three Kingdoms during the
much later Ming Dynasty period and it follows the monk on his journey to India.
He's accompanied by a group of very exotic fellow travelers, by monkey who carries with
him three magic hairs, by pigsy who was banished to earth from the Milky Way for getting drunk,
by sandy a very polite river monster and by the dragon king who can turn himself into
a white horse for Xuanzong to escape on.
The adventurous yet often hilarious novel has remained a source of inspiration for operas,
for puppet shows.
I myself saw a wonderful, hilarious puppet show version in Sian not so long ago, for
video games now and also for many television dramas and movies produced in both the West
and the East.
But what really concerned literary figures during the Haitang was not so much the writing
of novels but the crafting of exquisite poetry.
Ever since the time of Confucius, who himself was a poet, poetry had been amongst the most
prized accomplishments of a gentleman.
But the poetry produced during the Tang has been seen ever since as the finest ever created
in China's enormously long cultural history.
It was during the reign of Emperor Xuanzong that many of China's most revered poets were
active.
Even today we have in our possession more than 48,900 poems written by 2,200 named Tang
poets that have survived to this day.
One of the reasons both for this great proliferation of poetry writing and for the survival frankly
of so many Tang poems is actually technological.
You remember we saw in a previous lecture that papermaking had emerged during the late
Han dynasty and by the time of the Tang of course this had reached great levels of production
and sophistication.
Me and the Tang printers devised a method of printing on paper using carved fixed blocks
of wood.
So this coupling of paper with printing and the widespread levels of literacy achieved
in this most educated of societies gave a significant boost to literature.
Tang poetry achieved its greatest heights with the poets Li Bai who lived from 701 to
1763 and Du Fu his near contemporary who lived from 712 to 770.
These are frankly two of the greatest poets who ever lived.
If our good luck had continued during our visit to the court we might even have had
the experience of hearing both these poets recite some of their works to the assembled
court of Emperor Xuanzong.
Although the two poets were friends and colleagues their approach to their craft differed considerably.
Li Bai loved mountains he also loved wine his renown for his free spirit and his great
appreciation of alcohol.
In fact legend has it that Li Bai died during a drinking party as he leaned out of the boat
to scoop the moon out of the water he fell in and was drowned.
Now sadly I only have time to read you one poem each of these two giants of world literature.
The first is from Li Bai and it clearly illustrates his love of wine but also his sense of the
I guess the bittersweet poignancy of life.
This is Li Bai's poem drinking alone by moonlight.
A cup of wine under the flowering trees I drink alone for no friend is near raising my cup
I beckon the bright moon for he with my shadow will make three men.
The moon alas is no drinker of wine listless my shadow creeps about at my side yet with
the moon as friend and the shadow as slave I must make merry before the spring is spent.
To the songs I sing the moon flickers his beams in the dance I weave my shadow tangles and
breaks.
While we were sober three shared the fun now we are drunk each goes his way may we long
share our odd inanimate feast and meet at last on the cloudy river of the sky.
Du Fu I think was the more serious of the two well known for his social conscience his
biting sociopolitical commentary I think we hear a glimpse of this in this powerful anti-war
poem called Facing Snow.
After the battle many new ghosts cry the solitary old man worries and grieves ragged clouds
are low amid the dusk snow dances quickly in the whirling wind the ladles cast aside
the cup not green the stove still looks as if a fiery red to many places communications
are broken I sit but cannot read my books for grief.
Tong Poets also frequented the many entertainment quarters of the cities where they would call
on the skills of highly trained female musicians to help set their words to music.
In Xuan Zong's court beautiful court of science played an increasingly important part in popularizing
a new verse form by singing the lyrics setting the lyrics to music that were written by famous
men but also by composing their own lyrics and their own musical accompaniment.
Some of these female composer poets achieved great renown particularly the beautiful and
talented lyric poet Li Jinggao Li's position in society reminds us that the status of women
in Tong China was enigmatic to say the least.
On the one hand we know that these talented courtesans were deeply respected by court elites,
by Confucian scholars, by the emperor himself and also as we've noted the only woman ever
to rule China did so during the Tong.
But on the other hand legal codes introduced by the first Tong emperor which went on to
be highly influential by the way on all East Asian societies contain severe penalties for
wives who disobeyed or unfaithful to their husbands.
To add to this confusing picture of Tong dynasty women the literature of the period often depicts
active strong women fighting against convention but in the end they all seem to want to go
back to being beautiful Confucian women.
Now you know the most famous example of this would have to be the Ballad of Mulan although
this was probably composed a century or so before the Tong came to power and then was
revised several times during the early Tong.
The famous story of a girl who goes off to war in place of her father has inspired many
subsequent interpretations including of course the popular 1998 animated Disney movie.
The Ballad of Mulan tells in lilting verse the story of a loyal daughter, a filial daughter
really who dresses up as a man and goes off to war to save her elderly father from conscription.
After 12 years of successful fighting against the nomads in the north she returns to her
village and changes back into a woman utterly astonishing her soldier companions.
So this seems to suggest I guess that this woman has courage she has initiative she can
certainly master the world of men but ultimately all she really wants to do is be a good dutiful
Confucian daughter.
After 10 years of military campaign leading her soldiers to victory after victory against
the nomads the Song knew really here is Mulan herself telling us what happens next.
I take off my battle cloak and put on my old time clothes.
I adjust my wispy hair at the windowsill and apply my makeup by the mirror.
I step out to see my comrades in arms they are all surprised astounded.
We travel 12 years together yet didn't realize Mulan was a lady and then comes this final
enigmatic statement.
The buck bounds here and there or the doe has narrow eyes but when the two rabbits run
side by side how can you tell the female from the male.
I mean just think about those last two enigmatic lines and ponder their meaning but when the
two rabbits run side by side how can you tell the female from the male.
With this ambiguous consideration of the status of women in Tong China our visit to the glittering
court of Emperor Zhuanzong must sadly come to an end.
During the last decade of his reign the old emperor he lost interest in government he
was increasingly distracted by the charms of his concubine Yang Guofei who is regarded
to this day as one of the four beauties of Chinese history.
Now Yang Guofei left her husband who was actually the emperor's own son to become concubine
of the old emperor himself and so rose to a position of great power in the court.
Later Yang Guofei got caught up in a dangerous nasty rebellion against the emperor and the
people demanded her execution.
The old emperor could only watch her hang and was so distressed that he abdicated soon
after and spent the rest of his life lamenting her loss.
The rebellion that cost Yang Guofei her life was led by a career soldier An Lushan who
had become an advisor to the emperor Zhuanzong but he betrayed the emperor by leading this
bloody rebellion against him that nearly brought down the entire dynasty.
The rebellion was long it lasted from 755 to 763 although An Lushan himself was assassinated
in 757.
200,000 rebel troops seized all of the imperial capital cities and the emperor was forced
to flee far off to the south to Sichuan.
Now the tongue held on to power for another 150 years after this but frankly the rebellion
of An Lushan weakened the power of the government.
This rebellion by the way has also been the subject of a couple of great Chinese movies.
In the aftermath many regions withdrew from the empire and central power fell into the
hands of, no surprise here, powerful court eunuchs.
The equal field system collapsed throughout the land many peasants became bonded serf
laborers to the wealthy landlords.
The old taxation system also fell apart although interestingly in the reign of one of the late
Tang emperors Daxong in the early 9th century this system was replaced by a new system whereby
the various levies made on the peasants were combined into a single tax that was paid twice
a year once in the summer and once in the autumn.
Now this tax was based on the value of the property rather than the numbers of people
in the household and thus this new property tax system replaced a sort of income tax production
system and remained the basis of tax collection in China for the next 800 years.
The Tang's tolerance of other religions also began to decline in the last century of its
existence.
The pro-Daoist emperor Wu Zong began a systematic series of persecutions against Buddhists.
Buddhists show us that 4600 Buddhist monasteries and 40,000 temples were destroyed in the Mayhem.
This persecution frankly marked the beginning of the decline of Buddhism in China although
as we will see in the next part of the course certainly not throughout the rest of East
Asia.
Taoists and others increasingly attacked it as a foreign ideology which subverted traditional
Chinese values and Buddhism in China would never be quite the same again.
During the last half century of the dynasty conflict and mistrust between court officials
and commanders in the field paralysed the government.
Rebellions late in the 9th century destroyed several cities.
Some new players now appear on the scene, rest of Turkic speaking peoples.
They turn up on the northern borders although initially at this stage they tended to side
with the Tang dynasty rulers and their interventions may actually have saved the dynasty from destruction
several times.
The Tang dynasty was finally ended in the year 907 of the common era when one of the
regional military governors deposed the last emperor and took the throne for himself beginning
a new era that historians call the Five Dynasties period.
And so ended the reign of the Tang dynasty one of the greatest imperial structures of
the post-classical world rivaled only in size and power by the Islamic caliphate of the Abbasids.
In China today the Tang remains one of the most fascinating historical periods for filmmakers
for television producers, opera composers and for authors of historical fiction.
This is one of the great moments of eastern civilization when foundational ideas about
government and bureaucracy, about religion and ideology, art and literature and about
gender relations flourished and spread throughout much of the eastern hemisphere.
As we'll see later although division returned to China following the fall of the Tang this
fragmentation was short lived.
The Song dynasty came to power a mere 50 years later and built on the achievements of the
Tang to turn China into an economic powerhouse of the world.
Indeed the Song initiated an industrial revolution that's not too strong a phrase, an industrial
revolution that had it been sustained would have dramatically altered the subsequent course
of global history.
But you're going to have to wait a while to hear that part of the story because next
time we will begin our exploration of the wider experiences of eastern civilization
in one of the most enigmatic and mysterious lands of all the land of the morning calm
an extraordinary peninsula that sticks out of the east Asian mainland like a rabbit or
if you turn the map sideways like a tiger.
I look forward to joining you next time as we begin our journey into the culture of
Korea and its role as one of the core societies at the very heart of eastern civilization.
See you next time.
