Welcome everyone. This is quite a significant moment in our exploration of the foundations
of Eastern civilization because we are now leaving China for a while to spend time in
some of the other major states and cultures of the Eastern Hemisphere, particularly Korea,
Japan and Southeast Asia. Partly we are doing this because the origins and histories of
those regions and cultures are immensely fascinating in their own right. But we're also doing
this because it's time to see how the various foundational Chinese ideas about government,
about philosophy, religion, society and culture that we have been considering in such depth
in our series so far went on to profoundly influence emerging Korean, Japanese and Southeast
Asian culture. What we will see, I think, is that China undoubtedly exercised an enormous
influence on the development of all these neighbouring societies during their long related histories.
Some of this influence was very hands on or even in your face, and by that I mean Chinese
armies regularly invaded and even colonised Korea and Vietnam and also established strong
tributary and commercial and diplomatic relations with Japan and most of Southeast Asia. Some
of this influence was actually spiritual. Buddhism, modified by its long contact with
China, was further diffused to the East and South where, as we will see, it had an enormous
impact on the entire Eastern Hemisphere. And some of this Chinese influence was in the
form of political philosophy. So we will explore in this next series of lectures the way in
which Chinese techniques of government and administration, notably the ideas espoused
by Confucianism and Legalism, helped shape public life in Korea and Japan. But what I
also hope to show you is that despite these regular contacts with and almost overwhelming
influence from China, the states and peoples of Korea, Japan, Vietnam and all the other
Southeast Asian states did not become utterly absorbed by Chinese culture, did not become
carbon copies of their giant mainland neighbour. Instead, partly in response to this pervasive
cultural influence coming from China, these other Eastern societies were able to maintain
their own distinctive identities and fascinating traditions, which went on to contribute to
the collective global cultural treasure house we now call Eastern Civilisation. So we will
allow ourselves some time to explore these distinctive contributions, modifications of
sometimes direct challenges to Confucianism and Buddhism, for example. New ideas about
the role of nature, the environment in human life, new thinking about social hierarchies
and the roles of women and many other contributions. But having said all this, it cannot be denied
that Korea, Japan, Vietnam and the rest of Southeast Asia drew enormous inspiration from
China and built societies that reflected their participation in a larger Eastern regional
identity that revolved around China. This is why it is perfectly appropriate to talk
about an emerging Eastern Hemispheric cultural zone from very early in the history of Eastern
Civilisation, much in the same way that we speak about the East Asia region today as
a semi-unified cultural and economic assembly of nations. My plan then is to spend the next
ten lectures widening the scope of our investigation of Eastern Civilisation by examining the early
histories of these other fascinating regions. We'll begin with four lectures on Korean history
and culture, taking us from the misty mythical origins of that society through to the tribulations
that suffered after the Mongols invaded the Korean Peninsula. And then we'll shift our
focus to the island state of Japan and inform all lectures follow the development of Japanese
history and culture from the arrival of the first human migrants to the archipelago through
to the end of the glorious Heian period when Japan transformed itself from a Chinese style
imperial political structure into a feudal state. Before returning to China, I will also
offer two lectures on Vietnam and her Southeast Asian neighbours, which despite the powerful
cultural influences coming from both China and India and later Islam, managed to construct
their own unique societies. And even after we go back to China, we will continue to return
periodically through the rest of the course to these other East Asian societies as we
bring our investigation of the rich legacy of Eastern Civilisations through to the present.
Let's begin now by first considering, as all historians must, I think, the role played
by geography and climate in the somewhat mysterious beginnings of Korean history.
Just as Korea was never subsumed culturally by China, much the same can be said of its
geology and geography. There are similarities certainly, but also significant distinct environmental
differences which partly explain some of the distinctive cultural practices that emerged
there. The Korean peninsula is separated from the mainland of China by the Yellow Sea and
from the islands of Japan by the Sea of Japan, and it does share many characteristics of
climate and coastline, for example, with both these neighbours. But unlike its neighbours,
most of Korea is extremely rugged, mountainous and heavily forested to this day. This meant
that the first human migrants to Korea had a host of environmental challenges, but also
a wide range of possible settlement sites. These included a very long and sinuous coastline
with many microenvironments, many marine resources, much like Japan, but also many wooded interior
environments and river flats with access to forest foods, to timber, to fresh water and
even caves. Now if you look at it on a modern map, the Korean peninsula seems to extend
like an inverted thumb southward from the mainland of East Asia. Today it's bordered
on the north of course by China and Russia, and in the south the thumb is pointing directly
at the southern Japanese island of Kyushu. Modern Koreans see the shape of the peninsula
as somewhat resembling a rabbit looking westwards across the Yellow Sea to China with its ears
extending back to the northeast. But if we were to orient our maps of the region so that
east was now at the top, the Korean peninsula looks much more like a crouching tiger. The
landmass of Korea is just over 220,000 square kilometres in area, about the same size as
Great Britain or the US state of Utah. The peninsula is roughly 1,000 kilometres, 600
miles long, and at its narrowest point the waist is no more than 200 kilometres, that's
about 120 miles wide. Korea sits squarely in the temperate zone of the world, so for
example Seoul, the capital city of South Korea, is on the same temperate latitude as Denver,
Colorado. Korea is surrounded by sea on three sides, although the distances to the other
coasts are not great. Across the Yellow Sea the Shandong Peninsula of China is only 200
kilometres, about 120 miles away. And if you were to cross by boat from the southern
Korea to Kyushu in Japan, land would probably never be completely out of sight on a clear
day. Geologically, Korea consists mostly of a block of ancient granite that was laid down
before the Cambrian era, so before 600 million years ago, and which tilts west towards the
Yellow Sea, overlaying this block of younger rocks, nieces, more recent granites and limestone.
The limestone has produced caves that were initially attractive to early human migrants,
but actually few of these caves turned out to be the right shape or size to become practical
dwellings. These ancient granites, by the way, contain important metals like gold, copper, tin and
iron, all of which were accessed by early governments that, as we will see, created lucrative
industries from them. In fact, you may not be aware of this fact, but Korea has been a major
gold producer for a very long time. It was actually the largest gold producer in the world during
the first half of the 20th century. Now, although Japan is very close by, Korea has almost none of
the volatile volcanic activity of its neighbor, so volcanism and earthquakes did not have the same
shaping influence on developing Korean civilization as they did on Japanese civilization, as we will see.
In fact, the only volcano on the entire Korean peninsula is Mount Baikdu in the far north,
which at 2,744 meters or just over 9,000 feet is also the highest mountain in Korea.
Today, this is an extinct crater filled with a beautiful lake, Heaven Lake, where, according to
ancient legend, the gods used to dwell. Even today, Mount Baikdu is regarded by Koreans as a sacred
mountain and is the place of their ancestral origins, a fact exploited by the founding
commonest leadership of North Korea, which actually makes several claims of close association
with Baikdu. Many Korean states and dynasties have held sacred rituals at the mountain over the
centuries. As we'll see later in the course in the 15th century, the great King Saejong of the
Chosun dynasty made Baikdu the centerpiece of an extensive fortifications network that he had
constructed right across the north. But during the Second World War, the dense forest around the
mountain became a stronghold for anti-Japanese resistance fighters, and communist guerrillas
also based themselves in the mountain's forests during the early stages of the Korean War,
events we will be following later in the course. North Korean propaganda claims that the founder
of their state, Kim Il-sung, was one of the organizers of the Japanese resistance movement
that operated at the base of the mountain, and also that his deceased son, Kim Jong-il,
was actually born beneath Mount Baikdu. Mount Baikdu aside, much of Korea is mountainous,
with in fact over 70% of the land covered in steep-sided mountains. Now, most of these mountains
are less than 5,000 feet high, so it's not so much the height that has been so influential on Korean
history, but rather their ruggedness and their steepness. The major watershed of Korea runs
close to the east coast and extends from north to south down the entire length of the peninsula.
The mountains do get gradually lower from north to south, but the peaks remain rugged throughout,
and this historically made it very difficult to actually cross from east to west in many parts of
Korea. In the far southwest, for example, the Sobaek Mountains rise to heights of roughly
6,000 feet, and finding a way through is challenging even today.
The shelf of flatter land along the eastern seaboard is narrow because the land drops an
altitude from about 1,000 meters, 3,000 feet or so, to sea level quite quickly, in just a few
kilometers. But this coastal zone is where ancient fishing villages were formed beside
lagoons and behind sandbars, often in the narrow inlets between plunging mountain headlands that
fall into the sea. Because there are no significant bays or harbors along this east coast to encourage
the development of larger communities, the coast is so rugged, much of the political development
of Korea actually occurred along the south and west coasts and the thousands of islands that
sit just offshore. Here is where much of the evidence of early human habitation has been found
by archaeologists. Although the environment is far from perfect for human habitation,
because the adjacent and very shallow yellow sea means that the west coast is subject to
enormous tidal fluctuations of up to 10 meters or up to 30 feet.
Korean rivers are also legendary and legion. If you've walked beside any Korean river,
you'll know that all are twisted, convoluted, relatively narrow for their length as they cut
their surging way down from the mountains. Six rivers are over 400 kilometers long,
and most of them run towards the west or south. The exception is the two men in the far north,
which flows east into the east sea near Vladivostok in Russia, a natural boundary that today separates
North Korea from Russia. The nearby Yellow River flows the other direction southwest into the
Yellow Sea to carve out the border between Korea and China. These rivers have been critically
important to political and cultural development. Indeed, all the great capitals of Korea have
been located along three major rivers in particular. The Taedong, where Pyongyang,
the capital of North Korea, lies today. The Imjinhan River system, where Seoul,
the capital of South Korea, is located. And the Kum River, further south.
As far as climate goes, Korean winters are cold and dry. The summers are hot and often
drenched with torrential monsoon rains. During the last ice age, sea levels were some
400 feet lower than they are today. This meant that much of the Yellow Sea was dry land,
and that Korea was actually connected by land bridges to Japan. It would have been possible
to walk from China across the Yellow Sea plain to Korea and then on to Japan, which is exactly
what early human migrants did. Then from about 11,000 years ago, the earth entered a sustained
warming trend. As a result, sea levels rose to seal off the inhabitants of Japan
and to separate Korea from China, except of course along that northern border.
But long before the last ice age ended and the earth began to warm, humans had already arrived
in Korea. Now as was the case with China, there is very sketchy evidence to suggest that
Homo sapiens were preceded into the Korean Peninsula by earlier hominids. Several skulls
founded a number of cave sites, appear to be those of Homo erectus, some of which have been dated
to between five and six hundred thousand years ago or before the present. They were discovered
with some basic stone tools and crude handaxes. In central Korea at the Chonggoni site above the
Hantan River, more sophisticated handaxes and flake tools have been discovered in close proximity
to the raw materials needed to produce them, suggesting that this was some sort of hominid
workshop site. The most important parallelithic site of early human activity in Korea is Sokchanggi,
located beside the Kum River in south central Korea, where many artifacts including an increasingly
sophisticated toolkit have been discovered. Some archaeologists see similarities between the tools
found at Sokchanggi with those discovered in the Jokudian caves in China, which as you might remember
from our third lecture I think, were occupied for enormously long periods by hominids and then by
stone age humans. Six basic types of tools found at Jokudian in China are very similar to tools
found from the same period at several Korean sites. Now given of course that the Yellow Sea was
largely dry land for much of the Paleolithic, it's hardly surprising that there would be
these similarities between Chinese and Korean Paleolithic lifeways. The same groups of humans
could have been wandering back and forth across the Yellow Sea plain at will. Another important
Chinese Paleolithic site at Jinyushan in the Liaodong Peninsula, which is also just across
the Yellow Sea from Korea, has yielded flake tools and evidence of the controlled use of fire
that are remarkably similar to tools found at the Korean Hukwuri cave site.
And just to complete this story of Paleolithic connections, many similar tools turn up at
Paleolithic sites in Japan, which as I said was connected by land bridges to Korea for much of
this period. We get a glimpse at the upper Paleolithic, so that's the late old stone age
lifeways of humans in Korea over an enormously long period between 30,000 and 3,000 BCE. So
a period of 27,000 years through materials found at Sokchengi and also at two other important
sites, the Sanxi Rock Shelter and the Yonggul Cave. In the upper layers of these sites, archaeologists
find well-made handaxes with sinuous edges. They find knives, microblades along with a lot of
charcoal produced by the burning of pine and larchwood. But the big problem for Korean archaeologists
working in the late Paleolithic is that as the climate warmed at the end of the last ice age
and as sea levels rose, many of the sites humans had occupied for tens of thousands of years
were completely submerged under the sea. Despite this, we know that really wherever
on earth humans lived during the long Paleolithic era, they followed foraging lifeways, which in
Korea meant exploiting the plant resources of the extensive forests of the peninsula and also
hunting deer, wild boar and even macaques in the jungles, in the forests. We know that the
occupants of the Soiangai site ate persimmons because we found fossilized remains of them
and those at Soiangai certainly caught and ate fish. Archaeologists have found extensive fishing
materials there. So while the Yellow Sea was this great plain during the ice age, humans probably
lived mostly down there on the flats and only visited the mountains seasonally in search of
perhaps boar, nuts, fruits and different herbs. Partly because of this, only a handful of
Paleolithic constructed shelters had been found so far anywhere in the Korean Peninsula. Sokchangi,
for example, has revealed the remains of two huts that are outlined by lines of stones,
a half and five post holes to support the roof, presumably, and another dwelling unearthed at
the Kulpuri site seems to be the remains of a single enclosed house. But these dwellings
are very small and even the cave sites have such restricted areas that they could only have housed
very small families at best, not large populations. So all this evidence suggests that
these early human communities in Korea were very small, that only minimal hunter-gatherer bands
or perhaps even just extended family groups occupied these sites. Only with the transition
to the Neolithic or the New Stone Age do we begin to find evidence of villages and larger populations.
And indeed, in the archaeological record, some time after 6,000 before the common era,
villages do indeed begin to appear in Korea. Initially, it was assumed that the
the Paleolithic communities already living there had simply increased in size and
morphed, transitioned into sedentary communities. However, as archaeologists came to realize that
the the Paleolithic populations of Korea must have been very small, another theory was advanced,
that perhaps migrants coming in from Siberia in the north had brought new technologies and new
life ways with them. But the discovery of a number of different pottery styles or
different types of bone and stone tools now suggests that rather than one new migration,
it was probably a series of complex migrations by different peoples that inaugurated the New Stone Age
in Korea. Most of these early village sites were located along the coast or on river terraces
and they featured houses that were partly subterranean and were heated by central
hearths. The villages are small, just a few houses in most cases, and they were strategically
positioned to exploit the natural resources of the region, obviously fish and other marine resources,
and then river and forest resources. A distinctive type of pottery appears during this period,
chulmun pottery. It's produced over a pretty long period between roughly 6000 and 2000 BCE
and it's decorated with patterns that have been incised into the wet clay by fingernails in many
cases or by bird bones, shells or sticks. Villages on the on the more rugged east coast
featured sunken houses with living rooms and and round or oval floors, some of which were even paved
with stone, along again with a central hearth. Now even as tentative experiments with agriculture
commencing in the flat areas around these simple villages, the flat areas cleared of forest,
hunting, gathering and fishing were still practiced, indeed were still vital to the survival of these
villagers. Great middens, these are essentially mounds of eaten and discarded marine animals are
common along the south coast in particular and fish hooks made of stone are quite commonly found
as are great round stone sinkers that must have been used to tie to net somehow and used for fishing
from boats. This diet then of fish and other marine resources was supplemented by hunted deer,
antelope, hunted boar, even water buffalo, dogs, cats, badgers were hunted and even dolphins and
whales and its triangular arrowheads, stone arrowheads, hafted to wooden arrows that show us
the effective technology used for all of this hunting. But the fact that Chulmun Potry has been
found at major sites along the the Han and Taidong rivers along with hoes made of slate and antler
tells us that basic agriculture was now also being carried out at these sites, horticulture really
and these wide-mouthed conical-bottomed potry pieces were being used for the storage of agricultural
surpluses. Now despite this this increasingly rich evidence I guess you'd have to say,
it's still very difficult to know exactly how people lived during the Neolithic in Korea,
let alone what they thought of the world around them. We have to base our tentative conclusions
about these foundational moments, foundational ideas and lifeways in Korean history based on these
very ambiguous discoveries made by archaeologists and then we can supplement this with the myths,
the legends and the traditional patterns of behavior from later periods that seem to reflect
back upon social organization way back there in the Neolithic period. I will recount the most
persistent creation myth of the Korean people for you next time as an introduction to our second
lecture on Korea. These early villages appear stable, the occupants pursued lifeways that were
clearly well adapted to the local environments so they hunted, they fished, they practiced small
scale horticultural farming and they gathered forest and marine products. Society must have been
clan based, village life was communal, it looks egalitarian, the residents were probably all
related to each other by blood. Although each village probably had some sort of a chief,
important decisions would have been made by clan assemblies of elders, members of the senior
lineages of these families. Some anthropologists argue that the different councils of nobles that
appear at various stages in later Korean history as we'll see was probably an echo of these earlier
institutions. So perhaps we can say a foundational element of Korean civilization that can be traced
back to the shadowy Stone Age are these councils of nobles. Trying to gain a glimpse of the religious
beliefs of these early communities is frankly much more difficult again. Those few burial sites
that have been found featuring skeletons show these skeletons extended on their backs with their
heads in the east quite often. They're accompanied in death by bone hair ornaments, shell necklaces
and jade rings. At some other sites pieces of a smoky topaz have been found which may have
been worn as amulets and also some basic human figurines have been discovered in these terms,
even simple clay masks of human faces. These burial practices, these amulets, these masks
must have had some sort of spiritual significance but precisely what is unclear.
The shamanistic beliefs of early Neolithic peoples everywhere revolved around the idea that the world
was full of spirits, some good, some evil that had to be propitiated through ritual and through
magic. It was possible for the soul of a human to enter that world after death if the proper
rites were observed and these ideas led directly to the organization of complex ritualized religious
practices in the next stage of Korean history as we will see. This fascinating suite of beliefs,
rituals, life ways, survival strategies and ideas about the communal relationship and
egalitarian nature of families and the relationship of these families to larger clan associations.
Each of these being a product of the environmental and geographic context in which they are merged,
all these ideas would go on to become foundational elements of the subsequent culture
and history of the Korean people.
In the next lecture, our second on Korea, we will follow these developments
and watch as these ancient clan communities began to combine together to form small town
states which rose and fell in rapid succession. Sometime between roughly 900 and 700 before the
common era, Korea entered the Bronze Age which led to the emergence of powerful leaders and
coercive states. In the next few lectures, our job is to trace these developments including the
emergence of three powerful kingdoms that would dominate Korean history and culture for centuries,
the kingdoms of Koguyo, Paekche and Silla. I look forward to joining you again as we begin to explore
the beginning of influential relationships between these kingdoms and China, relationships that had
really profound implications not just for Korean but for all of Eastern civilization.
