Hello folks and welcome to this second lecture in our series on early Korean culture and
history and on Korea's contributions to eastern civilization.
Last time we looked at the environment of the Korean Peninsula and also at archaeological
evidence for the earliest stages of human history as it played out there.
We saw how Paleolithic and Neolithic beliefs, rituals, lifeways, survival strategies and
social structures emerged as a direct product of this relationship between the first human
migrants to the region and the mountains, the forests and the coastlands in which they
eked out a living.
These ancient values and ideas firmly rooted in the environment went on to become the foundations
of the culture and history of the Korean people.
Much later these early experiences were transformed into a series of creation myths.
The most persistent of these, the most famous in Korea today actually dates to a 13th century
Korean collection of folktales called the Samguk Yusa and this legend recounts the story
of King Tangun, the mythical legendary founder of Korea's first kingdom, the Joseon.
According to the legend, King Tangun's grandfather who was the Lord of Heaven allowed his own
son Hwanung and 3,000 of his followers to descend to Mount Baikdu, the legendary North
Korean volcano that we discussed last time so that they could live amongst the mountains
and forests of the earth.
Sometime later a tiger and a bear approached Hwanung and asked if they could be transformed
into humans.
The tiger soon gave up on the rigorous transformation diet of garlic and mugwort but the bear persisted
and eventually became a woman.
But she lacked a husband and became so sad about this that eventually Hwanung took her
for his own wife and she gave birth to a child named Tangun.
In the year 2333 before the common era Tangun ascended to the throne, built a walled city
near modern Pyongyang and founded the kingdom of Joseon which translates to the land of
morning calm.
Given the tranquil forest camps, the seaside villages, the terraced locations beside the
beautiful rivers that we discussed last time, the land of morning calm might seem an entirely
appropriate name for this first kingdom of Korea and a further example of the symbiotic
relationship between humans and their environments.
But the next stage of Korean history was to be anything but calm.
I ended our last lecture by noting that the small village communities of the Neolithic
era eventually began to combine together to form small town states.
Early in the first millennium BCE Korea entered her own Bronze Age, an historical process
accompanied by the emergence of powerful leaders and eventually of coercive states.
In this lecture we will follow these developments into the so-called Three Kingdoms period,
an era characterized by almost continual conflict between the kingdoms, but also by the emergence
of a complicated political, military and cultural relationship with the giant neighbor to the
West, China.
Let's pick up a story about 2000 BCE when large-scale stone tomb structures called
dolmen start to appear in the Korean archaeological record.
A new form of pottery also appears around the same time, the so-called Moomin Pottery,
which becomes so widespread throughout the peninsula that it's given its name to an
entire archaeological era, the Moomin period, which lasted between about 1500 and 300 before
the common era.
Unlike the Chulman Pottery that preceded it, which as you might remember was in size with
designs drawn into the wet clay by sticks, shells and even fingernails, Moomin Pottery
is plain faced with no decoration.
These plain cooking and storage vessels that proliferated during the Moomin period are
evidence of the adoption of intensive agriculture throughout the Korean peninsula.
Now the Moomin period is subdivided by archaeologists into early, middle and late.
These are chronological and also cultural periods that correspond to the appearance
of increasingly complex societies.
And then sometime in the 8th century before the common era, bronze artifacts also start
to turn up in the archaeological record for the first time.
Ritual bronze bells, horse bells, polished mirrors as we've seen several times in this
course, swords, axes and chisels.
These comparatively rare bronze goods and also gemstone beads that are found in the
sumptuous tombs from the period, they all appear to have functioned as some sort of
a status symbol for emerging elites.
Archaeologists are frankly uncertain whether all these developments, that is the appearance
of Moomin Pottery are the dolman burial structures, the appearance of bronze and other status
artifacts and tombs, are these products of cultural evolution within these indigenous
early Korean town-state organizations or do they represent evidence of the migrations
of new peoples from the North and the West into the peninsula?
These are also uncertain about the extent to which these developments were influenced
by changes in China at the same time.
I'm sure you remember that between roughly 2000 and 1000 BCE, mighty dynasties appeared
in China for the first time, the Shah or Urlatal and certainly the powerful Shung.
The emergence of these dynasties was accompanied by, as we've seen in the appearance of writing,
of powerful standing armies, of long distance trade connections within the eastern hemisphere,
of highly developed bronze metallurgy and of powerful military and political elites.
So the appearance of hierarchies as indicated through this possession of high status objects
and more complex tombs and also the appearance of craft specialization in Korea suggests
that powerful states and leaders were also emerging in Korea.
Perhaps as a result of political influence coming from China across the Yellow Sea.
The arrival of Moonman pottery and bronze implements also coincides with an interesting
shift in the location of Korean communities and settlements.
The riverbanks were abandoned during the Moonman period and villages were instead set up on
the hillsides and are the high ground above the river valleys.
Now although the first assumption by archaeologists was that this must have been done for defensive
purposes, it's now more likely it was done so that the valleys and the river flats could
be left free for farming.
Further evidence that these communities were now engaged in intensive agriculture and needed
all the flatland they could get to farm.
In the south of the peninsula, rice was being seriously cultivated based on the number of
hoes and other hand rice farming tools that have been found there.
In other environments, different types of influence have been found, axes for clearing
forests, sides and other tools for harvesting millet and wild grasses.
Water buffalo and pigs were also domesticated by the beginning of the first millennium BCE.
Now these higher altitude villages increased in size, now numbering anywhere from tens
to hundreds of pit homes, evidence surely of successful farming of the accumulation
of surpluses and a population increase.
The villages were now structured around a strong sense of communal life.
We see this sense of community in the Sinmari site, an important late Moonman period village
discovered above the North Han River in central Korea, estimated to have flourished in the
fourth century BCE.
Hedge storage facilities have been found and the dwelling huts surrounded an outdoor fireplace
with two large stone slabs on either side, probably to facilitate communal cooking.
The largest house is around 16 by 13 feet in area and has two hearts, both of which were
still filled with ash and charcoal when archaeologists uncovered them.
More of these megalithic dolmen burial structures were also found nearby.
What are dolmens?
These are constructions of very big unworked stones, usually with a couple of upright stones
supporting a large horizontal capping stone.
Now dolmens were constructed in various parts of ancient Eurasia.
You may have seen some in France for example, in other places in Europe.
India also are parts of the Middle East, but by far the largest concentration of dolmens
is in Korea where some 35,000 of these burial structures have been discovered.
So the deceased were buried with Moonman pottery pieces, with arrowheads, with polished stone
axes, with pottery beads and these impressive dolmen structures were erected over the tombs.
The fact that some of the burials are richly furnished with pottery, bronze and occasionally
jade artefacts is surely further evidence for the emergence and existence now of social
elites, but despite this there remain many questions for archaeologists who are working
in this formative period of Korean history, questions they find very difficult to answer
at this stage.
For example, was the sheer size of the dolmen burial structure linked in some way to the
power of the chief in these communities?
Is the fact that there are clusters of dolmen burials quite close together indicative of
the emergence not just of a chief but indeed of an entire elite class or group?
How large were the territories ruled by these clearly powerful individuals or groups?
Did they control no more than the villages and the farmland in the immediate neighborhood
of their tombs or were they in control of much more extensive regions?
We simply don't have enough evidence to answer any of these questions yet, but these bronze
age finds and their intriguing questions that they give rise to bring us back to another
very important question about the relationship between early Korean societies and the powerful
first dynasties of China and to the question then of cultural influence coming from China.
It is, for example, surely reasonable to assume that the seeds that first brought rice to Korea
must have come from China.
The rice variety found in these bronze age Korean sites, the oldest examples of which
can be dated to about 1200 BCE, is the Japonicat variety, which is well adapted for growing
in cooler, drier, northern climates.
This type of rice did not appear in China until the Shang dynasty, which I'm sure you
remember ruled from roughly 1600 to 1050 BCE, the same period during which the same strain
of rice begins to be grown in Korea.
We've also got some fascinating references in Shang dynastic sources to a people and
a land called the Dong Yi, which means the Eastern Barbarians, which many scholars believe
must be a reference to the Korean people.
A lot of the Shang oracle bones actually seem to be describing battles between the Shang
forces and those of the Dong Yi.
Now if there was ongoing conflict with the Chinese, it would have become even fiercer
in the mid to late 1st millennium before the common era when Korea, like China, entered
its Iron Age.
Iron metallurgy probably also traveled into Korea from China, this time via Manchuria
in the north and then down through the peninsula.
And it soon led to striking changes in Korean life ways.
By the 2nd century BCE, agriculture was boosted by the use of iron tools, of course, including
plough shares and iron sickles.
Although interestingly enough, it looks like the ploughs were probably pulled by humans
at this stage, not animals.
Iron weapons also appeared, of course, daggers, spear points, and of course arrowheads.
But these weapons, along with chariots, appear to have been reserved exclusively for the elites,
which helps explain, I think, how these elites were able to impose their will on the large
farming population of the Korean Peninsula.
Not all the cultural influences were coming from China.
Although the design of many iron products was clearly Chinese, there was also evidence
of a strong influence coming from the steppe nomadic peoples to the north, the same rest
of militarized nomads like the Zhongnu, who, as we've seen repeatedly throughout the course,
caused so many problems for the early Chinese dynasties.
All of these developments we've just been discussing, the emergence of political elites,
megalithic burial structures, bronze technology, large farming villages situated above the
river flats, and finally the arrival of iron tools and iron weapons, culminated in the
appearance of large walled towns late in the first millennium BCE.
The most advanced of the Korean states of this period is known as the Wiman Joseon, which
combined with some of the other walled town states to form large, really state-like confederations
headed now by a powerful king.
Of course, this only served to bring Korea increasingly to the attention of China, particularly
after the warring states period of the Leizhou dynasty in China had given way to the more
unified Qin and Han dynasties.
Chinese influence on Korean politics now became direct, even personal, because according to
Chinese sources, it was a Chinese general named Wiman who adopted the dress and hairdo
of the Koreans and who moved into the Korean peninsula with about a thousand followers
around 200 BCE at the very beginning of the Han dynasty in China.
By 198 BCE, Wiman had constructed his own state and built his own capital near the present
day North Korean capital of Pyongyang.
This Wiman Joseon state then lasted for several decades before the Han decided to send their
armies to conquer it as part of their program of imperial expansion and also to seek some
of the ritual resources that I mentioned were located in the ancient granites of the Korean
peninsula.
So the Chinese armies besieged the forts and towns of Northern Korea until eventually
the Han conquered the Wiman Joseon state and turned Northern Korea into a Chinese colony,
a situation which lasted for the next 400 years.
The expansionist Han claimed a vast region now of Manchuria and Northern Korea and established
four large commanderies, provincial outposts, if you like, to administer their new territories.
Because of the fierce resistance offered by the Korean residents in the South, the Han
were eventually forced to remove their commanderies from the southern part of Korea, which then
remained largely independent and which was viewed as a barbaric and uncivilized region
by the Chinese.
We'll see much the same scenario play out with Han expansion into Vietnam, by the way,
in a later lecture.
But all the Korean territories proved difficult for the Han to govern, even with their powerful
armies, their well-run command outposts and the large numbers of Chinese expatriates who
now moved into the region.
But despite frequent rebellions and also eventually reducing the number of commanderies
to just one, Lo Lang near Pyongyang, the Han did manage to maintain their presence in
Korea for about 400 years.
This is similar to the length of the Roman occupation of Britain.
And this fact alone, I think, helps explain the enormous cultural influence the Chinese
continued to exert on Korea.
The administrative center of Lo Lang became a sophisticated Chinese city and military
command post deep in the heart of Korea.
The Han governor and his administrators lived a sumptuous Chinese lifestyle there, as indicated
by the richness of their tombs and the expanse of Chinese-made goods that they contained.
It was the command center of Lo Lang then that was instrumental in the fact that so
many of the cultural inventions of the Chinese, their writing, their technology, their philosophies
of government were directly imported into Korea.
But we must also acknowledge that the greatest effect of this cultural influence was localized
in the north around the former women's Joseon capital near Pyongyang, ensuring that much
of the so-called barbaric south remained culturally and politically more independent, perhaps,
of China and to a certain extent of the influence of Chinese culture.
So to sum up this story of cultural influence to this stage, the Chinese had been interacting
with Korea extensively throughout the first millennium BCE, through trade, through the
exchange of agricultural products, and also, perhaps, military contact if the shun oracle
bones are to be believed.
Eventually the Han conquered the women Joseon state and ruled from their well-organized
provincial administrative city, Lo Lang, for the next 400 years, helping to further
embed Chinese culture deep into the psyche of Korean elites, but not necessarily of the
common people.
The next stage of Korean history was not to belong to the Chinese, however, but rather
to three powerful kingdoms that emerged in Korea late in the first century before the
common era.
These three kingdoms, the subject of the last part of this lecture, were Koguyo, Paeche
and Silla.
For a time there was actually a fourth kingdom squeezed in between Paeche and Silla in the
south.
Each of these kingdoms developed along parallel paths of state formation and expansion, and
each competed with the other and with the Chinese for superiority.
Although we have extensive archaeological evidence of the lives of the elites during
this period, little is known about the lives of ordinary people, but the enormous differences
in the size and sumptuousness of elite tombs and the tombs of the peasants bear stark witness
to the steep hierarchies of wealth and power that now dominated Korean society.
The relationship between the kingdoms and China is messy and complicated, and frankly
the best I can hope to do here is just try and touch upon the key developments as they
pertain to their influence on Eastern civilization more broadly.
So remember that after the collapse of the Han dynasty in 220 CE, the Chinese stayed
fragmented entering the 350-year-long period, the age of disunity.
This meant that the Chinese were more focused on their own internal problems during this
period and largely left Korea alone to sort out its own affairs.
Only with the reunification of China under the sway followed by 300 years of powerful
Tang dynasty rule did China begin to actively interfere in Korean affairs again as we will
see in our next lecture.
In the Han dynasty, the Koguyo Kingdom arose in the north of Korea in a region that is
now actually part of modern China.
The kingdom's traditional founding date is the year 37 BCE, and we know that within
five decades Koguyo was strong enough to revolt and resist the Han Chinese control of the region.
Koguyo began as a confederation of five clans ruled by a council of chiefs from each with
one chief elected as supreme commander.
As this chieftainship became hereditary, a rigidly stratified society was established,
including elites who were categorized as, quote, those who do not work the fields, peasant
farmers and also now slaves who were war captives.
This rigid, hierarchical organization of society was to have profound implications for subsequent
Korean culture, as we'll see.
The Paikche Kingdom, with its headquarters on the Han River and Central Korea, was traditionally
founded by two brothers in the year 18 BCE.
Now the Paikche went on to rule a substantial territory in the southwest of Korea, which
they divided into 22 administrative districts, each one controlled by a member of the royal
family.
The rulers lived in a fortified palace and adopted Chinese style clothing and manners.
The area controlled by Paikche was the most productive rice growing region of Korea, which
meant that there was sufficient agricultural surpluses available to support a flourishing
artisan class.
And for this region, for this reason, Paikche became renowned for the quality of arts, handicraft
and industry, all centralized, all controlled by the state.
The third kingdom, that of the Silla, was located way to the southeast and was founded
we read in the year 57 BCE, when a group of six villages joined forces.
In the face of, quote, strong enemies all around, the villagers decided to elect a paramount
chief to take care of their interests.
For the next several centuries, this chief was always chosen from one of three clans,
the Paik, Sok and Kim clans, which collectively constituted the highest strata of Silla society.
Now just think for a moment of how those same three clan names still resonate in Korean
culture and politics today, particularly that of the Kim clan.
Silla was protected by rugged mountains from the other kingdoms and also largely from Chinese
influence.
So it developed on its own in the isolated far southeastern corner of the peninsula.
But it didn't take long before these three independent kingdoms were brought into conflict
with each other and also with the Chinese.
Relationships between the kingdoms revolved around outright war at some stages and also
shifting alliances at others, and they're catalogued in early chronicles from the period
supported with a lot of archaeological evidence.
So let me try and pick up the story for you now in the fourth century of the common era.
In the year 313 of the common era, the Koguyo, under King Nishon, attacked and destroyed
the Chinese commandery of Lolang, entering this 400-year-long period of Chinese colonisation
and bringing the boundary of Koguyo territory contiguous with that of Paikche.
Along the northern frontier, confrontations between Koguyo and the Chinese northern Wei
dynasty continued through the fourth century.
Now while Koguyo was preoccupied with the northern Wei, Paikche was amassing power in
the south, and by the late fourth century, Paikche was at war with Koguyo.
In 427, Koguyo moved its capital closer to Paikche and drove the Paikche court further
south to the Kun River.
Paikche now opened negotiations with the southern Chinese Liang dynasty, one of the number of
dynasties in southern China that rose and fell quite quickly during this period, searching
for allies.
Fifty years later, in 475 CE, Koguyo forces drove south again, conquered the Paikche capital
and killed the king.
This protracted conflict between Paikche and Koguyo facilitated the growth of the isolated
Silla Kingdom in the southeast.
But while all this was going on, the Indian spiritual ideology of Buddhism, which as you
remember had entered China late in the Han and spread during the Age of Disunity, began
to diffuse into Korea.
So monks carried Buddhist ideology from northern China into Korea until eventually each of
the three kingdoms had adopted Buddhism as the official religion of their state.
Koguyo in 372, Paikche soon afterwards in 384, Silla quite a bit later in 528 CE.
Those scriptures in Chinese translation now became the core canon of the new religion
of Korea, but Buddhism was not the only Chinese cultural export to powerfully influence the
three kingdoms' era of Korean history.
The adoption of Confucianism in the Silla Kingdom, for example, put an end to the custom
of sacrifice and the burial of retainers with rulers.
Indeed Queen Sayonduok of Silla, who reigned from 632 to 647, introduced many Chinese customs
into her court and also began to send students to study abroad in China.
At the same time, Koguyo elite tombs were modelled on Chinese tomb construction and
were decorated inside with scenes from Chinese fairy stories.
And the Paikche court was literate in classical Chinese by at least the 4th century CE, although
because of their geographic location, Paikche also maintained a close relationship with
Japan as we'll see in a later lecture.
Now perhaps you remember that in the year 581, the very effective Sui dynasty came to
power in China.
During this period of political change, the Koguyo Kingdom in Korea began raiding the
coastal regions of China, which led to reprisals from the Sui and an eventual attempted invasion
led by the Sui Emperor Yang Di himself.
In 611, Yang Di, the flaming emperor, led a huge Chinese army numbering, so we read,
up to a million men, into the Koguyo Kingdom.
But the Chinese were lured into a trap by the great Koguyo general, Mandok.
Of the 300,000 men Yang Di had sent south to attack the Koguyo capital, Chinese sources
estimate that only 2,700 survived the trap that was laid for them by the general, and
also the bitter defeat that followed at the Salsu River.
Yang Di tried again in the year 614, but Koguyo's fortified cities were just too strong for
the Sui and these two failed campaigns not only cost the lives of perhaps a million men,
but also virtually bankrupted the Sui dynasty, leading to its rapid demise.
Archaeological evidence supplements the sources in describing all these centuries of bitter
conflict that so characterise the Three Kingdoms era.
Scores of mountain fortresses have been found up and down the length of the Korean Peninsula,
while the literature of the period abounds with tales of epic campaigns and brutal warfare.
As we will see next time, the Tang dynasty in China also tried to invade Koguyo, but
after failing to do so, they formed an alliance with the Silla Kingdom, which relatively isolated
geographically in the far southeast of the peninsula had managed to avoid much of the
conflict between Paikche and Koguyo, and between Koguyo and the Sui.
Eventually, the Silla Kingdom was able to unite much of the peninsula under their leadership,
and the Silla dynasty went on to control Korean affairs until 935 of the common era, firmly
embedding a syncretic mix of both indigenous and imported Chinese beliefs and practices
into the cultural psyche of the Korean people.
See you next time.
