In our last lecture, I noted that archaeology provides quite striking evidence of the violent
and bitter conflict that characterized the Three Kingdoms era of Korean history. Modern
archaeologists have discovered scores of mountain fortresses in the remote mountain
regions located throughout the length of the Korean peninsula. Tourists can visit the remains
of some of these today, and perhaps some of you have done that. The literature from the
period, both Korean and Chinese, also abounds with tales of epic campaigns and brutal warfare.
At the end of that last lecture, I also mentioned that next time we would see how the Tang dynasty
in China, after failing in its attempts to invade the Koguyo Kingdom in the north, decided
to instead focus its Korean foreign policy on forging an alliance with the Silla Kingdom
in the far southeast of the peninsula. Eventually the Silla, after having to deal with some
tricky Tang foreign policy machinations, was able to successfully unite most of the peninsula
under its leadership. The dynasty of the unified Silla, which went on to rule much of Korea
until 935 of the common era, and its ongoing relationship with the powerful Tang dynasty
in China, is the subject of this lecture. What we will see, I think, is that this relationship
was not only politically important for both states, but also responsible for the further
transmission of core Chinese civilizational ideas into Korean culture, with profound implications
for the future. You remember from last time that the Koguyo Kingdom in the north was engaged
in repeated bloody conflicts with both the Sway and Tang dynasties in the mid-7th century.
At this moment, with their traditional foe distracted by these Chinese campaigns, the
king of the Pikeshe Kingdom decided to attack Silla in the south. Now, Silla were hard-pressed
to stave off the Pikeshe forces and decided to seek a strategic alliance with the Chinese
Tang dynasty. The two new allies agreed on a strategy. The Tang would join forces with
the Silla to help defeat Pikeshe, after which Koguyo would be attacked in a pincer movement
by Tang forces coming in from the north and Silla troops driving up from the south. Accordingly,
in the year 660 of the common era, a Tang invasion fleet landed troops near the Pikeshe
capital while a Silla army simultaneously attacked Pikeshe territory from the east and
south. The capital of Pikeshe fell to the combined assault and the Pikeshe kingdom was utterly
defeated. And now following up on the second part of their agreement, over the next several
years Koguyo came under increasing pressure from Tang forces in the north and Silla forces
in the south, and by 668 Koguyo had also been defeated. But now the Chinese Tang dynasty
revealed its true intentions to bring the entire Korean peninsula under Chinese imperial control
by establishing powerful military commanders throughout the region and appointing a protector
general to rule all of Korea, including their new allies, the Silla. Silla was not prepared
to accept Chinese hegemony and fought back against their recent allies, repeatedly sending
armies north into former Koguyo and Pikeshe territory to defeat both revivalist forces
there and also Tang dynasty armies. In the end, after almost a decade of quite bitter
military struggle, Silla triumphed and by 676 had forced the Tang dynasty to remove most
of their forces and retreat. Now this victory of the Silla kingdom and their success in
repulsing the Tang had immense historical consequences for Korea, not just politically
and militarily, but I think also culturally. In essence, this victory of 676 preserved the
political and cultural independence of the Korean peninsula. This victory over the Tang
ensured that the Korean people, although still heavily influenced by Chinese culture, were
nonetheless able to retain their own distinct cultural identity which further enriched the
complex tapestry of eastern civilization. Although the full name of the dynasty, the
Silla established is the unified Silla. In fact, this is a misnomer. The Silla was never
able to control the entire Korean peninsula. Emigres from the defeated Koguyo kingdom established
a new political entity in the north that they called Pahai, which gained control over much
of the northern peninsula. But this also was a good thing, particularly for the preservation
of Korean culture, because the strong Pahai state in the north was able to keep Tang dynasty
armies at bay, further protecting Silla in the south, and Silla culture particularly
from possible Chinese invasion. At first, Silla did attempt to try and bring Pahai under
its control, but eventually gave up and instead built a strong defensive wall along its northern
border. In the year 721, this is an earlier version of the demilitarized zone that of
course divides northern and southern Korea to this day. Now, I want to return to this
point later in the course, but it's certainly worth noting here that Korea has a long history
of division between north and south, reinforced by influences in the north coming from China,
but also the step nomads, influences that did not penetrate as deeply in the south.
But the relationship between China and all the Korean states remained strong, and eventually
both Silla and Pahai reconciled their differences with the Tang and went on to establish very
strong diplomatic and trade relationships with the Chinese. In the end, both Pahai and Silla
agreed to formalize the relationship with the Tang and accept tributary status with
the Middle Kingdom, a decision that was tremendously beneficial to both Korean kingdoms. I say
this because large-scale cultural exchange now began to take place between both Silla
and Pahai and the Tang. Monks and students travelled in their thousands to the Great
Tongue Capital of Chang'an to study Buddhism and Confucianism. You might remember we met
several of them during our visit to the Great Tongue Capital of Chang'an in an earlier lecture.
The impact of this exposure to sophisticated Tang civilization allowed the culture of both
Silla and Pahai to blossom. But let's turn now to the sort of political and administrative
structure that emerged in the Silla dynasty to see what sort of influences continuing
exposure to civilization had on Korean ideas about governance. As royal authority became
more authoritarian, more centralized under the Silla, members of what was called the
true bone clan lineages became the elites of Silla society. But as this elite true
bone group was gaining in power and prestige, membership of the royal family came from an
increasingly smaller section of the aristocracy. And one example of this is that all queens
had to come traditionally from the House of Kim and the exclusivity of access to the monarchy
led to the undermining of claims to power from most of the other rival aristocratic
families. This in turn created an atmosphere of almost continuous tension between the ruling
families, the other nobility, and also with a third group, a particular group of highly
educated intellectuals who held a status known as the head rank six. This is a sort
of scholar class that was looked down upon by the true bone noble families. Eventually
the royal family and the head rank six families were reconciled and they agreed to work together
for the success of the state, although not without periodic outbreaks of conflict. Most
of the aristocratic true bone families now lived in the great capital, the Silla constructed
near Qionju, which at that time had had a different name, a very descriptive name that
translates as city of gold. We have a pretty good idea of the immense wealth of the aristocratic
true bone families living in the Silla capital, actually from tongue dynasty references. Let
me quote one for you. Wealth flows unceasingly into the houses of the highest officials
who possess as many as 3,000 slaves with corresponding numbers of weapons, cattle, horses and pigs.
The same tongue sources note that there was not a single house with a thatched roof in
Qionju. This is important because thatched roofs were standard in the homes of common
people in China and Korea, but elites could afford more substantial roofing materials
like timber and tiles, for example. And the tongue sources also comment almost enviously
that the sounds of music fill the streets of Qionju night and day. Archaeological excavations
of Qionju have reinforced this tongue literary evidence by revealing very careful city planning
with the city laid out on a grid pattern like Chang'an, plus many large stone buildings
and beautifully planned gardens. But these tongue references to the large numbers of
slaves owned by the noble families also remind us that as the wealth and power of the aristocracy
increased, so the lives of the common people were increasingly impoverished in Silla, Korea.
More and more peasants found themselves being sold into debt slavery, and even the laborers
and highly skilled artisans who built this glorious capital city were probably slaves.
Fortunately, for historians, the Silla court carried out a census of rural villages and
families every three years. So these critically important records that were collected served
to allow the state to extract as much as possible in terms of taxes, but also conscripted labor
from the peasants for the benefit of this elite Silla nobility.
Despite the rigidly hierarchical nature of Korean society during this period, it's worth
noting that everyone who lived in the so-called unified Silla, rich or poor, had become an
ardent follower of the religion of Buddhism, which utterly dominated the intellectual and
cultural life of the state. As I mentioned just a few moments ago, thousands of monks
and students studied in Chang'an in China, and many even travelled on to India, bringing
back with them documents and ideologies of the various schools of Buddhism that were
flourishing all over Eurasia, particularly in Tang China.
The school of pure land Buddhism was particularly popular with the common people in Korea because
it did not require literacy to appreciate it, simply the ability to memorize and chant
the mantra homage to the Buddha of infinite light.
Perhaps more than 80% of the population of Silla believed that regular recitation of
this and a handful of other mantras would lead to rebirth in Nirvana, rebirth in paradise.
The only real rival to Buddhism as the orthodox system of thought in Silla was not surprisingly
Confucianism. Indeed a Tang style national Confucian college was established in the Silla
capital in the year 682, where students studied the Anilex of course and all the Zhou dynasty
classics. Eventually the Silla adopted the Confucian state examination system in 788,
but in a significant departure from the Chinese system, because Silla society was now so rigidly
hierarchical and the elites would not dream of sharing power, political power with lesser
classes. Entrance to the Silla college and exam system was strictly reserved for members
of the aristocracy. Now you remember of course a crucial component of Confucius' definition
of a gentleman, a junsir, a princeling was that he could come from any class whatsoever
so long as he achieved the necessary levels of intellectual and ethical cultivation. But
such a definition was not recognized in the Silla dynasty of Korea. Despite this restriction
actually more probably because of this restriction, the Confucian system was viewed as beneficial
to the effective administration of the state, so it was supported and sponsored by the royal
families and all the other nobility. This deep penetration of Buddhism and Confucianism
in Silla government, in Silla society is of course further evidence of just how profoundly
Chinese civilization was now influencing Korean culture. But very interesting, we also know
that a number of Silla intellectuals were already pushing back, they were deeply concerned
by this Chinese influence. They did what they could to prevent Korean culture from being
swamped by the Tang dynasty cultural juggernaut. The work of scholar Kim Taemun for example
constantly emphasized native Silla cultural achievements in the face of this widespread
obsession with Chinese civilization. And frankly King Taemun did have much to celebrate including
the construction of a superb astronomical observatory that was built by Silla intellectuals and
architects in Qiongju. But sort of ironically I guess the observatory actually grew out of
a Silla obsession with another Chinese cultural invention, one we've explored several times
in the course, the concept of Yin and Yang, and how to best establish a harmonious balance
between the two. An 8th century Silla astronomer astrologer mentioned in the Tang sources became
a great student of Yin Yang philosophy in China and after he returned to Korea he was
appointed by the Silla court as 7th of the celestial phenomena. Now part of his job was
to use the astronomical data from the observatory to try and balance the celestial phenomena
for the good of the state. Not surprisingly Silla intellectuals were also very advanced
in mathematics. Their mathematical knowledge was theoretical certainly but also practical,
particularly in its application to the design and construction of quite magnificent Buddhist
architecture. The superb temples and other buildings were very carefully designed by
these mathematicians in fact, particularly to provide for sufficient air circulation
within the buildings to prevent damage from an excessive buildup of moisture. The skill
of woodblock printing was also highly advanced in Silla where it was used mostly to print
Buddhist and Confucian texts. In fact a copy of the Buddhist Dharani sutra printed before
the completion of the pagoda that casts no shadow in the year 751 may well be the oldest
surviving printed document in all of world history. Now nowhere are Silla architectural
skills and this fascination with Yin Yang more evident than in the construction of the
refined and harmonious Bulguksa Buddhist temple in Qiongju. This collection of buildings
still stands today and is so important to Korean cultural history that it has been designated
as I quote historic and scenic site number one by the South Korean government. It was
also declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1995. Built in the year 751 on the slopes
of beautiful Mount Tohamsan, the names of the various features give us some idea of
the ethereal and refined nature of this complex. There is the cloud bridge stairway, the mauve
mist gate, the floating shadow pavilion and of course the pagoda that casts no shadow.
The nearby Sayok Guram Grotto is a man-made grotto of stone within which a massive statue
of the Buddha was worshiped then and still is to this day. This enormous Buddha was surrounded
by Bodhisattvas and by other disciples of the Buddha by four Deva kings and was accompanied
by the 11 headed goddess of mercy. Silla craftsmen also brought the art of bronze bell making
which as we've seen first emerged way back in the Shang dynasty in China to an extraordinary
level of sophistication. The oldest Silla bell that has survived through to the present
day dates to 725 but the most famous surviving bell of all is the so-called Amiel bell which
was cast in 771 and which resides today in the glorious National Museum of Korea in
Kyongju. The Amiel bell superbly decorated with flying angels and lotus flowers is nearly
eight feet in diameter and 11 feet high making it also the largest surviving Korean bell.
Some ancient sources do refer to a much larger bell again but unfortunately now lost. A bell
that was once housed in the Silla temple and was purported to weigh more than 300 tons.
Silla bronze bells were able to blend the Chinese technique of casting the striker and
clapper bells with their own technological innovations which accounts for their particularly
sonorous sound in these Silla bells compared even to the great Chinese bells. So the result
was that with their exquisite shape designs and sound the bells of Silla are simply unequaled
by even the finest cast bronze bells of ancient China or ancient Japan. Now as we noted earlier
throughout this entire period of Silla unified rule in the south the northern regions of
the Korean peninsula remained under the control of the Pa Hai state where the Silla left many
traditional three kingdoms aristocratic administrative structures in place. The Pa Hai
created a new system of government that was a lot more closely modelled on that of the
Chinese Tang dynasty. With thousands of Pa Hai students studying in Chang'an and returning
home of course Pa Hai culture flourished as it attempted to emulate the highest achievements
of the Tang. In fact the Chinese were so impressed by Pa Hai that some Tang official histories
describe Pa Hai as I quote the flourishing land in the east. The Pa Hai capital of Sangyong
was carefully modelled on the design of the Tang capital of Chang'an. So the city was
surrounded by a Tang style rectangular outer wall with an inner wall constructed around
the palace and government buildings. A broad thoroughfare was constructed linking the south
gate with this inner citadel with the great southern gate of the outer wall. And as was
the case in Tang Chang'an great residential buildings were erected on either side of the
thoroughfare. I think we should return now to political matters as we begin to bring
this lecture to its conclusion. Silla civilisation reached its zenith during the reign of King
Kaiongdok who ruled from 742 to 765. Yet even this powerful king faced renewed pressure
from members of the true bone aristocracy who were determined to break the power of
the throne and the power of the ruling families that had dominated the throne for a century
by this stage. Kaiongdok tried to appease his rivals. He introduced some political reforms
based also on the Tang dynastic model but this was to no avail and rebellion broke out
which lasted on and off for the next 20 years until in the end the hereditary line of Silla's
royal family, royal ruling family had been destroyed. The immediate consequence of this
was that with the authority of the throne now undermined aristocratic families turned
upon each other and their competition for wealth and power nobles assembled their own
personal armies and also armed the slaves and the landless peasants who began to roam
and menace the countryside almost at will. Records show that the late Silla period was
dominated by shifting alliances of aristocratic families who seized the throne only to become
the target for new rebellions and new revenge. Twenty kings ruled during this 150 year long
period of Silla decline and every single reign was marked by instability and conflict.
As we noted earlier in contrast to Tang government the Silla version of the Confucian exam system
had permitted only the sons of the aristocracy divide for positions in the administration.
Men of other ranks no matter how well qualified were excluded which meant that capable intellectuals
of the head rank six social class for example were blocked from applying for positions of
real political power in the Silla. Unrest grew amongst the intellectuals. It came to
a head then late in the ninth century after a Silla candidate won Kui Kui Won past the
very difficult Tang dynasty exam. Remember the exam that only 30 men passed each year
and was appointed to an important administrative position in China. This leading intellectual
Confucian scholar highly respected in Tang China later submitted detailed proposals to
the Silla court for political reform but he was ignored and rebuffed and so he retired
in disgust to the countryside. After this snub head rank six collars began to actively
work against the Silla government. At the same time the intense struggle between the
aristocratic clans began to abate somewhat in the mid ninth century as a number of these
powerful families actually gave up the aspirations for the throne and began to focus on getting
rich through trade instead. These families came to dominate the maritime shipping lanes
of the region and established themselves at the center of a flourishing trade system that
now connected Japan, Korea and Tang China. This in turn led to outbreaks of piracy and
military garrisons were established at a number of strategic locations around the coast particularly
Wando Island a major island just off the south-west coast of Korea where garrisons were set up
to combat the pirate fleets. The commandant of Wando Island Won Jang Bogo created a very
powerful military force indeed up to 10,000 men we read that control the coastal waters
and put an end to Chinese piracy. Jang Bogo effectively became the master of the Yellow
Sea and he used his power to actively interfere in Silla political affairs by supporting particular
allies in their attempts to become king and also trying to marry personally married sorry
members of his family into the royal family but by 846 Jang Bogo was dead the victim of
assassination. So political rivalry flared up again late in the ninth century. Powerful
families now abandoned the capital and set themselves up in a series of fortified compounds
near the major population centers. They became known as the castle lords and they exercised
authority over their own private armies and also the regions and the peasants around the
castles in a manner quite similar to the nobles who would later operate in feudal Europe. Of
course this further weakened the central authority of the Silla kings. This made it impossible
for them to collect taxes for example peasants abandoned their farms in large numbers and
wandered the land as rebels. Large scale peasant revolts broke out in the year 889 and the
government forces found it very difficult to put down these huge peasant armies particularly
the red trousered bandits who seized control of the region southwest of the capital. Three
powerful castle lords emerged to take control of competing rebel forces setting in motion
a three-cornered contest for mastery of the Korean peninsula. One castle lord Koyan Hwan
sat the Silla capital in 927 and killed the king but the other two Wang Kwon and Kung Ye
prevented him from toppling the Silla state. Now Kung Ye was later killed by his own people
which meant that there are now two powerful lords competing for control of the land. Wang
Kwon who came from a noble family in the northern Kaisong region considered himself to be a
successor of the old Korguyo kingdom from the three kingdoms period and he came up with a new
name for the state that he wanted to construct to replace Silla the Koryo Koryo state. Wang
Kwon built strong alliances with other northern nobility and also shrewdly pursued a policy of
friendship with the Silla king partly to forge an alliance that would allow him to defeat his
rival Koyan Hwan. In the end the army of Wang Kwon crushed the army of Koyan Hwan in the year 934
of the common era. At about the same stage the same period the Pahe kingdom in the north was
defeated by militarized nomads who came in out of Manchuria and members of the Pahe elites the
Pahe ruling class fled to the new state of Koryo where they received a warm welcome from Wang
Kwon. One year later actually in the year 935 of the common era the last Silla king abdicated
allowing Wang Kwon to quickly achieve complete reunification of the Korean Peninsula under
his rule really for the first time in the history of Korea. Wang Kwon was careful to placate the
Silla aristocracy he gave the former king the highest post in his new government he personally
married a woman of the Silla royal family. Wang Kwon who is now known today as King Taijo now
officially named this new era the Koryo dynasty. Koryo which gave its name to the modern nation of
Korea which would go on to rule for nearly 500 years. Now the Koryo and its epic conflict with
the Mongols will be the subject of our next lecture and this will be the last in this series of four
on the history and culture of ancient Korea. See you shortly.
