As we saw in our last lecture after the victory of Wang Kuan over the forces of his rival
Kion Huan, the tide of battle turned in Koryo's favour, and in the year 935 CE, the last king
abdicated in favour of Wang Kuan. At about the same time, the Pahai kingdom in the north was
overrun by nomads, and Wang Kuan welcomed the evicted Pahai nobility into his court.
This not only gave Wang Kuan and his forces complete victory over all rivals,
but also allowed for the complete unification of the Korean Peninsula under one government
for the first time in its history.
The Koryo would go on to rule unified Korea for the next 500 years, and it is remembered today
as one of the most successful of all Korea's dynasties. The Koryo, its government, its culture,
society, and its bitter struggle with the Mongols is the subject of this lecture,
the last in this series of four on the history and culture of ancient Korea.
King Taijo, which is Wang Kuan's posthumous
reign name, now attempted to unite the disparate nobles whose fragmentation had
so blighted the late Silla period. First he paid due homage to his predecessors, the Silla,
by treating the Silla nobility with great generosity and by taking as his queen a woman
from the Silla royal house. He also invited many Silla nobles into the Koryo bureaucracy,
establishing a tradition of continuity, I guess, amongst the ancient and elite Korean clan families
that would continue despite changes in the ruling house to resonate in Korean politics
right through to the 20th century, as we will see.
But despite these overtures, many of the regional castle lords continued to maintain
their independent status in the countryside and rejected attempts by the Koryo government
to control them. Even many members of the nobility who had actually supported Taijo in
his campaigns of conquest refused to give up their private armies. The king attempted to
the king attempted to placate and control them by establishing marriage ties with more than
20 noble families and even by bestowing the royal family name on some of these lords.
But by the time Taijo died from some sort of disease in the year 943, political consolidation
consolidation was far from complete.
In the end, it was the reforms of Kwang Jong, the fourth king of the Koryo,
one of Taijo's sons who ruled from 949 to 975, that finally consolidated Koryo's central rule
and crushed the power, at least for a while, of the landed nobility. He did this in a series of
thoughtful related steps. First, he enacted a slave review act that was designed to restore to
freedom of many of the peasants who had been enslaved during the later Three Kingdoms period.
He knew this would be resented by the nobles because by depriving them of their slaves,
it reduced their economic and military power. Next, the king attempted to put in place a
genuine Confucian civil service exam system that was open to men of intelligence and ability,
not just to the sons of the nobility. These elite military and political figures who had
helped in the founding of the Koryo state were obviously incensed by these reforms
and resisted strongly. In response, King Kwang Jong instituted a brutal purge of the dissenters.
He spared no one, even imprisoning or executing those military commanders who had fought side
by side with his father to help found the Koryo dynasty. As a result of these steps,
opposition was crushed and the Koryo were able to assert their royal authority over the entire
peninsula. In the age of authoritarian strong central rule that followed the purges, Confucianism
became even more widely accepted as the best system to ensure good ethical government.
It was Confucian scholars who now provided the new political orthodoxy of the Koryo
as they deepened their control of the state. Interestingly, at the same time that Confucianism
was becoming more entrenched in government, a new trend in Buddhism was also becoming
increasingly popular. Son, or you will know it better by its Japanese name, Zen Buddhism,
which emphasized enlightenment through meditation rather than the written word.
Son was particularly well received by the landed gentry and the monks of the so-called
nine mountain sects of Son gained wide respect amongst the government and other elites.
Another intriguing ideology that emerged early in the Koryo period was a particular form of
geomancy first introduced into Korea by a monk called Toson. Now Toson began to argue that
the natural features of a land area, essentially the geographical and environmental configuration
of a particular place, a particular property influenced whether the family living in that area
would enjoy prosperity or decay. These arguments were of course very similar to the Chinese
principles of Feng Shui which had first emerged in the pre-dynastic cultures of China's early
history and were eventually codified under the Zhou. So all the Chinese capitals followed rules of
Feng Shui for their design, their layout, their location, which meant trying to orient the buildings
in the most propitious manner to achieve the best spiritual balance with nature and the cosmos.
Because of Toson's influence, it soon became critically important for Koryo families to also
select a propitious site for a building, particularly for a family dwelling or a family tomb.
At the same time, inauspicious sites could be improved by placing a temple right on top of them.
Now Toson is reported to have wandered all over Korea assessing topographical features as
auspicious or inauspicious, gaining widespread influence amongst the elite families of Koryo.
After King Kwong John's death, many of his reforms lapsed and Confucian scholars of the
the Silla's old head-ranked six lineages became increasingly powerful. Members of this class
detested strong central monarchy and were determined instead to create a genuine Confucian-style
society that would control the political process. Rather than opposing this powerful group,
King Song Zhong, who ruled from 981 to 997, decided to work closely with the Confucian scholars.
And by doing this, he helped re-establish, I guess, the foundations for Koryo's social order.
The elite lineages now used marriage to expand the power of their families,
again in greater political influence by bringing two already powerful families together.
The two most exalted lineages during this period were the Ansan Kim and Inju Yi families,
who between them managed to control the throne for the next 130 years.
All the powerful families now lived in the Koryo capital at Kaesong,
constructing their palaces according to the principles of Jiyomansi, of course,
dwelling in opulent splendor in a city of broad streets and great buildings,
full of monasteries, temples and mansions.
Aristocratic Koryo government was reorganized now around three specific ministries.
Two of these were responsible for making high policy decisions, while the other,
the so-called secretariat for state affairs, carried out these policy directives and then
handled day-to-day administration. The highest officials in the land met in joint sessions
of the Privy Council. Is there an echo here, by the way, of those ancient gatherings of elite
families from the Neolithic past in Korea? And a powerful censor, it was also installed now to
scrutinize officials for any wrongdoing. And this became a strong disincentive against corrupt behavior.
In terms of provincial administration, the state of Koryo was,
in the beginning, divided into 12 provinces, and officials were dispatched from the capital
to administer each of them. But by the year 1018, a provincial system became even more
sophisticated, similar to some of the extraordinarily complex provincial systems we've
seen installed by various Chinese dynasties like the Han and the Tang. The entire country was now
divided into a capital region, several large sort of provincial circuits, and also border regions.
Four capital cities and five regional military commands were established to rule eight provinces,
which were further subdivided into districts, counties, and garrisons. Needless to say,
administration of this complex state structure was handled by a mix of local officials and powerful
government ministers in the capital. And as all the Chinese dynasties had realized,
effective administration required the ongoing availability of a pool of educated and ethical men.
To help achieve this, Koryo established the Kukchagam National University in 992,
which was organized very much like a modern university, very much like my university.
It's divided into a number of different colleges. Each college specializes in different subjects
and disciplines. This college is focused on the sources of Chinese tradition, another own law
on the art of calligraphy, a college of medicine, a college of accounting.
King Songjong was particularly focused on spreading education throughout his country,
and he brought young men from local areas to study at the university. And during the reign of
Injong between 1122 and 1146, state schools were set up in rural areas to educate local youth.
The Koryo administration also focused on land reform during this period and articulated an
underlying and actually quite startling premise, I think, that all land in the country essentially
belongs to the king. The government did, however, distinguish between public land that would be
managed directly by the state and private land held by individuals and families, often in perpetuity.
This meant in theory that the wealth of both the government and the land owning aristocracy grew.
But in a social land structure very different to that pursued by the Chinese dynasties,
freeborn peasant farmers were not eligible to receive land allocations from the state.
So there's no equal field system in Koryo Korea. Instead, freeborn farmers can farm public land
if they pay 25% of their output in taxes to the government.
Frankly, farmers working on private land were much worse off because they had to pay
50% of their yield to the noble families that owned this land in perpetuity.
Below the freeborn farmers in this rigidly hierarchical society, much more so than in
contemporary China, were the low-born peasants who had to live in special districts and do
whatever work was assigned to them, farm labor, mining, producing silk or making paper.
At the very bottom of the heap, well, almost the very bottom of the heap, were the slaves.
Government-owned slaves performed duties in the palace and government buildings, of course,
privately owned slaves did whatever duties were assigned to them by members of the aristocratic
families. Slave status was hereditary and slaves could certainly be bought and sold.
There was even an outcast group, something like the Untouchables in India, made up of butchers,
wicker workers and female entertainers and comfort women known as the kaiseng,
all of whom were despised by the freeborn population and whose status was
frankly almost worse than that of the slaves.
Now, turning from choreo ideas about government and social structure to foreign relations,
even before his death, the founder of the Koyo King, Taijo, had sought to extend the northern
borders deep into the ancient territories that had once been controlled by the Koguyo Kingdom.
His successes continued this effort, establishing garrison forts across the north and
pushing towards the Yalu River. Now, this brought Koyo into conflict with a group of militarized
nomads, the Kitan Nomads. This is the same people who had conquered the Pahai state,
as we discussed in our last lecture. In the winter of 2010, we read in the Koyo annals
that a Kitan army of 400,000 troops crossed the frozen Yalu River and drove south for the Koyo
capital, which they sacked and pillaged. Eventually, with their supply lines stretched
thin, the Kitan were forced to fight a bloody retreat back to the Yalu at the cost of perhaps
40,000 men. Koyo's other great northern foe was the Jurchin Nomads, who dwelt further east again
in Manchuria. Now, sick and tired of this constant harassment, these fierce attacks from
nomadic peoples, well-armed nomadic peoples, archiwarriors, the Koyo decided to build their own
great wall clear across the northern frontier. The official records tell us that over 300,000
laborers were employed for 11 years between 1033 and 1044 to build this massive rampart,
which was obviously modeled on China's own great northern wall. The rampart linked 14 walled towns
in a line that stretched northwards from the mouth of the Yalu through the mountains near
the headwaters of the Chongchon and Taidong rivers all the way out to the east coast.
With the wall in place, the Jurchin decided to enter into a trade relationship with the Koyo,
at least for a while, supplying horses and furs from the steppes in exchange for Koryo's salt
and iron weapons. But under new leadership, the Jurchin again began raiding the Koyo,
and then nomadic horsemen actually easily found a way over or around the wall
and defeated several Koyo standing armies. This time the Koyo responded by creating a new
elite military force. It was called the Extraordinary Military Corps, which in 1107
drove the Jurchin back to the steppes and then built nine new forts in the northeast to try
and keep them out to try and contain them. As we will see later in the course,
while all this was going on, China was under the control of the powerful Song dynasty.
But by 1125, the Jurchin, the same nomads, succeeded in defeating first the Kitan and
then the Song themselves, capturing the northern Chinese capital at Kaifeng.
The Song were forced to retreat south and China was divided again between the Jurchin-controlled
north and the southern Song, who ruled all of southern China now from a border,
roughly halfway between the Huanghe and the Yangtze. But again, more about that in a later lecture.
Throughout all these tribulations, the Koyo state remained committed to
rule by ethical civilian officials, which meant that Confucianism was the orthodox
philosophy of the Koyo. Although because of the aristocratic nature of Koyo society,
it was essentially the sons of the aristocracy that were mostly groomed
to pass the Confucian exams and to rule the state.
But as well as this somewhat modified form of collective Confucianism, I guess,
the individual spiritual philosophy of Buddhism continued to thrive within elite circles.
The Koyo Buddhism was focused on using the technology of woodblock printing to create
vast woodblock translations of the Buddhist canon. The first massive calming of the
Tripitaka, a major collection of Buddhist scriptures, was undertaken in the year 1087
as a sort of ritual observance seeking the Buddha's assistance against the Kitan threat.
This was destroyed by the Mongols and a new version, the famous Tripitaka Koryana,
that can still be seen today at the Haiyan Sa Temple, was completed in 1251.
This amazing woodblock is renowned for the accuracy of its translation. Indeed,
it's regarded as the most accurate translation of core Buddhist text in the world today,
also of treatises and laws ever made. But also it's renowned for the beauty of the
exquisite carving in wood of the Chinese characters in which this text is translated.
Now the blocks are made of a birch wood that was specially treated to prevent them from decaying.
These blocks were soaked in sea water for three years, then they were cut into the Chinese characters,
then boiled in salt water, then exposed to the wind for three years after which they were finally
ready to be carved properly. And after each block was superbly carved, it was painted in a
poisonous lacquer to keep the insects away and then each block was framed with metal to prevent
warping. As this sort of extraordinary care indicates, Buddhism was integral to everyday
life in Korea and was the major force shaping its cultural achievements. Temples now proliferated.
There were as many as 70 Buddhist temples in the capital city alone. And enormous state Buddhist
festivals were held throughout the year. One, we read about a vegetarian feast prepared for 100,000
monks. As well as temples, Buddhist monasteries proliferated throughout the land. And because
they were tax-exempt, the Buddhist establishment became increasingly wealthy and powerful.
The crowning glory of Koryo artistic achievement was a particular type of ceramics called
Celadon. This technique developed under the Chinese Song dynasty originally, but even the
Chinese came to acknowledge in the end that Koryo Celadon was the world's finest example
of ceramic art. Koryo Celadon was particularly notable for its gorgeous jade green colors
and also for the variety of beautiful shapes and cups, jars, wine pictures of course,
but water droppers, delicate teapots engraved with flowers along with an amazing range of
animal figures. The distinctive decorative elements of Koryo Celadon were created by
actually overlaying different glazes on contrasting types of clay bodies. And one particular type of
design, the Sangam design, in this case small pieces of different colored clays were inlaid into
the base clay. And when these layers were laid carved away, they revealed a range of varying
beautiful colors. So extraordinary was Koryo Celadon that modern potters with modern materials,
modern tools struggle to recreate the complex Koryo Celadon techniques to this day. I hope
you get a chance to see Koryo Celadon, you'll find them in most of the great art museums of
United States and indeed the world. Inevitably this refined aristocratic world of privilege and
the aesthetic appreciation for Buddhism, for art, for culture was severely disrupted.
The first disruption came as the balance of power between the great hereditary houses was
broken through the ambition of certain families. So in the year 1122 a leader of the Yi lineage
had become so powerful, so ambitious that he desired the crown. He imprisoned the king and was
about to assume the throne himself when he was driven into exile. The next disturbance was led
by a Buddhist monk who in 1136 raised an army against the king, but this revolt too was suppressed.
The third and most serious disruption came from the military which had traditionally been looked
down upon by the Koryo. We'll see something very similar by the way in early medieval Japan.
Officers who had served the state well in defending it against the the Kitane and the
church and nomads were poorly rewarded. Common soldiers were viewed as menial servants.
In the year 1170 a military revolt broke out against the high-handed civilian officials.
The cry of soldiers and officers alike became death to all who wear the civilian official
headdress. After the massacre of countless government officials the rule of the state
passed into the hands of the military but its attempt to govern through a supreme council
quickly broke down leaving frankly political and social chaos in its wake. A powerful general put
an end to the chaos by establishing a personal dictatorship and by leaving the ruling Wang
family on the throne but by deposing any kings who would not obey him. But peasant
revolts broke out across the country. The worst in 1193 when 7,000 rebels were slaughtered in
battle with the military and again in 1198 when the entire slave population of the capital
was in turmoil. And in the midst of all this chaos with the foundations of Koryo society
having been shaken to the core the Mongols turned up. The Mongols had such an impact on
eastern civilization that we'll be devoting two complete lectures to them later in the course.
All we need to say here I think is that the Mongols were another group of pastoral nomadic
peoples who dwelt in the steppes of Central Asia. Part of this great heritage of militarized nomads
we've considered so many times in this course already like the mighty Songnu, the UHR, the
Scythians and the Jurchin. In the early 13th century under their quite extraordinary charismatic
leader Chinggis Khan the Mongols began a series of expansionary campaigns into China and indeed much
of in Asia. The first contact between Mongols and the Koryo took place when they formed an alliance
together to destroy a Qitan army that had crossed the Yellow River to escape the Mongols. The Mongols
then demanded tribute from Koryo but the Koreans refused and after a Mongol envoy was killed
returning from Koryo in 1225 the Mongols prepared to invade. In 1231 the Mongols overcame stubborn
Koryo resistance and pressed on towards the capital. At that point the Koryo sued for peace so the
Mongols left military commanders in charge and agreed to withdraw their troops. But a Koryo
military dictator then decided to resist the Mongols and came up with the idea of withdrawing
his forces and the government to Kanghua Island in the year 1232 to exploit the Mongols only real
weakness which is a somewhat irrational fear of the sea. Because of this fear of the sea and the
fear of crossing the sea the Mongols could only glare across the strip of ocean that separated
the mainland from the island where the ruling class continued to govern and to enjoy luxurious
lives based on the grain tax revenues that were now being shipped from the peasant farmers of the
mainland to the island by boat. Frustrated the Mongols instituted a scorched earth policy on the
mainland they burnt the grainfields they captured the mountain fortresses the defenders of which
were then massacred. In one invasion alone in the year 1254 the Mongols took back with them 200,000
captives they left countless dead and they reduced huge areas of Koryo Koryo to ashes.
The peasants lost heart of course for resistance with all this. As this happened the government
tried to seek divine assistance by having that magnificent Koryo Tripitaka that we just discussed
carved and for the next decade peace overtures to the Mongols were gradually accepted. The Mongols
who in the meantime had subdued China all of China and declared the Yuan dynasty in 1271 events
we will of course be pursuing later in the course then sought Koryo assistance for their attempted
invasion of Japan. As we'll also see in a later lecture both attempts failed because of the
intervention of fierce storms of mighty winds that blew up winds the Japanese later called
the kamikaze the divine winds. The Mongol rulers of China who actually grudgingly respected the
resistance of the Koryo military placed some regions of Korea under their direct control
but left many other regions under the rule of Koryo officials but Mongol levies regular levies of
gold of silver cloth grain falcons and also of young women devastated the nation already weakened
by this stage by 30 years of resistance and naturally these burdens fell most heavily on the
peasants who had to meet the Mongol levies plus the taxes still being demanded by their own government
and at the same time many leading Koryo families began to work closely with the Mongols
for their mutual enrichment but all this changed in the mid 14th century when the tithes started
to turn all across Eurasia against the Mongols. In China as the mighty Ming dynasty arose and began
to drive the Mongols back to the steppes so a new king Koryo king Kongmin decided to oppose the
Mongols also and to destroy the power of the families who had worked with them. When the Ming
dynasty was declared in 1368 Kongmin adopted a pro-ming policy and appointed a monk-sinton
as his prime minister together they worked to oust officials from the powerful families
and to redistribute some land to the peasants. But the last years of the Koryo were chaotic
the king was assassinated a peasant revolts broke out again and Japanese pirates raided the
Koryo coast at will devastating trade and the villages. The upshot of all this was the overthrow
of the last Koryo king and the establishment of the next great dynasty of Korean history the Choson
which as we will see in a later lecture would rule Korea for 512 years from 1392 until the 22nd
of August 1910 when Korea was annexed by the rising power of Japan. So next time nice segue there
next time we're going to turn our focus towards Japan and in a series of four lectures we're
going to trace the emergence of Japanese civilization from its very mysterious beginnings
through to their transformation into a feudal society late in the 12th century but we have
not yet finished with our consideration of the Korean contribution to eastern civilization
a contribution based on a beautiful environment which bestowed the name land of morning calm
on the first dynasty. But as we've seen I think despite a dedication of rich and poor alike to
Buddhism and to the production of magnificent architecture woodblock carvings and delicate
Celadon pottery the history of Korea from the bloody three kingdoms period through the Silla
and Koryo dynasties was anything but calm. But next time folks we're heading to ancient Japan I'll see you then
