Hello everyone, and welcome to this first lecture in our course on the Foundations of
Eastern Civilization that is focused on the island nation of Japan.
I plan to spend the next four lectures talking about early Japanese culture and history beginning
with the environmental context in which Paleolithic humans first settled the islands and then
taking us through the Neolithic, the Yamatai, the Nara and Haiyan periods up to the moment
of transformation of Japan from an imperial to a feudal society late in the 12th century.
The major theme that we will continue to explore in this series of four lectures is the degree
to which early Japanese societies were able to balance the interplay of local and imported
cultural influences.
What I think we'll see here again, I think, is that just as was the case with Korea, a
Japanese culture was undoubtedly deeply influenced by Chinese cultural prototypes and was particularly
welcoming to Tang Dynasty civilization.
But again, like Korea, Japanese society and culture became much more than just a carbon
copy of China.
Instead, sealed off from the East Asian mainland by geographical barriers, the inhabitants
of the Japanese archipelago were able to develop their own unique traditions.
And this reminds us, of course, of another central theme that's been running right through
our course, the role of the environment in shaping society and culture.
You've already heard me say this several times by now, so I might as well say it again in
the Japanese context.
There is only one place to start an investigation of the history and culture of Japan, and that
is with the environmental context in which it flourished.
So let's take a look now at the rich and challenging geography of the island nation called Japan
today.
Modern Japan consists of four large islands from north to south, Hokkaido, Honshu, Shikoku
and Kyushu, and hundreds, actually thousands of smaller ones.
This archipelago of islands is some 1500 miles long and stretches from cool northern latitudes
off the coast of Russia, a latitudes equivalent to say Montreal in Canada, two warmer southern
latitudes off the coast of South Korea on more or less the same parallel as the Bahamas.
As you would imagine, due to this long north-south extension of the country, the climate varies
considerably throughout the archipelago.
But most of the major cities, including Tokyo, have climates ranging from, I guess, from
temperate to subtropical, and each has four distinct seasons.
The thousands of islands that make up Japan have a combined area of roughly 146,000 square
miles, which means it is just a little larger than Italy and a little smaller than California.
Because these many islands of Japan are separated from the mainland by several hundred miles
of seawater, although actually only about 120 miles at the closest point, this has fostered
a sense of security, even isolation, that helps explain the emergence of a distinct
Japanese culture.
This isolation also helps explain why, unlike Korea, the Chinese never invaded Japan and
also why the Mongols were unsuccessful in their two attempts at invasion.
But although this freedom from invasion has contributed to the distinctiveness of Japanese
culture, Japan has never really been isolated from the influence of powerful neighbouring
cultures.
Now, if it will allow me to take a big-picture geographical perspective for a moment, the
geographical chain of islands to which Japan belongs is much more extensive than just the
Japanese archipelago.
Japan is part of the same huge chain located along the northwestern edge of the Pacific
that stretches all the way from the Aleutian Islands in the north to the Philippines in
the far south.
All these islands share life-ways that are inevitably dependent on the ocean for food,
for transport and for defence, but they also share something else, something geological
and something actually very dangerous.
This extensive island chain is the product of, and of course still heavily influenced
by, the tectonic forces that shape the surface of the Earth.
Geologists have understood the principles of plate tectonics for only about 50 years
now and they are constantly learning more all the time about this great paradigm of
Earth science.
We do know that heat in the centre of the Earth is constantly melting sections of the
planet's mantle, moving it upwards on internal convection currents.
In other places, cooler denser slabs of lithosphere, that is oceanic crust, the crust found mostly
underneath the oceans, is being dragged back down into the mantle.
It is these thermal movements that cause the great crustal plates of the Earth's surface
to move, generating earthquakes, volcanic activity and mountain building.
The internal heat deep inside our planet that drives great continents across the surface
of the planet comes from a combination of different forces.
It comes from the meteoric collisions that pounded the surface of the early Earth during
the Hadian Eon.
It comes from radioactivity and it comes from pressure caused by the forces of accretion
and gravity that were active when our planet was being formed.
So if you think about this for a moment, the heat inside our planet that drives plate movements
and causes places like Japan to suffer devastating earthquakes is actually a result of the way
stars and solar systems are formed and of the effects of gravity on these objects.
In other words, the heat that created the environmental niche in which the future nation
of Japan would flourish is a direct product of the origin and evolution of the entire
universe starting with the Big Bang.
Now how's that for a big history perspective?
Japan sits at the intersection of no less than four different tectonic plates, so it
has undergone regular violent geological shaping and upheaval.
The devastating earthquake we all remember of 2011, which generated that massive tsunami
and nearly triggered a nuclear catastrophe, was just one of up to 1,000 earthquakes which
rattled Japan every single year.
Another product of Japan's tectonic location is that most of the country consists of geologically
young mountains driven up by these same plate collisions.
These mountains are not old and eroded but steep, jagged, very rugged.
They produce fast moving streams and regular landslides.
The tectonic forces have also produced volcanoes, the highest and most famous of which is Mount
Fuji of course, at 12,388 feet above sea level.
These rugged and unstable mountain ranges are unsuitable for farming.
They obviously limit settlement patterns and they're very difficult to climb or cross.
So these have been serious barriers for internal transportation and communication from the very
beginning of Japanese history.
Now this geological context in turn led to the emergence of regionally quite autonomous
even isolated states early in Japanese history and of course to an increased reliance on
water transport systems.
The sediment that's regularly being washed from these young mountains joins with rich
volcanic soil to create narrow but very fertile coastal plains.
Although these plains make up only about 13% of Japan's total area, the fertility of these
plains has meant that here is where the first farmers settled, here is where the first towns
and eventually cities were built.
One of the most important of these plains in early Japanese history is the Tsukushi Plain
in northern Koshu.
This is the southernmost of Japan's four major islands.
Because this is close to Korea and China, the region became an early center of emerging
Japanese culture and as we will see was strongly influenced by the more sophisticated culture
of the neighbors.
Japan's location between the great mainland continent of Asia and the wide Pacific Ocean
also creates a distinctive and quite challenging weather environment.
So in winter cold winds blow out of Asia and dump large quantities of snow on the mountain
ranges of Japan, although the Pacific coast remains relatively mild and dry.
But in the summer, warm moist air blows in from the south bringing high temperatures
and often torrential monsoonal type rains.
These wind and weather systems have also powerfully influenced settlement patterns in Japan.
For example, the Pacific coastal plains are much more conducive to intensive farming than
the coasts along the Sea of Japan.
Because of its long north-south stretch and varied terrain, Japan also contains a wide
variety of plants and animals.
But because the archipelago was linked to the mainland by land bridges during long periods
of the geological past, these same plants and animals are also found in many other parts
of East Asia, so there is nothing particularly unique about them.
But the combination of plentiful fresh water and a long growing season has created a paradise
for plants and for the herbivores that feed off them.
These conditions also meant that when foraging humans first arrived on the archipelago, they
found a rich variety of potential foodstuffs awaiting them, obviously forest and seafood
along with plentiful boar, deer and many smaller animals that had crossed these land bridges
from the mainland.
It was across these same land bridges that the first human migrants came to Japan beginning
at least 35,000 years ago and maybe even earlier.
The Paleolithic Lifeways these early human communities pursued marks the beginning of
the development of Japanese history and culture.
Now to be honest with you, as was the case in Korea, there is much we don't yet know
about Paleolithic Lifeways in Japan because the evidence is so scarce and so ambiguous.
Indeed the field of Paleoarchaeology, ancient archaeology, is still relatively new in Japan
actually much newer again in Korea.
One example of this, the first discoveries of stone tools in Japan were not made until
as recently as 1949.
But evidence from two Japanese archaeological sites Hoshino and Sozudai has yielded the oldest
manufactured influence including different choppers, picks and very basic hand axes.
But dating of volcanic ash and other materials found at these sites shows us that they were
occupied a very long time ago, perhaps between 400 and 200,000 years ago, which means these
sites were almost undoubtedly occupied by our hominid ancestors, homo habilis perhaps
more likely homo erectus.
A much more recent Japanese site, both in terms of its discovery and also the dates
of its artefacts, is at Zazaragi and this has yielded stone tools that have been dated
to roughly 40,000 years ago, which means that these stone points and scrapers were most probably
manufactured by modern humans.
So this suggests that parallelithic homo sapiens after migrating through China and down through
Korea or perhaps across that great Yellow Sea plain might have crossed land bridges
to Japan as early as 50,000 years ago, although this data is still very controversial.
But I think after 35,000 years ago we are on firmer chronological ground and all sites
dated since 35,000 BP before present are definitely assumed to have been populated by modern humans.
These dates for the colonisation of Japan correspond with key developments during the
last Ice Age of course.
As we discussed in our first lecture on Korea, despite some fluctuations in climate conditions
all over East Asia at the height of the last Ice Age were bitterly cold and sea levels
were much lower.
Not only was the Yellow Sea a dry plain, but even the deeper Sea of Japan to the north
was just a large lake that drained through the present Korea Strait.
These increased dry land areas facilitated the movement of plants, certainly of animals
and of humans, between parts of East Asia that are now underwater.
Ice Age humans considered the large animals of the period their primary food source, which
meant that where the great herds of bison or mammoth went, so too did hunter-gatherer
bans.
This not only explains why some human groups migrated, for example, into frigid Siberia
during the coldest part of the Ice Age, quite extraordinary, but it also explains the migration
of East Asian hunters across that great Bering Strait land bridge that opened up at this
period and that took them into the Americas at least 15,000 years ago, perhaps much earlier.
So the arrival of humans perhaps 35,000 years ago in what is now the Japanese archipelago
probably corresponded to the migrations of different herds of megafauna.
To reinforce this, ancient megafaunal bones have actually been dredged up from the bottom
of the Sea of Japan, proving that large game once roamed this region.
But of course this also means that many early human sites are now deep underwater, although
one important site from the Paleolithic is an exception.
The Hanazumi site lies at the northern tip of Honshu Island and it is one of the few
sites to provide us with a glimpse of lifeways during the long Paleolithic period.
At this site, paleontologists have found the bones of bison, for example.
Also of elk, of ancient elephants preserved in a peat bog and dated to between 35,000
and 15,000 before the present.
Now both stone tools but also bone tools have been discovered here and this combination
of animal bones and tools leaves researchers to believe that Hanazumi was probably a kill
site or even a bone dump rather than a residential camp.
This reminds us of course that one of the main reasons for the scarcity of Paleolithic
evidence in Japan and indeed all over the world is that humans were of course nomadic
throughout this long era.
They rarely settled in any one place long enough to leave a substantial record.
Indeed very few Paleolithic era human skeletons have been discovered in Japan, although the
limestone fissure at the Minatagawa site near Okinawa has yielded valuable evidence
about human colonization and lifeway during the period.
Japanese archaeologists divide the late Paleolithic era in Japan which begins about 30,000 years
ago into four phases each characterized by different types of stone tools, different
stone technologies that are found in the layers they are excavating.
So in phase one for example the deeper layer we find that humans used long flakes for tools.
These are not really very worked or shaped but by phase two as we move up humans had
learned to manufacture true blades which archaeologists define as flakes more than twice as long as
they are wide and with regular parallel sides.
After about 17,000 before present in phase three humans begin to manufacture micro blades.
So these are a range of tiny little bladelets for all sorts of specialized cutting uses
and by phase four both the front and back surfaces of these blades were being shaped.
So now we start seeing arrowheads, we see spearheads.
These are clear signs of advanced hunting lifeways.
As is the case across much of Afri-Eurasia it's also during the late or upper Paleolithic
period that we start to find evidence of humans using art as a form of self and communal expression.
So stones shaped like humans have been found in Japan dating to this upper Paleolithic and
at the Iwato site a face sculpture pecked into the hilt of a stone tool was found dated
very broadly at this stage somewhere between 20 and 10,000 years ago.
Archaeologists have also excavated some quite extraordinary river stones at the Kamikura
Iwa site and these date to about 10,000 years ago.
These stones appear to be decorated with images of females with long heavy breasts wearing
what looks like grass skirts.
With improved tool technology, a greater awareness clearly of art, perhaps of magic symbolic
thinking and the waning of the last ice age, human history in Japan marked the beginning
of the Neolithic or New Stone Age by manufacturing what is probably the world's first pottery.
At the very end of the Paleolithic human communities in Japan began to make some of the world's
earliest known ceramics, the so-called Jomon Pottery which gave rise to a new era in Japanese
history, the Jomon Era.
Initial evidence of this extraordinary pottery came from the Fukui and Kamikura Iwa cave
sites where pottery shards dating to around 12,000 years ago were discovered.
This is very early for pottery but more recent discoveries have pushed these dates back by
perhaps another 2,000 years and if this is true it means that the world's first vessels
made of baked clay were not manufactured in Sumeria or West Asia but were manufactured
in the Japanese archipelago.
As was the case with new ceramic developments in Korea that we discussed earlier, archaeologists
are uncertain whether this technological innovation was an indigenous product or was influenced
by new arrivals from North East Asia.
Certainly the appearance of this pottery might also be linked to global climate change.
As we've discussed several times in this course already, from about 14,000 years ago the earth
begins to slowly warm, it's not a smooth process, there are cooling periods returning as well
but it's a generally warming trend.
As a result tundra and conifer forests begin to retreat northwards to be replaced by broad
leaf and deciduous trees like beaches and oaks and by 12,000 years ago global sea levels
had risen substantially as the great glacial ice sheets that had covered much of the world
now melted and this meant of course that Japan was now cut off from the Asian mainland.
The new forest provided plentiful foodstuffs for Neolithic Jomon-era foragers, nuts and
acorns for example and the animals that grazed in the forest, particularly various species
of deer.
Along the coasts fishing and the exploitation of other marine resources provided a new and
viable life way.
As was the case with coastal gatherers in Korea we actually have plenty of evidence of just
what these coastal life ways were like in the form of huge midden mounds of discarded
shells and other types of debris.
Now humans also invented a whole range of new technologies and strategies to exploit
these resources.
We find arrows now, we find picked traps for animals, we find fishing hooks and nets with
sinkers, harpoons, canoes, even dogs have been domesticated surely as an aid to hunting
and of course humans now need pottery vessels to store and carry these resources.
So although the term Jomon culture is used to describe most of the 10,000 year period
that preceded the before the common era divide, because of these different environmental
life ways that Japanese Neolithic humans pursued, these life ways were far from uniform.
When the pottery shows considerable variation, in central Honshu itself, just one island,
we find three distinctly different types of textured surface pottery being produced during
the middle Jomon period.
There was also a lot of trading of pottery and other valuable objects going on within
the islands and between individual islands.
Now although the original impetus for this technological innovation was probably the
need for vessels to store foods, many of the more elaborate pieces of Jomon pottery
appear to have been manufactured for use in early religious or shamanistic rituals.
Indeed we can say that Neolithic Japanese communities invented some quite extraordinary
rituals to help ensure a continuing food supply and to ask for protection from the gods from
environmental disaster.
The Katsusaka mountain people are a great example of this.
This was a Neolithic community that lived in semi-permanent villages and outside and
surrounding their pit houses they put up large phallic standing stones.
These clearly indicate an interest in fertility and in the seasonal regeneration of crops
but also in linking this somehow to human reproduction.
At other sites pottery doll-like human figures with great bulging eyes have been found often
with their arms snapped off.
Again archaeologists speculate whether this procedure might have been part of some sort
of a fertility right.
Once agriculture was introduced and these communities became utterly dependent on successful harvests
this earlier interest in the magical qualities of seasonal regeneration of fertility and
of human reproduction became even more important.
And some of the ancient sexual fertility rituals that were performed by early farmers continued
to resonate in parts of rural Japan to this very day.
One example of this in Tochigi prefecture after the seedlings have been transpired into patties
replicas of male and female genitalia are made of straw although increasingly today
they're made of plastic and they're suspended from great bamboo frames.
Now this might sound bizarre but when the wind blows in a certain direction the male
organ appears to penetrate the female in an obvious attempt to use ritual human sexual
activity and the power of nature to ensure crop fertility.
But with so many resources available to these affluent foragers there was no rush to adopt
farming until it was eventually I guess we could say forced on these sedentary foraging
communities through population increases.
By the late Jomon period that is from roughly 5000 BCE on evidence of agriculture does indeed
begin to appear in the archaeological record in the form of farming tools and the remains
of major grain crops found inside these ancient pottery shards.
Around the same period we also have evidence that full scale villages are starting to appear
consisting mostly of pit dwellings with roofs made of wood, thatch or earth.
Large communal storehouses also begin to be constructed in the millennia that followed.
All these processes of of life way and I guess technological evolution led to periods of
enhanced cultural activity particularly in central Hongshu after about 3000 BCE.
And during the first millennium before the common era strikingly new technologies begin
to appear in the Japanese archaeological record.
New pottery, new technologies, new life ways known collectively today as the Yayoi culture.
The Yayoi people are associated with complex technologies like bronze for example and later
iron metallurgy like glass making, weaving and advanced agricultural techniques including
horticulture obviously but now also slashenburne farming and wet rice farming.
The transition from Jomon to Yayoi was gradual but it was nonetheless dramatic.
It has been described by archaeologist Jeena Barnes and let me quote Professor Barnes as
not just a change in subsistence pattern but an entire restructuring of the material economy
of the Japanese islands.
Most Yayoi evidence comes from Kyushu remember this is the southernmost of the four large
islands and is thus the closest part of Japan to Korea and it corresponds to similar complex
changes that were occurring in the Korean peninsula at more or less the same time.
Now this really means that the direction of cultural influence seems pretty clear from
Korea into Japan.
Excavations in western Japan have suggested that the Jomon and the Yayoi people were in
fact two distinctly different groups of humans.
Jomon people the older group were shorter, more robust, rounder in face.
The Yayoi were taller, a grass isle, long faced.
Strong evidence we think that the Yayoi people were most probably immigrants from Korea.
The Yayoi brought with them new pottery styles and I mentioned wet rice agriculture and this
was so successful it leads to a population boom on the plains of northern Kyushu.
Both the Yayoi people and their life was then expanded explosively throughout the western
lowlands of the archipelago.
As far as we can tell there was little conflict between the Yayoi newcomers and the Jomon people
who seem to have been actually quite receptive even welcoming to new ideas about farming.
The one area of possible resistance to Yayoi agriculture appears to have been in the northeast
of the country where Jomon people retained their commitment to a marine based life way
which was already incredibly efficient and productive.
That rice farming spreads through the rest of the island in two stages through Honshu
by around 100 BCE and throughout the rest of the islands by around 700 of the common
era bringing with it new tools, new architectural styles and new cultural ideas.
With the advent of full-blown agriculture of more complex technologies, much larger villages
now and the arrival of metallurgy, Japanese culture had clearly entered a new stage.
One that as we will see would be marked by the emergence of surpluses of social complexity
of elites and then powerful individuals like chiefs.
In our next two lectures we have much fascinating cultural history to investigate.
The Bronze Age in Japan first, the extraordinary tomb period, the powerful Yamato kings, ongoing
interaction with Korea, the arrival of Buddhism and the Buddhist dominated Nara period that
followed.
And then we'll conclude this four lecture mini-series on early Japan by discussing the
glories of the Hayan, a period of magnificent and sophisticated cultural flowering that
still resonates throughout eastern civilization to this day.
I'll see you next time.
