Welcome to this third lecture in our mini-series on ancient Japan.
Last time we saw that in perhaps the most important innovation of all introduced into
Japanese culture by the rulers Tenmu and Jito, the official title Tenno was adopted for the
ruler of Japan and the name Nihano, Nippon, for the Japanese state.
These were their intentional final steps in legitimizing and strengthening the power of
the throne and transforming Japan into a fully fledged state.
And they remember that Tenno means the heavenly sovereign and Nihano, Nippon, means the base
or the origin of the sun, which now came to be the official name for the entire country.
And both these terms survived to this very day, of course.
Japan referred to as Nipponkoku, the state of Japan, and the emperor as the Tenno or
the heavenly sovereign.
I also mentioned briefly that another of the great projects of Tenmu and Jito was the
construction of a new capital city to be the symbol of their new centralized state.
In 710, the capital was moved from Fujiwara to a new city, Heijo, or modern Nara.
Now it's hardly surprising that the design and construction of the city would be strongly
influenced by Chinese urban planning in general and by the great and magnificent tongue capital
of Chang'an in particular.
The construction of Nara marks the beginning of a new era in Japanese history, the Nara
period.
And that, of course, is the subject of this, our next lecture, in this exploration of the
foundations of Eastern civilization.
You might remember that, for many historians, the Taika reforms of the year 645 CE are recognized
as the moment that the Yamato began to transform itself from a kingdom to a legitimate state.
But as we saw in our last lecture, the crucial reforms to create a state based on tongue administrative
models actually took place over a much longer period, a period of about 100 years from the
end of the 6th to the beginning of the 8th centuries.
This began with the rise to power of Soga no Umako, continued with the reign of Prince
Shotoku, certainly the coup of Kamitari and Tenjo, and it concluded then with this reformist
agenda promoted by Tenmo and Jito.
During this same period in Korea, the Silla Kingdom was also in the process of transforming
itself into a tongue style state, as I'm sure you remember.
In both Korea and Japan, the reforms involved a complete restructuring of the administration,
the taxation and legal systems of the two countries along Chinese tongue dynastic lines.
And it's no surprise that both countries also decided to build their own great planned
capital cities as the symbol for these new states, cities that might mirror in some way
the glorious tongue capital of Chang'an.
In Korea, you remember the Silla built Khaeyongju as their capital, whilst in the north, the
Pahai state built their capital, Sangyong, both of which were closely modeled on the
grid plan of Chang'an.
In Japan too, rulers Tenmo and Jito decided to construct a new permanent city at Nara.
Now, before this, different Yamato kings had ruled from what were called different shifting
palaces, but now it was time for something permanent, something splendid.
Nine of the shifting palaces of the Yamato kings had been located in the small confines
of the Asuka Valley in the southern Nara basin.
The first gridded city of Yamato was Fujiwara, built in 694 just north of the Asuka Valley.
This impressive palace and its administrative buildings were linked to the northern Nara
basin and to Osaka Bay by government roads, which were also laid out on a grid pattern
that corresponded to the land division system that was in place at the time.
Tenmo and Jito decided to also construct their new and permanent capital in the northern
Nara basin, where so much transport infrastructure was already in place.
The capital city of Heijo, again it's known today by the name of the modern city of Nara,
was completed in the year 710, towards the end of the reign of Jito, and it gives its
name to the Nara period.
By the mid 8th century Nara was home to about 100,000 people, at a time when demographers
estimate the total population of the Japanese archipelago was probably around 6 million.
I guess this seems tiny compared to the 1 million people who lived inside the city walls
at Chang'an with another million living just outside of course, out of a Tang dynasty population
of some 80 million, but this was by far the most impressive city and actually most impressive
population density ever seen in ancient Japan, and because it was modeled on Chang'an the
city's dimensions were also impressive.
Like Chang'an a great central avenue, in this case 80 yards wide, the Suzaku Avenue, ran
from the southern gate through to the palace in the north.
The avenue bisected a grid of streets that measured three miles from north to south and
three and a half miles from east to west.
The land plots within the grid were then allocated according to rank, with the elites of their
mansions located closest to the palace.
After processing up Suzaku Avenue dignitaries and envoys would have entered the palace through
the huge main gate which had a tiled roof and was painted in brilliant red, green and
white.
All the gates were manned by armed guards and with the exception of very high ranking
government bureaucrats, written passes were required for entry into the palace complex.
Stretching away from the gate in both directions was a wall 30 feet high, protecting a palace
complex that measured 1300 by 1100 yards.
At the heart of the palace was the great supreme hall, inside which the emperor oversaw state
ceremonies and rituals or greeted foreign dignitaries.
The great hall was also the center of court life and was surrounded by pleasure gardens,
offices, by kitchens and by storehouses.
Some idea of the wealth and aesthetic sensibilities of the imperial and the other elite families
who lived in Nara can be gained from the valuable goods collected in the Shoso Inn,
a log cabin like storehouse still standing in the compound of the Todaiji Temple today.
This is frankly one of the greatest collections of early Eurasian art ever assembled.
The Shoso Inn contained ancient books, weapons, silk of course, bronze mirrors, wonderful
musical instruments, medicines, magnificent art objects of gold, glass, mother of pearl
and lacquer.
Many of these objects had traveled along the silk roads, which you might remember were
flourishing again during the Tang Dynasty.
So these objects came in from Korea certainly, but India, Persia, Greece, even the Mediterranean
Basin.
The collection includes Persian glass, Sasanian silver vessels, an extraordinary ivory ruler
from India, Tang Dynasty ceramic pagoda models and musical instruments from deep in the heart
of Central Asia.
For many silk road scholars, Nara is regarded as literally the eastern terminus of these
great transurasian trade routes.
The possession of these objects by the Nara court also reminds us that the elites of Tang
China, of Shilla Korea, and of Nara Japan, shared much in common.
And these shared beliefs, these shared aesthetics, if you like, also help us understand why even
today these nations with this shared heritage of eastern civilization still adhere to many
certain common philosophical, legal and administrative models and ideals.
I mentioned the magnificent Todaiji Temple in Nara.
This also reminds us that this was a great age for Buddhism in Japan, as it was frankly
in contemporary China and Korea.
The Todaiji Temple was constructed just to the east of the palace.
In fact, Todaiji means the Great Eastern Temple, and it contained a gigantic bronze
Buddha cast partly from thousands of bronze mirrors that the ladies of the court had donated
for this very purpose.
This Buddha was over 50 feet tall and weighed, so we read, one million pounds.
This is undoubtedly the largest bronze statue ever cast to that point in world history.
The Buddha was housed in the Great Buddha Hall, which with dimensions of 280 by 150
feet, was also undoubtedly the largest wooden building constructed anywhere in the world
to this point in time.
The temple complex also featured two towering pagodas more than 330 feet high amongst the
highest buildings ever constructed anywhere in East Asia.
This really was a temple that set several new global records.
The original function of the pagoda structure, which appeared all over Buddhist East Asia,
as we've seen certainly in China and Korea also, was to house sacred relics of the Buddha,
pieces of bone or teeth.
Like the finger bone I mentioned that I personally have seen, it's housed at the enormous, far-men
temple complex just outside of Xian in China to this day, purported to be the finger bone
of the Buddha.
The Todaji pagodas were not only impressively high, but also visually stunning and quite
brilliantly engineered.
The central pole in each was largely unconnected to the surrounding wooden bracketing, which
allowed the building to shake during earthquakes without falling down.
But alas, these wooden pagodas were very vulnerable to fire, and so the originals have been lost,
although we can say that the world's oldest wooden building can still be found in Nara
today, having survived since the 8th century.
On the ninth day of the fourth month of the year, 752 of the common era, the great Buddha
and temple complex was officially dedicated by the emperor.
Early Japanese sources tell us that this ceremony involved 10,000 monks, 4,000 musicians and
dancers, and perhaps 7,000 state officials.
And as the ceremony reached its climax of music and dancing, a visiting Indian Buddhist
monk named Bodhissina painted in the colored eyes of the great Buddha.
This is still regarded as one of the most magnificent spectacles ever staged in all
of Japan's long history.
When Buddhism was first introduced into Japan, the Buddha was regarded by the people as a
kami, a generic term commonly used to describe any of the supposedly innumerable divinities
and spirits in the world.
In the 6th and 7th centuries, the new religion came to be seen as a kind of magic, similar
to the attitude that common people felt towards their own indigenous and also quite magical
religion, particularly that which developed into Shintoism.
In both cases, the people believed that these supernatural entities could be accessed through
prayer and ritual to cure illnesses, to avert disasters, and to obtain the good things in
life.
So it was only natural for them to pray for such blessings simultaneously at Shinto shrines
and now at the Buddhist temples.
The survival of Shintoism, whose origins can probably be traced right back to as early
as the Jomon period, is thus another example of how, despite the overwhelming cultural influence
coming from China, Japan was nonetheless able to retain its own distinctive indigenous beliefs,
indigenous characteristics.
Japan most definitely did adopt Buddhism and Confucianism from China, but the Japanese
continued to observe the rites of Shintoism, which revolve around the worship of ancestors
and a host of nature spirits and deities.
As we'll see later in the course in the year 1868, so the early modern period, in an attempt
to create a new and much more modern Japan while not losing sight of the traditions of
the past, the major government tried to turn Japan into an official Shinto state and even
to make Shintoism the basis for government.
But by then, more than 2,000 years after Buddhism had first come to Japan, there was no way
to purify Shinto and eradicate this pervasive influence of Buddhism, despite the best efforts
of the Department of Shinto.
Now for the first century or so, following its arrival in Japan from Korea during the
Korean Three Kingdoms period, Buddhism remained a largely private religion for the powerful
families like the Soga.
Prince Shotoku of the Soga was deeply interested in Buddhism.
He had temples built and he devoted much of his private time to studying the Buddhist
sutras.
In a nunnery attached to the temple of Hoyuji, just outside of Nara, there is actually a
piece of embroidered cloth with an inscription that legend has it was something the prince
had once said to his wife and I quote, the world is folly, only the Buddha is true.
Around the time of the Taika reforms in 645, Buddhism started to reach a larger public
audience partly because of state patronage.
King Jomai had the great temple of Paiche constructed near his palace and King Tenmu
then built what was called the Daikan Daiji or the great official temple.
What was clearly going on here with this official recognition is that for various political reasons
the government had decided to invest great amounts of treasure and labor into supporting
the Buddhist establishment and the religion and building its infrastructure.
Now all this reached a climax during the Nara period, particularly during the reign of Emperor
Shomu between 724 and 749.
It was actually Shomu who had the great Tudaiji temple constructed close to the palace and
who presided personally over the extraordinary ceremony to dedicate the massive Buddha housed
in the great Buddha Hall.
So by this stage in Japan's history, Buddhism had now become the religion of the state and
large state prayer rituals were conducted not so much for personal salvation now but
really for the protection of the nation as a whole.
Indeed the rulers of Nara used fairly strict legal codes and government authority to now
try and control the version of Buddhism that was being taught to the people.
So socially the Buddhist hierarchy was now on the same level as the elite government
officials and was also materially supported by state resources.
But Buddhist affairs were also increasingly coming under the control of bureaucrats.
One example of this is that those entering the Buddhist priesthood now needed government
permission and the legal codes contained lists of prohibitions and restrictions on the behavior
of monks.
So monks and nuns were now forbidden to hold ceremonies outside of the temples.
There were new laws now against people congregating for religious purposes.
On the one hand this meant that in this increasingly I guess legalistic age Japanese Buddhism was
unable to produce any original religious philosophy because in some way it might transgress the
new state sponsored orthodox version which was now exclusively focused on using Buddhism
to protect the authority of the state.
But having said that on the other hand this did mean that the religious community supported
by the wealth and resources of the state was able to create brilliant material culture
in the form of glorious religious art.
This trend was helped by the fact that the ruling class believed the more splendid the
temples and statues were the greater would be the spiritual return for the state.
So the Nara period is regarded today as a glorious age in the history of art and culture
in Japan frankly in eastern civilization more widely.
I'd like to briefly explore some of this with you now in the final part of this lecture.
It's no surprise that most of the visual art that survives from the Nara period is Buddhist
given what we've just been discussing.
We're talking here about sculptures, ritual objects, silk tapestries and of course copies
of the sutras that are masterpieces of calligraphy.
The temples around Nara many of which survived to this day were and are veritable treasure
troves.
Architecturally the temples were masterpieces of planning in which the buildings were placed
in a particular vertical order based on careful sight perspective from the front main gate
all the way back towards the main hall.
We can almost imagine the feelings of visitors as they entered these complexes.
The soaring pagodas, the carved roofs somehow suspended between heaven and earth, the brilliant
contrast between bright red painted structures and white washed walls.
Imagine the awe of the common people in particular long accustomed to humble dwellings, small
villages as they entered the great halls full of massive pillars, huge Buddhist statues
and monks in these flowing saffron colored robes with their serene faces.
To the people the statues must have seemed like actual realizations of the eternal Buddha
himself.
This aesthetic visually splendid sense of the meaning of Buddhism explains the rich
artistic treasures that were produced during the Nara period.
It also reminds us of course that all religions have used magnificent architecture and art
to create a similar sense of awe and wonder amongst the faithful as any visitor to the
great cathedrals of Europe or the magnificent mosques of the Islamic world can testify.
Although brilliant Japanese painters and sculptors of the Nara period are known much of the art
inside these temples was actually created by visiting or resident Chinese and Korean
artists.
Koryuji Temple for example contains a superb elongated sculpture known as the Kudara Canon.
Some of the oldest paintings in Japan are found on the cabinet sized jewel beetle shrine
in the same temple which is decorated with iridescent beetle wings set into metal edgings.
The Toshodaiji Temple of Nara was founded by a Chinese monk named Ganjin who after being
shipwrecked, delayed by storms and also by government opposition actually needed six
attempts before he finally reached Japan but by then he had gone blind.
The sculpted portrait of Ganjin in the Toshodaiji Temple brilliantly captures his blindness
but it also reminds us that the Buddhist culture of Nara was very cosmopolitan with many important
practitioners having come from Korea, China, even from India.
Let's remember again that this was one of the great periods of Silk Road's exchanges.
We know that priests, merchants, ambassadors from Tong China, from the Silicord, from India,
even from Persia regularly visited Nara Japan.
Partly this was a reflection of the internationalism of Buddhism but partly it was a product of
the I guess the hunger for trans-cultural exchange that so characterizes this extraordinary
era of Eastern civilization.
But we should note something very important here.
We should note that Japan would rarely experience this level of contact with the outside world,
this sense of cosmopolitanism again, not for more than a thousand years until after the
major restoration of the 19th century.
In literature too the Nara period was a golden age.
A sacred texts from China and Korea were copied and commented upon in flowing calligraphy.
We actually know of some 100,000 volumes of sacred texts that have survived from the
8th century through to today.
Japan's first history texts, indeed some of the very first texts of any genre produced
in Japan were also written during this Nara period including the Kojiki or the Records
of Ancient Matters published in 712 of the Common Era and the Nihon Shoki or the Chronicles
of Japan in 720, needless to say two very important books for historians.
These books are bound with songs, with prose passages and poetry about magical battles
and fascinating stories from the past.
One of the greatest anthologies of Japanese poetry was also produced during the Nara
period.
Manayoshi or the Collection of 10,000 Leaves which actually contains more than 4,500 superb
poignant poems.
The Manayoshi reminds me that before we leave the rich and glittering Nara period we need
to remember that we've largely been describing the world of the super secular and spiritual
elites thus far in this lecture.
But one of the poems in the Manayoshi written by the poet Yamanoi no Okura describes the
impoverished lives of the peasants who labor to supply the resources that sustain these
very elites.
Let me just read a little bit for you.
By my pillow side my father and mother crouch and at my feet my wife and children thus am
I surrounded by grief and hungry piteous cries.
But on the hearth no kettle sends up clouds of steam and in our pot a spider spins its
web.
We have forgotten the very way of cooking rice.
Let me begin to conclude this lecture now by noting that although the Nara court had
to face no foreign crises or no full blown civil wars it did have its share of problems
including periodic famines and also a smallpox epidemic that lasted for two years between
735 and 737.
But the biggest challenges to the Nara court came from bitterly disputed succession problems
and power struggles.
At the center of many of these struggles was the Fujiwara clan whose ancestors had actually
helped stage the anti-Soga clan coup right back in 645.
The great emperor Shomu who reigned from 724 to 756 and who presided over the dedication
of the great Buddha was of the Fujiwara clan.
The Fujiwara used into marriage into the royal bloodlines to advance their claims but they
also managed to dominate many of the leading positions on the council of state affairs.
But after the death of Shomu his Fujiwara consort left no mail heirs so their daughter
was eventually placed on the throne.
Empress Koken Shotoku actually reigned twice after the initial reign she was forced to
abdicate but she overthrew her successor and came back to reign again.
But she left no successor however and her reign was punctuated by the increasing power,
the increasing independence of both the Buddhist hierarchy and also the unbridled ambition
of the Fujiwara.
Now as we'll see in our next lecture these problems would provide instability in Japan
for frankly for centuries to come.
Eventually the great grandson of Tenji Kanmu ascended to the throne in the year 781.
He was already middle aged and was determined to move quickly to try and reduce the power
of the Buddhist temples and also of the ambitious noble kinship groups.
In order to do this he decided that the court simply had to be moved again, a move from
Nara which was too closely associated with the powerful court families and the Buddhist
hierarchy.
The site the Empress selected for his new capital at Nagyoka had other advantages too
including much better access to water transport which would then link the capital to the port
at Naniwa and onto the Sea of Japan.
So the capital was moved but there were problems with construction at the first site and a
decade later the capital was moved again to a new site at Hayan or the modern city of
Kyoto.
This proved a much better choice because the capital at Hayan would go on to remain the
royal seat of power for the next 1,100 years until the 19th century.
The Hayan period up until the year 1185 will be the subject of our next lecture.
This will be our last on Japan for a while but I certainly promise to return to Japan
in future lectures to explore how the warrior class gradually gained enough power to replace
the imperial system with a feudal shogunate.
Let me begin to conclude here though by noting that with the emulation of the government
and culture of the Chinese Tang dynasty during the 7th and 8th centuries by various other
regional societies by kingdoms in Korea and now in Japan, East Asia became a coherent
regional entity based as I suggested earlier on common aesthetic values, certainly on common
philosophies, certainly we see with Buddhism rather on common religion, a common literary
tradition and very similar state structures.
But again, Korea and Japan never became carbon copies of the Tang and neither did their common
values ensure peaceful relations nor parallel development thereafter.
Indeed, I think we can say the history of the region for the next 1,300 years was to
be dominated just as much by violent struggles between these East Asian neighbors as it was
by shared values or shared fortunes.
Thank you.
