Although the high-end period which followed the Nara began with a strong assertion of
imperial power by Emperor Kanmu, this was not to last.
Under the influence of a powerful aristocracy, the high-end introduced a new Japanese political
and social system, part imperial, part feudal, that would go on to dominate Japan for almost
a thousand years.
The high-end capital built at Kyoto in 794 was also destined to remain the Japanese capital
for more than a thousand years, until 1868.
But as we'll see, after 1185 CE, real power moved to the countryside, where it now resided
in the hands of military governors called shoguns and their personal armies of samurai warriors.
As we'll see in this lecture, the founding of the new high-end capital was followed by
two centuries of relative peace dominated by the powerful Fujiwara House.
But the emperor increasingly became only a figurehead, and it was the Fujiwara regents
who literally became the power behind the throne.
The high-end remains one of the most fascinating periods in this long history of Japan, politically
and certainly also culturally.
It began with a political structure closely modelled on that of Tong China, but it ended
as something quite different again, something that was distinctly and recognisably Japanese.
The high-end period is the subject of this lecture, our last in this series of four on
the early history and culture of Japan.
One of the major reasons Emperor Kanmu decided to move his court to a new capital at Hayan
was to reduce the power of two groups who had constantly threatened to undermine the
authority of the emperor during the Nara period, the Buddhist hierarchy and also the
ambitious noble kinship groups.
Now by having temples built on the outskirts of his new capital, unlike at Nara where they
had actually been central to the palace, Kanmu was able to reduce the influence of the Buddhist
monks on his secular government.
And by increasing the authority of the bureaucracy, he also helped keep the hereditary kinship
families at bay at least for a while.
So for the first 50 years of the Hayan, Kanmu and his successors successfully maintained
the pre-existing framework of the imperial state system.
But after that first half century, the House of Fujiwara began to assert its authority
and eventually came to dominate the state without ever actually displacing the imperial
House.
This system of government, which to a certain extent has continued right through to the present
day, allowed the emperor to continue to function as the titular head of the government and
to remain an object of veneration.
But despite the continuing aura and mystique surrounding the many emperors of Japan that
have followed Kanmu, they've actually possessed no real political power.
But since the 9th century, in fact, the Japanese political order has been based on this split
between a publicly recognized imperial figure and a separate agent of effective rule.
This arrangement helps account for the exceptional longevity of the Japanese imperial House,
of course.
Because emperors have not actually ruled, they have not been subject to deposition during
times of turmoil.
That is, ruling parties, ruling houses, ruling factions have come and gone, but the imperial
House has survived through to today.
This profound change in the Japanese system of government can be traced squarely to the
rise of the Fujiwara Hereditary House, and this in turn can be explained by changes in
the principles of land ownership in Japan.
These are messy, but we need to explore them.
They're very complicated.
Under the pre- and early Haiyan legal systems, all land essentially belonged to the Crown.
The government had the right to allocate land for farming, but for aristocratic and Buddhist
and for aristocratic and Buddhist estates, of course, and also to decide which land was
taxable and which was tax-free.
The noble estates were augmented by local peasant farmers who could often not meet their
tax burdens and so allowed their plots to be swallowed up by the larger states.
Eventually this meant that in many of the outlying districts of Japan, powerful noble
houses were able to increase their landholdings and, obviously, thus their wealth and power,
so significantly that the officials of the central government effectively lost authority
and control over them.
These greater states, called Shouen in Japanese, became hereditary possessions of these aristocratic
families who were often granted tax-exempt status in return for supporting the central
government and who were often also immune from bureaucratic interference.
This was actually a further incentive for the small landowners to place their fields under
the control of these larger states because they could now share in the tax-free status.
Because the elite landowners were often far away in court, the estates were managed by
administrators who also received rights of income from the lands.
These rights, they're called the shiki, entitled individuals to a percentage of income from
the estates and these rights could be further subdivided or even sublet and passed on to
one's heirs.
Over the centuries, this system became extraordinarily complicated.
Modern women might hold different kinds of rights on different estates, until eventually
four levels of rights holders were recognized, even in a single estate.
From the bottom up, these were the farmers, the shoumen, then the managers, the raioshu,
then the influential families or officials of the estate, the shokan, and finally the
patrons of the estates who lived far away in the capital, the raioki.
The government did attempt to try and regulate this process, but the greater states continued
to grow and so did the power of the families that controlled them.
Government officials dispatched to the rural areas to try and collect taxes on the remaining
public-owned land also became increasingly autonomous and wealthy.
In the capital, meanwhile, the great families competed for status and power and for the
most important public offices that had come to be dominated now by the nobility.
With wealth, power, and even the bureaucracy now essentially under private control, the
high-end government became something very different to the government of the Nara period.
As imperial government declined, so de facto government had become essentially privatized.
For most of the 9th and 10th centuries, this privatized government was controlled by the
House of Fujiwara, a name, by the way, that literally translates as Wisteria Plain.
The Fujiwara clan eventually grew so large that it divided into four main branches or
groups of families, if you like.
It was the Hoki or northern Fujiwara branch that came to dominate the high-end court.
Included into marriage with the imperial family to amass power, by 857 the northern Fujiwara
had a member of their clan in a powerful position to influence the throne.
The statesman Fujiwara no Yoshifusa.
When a grandson of Yoshifusa was placed on the imperial throne as Emperor Siva, Yoshifusa
became regent to the young emperor.
Yoshifusa was the first man, not of imperial rank, to assume the title of regent.
He was also the first in what would be a long line of Fujiwara clan regents.
This new regent position, called the Kanpaku, was institutionalized and so it became the
mechanism whereby the Fujiwara could wield real power.
The regent was now literally the power behind the throne and all the regents were Fujiwara
men.
Although there were some attempts to oppose the power of the Fujiwara, they used the regent
system so effectively to dominate and control high-end government for centuries.
Under the old system, the aristocrats had acted as officials similar in a way to the
role of Confucian bureaucrats in China.
So during the Yamatai and Nara periods, officials and peasants had, I guess, certain views in
common.
The poems in the Manioshu reflected empathy for the shared experiences of life amongst
the two classes.
But the elite society of the high-end period grew more and more aloof from the people and
came to ridicule the rural lifeways upon which their privileged lives depended.
Day-to-day administration of government and private estates was now handled by underling
officials, leaving these aristocrats free to devote themselves wholly to their super-refined
lifestyle in court.
Shut off from the real world, unburdened by any genuine political responsibility, these
elites lived a life of luxury and pursued their aesthetic interests.
As a result, high-end elite society was responsible for quite extraordinary achievements in literature,
visual arts, ideas about beauty, and the subtle refinements of courtly life.
The perfect high-end gentleman now took great care over his appearance, wearing a magnificently
coloured court cloak, grape-coloured trousers embroidered with wisteria designs, and a glossy
crimson underrobe.
And the women were even more splendidly attired.
Indeed, in many ways, this was a quite magnificent age for the elite women of Japan.
We have startling evidence of this in a famous literary work from the period, the Genji Monogatari,
the famous Tale of Genji.
Although some Shinto sects actively marginalise women, as we've seen already in this short
series on Japan, the history of early Japan features many powerful and successful women
rulers.
Now, in this sort of super-refined world of the Haiyan, a lady in waiting at court, Lady
Murasaki Shikabu, had the talent and the opportunity to write what many consider to be one of the
world's first, indeed one of the world's finest novels.
This book is not structured in a modern sense like a novel, not in a technical sense, rather
it strings together a series of tales centred on the figure of the fictional prince Genji,
the shining prince, and on the people of the generation that follow his.
With extraordinary insight, Lady Murasaki describes the romantic intrigues of her time
and offers intricate and subtle psychological portraits of her characters.
No doubt the ladies and gentlemen of the Haiyan court would have recognised themselves in
the book because it so brilliantly brings to life its particular place and time.
But like the Buddhist art of the Nara, the Tale of Genji transcends the Haiyan because
the protagonist it portrays are such universal characters.
This book demonstrates the author's great store of knowledge about relations between
men and women, about ways of living, about poetry, music, painting, and all the refined
interests of the elites.
Lady Murasaki, who lived between 978 and 1031, wrote the book when the Fujiwara house was
at the height of its power.
Fujiwara Mishinaga was the outstanding aristocrat of the time and many believed that the character
of Genji was modelled on him.
The prince and his friends live amongst the gardens and palaces of the Haiyan court cultivating
their super refined lifestyle.
They passed their time mixing subtle perfumes, composing fine poetry, and wooing cultivated
women.
But Haiyan men had no real idea of what the women they were wooing actually looked like
because the women were hidden behind screens with only their sleeves showing.
Beautiful women were valued for round white faces and extraordinarily long hair, but what
men really fell in love with was a woman's sense of the aesthetic as revealed through
her talents at poetry and calligraphy.
Calligraphy was seen as the key to a woman's soul, so the Haiyan version of love at first
sight was a man falling in love with a woman after glimpsing a few beautifully drawn brush
strokes.
But the tale of Genji is more even than a brilliantly realised evocation of an era.
It also offers a profound meditation on the passing of time and the sorrows that time
can bring to sensitive humans.
As Genji and his friends age, they realise that past joys, past relationships have gone
forever.
Their thoughts suffuse the tale with a melancholy spirit that presents a subtle contrast to
the elegant atmosphere of the Haiyan court.
Lady Murasaki Shikibu created one of the great literary works of the Japanese language,
a rich insight into the world of Haiyan elite and a universal tale of the passing of time
and the inevitability of ageing and death.
By way of contrast, another great literary work of the period, the tale of Konjaku, describes
a harsh and miserable peasant lifestyle very different to the refined world of the capital.
Despite the fact that aristocratic wealth in the capital was based on the agricultural
resources produced on the greater states in the country by these farmers, during the
Haiyan there existed a wide gap between the elite way of life and that of the common people.
This is also reflected in the clothing worn by members of the different classes, members
of the peasantry war, simple and practical dress because their work demanded freedom
to move.
This was in stark contrast to the physically limiting and inconvenient clothing of the
court, particularly the 12 layered garment of elite women.
But there was another increasingly powerful group that emerged during the Haiyan, the warrior
class.
They also preferred the simple and practical clothing of the common people to facilitate
their art of fighting.
Haiyan refined elites also look with disdain upon the military but realized they could
not do without them.
Before conscription had been introduced right back during the tomb period, trained warriors
had been associated with particular hereditary houses, far back into early Japanese history.
Even after conscription was introduced, this class of private fighter never really disappeared.
With the abandonment of the conscription system just before the Haiyan period, the central
government lost the ability to raise state armies.
Big power and responsibility now passed into the hands of the provincial officials and
the great hereditary houses.
A warrior class that arose did not live in the capital but in the provincial regions
and it was these fighters who evolved into the famed Samurai.
These warriors actually lived on their own lands and were well versed in practical agriculture.
Frankly, fighting equipment was expensive.
Horses, armor, weapons, specialized training, something that the rural elite could afford
only through successful farming.
In certain regions in the countryside, large local warrior organizations developed.
Notably along the eastern frontier regions of Kanto where they honed their skills by
repeatedly clashing with each other.
It was these fighting organizations that kept order in the provinces, fighting for various
wealthy patrons and jockeying for power.
Local lords who claimed descent from the powerful hereditary families proved particularly adept
at constructing and maintaining the loyalty of what were increasingly becoming private
armies.
The two of the greatest warrior associations coalesced around the powerful Minamoto and
Tyraclans and members of both were involved in rebellions in the 10th century.
By the 11th century, some of these clashes had developed into full scale wars, including
one that lasted for about 60 years between 1028 and 1087.
The Minamoto and the Tyra continued to amass power and as we'll see a bit later in the
course, it was the ongoing conflict between them that effectively ended the Hayan.
But before concluding this initial series of four lectures on early Japan, we must now
take a brief look at some of the other rich cultural achievements of the Hayan.
This will also help us consider again, I think, the degree to which these societies were able
to escape or not the pervasive cultural influence coming from China.
Now there's no doubt that Hayan culture deeply reflected Chinese traditions.
This literature, for example, copied Chinese models and was written in Chinese classical
script.
Young men received their formal education by learning to read and write in the Chinese
language and through studying the great classics of Chinese philosophy, Chinese literature.
Actually as an interesting side note to this, because girls rarely received formal Chinese
education, Lady Murasaki Shikabu had to write the tale of Genji in vernacular Japanese because
her Chinese was so basic, how ironic.
The Japanese writing system also reflected Chinese influence.
Scholars borrowed many characters from Chinese, for example, and they used them to represent
Japanese words.
They also directly adopted some Chinese characters straight into the Japanese syllabic script
in which, by the way, symbols represent now whole syllables rather than just a single sound
as in the alphabetic script.
The other overwhelming influence that came to Japan filtered through China was Buddhism,
of course, which, as you remember, was flourishing during the preceding Nara period.
And now in the Hayan, different and distinctly Japanese variants of Buddhism began to emerge,
which went on to also influence the further development, by the way, of Shinto religion.
Although Emperor Kanmo had originally moved the court from Nara to Hayan to curtail the
power of the Buddhist hierarchy, Buddhism continued to flourish under the Hayan.
Emperor Kanmo supported the ideals of one monk in particular, Seicho, who lived from
767 to 822.
In the year 804, he traveled to Tongchina to seek sanction there from the Buddhist hierarchy.
In his return, he turned away from the worldliness of the Nara temples and adopted the broad
and accommodating Tendai version of Buddhism, which he then promoted despite bitter opposition
from the Nara religious establishment, as you would imagine.
Now, Tendai Buddhism believes that everyone can gain enlightenment through meditation.
It became so popular in Japan that Seicho's little temple at Mount Haik grew into a vast
complex eventually of some 3,000 buildings.
A later follower of Seicho, named Enin, also traveled to China, but in the late 9th century
a bit of split developed between the followers of Enin and those of his successor.
This led to the introduction of a new force in Japanese Buddhism, well-armed temple militias.
These Akuso, the so-called evil monks, engaged in violence, they learned the skills of combat
and by the 11th century all of the leading temples were maintaining what would have to
call large standing armies of Akuso.
Mount Haik itself had several thousand troops, which regularly descended on the capital
to terrorize the residents and to demand titles, administrative positions and more land.
The other major school of Buddhism during the Haiyan was Shingon, founded by the monk
Kukai, who lived 774 to 835.
Like Seicho, Kukai also traveled to China.
He gained imperial patronage and he founded his own monastery on a mountain, Mount Koya
this time.
Shingon Buddhism was focused on mystic spoken formula and I guess on the secret oral transmission
of knowledge from master to student.
These teachings were esoteric, they were difficult to understand, yet because Shingon used mystical
rights, incantations and even exorcism, it also became deeply popular in the Haiyan period,
appealing to the common people who had always been attracted to the magic possibilities
of Buddhism.
This reminds us that like their ancient predecessors, the great majority of Japanese people do
during the Haiyan lived in a world permeated by religion and magic.
In this strange, syncretic mix, various versions of Buddhism and Shintoism blended with Confucianism,
with Yin and Yang philosophy, with Geomancy or Feng Shui and also with exorcism.
So residents of the capital would purify themselves regularly, they would avoid travel to different
places or even in different directions on inauspicious days and they sought exorcism
from priests when they were sick.
As well as the powerful Buddha, people continued to worship their local spirits and all of
this as we'll see in a later lecture, fed back into the development of Shintoism.
But our focus is on the arts here for the last part of this lecture.
We've already seen that Haiyan was a rich era for literature.
He then wrote superb Chinese style poetry, tongue style poetry and prose and writing
in the Japanese vernacular often by women also thrived as the tale of Genji so inestimably
demonstrates.
Japanese vernacular poetry also reached superb heights of expression and many of the Haiyan
classic poems were collected and published in the Kokinshu, the collection of ancient
and modern poetry.
All this further influenced Japanese writing itself as the syllabic use of characters continued
to evolve, they were gradually abbreviated and simplified, leading to the appearance
of new symbols that were distinctly different from the Chinese characters.
Japanese architecture was also transformed in the Haiyan, particularly the layout of
new temples.
Now when Saito and Kukai decided to build their temples on mountains, they abandoned
the formal symmetrical plans we discussed of Nara and they accommodated the construction
of their temples to the natural environment.
So now trees, rock outcrops and streams became an integral part of the spiritual experience
in a way that has remained distinctly Japanese ever since.
The design of private dwellings was also influenced by this new aesthetic.
In mansions all featured a garden now, artificial hills were created, carefully placed bamboo
and trees, a pond was always crossed by a bridge like all Japanese buildings of the period.
The structures with their beautiful polished wood floors were now raised a few feet off
the ground to allow a stream to pass underneath.
Painting also thrived notably on the screens of sliding doors which were decorated with
landscapes.
Haiyan artists took Japanese painting away from the Chinese inspired art of the Nara
period.
Late in the Haiyan glorious picture scrolls started to appear which combined text and
images to illustrate scenes from the tales.
The scrolls painted to illustrate the tale of Genji are particularly gorgeous, illustrating
the superb story with richly coloured pictures of the luxurious apparel and refined lifeway
of the aristocrats, also with elegant cursive script and on handsome coloured paper on which
all the elements were combined and expressed.
These early combination scrolls later evolved into picture only scrolls which featured a
continuous horizontal strip of painted images unfolding a story in chronological order not
unlike the embroidered Bayer tapestry in France which richly illustrates William of Normandy's
1066 conquest of England.
But despite or perhaps even because of the sumptuousness of cultural life in the court
late in the Haiyan period the countryside was transformed as the equal field system fell
apart and aristocratic clans accumulated most of the land for themselves and for their private
armies.
By the 12th century the two most powerful clans Tyra and Minamoto were engaged in open
war until in 1185 the Minamoto emerged victorious a victory that brought to an end this extraordinary
glorious cultural Haiyan period.
The Minamoto now claimed the right to rule in the name of the figurehead emperor and
they installed a shogun, a new title for a military governor who now ruled the imperial
structure.
The Minamoto established the new seat for their government at the town of Kamakura and
as we'll see later in the course they went on to rule Japan for the next four centuries
in an era known as firstly the Kamakura then the Muromachi shogunates.
But for now I think we need to take leave of Korea certainly and also Japan just for
a while because I think we need to take a brief visit to some other regions that fell
within the powerful Chinese cultural zone the fascinating states of Southeast Asia.
In these lectures on Korea and Japan I've tried to show that although both these states
took their inspiration from Chinese culture their political and cultural structures developed
along lines that I think we can say were distinctly different from those of the powerful middle
kingdom.
Yet Japan and Korea clearly had a place in the larger eastern cultural zone influenced
by Chinese religion, philosophy, law and imperial administration.
I look forward to joining you again next time as we further widen our investigation of the
foundations of eastern civilization by journeying to Southeast Asia to see if we can discern
similar but also different cultural developments there.
Thank you.
