Hello, folks, and welcome.
Following our two series of lectures on ancient Korea, ancient Japan, and before we return
to events in China following the fall of the Tang Dynasty, I thought it might be a good
idea if we devoted the next two lectures to the history and culture of the Southeast
Asian region.
Now, partly we should do this because the history and culture of Vietnam, Cambodia,
Thailand, Malaya, and the various states and islands of the region is so fascinating
in its own right.
And partly we need to do this because these states also inevitably found themselves members
of the vast Eastern cultural zone dominated by China, although, as I hope to show you,
Southeast Asia was also heavily influenced by both Indian and Islamic culture.
But it makes sense, I think, to widen our lens even further now and investigate the
impact of many of the foundational elements of Eastern civilization that we have so far
considered in this course on the states and peoples of Southeast Asia.
At the same time, we'll also try and tease out what impact political, economic, and cultural
developments that occurred in these Southeast Asian states had on China and on Eastern civilization
more generally.
In this first lecture, we focus exclusively on the history and culture of Vietnam from
its earliest interactions with ancient China through to its colonization by the French
in the 19th century.
As many of you are aware, of course, Vietnam played a critical and costly role in the Cold
War during the 20th century.
So it might be interesting if we try and trace these more recent events right back to their
ancient historical origins.
In our second lecture in this mini-series, we'll briefly consider the history, the culture,
and the fortunes of other states of Southeast Asia, including Cambodia, Thailand, Malaya,
parts of Indonesia, even the Philippines, over roughly the same chronological period.
In this first lecture, what we will see, I think, is that Chinese relations with Vietnam
were almost always tense, at least until the 20th century.
From the moment Chinese armies began venturing into the region as early as the 3rd century
BCE, they met with spirited resistance from the Viet people.
Sometimes the Chinese were successful in gaining direct political control of Vietnamese towns
and rural areas, and because of this the Viet people absorbed many Chinese cultural elements.
Often the Viet elites were able to cleverly use many of these Chinese ideas and techniques
about governance in particular to build their own strong independent kingdom.
Later they expanded this kingdom further to the south until they had constructed a powerful
state that managed to remain independent until the arrival of European colonists.
So in a nutshell, that is the story of Vietnam that I would like to unfold for you in this
lecture.
A story of Vietnamese absorption, resistance, and ultimately use of many of the key cultural
inventions of Eastern civilization, which allowed the Viet people to carve out their
own place in world history.
The first recorded mention of the Viet's appears, not surprisingly to us, in Han dynasty
annals where they are described as, and I quote, Southern barbarians who resisted Qin
dynasty raids into South China in the 220s before the common era.
At that time their kingdom, which the Chinese called Nam Viet, or people in the south, hence
the modern name of Vietnam of course, extended quite a long way along the southern coast
of what is actually Chinese territory today.
The Qin raids had little political impact, but they did give a boost to the small scale
trade that had existed between the Viet's and the Chinese for centuries before this.
In exchange for Chinese silk, the Viet's sent to China ivory, tortoiseshell, pearls, peacock
feathers, and also many aromatic woods from the extensive coastlands and tropical forests
of the region.
In the decades that followed the Qin raids, expansionist Viet rulers defeated the warlords
who at that time controlled the Red River Valley, which today is actually in southern China,
and brought their lands under Viet control.
The Viet's then intermarried with many of their neighbors, including the residents of
the Red River Valley, the Khmer and Thai peoples, all of which contributed to the formation
of the Vietnamese people as a distinct ethnic identity.
The willingness of the Vietnamese to intermarry with Khmer's, today's Cambodian people, and
the Thais, suggests that before Vietnam was conquered by the Han, Vietnamese culture had
much in common with the other peoples of Southeast Asia, and was in fact distinctly different
to Chinese culture.
One example of this, none of the Southeast Asian spoken languages had any linguistic
relationship with Chinese.
The Viet's also had a strong tradition of village autonomy, often physically symbolized
by the bamboo hedges that still surround many Vietnamese villages to the present day.
The Viet's and other peoples of Southeast Asia also favored the smaller nuclear family
over the much larger extended family, preferred by the Chinese, and of course explicitly sanctioned
by Confucianism as being critical for the exercise of filial piety.
How did the Viet people develop the same strong clan associations that characterized Chinese,
Korean, and particularly Japanese society as we have so recently seen?
Another significant difference I think is that Vietnamese women had much greater freedom
and influence on public life than women in China ever enjoyed.
The Viet people also dressed differently to the Chinese, for example the women preferred
long skirts where Chinese peasant women wore long black pants.
The Viet's enjoyed cock fighting as a popular pastime, the Chinese did not.
The Viet's chewed beetle nuts and blackened their teeth, practices the Chinese found frankly
disgusting.
Even after the Chinese conquered Nam Viet politically and after the introduction of
Buddhism from China, many of these distinct cultural practices were preserved by the Viet
people.
Indeed partly in response and resistance to Chinese domination, the Viet people clung
on to these cultural differences ever more tightly, particularly at the grassroots level.
And this preserved a certain cultural distinctiveness that once again ensured that Vietnam never
became a carbon copy of its giant neighbor to the north, even after Chinese armies came
marching in during the early Han dynasty.
As the mighty early Western Han began to consolidate its power throughout China, East
Asia and Central Asia, in the third century BCE they soon came into contact with the Viet's.
Initially the Han were happy to accept an acknowledgement of vassal status from the Viet's
along with periodic payments of tribute so that Nam Viet became part of the vast Han
tributary empire.
But in the year 111 BCE, no surprise again during the reign of the vigorous Emperor
Wu Di, the martial emperor, the Han decided it was time to conquer the feisty Viet's outright
and to govern them directly as a Han province, the same of course as the Han were doing in
Korea at precisely this same time, as I'm sure you remember.
Though the Red River area was quickly garrisoned with Han troops and Chinese administrators
who were dispatched to the region now worked closely with local lords and officials, encouraging
them to learn Chinese language and culture.
And indeed, realizing that they had much to learn from the sophisticated and of course
incredibly well organized Han state to the north, the Viet elites decided to cooperate
with the Chinese.
Chinese government, on the other hand, saw the Viet's as yet another barbarian people
ripe for assimilation and so they worked hard to introduce the essential elements of their
civilization into their new southern province.
Over the centuries of Han rule that followed, the Viet elites, very much like the Korean
elites, were drawn into the superb government structure administered by the Han Confucian
bureaucracy.
So they attended Chinese schools, they learned to read and write Chinese language, they studied
Confucius of course and all the other great classics and they took the Confucian exams.
In the rural areas, the village areas, the Han introduced sophisticated Chinese agricultural
techniques and also irrigation technology which quickly made the warm and moist environment
of Nam Viet the most productive rice growing region in all of East Asia.
As a result, the Viet population grew and high population densities were soon in place
all along the Red River Valley and also along the coastal regions to the south.
The Viet elites then used the lessons of Chinese statecraft to begin to extend their own military
control over regions further west and south which helped spread elements of Chinese culture
even more widely throughout Southeast Asia.
The Chinese must have assumed that the Viet Amis barbarians were well on their way to
becoming civilized, that is, cyanotized.
But as many later powerful invaders were to learn, the roots of Viet Amis resistance to
conquest and cultural colonization ran very deep indeed.
Ultimately, the Chinese were to be frustrated by a series of revolts against their hegemony
by Viet Amis elites and even more so by the failure of Viet peasants to adopt Chinese culture.
The elites had learned much from the Chinese but as the decades of colonialism passed,
this made them chaff even more against Chinese hegemony, particularly as provincial Chinese
administrators could barely conceal their disdain for barbaric Vietnamese practices.
In the end, what emerged was an intense determination to drive the Chinese out as Viet lords galvanized
the common people to join them in revolt.
One of the most famous of these revolts was instigated by women, the Trong sisters who
in the year 39 of the common era, riding their war elephants at the head of a powerful
guerrilla force, led a dangerous uprising against the Han.
The actions of the Trong sisters further demonstrate the profound difference that existed in the
status of women in Vietnamese and Chinese societies, which was a major contributing factor to the
failure of the Chinese to assimilate the Viet.
These women were bitterly opposed to the Confucian family system, which wanted to confine them
to their homes and subject them to male authority.
Women in Vietnam had long demanded and achieved a much higher status and a more dominant role
in society than women in China or in Korea or Japan for that matter.
And this was equally true throughout Southeast Asia more generally, where women had dominated
the markets for centuries and had been heavily involved in all sorts of business ventures.
Along with these powerful cultural incentives to resist the Chinese, which crossed all class
and gender barriers, as we've seen, the Vietnamese struggle was assisted by the fragile links
that bound Chinese administrators to their colonies.
So here again the environment plays a critical role in the way history unfolds.
Now Nam Viet was an awful long way from the great Chinese capitals in the North, separated
by wide rivers, rugged mountain ranges and very thick jungles.
These environmental problems or barriers, if you like, and that the tyranny of distance
meant that Chinese administrators charged with supplying military expeditions and garrisons
in the South faced logistical nightmares.
Very few Chinese actually lived in the Red River Valley, small regiments of bureaucrats
certainly, soldiers of course and merchants, but that was all.
And few of them lived there permanently.
Now the well-informed Viet elites were also very quick to seize upon periods of political
turmoil and nomadic invasion in China to advance their cause and assert their independence.
They tried several times to free themselves at these opportune moments in the interregnum
between the early and later Han, for example, and again during the long age of disunity.
And finally they were able to stage a massive rebellion against the Chinese after the fall
of the Tang Dynasty in the year 907 CE.
After 30 years of struggle, by the year 939, the people of Nam Viet had won political independence
from their giant northern neighbour after a thousand years of colonisation.
Both the formidable Mongols and the powerful Ming dynasty later tried to reassert control
over Vietnam, but both efforts ended in humiliating defeats for the invaders.
So from 939 until the conquest of the French in the 19th century then, the Vietnamese were
masters of their own fate.
From the late 10th century on, a succession of local dynasties ruled a politically independent
Vietnam, beginning with the Luoc dynasty, which governed for about three decades between
980 and 1009.
Although the Vietnamese were now free from direct Chinese cultural exports, particularly
ideas about government continued to play a critical role in Vietnam and even helped
legitimise claims to authority amongst the various local dynasties.
So the kings of Nam Viet ruled from Chinese style palaces in the midst of forbidden city
type complexes, modelled on those in Chang An and later Beijing.
The bureaucracy was also confusion.
There were secretariats, ministries and a bureau of censorship to control corruption.
And potential bureaucrats still had to master the Confucian classics and take the civil
service exam just as we've seen so recently was the case in Korea and Japan.
But the Vietnamese scholar bureaucrat never enjoyed the sort of prestige that their Chinese
counterparts enjoyed.
Only because the control of central government at the village level was much less secure
in Vietnam.
Local officials tended to identify more with the peasantry than with their government masters
in the capital.
And so they looked out for local above national interests.
Often it was the same local officials, ostensibly of course representatives of the central government
who led uprisings against the ruling dynasty when its demands on the common people became
too oppressive.
Government scholar bureaucrats also had to contend with competition from well educated
Buddhist monks.
But unlike the situation in China, Korea or Japan, these Vietnamese Buddhist monks had
much stronger links with the villages and with the peasants than they did with the state
hierarchy which made them more resistant to the bureaucrats.
Buddhism had proven itself remarkably adaptable to local cultural traditions wherever it spread
of course.
We've seen this several times.
So it's no surprise that the Vietnamese version of Buddhism held women in very high esteem.
In a region where women had relative equality and even public power, this of course further
endeared the monks to the community.
So if I can sum all this up, independent Vietnam had so many competing centers of power that
this prevented the dynastic rulers and their bureaucrats from achieving the sort of authority
over the people that their counterparts in the other East Asian states enjoyed.
Not that this situation prevented the central government from constantly trying to expand
the size of their state and the power of their control.
Despite the watering down of Chinese style authority, the well-organized Vietnamese
central state still enjoyed significant advantages over its neighbors to the South and to the
West.
The main adversaries of the Vietnamese during this period were the cam and Khmer peoples
who occupied both lowland areas to the South that the Vietnamese sought to settle themselves.
So the Vietnamese launched periodic raids into the region, but they also traded with
the hill peoples who dwelt above the lowlands for various forest products.
But these contacts were limited to commerce only because the Vietnamese regarded the hill
dwellers as, and I quote, naked savages and so tried to keep cultural exchange to a minimum.
With the steep, malarial jungle covered hills above the Red River Valley occupied by these
nude savages, the only expansionary route open to the South was along the narrow coastal
plain.
And so with their well-organized bureaucracy and their much larger military, the Vietnamese
fought a series of long and generally successful expansionary wars between the 11th and 18th
century against the cams, an Indianized people who lived along these southern coasts.
As a result, the cams were driven back into the highlands where their descendants live
to this day.
Once settled on the cams former farmlands along the coasts, the Vietes turned their attention
to the Khmer people who had quietly occupied the delta of the mighty Mekong River while
the Vietes had been preoccupied with the cams.
Once again, Indian-style Khmer armies were no match for these well-trained Chinese-style
Vietnamese troops.
By the time French missionaries and colonialists started to turn up in the Mekong Delta in
the 18th century, the Vietnamese had already occupied much of the delta of the river and
were pushing into territory that today is actually part of Cambodia.
As Vietnamese armies, farmers and administrators moved further and further away from the capital
in Hanoi, the ruling dynasties found it more and more difficult to maintain control of the
provinces in the south, just as the Chinese had done centuries earlier in their attempts
to colonize the Red River Valley.
As the southern Vietes intermarried with cam peoples and with Khmer's, so differences
in culture between north and south also began to emerge.
Although both groups still identified themselves as Vietnamese, the Northerners came to view
the southerners as less energetic, less intelligent even, as slower in speech, slower in movement,
generally less sophisticated.
And this meant that as Hanoi's hold on the south weakened, regional military commanders
became more independent.
By the 16th century, the Nien family had emerged in the south to challenge the legitimacy of
the Trinh dynasty ruling from Hanoi in the north.
For the next two centuries, the Nien, who ruled from their capital, Hoi, on the northern
Mekong Delta, fought the Hanoi-based Trinh and Vietnam was essentially divided into a
north and south political structure.
Now, this is a situation that no doubt sounds very familiar to many of you.
Isn't it extraordinary how far back the roots of north-south divisions often extend in world
history, particularly in places like Korea and now in Vietnam?
Yet neither the Nien nor the Trinh dynasties accepted this division as permanent and each
sought to reunite all of Vietnam under a single king.
This epic struggle so absorbed the energies of the Vietnamese people that, frankly, it
distracted them from recognizing a new growing external menace.
And this time, for the first time in its history, the threat to Vietnam came not from China
in the north, but from a distant land that the Vietnamese knew almost nothing about.
It came from France.
As we'll see in future lectures, European colonizing powers were destined to have a
dramatic impact on much of East and Southeast Asia and also, frankly, on the core elements
of Eastern civilization.
But perhaps we need to pause here just for a moment and take stock of where we are chronologically
in this course to help minimize the confusion I'm probably causing you all by jumping backwards
and forwards in time like this as we explore these different regions and their histories.
Now in China, you might remember, we have taken our story up to the end of the mighty
Tang dynasty.
At the very beginning of the 10th century of the common era, we will return to China
very shortly to trace, in a series of eight lectures, Chinese fortunes under the Song
dynasty, followed by the Yuan, then the Ming, and finally the Qing dynasty, which will bring
us through to the early 20th century.
As we'll see, Europeans first turn up in China in the form of Jesuit missionaries during
the Ming dynasty, and under the succeeding Qing dynasty, Europeans came to utterly dominate
Chinese fortunes.
In Korea, of course, we brought our story through to the end of the Mongol occupation
late in the 14th century.
When we returned to Korea to bring that part of the story up to the 20th century, we all
see far less interaction between the European powers and an increasingly reclusive Korea,
which instead was destined to lose its independence to a colonizing Japan in the 19th century.
And we've taken our series on Japan through to the dissolution of the Heian period in
the year 1185, and the replacement of an imperial political structure with a quasi-feudal one.
When we return to follow the story of Japan from its so-called medieval period through
to the Meiji Restoration and into the 20th century, we'll see far more substantial interaction
with the Europeans.
But because Japan was successfully able to reinvent itself as a modern industrial power
under the Meiji, the archipelago never became a European colony.
So having taken stock of our chronological situation, let me begin to conclude this lecture
on Vietnam now by saying something about the impact of French colonization.
So French missionaries first turn up on the shores of Vietnam during the 17th century,
having been rebuffed by the shoguns in Japan, the warlords, the military rulers of Japan,
as we'll see later in the course.
Initially the Vietnamese were very welcoming.
They gave the missionaries ample opportunity to try and convert the people of Vietnam to
Catholicism.
And many did convert, thousands in fact.
And French merchants soon followed the missionaries to begin to establish trade relations between
Southeast Asia and France.
But by the late 18th century, French interest in Vietnam had become less spiritual and decidedly
more political, even imperialistic.
After the Taishong dynasty staged a major rebellion in the late 1770s, the dynasty gained
control over most of the country, virtually eliminating both the Trinh and Nien dynasties
in the process.
But the French for various reasons decided to throw their support behind a surviving
Nien prince in the south, Nien Anh, who used French resources and French weapons to attack
and eventually destroy the Taishong rulers in the north.
Nien Anh then proclaimed a united Vietnam and ruled from the old Trinh capital at Hoi
in the south, rewarding his French allies with a special place in the court.
The Nien dynasty was the first in centuries to rule United Vietnam, and Nien Anh proclaimed
himself the Gia Long Emperor of Vietnam.
But the French were to be bitterly disappointed by the backing of Gia Long because he and
his successors proved to be arch-conservatives who were deeply committed to strengthening
Confucian values, this great ancient tradition of Eastern civilization.
Gia Long successors came to view the French Catholics as a danger to the dynasty and began
a campaign of persecution against the missionaries.
But raged by this, church authorities in France demanded action from the government,
and Napoleon III approved a naval expedition in 1858 to punish the Vietnamese.
By 1862 the court at Hoi had been forced to cede several provinces in the Mekong Delta
to France, and by 1890 the whole of the country was under the control of the French.
This was the start of their great colonial empire in Southeast Asia.
With the French in control on the cusp of the 20th century, we take leave now of Vietnam.
We will return to events in the region before this course is concluded, but as many of you
know failed attempts by the French to reassert colonial control over their Southeast Asian
colonial empire after the Second World War eventually got caught up with the Cold War,
and tens of thousands of young American soldiers learned again just how deeply the roots of
Vietnamese resistance against foreign control were just as countless thousands of Chinese
and even Mongol soldiers had learned centuries and millennia before this.
We will stay in Southeast Asia for one more lecture.
So please join me next time as we discuss the history and the culture of other states
of this fascinating region, states that were more powerfully influenced by Indian and Islamic
culture than they were by the Chinese.
