In our last lecture, the first of this two lecture series on Southeast Asia, we looked
at the culture of Vietnam and traced the history of that nation from its earliest interactions
with ancient China through to its colonization by the French in the 19th century.
We concluded with Vietnam on the cusp of the 20th century, a century in which, as I'm
sure many of you remember, failed attempts by the French to reassert colonial control
over their Southeast Asian empire, eventually fed into Cold War tensions and dragged the
United States military into a long and costly war.
As well as being interested in history, however, at its heart this course is about the origins
and evolution of the core philosophical, political, religious, artistic and cultural practices
and beliefs that distinguish Eastern civilization.
So in this second lecture, I want to return to religion specifically and trace the spread
and impact of Buddhism, of course, but now also Hinduism and even Islam on Southeast
Asia to see what transformational impact these foreign belief systems had on Southeast Asia
in particular and on Eastern civilization more generally.
Of course, we have already had much to say about the impact of Buddhism on Eastern civilization.
In previous lectures, we examined its origins in India back in the sixth century before
the common era, then it's spread along the Silk Roads into China during the first Silk
Roads era, partly facilitated at least by the tolerant attitude of the great Kanishka
and other Kushan kings.
We then observed the impact of Buddhism on China during the age of disunity and its
extraordinary growth amongst both elites and common people during the Sui and Tang
dynasties.
More recently in the course, we have discussed the extraordinary impact Buddhism had on early
Korean and Japanese culture, where it utterly transformed not only religious practices and
art in those two regions, but as we've seen also politics.
At the same time that Buddhism was spreading north from India, into Central and East Asia,
it was also beginning to attract a following in Southeast Asia.
Again, the Silk Roads played a critical role here, although this time it was the Maritime
Silk Roads.
A Buddhist ideas and beliefs were carried by sailors who travelled from India eastwards
across the Indian Ocean to Southeast Asia.
Buddhist mariners began to trade across the waters between India and Southeast Asia from
at least as early as 500 BCE, perhaps much earlier, and these exchanges intensified during
the first Silk Roads era between roughly 100 BCE and 200 CE.
As a result, by the first century of the common era, clear signs of Indian cultural influence
were appearing all over the Southeast Asian region.
In Java, Sumatra, other islands of modern Indonesia and also the mainland regions of
the Malay Peninsula, Cambodia and Vietnam, rulers of states began to adopt the Indian
model of kingship and to call themselves Raja, or kings in the manner of Indian rulers.
Many of these states also adopted the Indian classical language of Sanskrit as the means
for written communication.
As we saw in our previous lecture about Vietnam, many rulers also converted to Buddhism and
appointed Buddhist advisors to their courts.
By associating themselves with an honoured and ancient religion like Buddhism and by
patronising the Buddhist establishment, this enhanced the legitimacy of rulers and gave
them valuable allies in the monastic hierarchies.
But Buddhism was not the only Indian religion to make its way across these maritime trade
routes to Southeast Asia.
Hinduism also left an indelible mark on the region.
In addition to reading the great Buddhist treatises, many Southeast Asian rulers also
began to embrace the classics of Indian literature, like the great epic poems the Mahabharata
and the Ramayana, which promoted Hindu values.
These rulers did not show any enthusiasm for the caste system, however, which is interesting.
And they also continued to acknowledge the many nature spirits that their people had
worshipped for thousands of years before this.
But they did find Hinduism, like Buddhism, attractive because the faith supported the
principle of monarchical rule, particularly the idea that some were born into a particular
class whose destiny it was to rule over others.
You can imagine how attractive this idea was to kings and other elites.
So I think I need to say a few words here about the origins and ideas of Hinduism as
we further investigate the influence of outside belief systems on Eastern civilization.
You might remember from an earlier lecture that Buddhism, which emerged as an alternative
to the sort of classical Vedic religion of India, attracted widespread popularity in
India in the centuries either side of the common era divide.
Now Hinduism emerged in India at more or less the same time as a very syncretic faith that
incorporated some of the classical Vedic texts, many pre-Aryan practices that is dating right
back to the ancient Indus civilization, and also many gods of different origin.
In response to the success of Buddhism, Hinduism was able to transform itself into an immensely
popular religion of salvation, and ultimately Hinduism triumphed because it became a faith
that addressed the needs of the Indian people, frankly more effectively than Buddhism was
able to.
Hindu values are most clearly represented in the famous Bhagavad Gita, the Song of the
Lord.
This is a short poetic work which illustrates both the obligations of Hinduism and also
its rewards.
The Gita was composed by many poets between 300 BCE and 300 CE and probably took its final
revised form sometime around 400 of the common era.
The Bhagavad Gita illustrates an episode from the Mahabharata and it takes the form of a
dialogue between Arjuna, who is a war-weary warrior from the elite Kshatriya caste, and
his charioteer Krishna, who was actually the powerful Hindu god Vishnu, disguised as a
lowly human.
Vishnu convinces Arjuna, who is sick of killing and does not want to fight anymore, that only
by active engagement in the world of caste obligations is it possible to attain salvation.
In other words, salvation is not achieved through the sort of meditative detachment,
the renunciation of ordinary life that Buddhism demands, but rather through active participation
in the world and through the meeting of the responsibilities of one's caste.
Again, we can see here why kings would be particularly attracted to Hinduism because
it explicitly validates the notion that there must be leaders, there must be those who are
led, there must be kings and their subjects, each with their specific roles and duties in life.
This led to the articulation, I guess, of an idea that there are four essential aims of human life,
aims that are still at the heart of Hinduism today.
One must be obedient to religious and moral laws.
Here's the first law.
This is called dharma.
One should pursue economic well-being and honest prosperity.
This is artha.
One should enjoy social, physical and sexual pleasures.
This is karma.
And one must work for the salvation of one's soul.
This is moksha.
A proper balance of the first three aims would help individuals attain the salvation articulated
in the fourth moksha.
By articulating this supremely realistic and frankly much less demanding aims for life,
Hinduism eventually replaced Buddhism as the most prominent religion in India where Buddhism
was perceived to have grown more remote from the masses.
Later Buddhist monks frankly did not communicate their message to larger society as zealously
as their predecessors had.
So Hinduism attracted increasing popular support and also patronage from the wealthy.
The powerful Gupta emperors who eventually reunited India and ruled a great empire in
the fifth and sixth centuries of the common era, and many of their successors patronized
Hinduism in the same way that Ashoka and Kanishka had done for Buddhism 700 years earlier by this
stage.
Over the centuries that followed Hinduism and even the more recent faith of Islam
has completely eclipsed Buddhism in India where it is now very much a minority faith.
The first Southeast Asian state to reflect strong Indian and Hindu influence was Funan.
This was located in the very lower reaches of the Mekong River Valley and was thus beyond
the control of the Vietnamese rulers that we discussed last time.
Now Funan grew very wealthy indeed because it also controlled the Isthmus of Krah.
This is a narrow portion of the Malay Peninsula only some 25 to 30 miles wide I'm sorry across
which merchants were able to transport their trade goods because this allowed them to avoid a
much longer ocean voyage around the tip of the Malay Peninsula.
Because of this the rulers of Funan were able to control the bulk of the trade between India
and China. No surprise they grew very wealthy indeed they used this wealth to construct elaborate
systems of water storage and irrigation that are still visible to aerial archaeologists today.
The rulers of Funan also took to calling themselves Raja and they claimed divine
sanction for their rule the same way that kings in India were doing.
They also introduced ceremonies and rituals worshiping Shiva, Vishnu and other Hindu gods
like the great elephant god Ganesh. As these traditions became more entrenched at court
they spread amongst the common people as well helping embed Hindu ethics, Hindu practices
deeply into Southeast Asian culture. But during the sixth century of the common era Funan was
wracked by a bitter internal power struggle and this allowed their state to be overwhelmed
eventually by by cams who then settled in southern Vietnam and Camus who settled in
the modern day state of Cambodia. By the late sixth century the once powerful Funan state
had passed into oblivion. After the fall of Funan political leadership of Southeast Asia
passed into the hands of the rulers of the kingdom of Srivijaya which was based on the island of
Sumatra. Between 670 and 1025 Srivijaya elites built a powerful navy and controlled commerce
throughout the region. Their navy was so strong that many port cities all over the region were
forced to exceed to their authority. They also kept open and all see root between China and India
eliminating now the need for this overland portage across the Isthmus of Krah. Unlike Funan however
the rulers and trade officials of Srivijaya were devout Buddhists and that faith prospered under
their patronage. We have a real sense here I think of of these powerful ideologies in a state
of almost constant competition throughout the region. Srivijaya remained a wealthy and powerful
trading state for almost 400 years until the expansive South Indian state of Chola eclipsed them
in the 11th century. With the decline of Srivijaya three new kingdoms are Angkor,
a Singosari and Majapahit dominated Southeast Asian affairs until the 16th century.
The most famous of these kingdoms is Angkor based in modern Cambodia and ruled by the Khmer's for a
long period from 889 through to 1431 CE. The magnificent buildings at Angkor Tom and Angkor Wat
built by the Khmer's are further testament to the the powerful influence of Indian culture
on the region. The kings of the Khmer's in the 9th century built their capital at Angkor Tom
and with the help of Brahmin advisors designed the city as a microscopic reflection of the Hindu
world. At the heart of this great complex was a temple representing the Himalayan Mount Meru,
the sacred abode of Shiva. But during the 12th century the Khmer's turned from Hinduism to
Buddhism and so began to add Buddhist temples to the complex without removing the earlier Hindu
structures. Further evidence of this extraordinary syncretic mixing of these two very different
faiths in the region of Southeast Asia. The complex was vast it formed a square with each side
two miles long surrounded by a moat filled by a nearby river. During the 12th century the
Khmer kings also constructed a smaller but much more elaborate temple center at nearby Angkor Wat.
In 1431 Angkor was abandoned by the Khmer's after it was invaded by the Thai people. The
magnificent temples were overgrown by the jungle and completely forgotten for 400 years until
French missionaries and colonists rediscovered the sites in the 19th century. Today the the
temple complexes UNESCO World Heritage sites obviously stand as a magnificent example of the
influence of Indian cultural traditions on Southeast Asia. I've tried to show you in this
lecture that actually this lecture and the first one that Southeast Asia functioned for a very long
time as a sort of commercial and cultural middle ground between Arabia, India, East Africa and of
course East Asia. For centuries in the great ports of the region Chinese and East Asian traders
met their Indian counterparts. High value export goods from Tong China were transferred to Arabian
ships or Indian ships and imports from as far away as the Mediterranean were loaded into the
empty Chinese vessels to be carried back to China, Korea and Japan. But now we need to add something
else to this already very intriguing mix because from the eighth century on much of the coastal
trade of India came to be dominated by Muslim merchant communities who had settled in western
Indian regions like Gujarat following the spread of Islam into the subcontinent. This meant that
as well as classical Chinese, classical Indian cultural elements Islamic culture now also began
to filter into Southeast Asia to add to this already extraordinary rich syncretism that was
already going on. It was after the collapse of the Srivijaya Kingdom in the 11th century that
a way was opened up for the widespread introduction of Islam. Although the rulers of Srivijaya had
opened their ports to Indian traders because they were devout Buddhists there had been little
incentive for the traders and sailors of Southeast Asian ports to convert to Islam.
But with the collapse of Srivijaya Muslim missionary activity in the region increased
dramatically. Before I comment upon the success of these missionary efforts perhaps I should
pause here for a moment and also say something now something briefly about the origins and beliefs
of Islam. The word Islam as I'm sure you know means submission signifying obedience to the
will of Allah the only god in this monotheistic religion of course. One who accepts the Islamic
faith is a Muslim that is one who has submitted. From the moment the religion of Islam appeared
it quickly attracted followers and also quickly took on political and social significance as well
and it soon reached far beyond its Arabian homeland. By the eighth century the the world of
Islam the realm of Islam was matched only by Tang China as the great political cultural and social
giant of all of Afro-Eurasia. The prophet Muhammad was born into a world of nomadic
Bedouin pastoralists and merchants in about 570 of the common era. His parents died before he was
six and he was raised by his uncle and grandfather. He was then employed by a wealthy woman a widow
named Khadija who he married in or about the year 595. By the age of 30 Muhammad was a successful
merchant living in Mecca where the people recognized many gods and where there were many Jewish and
Christian communities. But sometime around the year 610 the 40 year old Muhammad underwent a profound
spiritual transformation. He became convinced that there was only one true deity Allah which
means God and that recognition of any other gods was wicked. Muhammad experienced visions which he
interpreted as revelations that were being delivered to him by the archangel Gabriel a messenger from
God. So without necessarily meaning to found a new religion he started to tell his family and
friends about these revelations and by 628 a zealous minority of Meccans had joined Muhammad's
circle. As Muhammad spoke about the revelations he had received some of his followers prepared
written texts of his teachings. So during the early 620s devout followers compiled these
written versions and issued them as the Quran the recitation the holy book of Islam.
Muhammad's new faith was based on five simple obligations. It's an extraordinary how all the
worlds the great global religions of the world are based on fairly simple obligations. Actually
it's not so extraordinary it makes a lot of sense. Muslims must acknowledge Allah as the
only god and Muhammad as the last prophet. Muslims must pray to Allah daily while facing Mecca.
They must fast during the daylight hours of the month of Ramadan. They must contribute arms for the
relief of the poor and they must try and undertake the hajj the pilgrimage to Mecca at least once
in their lives. Now because Islamic monotheism offended the polytheistic Arabs the growing
popularity of Muhammad's preaching brought him into religious conflict with the rulers of Mecca.
Eventually the pressure mounted until in 622 Muhammad was forced to flee to the rival trading
city of Yathrib which the Muslims soon started calling Medina the city of the prophet. Known as
the Hijra or migration the year of Muhammad's move to Medina the year 622 of the common era
serves as the official starting date for the Islamic calendar. Muhammad and his followers
eventually grew strong enough to return to Mecca to defeat the authorities there and then launch
a series of campaigns against other towns and other clans. By the time of the prophet's death
in 632 much of Arabia was under their control. Now after Muhammad's death his advisors selected
one of his closest friends and disciples to serve as Caliph which means deputy. Abu Bakia
thus became head of the Islamic state as well as chief judge chief religious and military leader
and under his exceptional leadership Islamic armies began to carry their message
into the Byzantine worlds into the Sasanian empire well beyond Arabia. They attacked at
precisely the moment that these great civilizations were exhausted and soon conquered Palestine
and Mesopotamia. During the 640s Muslim troops also conquered Egypt right across North Africa
by 651 they had toppled the Sasanians and incorporated much of Persia into their realm.
By 711 they were in Afghanistan northern India and then they crossed the Straits of Gibraltar
conquering most of Spain. The speed and scale of the expansion of Islam is frankly one of the most
extraordinary phenomena in all of world history. Despite the reputation for jihad or holy war
in most areas where Islam spread it was peaceful contacts and voluntary conversion
that were much more important than force and in the islands and coastal ports of southeast Asia
it was trading contacts that facilitated the spread of the religion there.
The first areas to be won over to Islam were small port towns on the northern coasts of
the island of Sumatra. From there the religion spread across the Straits of Malacca to the
north into Malaya then on to Java where after a long and bitter struggle with Hindu Buddhist kings
in the interior the whole island was eventually converted. From here Islam was carried by merchants
and missionaries onto the Salabis islands then on to Mindanao in the southern Philippines.
This pattern of the the spread of the Islamic faith shows that the the port cities and merchants
throughout southeast Asia were the most receptive to the new faith and this clearly demonstrates the
power of trade as an instrument of conversion. Once one of the key cities in a trading network
converted it was in the best interest of the other cities to follow suit to enhance personal
relationships with other merchants and to provide a common basis in Muslim law now to regulate
business deals. Conversion also tied more tightly these port cities to the great trade
networks already established by Muslim merchants thus linking the Mediterranean the Middle East
Arabia and India with Southeast and East Asia. The version of Islam that was eventually embraced
by many Southeast Asian communities was suffused with mystical strains and was able to accommodate
itself to much earlier sort of animus and also Hindu and Buddhist beliefs and rituals.
Active amongst the spreading of the faith were the Sufis a radical and and mystical
sect of Islam that many believe possessed magical powers. As Sufis established mosques
and schools in the region they allowed their converts to retain some of their pre-Islamic
beliefs similar to the way as we've seen in which earlier Buddhist missionaries to China
had attempted to confuse Buddhism with Taoist and Confucian ideas. Because of this approach and the
long tradition of relative gender equality in Southeast Asia that we discussed last time
women were allowed to have much greater power and even equality within the family and in public
society than in more traditional Muslim states. As in Vietnam trading in local and regional markets
continued to be dominated by small-scale female entrepreneurs and in western Sumatra and some
other regions lineage continued to be traced through the female line even after the arrival
of Islam and its tendency to promote I guess male domination certainly male descent.
Looking at all these developments from a world historian's perspective we can say that the huge
Islamic caliphates that appeared throughout Afro-Eurasia following the spread of Islam
functioned as a political commercial and cultural bridge that connected much of that vast world zone
into a single zone of exchanges including many areas beyond direct Islamic political control.
By the ninth century extensive Muslim merchant communities were in residence in Spain all across
North Africa all over the Middle East of course in India now in Central Asia and of course in the
great southern port cities of Tang Dynasty China and over the centuries that followed conversions
throughout Southeast Asia this also brought the sailors and merchants of that extensive region
also into the Muslim cultural, cultural orbit. Now some conversions also took place within China
the oldest mosque in China I remember was built in the great Tang imperial capital of Chang'an
and still today as I've mentioned to you a couple of times this is a place of extraordinary
serenity in the midst of the the bustle and the noise and the excitement of the the great modern
city of Xian as I've personally experienced and as I'm sure many of you have.
But it's also worth making the point again here that most foreign religions with the obvious
exception of Buddhism were unable to make much headway against the ancient and deeply ingrained
foundational ideas of Eastern civilization ideas like Confucianism and Taoism.
As we return to China for our next series of lectures we'll continue to explore the fate of
foreign religions in China including Christianity which despite the best efforts of brilliant
Jesuit missionaries in the 16th century was similarly unable to win many converts amongst the
Chinese. But while there is no denying the roots of Eastern civilization run very deep indeed
that's not to say that these external cultural ideas we've been discussing have not played a
role in in moderating and influencing these roots and this has been particularly the case
in Southeast Asia. In the next group of lectures we will return to China where we have much to
explore economic growth under the Song dynasty, subjugation again under the Mongols, the return
of indigenous rule under the Ming and the Qing dynasty which despite the fact that China was
now controlled again by foreign Manchu rulers in this case was a period of deeply conservative rule
that had major ramifications not just for Eastern civilization but frankly for the
making of the modern world. So please join me next time as we attempt to answer a very intriguing
question was there really almost an industrial revolution in Song China in the 11th century
700 years before the industrial revolution took place in Europe. See you then.
