Well, welcome back to China.
After our recent excursions into the fascinating early history and culture of Korea, of Japan,
and most recently of Southeast Asia, it's time to return to China now and pick up our
story there in about the year 900 of the common era.
In the next 12 lectures, I intend to bring our consideration of the foundations and evolution
of Eastern civilization up to the early 20th century by exploring the last four dynasties
of Chinese history, the Song, the Yuan, or Mongol, the Ming, and the Qing dynasties,
and also the Chosun dynasty in Korea, and the Tokugawa, Shogunate, and the Meiji eras
in Japan.
We will have a pair of lectures on each of the Chinese dynasties first, focused on developments
in the foundational ideas that we've explored much earlier in the course, ideas about political
organization, about how to manage a vast economy, ideas about philosophy, religion,
social relations, and, of course, attitudes about gender relationships.
But the critical idea I want you to take away from this first lecture on the Song dynasty
is this.
Under the Southern Song, China states a remarkable agricultural and then industrial revolution
that turned it into the economic powerhouse of the world.
As we'll see, the Song dynasty was founded when a military leader of one of the small
states that formed in the wake of Tang dynasty collapse staged a palace coup in the year
960.
Although this leader became an effective emperor, the Song faced continuous threats from the
militarized nomads in the North, no surprise to us there, who they placated through diplomacy
and through the payment of tributes in silk and silver.
But all this was to no avail because in the end the nomads overran Northern China again
and the Song were driven south where they ruled Southern China only from their new capital
of Hangzhou.
And this was the moment when the Southern Song government began to lead China into a
150-year-long period of unprecedented economic growth.
The Southern Song state was smaller, more like the small commercial states of Europe
that emerged at the end of the Middle Ages and particularly into the Renaissance.
So defense was a constant problem and to defend itself Song rulers had to find new sources
of revenue.
Because of this need the Song became intensely interested in commerce and in other forms
of economic innovation and this explains why there was a burst of astonishing new inventions
in China.
These economic developments are the main subject for this first lecture on the Song dynasty,
a lecture that could be subtitled nearly an industrial revolution in China half a millennium
before the industrial revolution occurred in Europe.
So let's pick up the story early in the 10th century.
Following the collapse of the Tang dynasty in the year 907 of the common era, China entered
two short-lived and tumultuous periods known as the five dynasties and then the ten kingdoms.
In the north dynasties succeeded each other in quick succession, the longest I think lasting
only for 16 years.
The irrigation systems fell apart, floods devastated the countryside and famine was widespread.
Refugees fled to southern China where although the political situation was more stable warfare
between warlords was endemic.
This chaotic half century was brought to an end by the Northern Song dynasty which was
proclaimed in the year 960 and which by 978 had reimposed imperial rule over most of China.
The Song dynasty is divided into two periods, the Northern Song is dated from 960 to 1126,
the Northern Song rule from Kaifeng in Northern China as their capital and then the Southern
Song dynasty dated from 1126 to 1279 which ruled from their great southern capital in
modern day Hangzhou.
Although a combined reign duration of more than three centuries looks like evidence of
pretty successful dynastic rule, in fact the Song never built a powerful state like that
of the Han or the Tang.
Now the reason for this is that Song rulers generally mistrusted military leaders and
preferred to keep the military under the control, the firm control of bureaucrats.
This meant that Song elites placed much greater emphasis on civil administration, certainly
on industry, on education and the arts as we'll see.
So they were never as militarily strong as their predecessors.
It was the first Song emperor himself who inaugurated this policy.
Zhao Kuang Yin, who adopted the reign name of Song Taizu, began his career as a junior
military leader for one of these small dynasties of Northern China and he rose steadily through
the ranks to the position of general.
He then led a mutiny against the ruling emperor of the so-called later Zhou dynasty, justifying
this breach of trust, I guess, by claiming that there was urgent need for competent rule
in the face of dangerous threats from the Qitan nomads in the north.
Zhao Kuang Yin had a reputation for honesty and for effective leadership and in 960 his
troops proclaimed him emperor, a position he then held until his death 16 years later
in 976.
Over the centuries since historians have also proclaimed their trust in him, sanctioning
his mutiny by arguing that, like a good Confucian ruler, this was done for the good of the country.
The usurper general was, of course, keenly aware that he too could be overthrown at any
time.
Hence this desire I mentioned to try and bring the military under effective civilian administration.
So over the next several years, he and his army consolidated song rule throughout Northern
China.
As a military commander, Taizu was naturally aware of the importance of having a powerful
army and specialists estimate that the song may have spent maybe 75% of its annual revenue
during this early period on military expenditures.
But again, Taizu was also fearful of the potential for regional commanders to become
autonomous warlords.
So he enacted a series of various measures to keep the military under bureaucratic control.
These were very thoughtful, very clever.
They included dividing the army into three balanced units, rotating troops and officers
regularly throughout these units, separating financial control from military control and
also establishing a strongly centralized command structure.
He even persuaded some of his more independent generals to retire to a life of luxury.
Ultimately, the song completely subordinated the control of the entire military apparatus
to high ranking civilian government officials who constituted the Privy Council.
In fact, Song Taizu regarded all state officials from the lowest to the highest as servants
of the imperial government.
So he set about also reforming the political administration of the state to increase the
power of the emperor.
To reduce the control of the highest ranking officials, assistance were also appointed
to these positions, which led to sort of a further division, if you like, of duties and
thus also a diminution of individual power.
The early emperors also greatly expanded the size of the bureaucracy and made sure that
it was based on merit, not just on rank.
And this, of course, meant the reintroduction of the highly competitive Confucian civil
service exam, which you will remember was first introduced right back in the second
century BCE under the Han and then further entrenched as one of the pillars of good government
by both the Sui and the Tang dynasties.
Those who made it all the way through and passed the highest level palace exam were
awarded the title of Jinche or advanced scholar.
This is the highest degree that could be obtained and these officials were eligible to serve
obviously as the highest officials in the land.
But there were also other routes, actually much easier exams, for example, into the lower
levels of administration.
And this meant that ultimately the Song accepted many more candidates into the bureaucracy than
the Sui or the Tang had done.
They also paid these bureaucrats very well indeed.
That is, in exchange for their loyalty, the Song rewarded their officials handsomely.
These measures resulted in perhaps the most centralized form of imperial government ever
seen in world history to that point.
But these reforms also caused two big problems that weakened the dynasty and eventually led
to the fall of the Northern Song.
Now the first problem, no surprise here, was financial.
This vast administration cost a fortune to maintain.
As the size of the bureaucracy and the employees' wages grew, the imperial treasury came under
enormous pressure.
Conservative officials in a manner that actually sounds particularly modern, I think, began
to argue that we need budget-cutting reforms.
They argued against any military action taken against the rest of Georgian nomads in the
North, for example, because these military endeavors were seen as just too expensive.
Efforts by the administration to meet debt by raising taxes obviously upset the peasants
who staged two major rebellions early in the 12th century.
But by that point, well-paid bureaucrats so dominated the Song administration that it
was impossible to seriously reform the system.
The second major problem the Northern Song faced was military.
Partly this problem was caused by the fact that scholar bureaucrats had little military
education or perhaps even little talent for military affairs, yet it was they who are
now making the tactical decisions to send Song armies into the field or not.
It's hardly a coincidence, then, that nomadic peoples flourished again along China's northern
borders throughout the entire Northern Song period.
As we saw in our lectures on Korea from the early 10th through to the early 12th century,
the Qitan, a semi-nomadic people from Mongolia, created a vast steppe empire stretching from
Northern Korea back up into Mongolia.
The Qitan people constantly threatened the Song and demanded and received large tribute
payments of silk and silver.
Then in the early 12th century, another even more formidable nomadic group, the Jurchen,
who we also met in one of our Korea lectures, attacked and conquered the Qitan and in 1123
invaded Northern China, sweeping across the Great Walls and down to the Yellow River Valley.
The Jurchen captured the Song capital of Kaifeng.
They declared the establishment of a new dynasty, their own dynasty, the Jin dynasty, and then
immediately pushed further south, intent upon conquering all of China.
Hard pressed by the Jurchen, the Song court fled south to the Yangtze Valley, where a son
of the last Northern Song emperor stemmed the Jurchen tide and declared himself first emperor
of the Southern Song dynasty in the year 1127.
And then on, the Song dynasty survived and ruled in southern China only.
A treaty was signed in 1141, which established the border between the Southern Song and the
Jurchen Jin dynasty, roughly halfway between the Great River Systems of the Yellow and
Yangtze.
The Song had no option other than to acknowledge the Jin now as their symbolic overlords and
pay them tribute.
But this worked, this secured the state, because although the Jin tried a couple more times
to conquer southern China, they were never successful.
So for about 150 years, China was divided again, right across the middle, and this remained
the situation until 1279, when the Mongols turned up and ended the rule of both these
dynasties for good.
Let's turn now to the main focus of this lecture.
The revolutionary economic developments that essentially modernized China under the Southern
Song.
The Southern Song was responsible for a remarkable series of agricultural, technological, industrial
and commercial and financial developments that transformed China, as I said at the start
of the lecture, into the economic powerhouse of the world.
So the Southern Song presided over this land of enormous prosperity, and this economic surge
had implications well beyond China, because this stimulated trade and production throughout
much of the Eastern Hemisphere, including the Indian Ocean.
These impacts can best be explored, I think, if we look at three aspects of Song economic
growth.
The first of these developments was in the agricultural sector, particularly the impact
of new strains of fast growing rice.
It's interesting that generally in world history, until the very modern era at least,
the prerequisite for economic growth has always been an increase in agricultural production,
which is of course the largest sector of the pre-modern economy.
Now this was just as true of the Industrial Revolution in Britain in the 18th century
as it was of the situation in Song China in the 12th.
Indeed, it's doubtful if there would have been an Industrial Revolution in Britain if
there had not first been a complete revolution of the agricultural sector, and then also
a social revolution that fed into an Industrial Revolution.
During the attempted invasions of Vietnam by the Tang Dynasty that we discussed in an
earlier lecture, the Chinese had encountered new strains of fast ripening rice, and these
allowed cultivators to harvest two, sometimes even three, crops of rice in a single year
instead of just one.
This strain of chumper rice was introduced into the fertile fields of southern China,
leading to a greatly expanded supply of food.
And of course this increased agricultural impact had dramatic demographic consequences.
In the year 600 CE, the population of China, as best as we can estimate, was about 45 million.
But by 1200 CE, the population of China had increased to roughly 115 million.
This rapid population growth was a result of greater agricultural productivity certainly,
but also of the well-organized food distribution transport networks that had been put in place
by the by the sway, by the tongue, and also by the northern Song.
Increased food supplies and increased populations naturally encouraged the growth of cities,
so that during the southern Song China was by far the most urbanized state or region
in the world.
The great capital of Hangzhou had close to two million residents, but several other cities
of the southern Song were home to a million people each, and scores, scores of other cities
had populations of 100,000 plus.
By way of comparison, we can estimate the population of Paris in about the year 1200
to have been around 250,000.
London only about 80,000.
City dwellers supported hundreds of restaurants, as we can imagine.
Tabins flourished.
There were tea houses, of course, brothels, music halls, theaters, club houses,
gardens, markets everywhere, all sorts of specialized shops dealing in silk and gems,
porcelain, expensive lack of wear.
Hangzhou residents had some particular and very interesting local customs.
The many taverns had had several floors, and the sophisticated urban patrons would would
move to higher or lower floors, according on their drinking plans for the night.
So those who only wanted a quick cup or two of wine would sit down at the street level,
but those planning a long evening of drinking and dining look for tables on higher floors.
Of course, something very similar to this still takes place in great Chinese restaurants
and taverns to this very day.
Another result of increased food production was the emergence of a commercial agricultural
sector.
Because of the large harvest being produced by the fast-growing rice in the south, farmers
could now actually buy cheap rice for their own food and instead devote their time and
their fields to growing other crops like vegetables and fruits to sell at great profit on the
commercial market.
So this led to an explosion of regional specialization as farmers began to grow profitable crops
well suited to the environment of their particular province and then export these over large distances.
The wealthy southern province of Fujian, for example, imported rice for their own food
and devoted its land instead to the production of light cheese, of oranges, of tea, of sugar
cane, which fetched very high prices in the great urban markets that operated 24-7 in
the many cities of southern Song China.
Market-oriented cultivation went so far that the Song authorities were worried that they
tried to force the Fujianese farmers to grow their own rice so as to avoid the build-up
of an excessive dependence on imports, but frankly with little success.
Indeed, the enormous success of the agricultural sector led inevitably to spectacular developments
in technological and then industrial production.
Abundant food supplies like this allowed many people to abandon farming and pursue technological
and industrial interests instead, leading to a truly remarkable series of innovations.
The first striking example of this perhaps is the expansion of the porcelain industry.
During the Tang era, potters had discovered the technique of producing porcelain.
This is lighter, thinner, and much more adaptable than pottery, and when it's fired with glorious
glazes, Song porcelain soon became a work of art.
Once again you'll see this in many of the great art museums of the world.
The technique gradually diffused westwards so that a bassid craftsman in the Islamic
realm also began to produce their own large quantities of porcelain.
But despite that demand for the frankly superb Chinese porcelain remained high and vast quantities
were exported all over Eurasia under the Song.
Porcelains have discovered Song porcelain at sites in Southeast Asia, obviously the
coasts of India, Persia, even the port cities of East Africa.
Chinese porcelain plates, bowls, and cups gained such a high reputation that the fine
tableware of the world has been known ever since as Chinaware.
Production of iron and steel also surged under the Song, due to techniques that made
these metals stronger and also because of increased demands from the military and commercial
farmers.
Now, by using coke instead of coal in their furnaces, Song manufacturers produced a superior
grade of metal.
This might remind some of you of the work of the famous English inventor Abraham Darby,
who also used coke smelting techniques to produce superior iron, except that the Song
were doing this 500 years before Darby was even born.
Between the 9th and 12th centuries, Song iron production increased almost tenfold to levels
that would not be seen anywhere in the world until the 19th century.
Give you a quick statistical example of this.
As early as the year 1078, China was producing around 125,000 tonnes of iron.
By way of comparison, the British iron industry produced only 76,000 tonnes of iron in the
year 1788, more than 700 years later.
Most of this increased supply of iron and steel went into weapons and also agricultural
implements.
Imperial armaments manufacturers produced about 16.5 million iron arrowheads per year,
for example.
But iron was also used for large-scale construction of bridges and pagodas, certainly the first
iron bridges built anywhere in the world.
These Song metallurgical innovations soon diffused out of China, initially, ironically,
to the north, to the Jurchin and other militarized nomads who copied Chinese techniques to produce
their own iron weapons to use against the Song.
Song inventors are also justly famous for their innovations with gunpowder.
Daoist alchemists had discovered how to make gunpowder back during the Tang Dynasty as
they tested various concoctions seeking elixirs to prolong life.
With several accidents, they realized that it was actually pretty dangerous to mix charcoal,
saltpeter and sulfur.
This is more designed to shorten rather than prolong life.
But of course, military officials were quick to recognize the potential and were soon using
gunpowder in bamboo fire lances, a kind of flamethrower that spurred at sheets of explosive
fire out of one end of the lands.
By the 11th century, the Song military were also using primitive bombs, although frankly,
often these early weapons were so unreliable and difficult to control that they ended up
going off accidentally and caused more confusion than actual damage.
But over time, gunpowder chemistry became more refined and of course such a useful technique
quickly diffused throughout Eurasia until by the 13th century, various Islamic and European
states were experimenting with iron-barreled cannons.
Although some form of basic printing, and we've discussed this, was known as early as
the Sui Dynasty in the 7th century, printing also reached a very high standard of quality
and production under the Song.
Tang Dynasty printers, you remember, had used fixed block printing techniques.
They would carve a reverse image of an entire page into a wooden block, ink the block and
press the page upon it.
But Song printers began to experiment with reusable movable type, including by the way
characters that were made out of baked clay.
They fashioned dyes in the shape of Chinese characters.
They then arranged them in a frame.
Of course, they'd ink them and press the page on top.
Maneuble type like this sped up production and allowed printers to make revisions, making
it possible to produce texts quickly, cheaply and in large quantities.
All this contributed to the dissemination of knowledge as large numbers of printed books
were produced on all sorts of subjects, Buddhist and Confucian texts, obviously.
But also calendars, better agricultural, Ormanax, medical manuals, even popular literature appeared
and spread in large quantities all over China.
A handful of these Song texts printed using movable type have survived through to the
present, including Joe Beider's notes on the Jade Hall, first printed using movable type
in the year 1193.
Song officials were themselves responsible for the widespread dissemination of printed
works throughout China because they plastered the countryside with pamphlets on government
initiatives and on improved agricultural techniques.
While all this was going on, Song inventors also made stunning advances in naval technology.
Before the Tang, Chinese sailors tended to stay close to the coast and actually relied
on Persian, Arab, Indian and Malay mariners for long distance maritime trade.
But during the Song era, to feed a voracious appetite for spices, Chinese mariners began
to build the best ships in the world and to sail them across the deep oceans.
Within China, merchants designed human powered paddle wheel boats to fly the rivers and canals.
The much larger ocean going vessels were now constructed with iron nails, they were waterproof
with special oils, they included bulkheads made waterproof with a sort of oil based corking.
These large ships used canvas and bamboo sails.
They perfected a stern post rudder to steer with and they navigated with the aid of what
the Song called the South Pointing Needle, the magnetic compass.
Chinese ships mostly plied the waters between Japan and Malaya but some of them ventured
into the Indian Ocean and called in at ports in India, Ceylon, Persia and even the East
African coast.
Just to say these long distance sailors helped to diffuse Chinese naval inventions more
widely, most importantly the compass which was soon being used by mariners all over
the Indian Ocean basin.
All these developments led to the emergence of a genuine and very modern market economy
in China by far the most advanced in the world at the time.
Increased agricultural production, improved transportation, the surging population growth,
humanisation and now large scale industrial production hugely stimulated the Chinese economy.
Within Southern China the various regions traded their specialised crops or their manufacture
goods now with each other creating a thriving internal market economy.
So millions of cultivators produced fruits and vegetables for sale on the open market
and manufacturers of silk, porcelain, other goods supplied both to domestic and of course
also the foreign market.
With a fully integrated economy, foreign demand for Chinese goods fuelled further rapid
economic growth.
In fact trade grew so rapidly that China experienced a shortage of copper coins under the Southern
Song.
To alleviate this shortage, merchandise developed alternatives to cash that resulted in even
more growth and the emergence of what I think we must describe as the world's first modern
banking system.
So letters of credit soon came into common use.
They were known as flying cash.
They allowed merchants to deposit goods or cash at one location and draw the equivalent
in cash or goods somewhere else.
Later developments included the use of promissory notes which pledged payment of a given sum
at a later date and also of checks which allowed bearers to draw funds against cash deposited
with bankers.
Eventually these developments resulted in the world's first paper money.
In return for cash deposits from their clients, wealthy merchants started to issue printed
receipts that the bearers could then redeem for merchandise.
In a society short of coins these notes greatly facilitated commercial exchange but of course
if the merchants were not able to honour their notes disorder and riots sometimes followed.
By the 11th century the Southern Song Chinese economy was absolutely dependent on paper
money so to avoid disturbances the Song government began prohibiting private parties from issuing
paper money and reserved the right for the state.
The first notes printed by the government appeared in 1024 and by the end of the century
the government was issuing notes throughout Song China complete with serial numbers.
So let me conclude this lecture now by stating the obvious.
Much of the Southern regions of China experienced this extraordinary unprecedented economic growth
during the Southern Song era.
The Southern Song China unleashed this remarkable series of innovations in agriculture, technological
innovations, industry and commerce finance that turned their state into the great economic
powerhouse not just of Afro-Eurasia but of the entire world.
The Song presided over this land of enormous prosperity and this economic surge had implications
well beyond China.
In the next lecture we're going to explore some of these ramifications.
The ramifications of this transformation both for Chinese society and of course for
many of the core ideas of Eastern civilization but also for world history.
I look forward to joining you soon.
