Welcome to this second lecture on the remarkable Song Dynasty of China.
I concluded our last lecture by stating the obvious that much of China, particularly the
South, experienced unprecedented economic growth during the 12th and early 13th centuries
during the Southern Song Era.
With the commercially-minded Southern Song Administration in charge, China unleashed a
remarkable series of agricultural, technological, industrial and commercial developments that
transformed their state into the economic powerhouse of the world.
The Song presided over a land of enormous prosperity, and as I mentioned last time,
this economic surge inevitably had implications well beyond China.
In this lecture, we're going to explore some of these ramifications, both for Chinese society
and for Eastern civilization, but more generally for world history.
But the first big question I want to consider today is, what impact did this era of heightened
economic activity have on the core foundational ideas of Eastern civilization, particularly
everyday life, intellectual life and a perennial theme of this course, attitudes towards women?
After addressing that question, I'd like to conclude this two lecture series on the Song
Dynasty by widening our focus to look at the impact of all this on the world economy of
the 13th century.
First then, what do we know about everyday life in the Southern Song Dynasty?
How did all this economic growth and technological innovation influence the way people lived?
We should start, I think, with the insights provided by visual art here, particularly the
glorious painted scrolls that Song artists produce, which provide us with a lavishly
illustrated glimpse at the daily lives of city dwellers in particular.
The famous 18-foot-long Qingming scroll, for example, shows fields and villages outside
of the city, it shows donkeys bringing produce to market, wealthy women are being carried
in sedan chairs towards the city, while poorer women are all walking in towards the markets.
Of course, there's another reason for this, a new practice that came to dominate the lives
of elite women during the Song, and that is footbinding, and more about that shortly.
As the city comes into view on the scroll, we see boats laden with passengers and goods,
we see streets lined with shops, there's hawkers selling food, selling tools, selling clothes,
in a market stretched out along a bridge, in the street we see Buddhist monks, Taoist
priests, Confucian scholars, merchants, artists, storytellers, dancers, children, barking dogs.
It all looks very modern and also remarkably similar to life in China today.
In fact, this was a commercial world that would be familiar to most citizens of the
global village of the 21st century.
Everyone is using money, everyone is involved in the orderly flow of commerce, everyone
is subject to the rule of law.
Actually thinking of law in another nod to modernity, court systems from the Southern
Song show all manner of claims being brought to the magistrates by men and women.
Everybody's suing everybody.
There's arguments over land, over house ownership, over inheritances, over fraud, gambling, violence,
disputes over money and so on.
There's also sharp evidence of an increasing gap between rich and poor, particularly between
the wealthy merchant class in the cities and the still relatively impoverished rural
peasant class.
But what also becomes clear from song art and song documents is that the construction
of better transport technology and infrastructure along with the widespread dissemination of
printed materials that we discussed last time meant that for the first time ordinary people
in both town and country gained access to knowledge and ideas that had been the restricted
knowledge, the restricted property of the elites for the previous several thousand years.
These ideas that were at the heart of Eastern civilization.
With so much domestic and foreign trade going on and the explosion of urbanization that
we also discussed last time, Southern Song China was transformed into a prosperous, cosmopolitan
and very modern society.
Trade goods and foreign ideas now poured into China again by land and sea.
Muslim merchants from the Abbasid Empire joined subjects of Byzantium and traders from India
and Central Asia in making their way to China along the Silk Road's land routes.
Residents of all the major Chinese cities now grew accustomed again to seeing merchants
from foreign lands in the same way that residents of Chang'an had gotten so used to foreigners
in their midst during the Tang Dynasty.
Musicians and dancers from Persia became particularly popular entertainers in these great cosmopolitan
cities of Southern China.
And with the flourishing of maritime trade, Arab, Persian, Indian and Malay mariners arrived
frequently from the Indian Ocean and South China Sea to establish large merchant communities
in the bustling Southern seaports of Guangzhou and Guangzhou.
Even under the Tang, of course, huge numbers of foreign merchants had been dwelling in
these Southern port cities.
We know this because of accounts from the late Tang period which described a campaign
of brutal terror unleashed by a rebel general named Huang Chao which resulted, so we read,
in the massacre of 120,000 foreigners when he sacked Guangzhou in the year 879.
But these numbers were replaced and then some under the Southern Song.
Because of these widespread cosmopolitan interactions, foreign faiths and philosophies also became
increasingly entrenched in pre-modern China.
As we all know, the establishment of trade and exchange contacts with much of Eurasia
during the first Silk Road s era had first opened Chinese and Eastern civilization to
outside influence by as early as the first century before the common era.
And we ve also seen that during the Han and the centuries following, particularly in the
age of disunity, a number of foreign religions established themselves in China.
The first of these, as you well know, was Buddhism which started to arrive during the
early Han dynasty.
By the late sixth century, communities of Nestorian Christians were also established
in China and Manichaeism, this mysterious Central Asian religion, had trickled in from
Central Asia along the same trade routes.
In the early seventh century, we have evidence that the Iranian pre-Islamic faith of Zoroastrianism
was also being practiced in China.
And later that same century, Islam was also being established in the heartlands of China
as the construction of the Great Mosque in the heart of the Tong capital, Chang'an, demonstrates.
With so many foreign faiths and ideologies beginning to compete with the core beliefs
of Chinese and Eastern civilization, one result of all this cultural exchange was intense
discussion and debate amongst scholars over the issue of whether core Chinese values needed
to be preserved or whether foreign faiths and ideologies should be permitted and indeed
even promoted.
These debates are fascinating.
They enriched but they also complicated intellectual life in Song China.
At the heart of these debates was the fact that the Song had been unable to achieve the
sort of military dominance over their neighbors that the Han and Tang had done.
And this profoundly disturbed Song intellectuals.
Those who felt acutely the ever-present military threat from the nomadic North and also the
powerful cultural influences emanating from the huge numbers of foreigners now living in
Song China became less open to foreign ideas and more intent upon preserving core Chinese
cultural identity.
We have plenty of examples of writers rejecting all things foreign simply because they were
foreign.
One immediate ramification of this was a turn against Buddhism despite the fact that this
ancient Indian philosophy had now been a core Chinese and Eastern spiritual ideology for
more than a thousand years by this stage.
Scholar Sun Fu argued that and I quote, allowing the teachings of the barbarians to bring disorder
to the teachings of our sages was a humiliation to Chinese scholarship.
Another scholar, Shi Jie, wrote that it was unforgivable for Chinese to and again I quote,
forget their ancestors and abandon sacrifices to them serving instead barbarian ghosts.
The fact that many of the nomadic confederations in the North, the bitter enemies remember
of the Southern Song, had all zealously adopted Buddhism seemed only to further underline
Buddhism's foreignness, even its danger.
Another cause of the increasing antagonism between Taoists, Confucians and Buddhists
was the wealth and power of the Buddhist hierarchy.
As we've seen several times in this course already, monasteries owned a lot of high value
often tax-free land.
They used these advantages as powerful conversion mechanisms because they were able to accumulate
and store grain and rice and then distribute this amongst locals during times of famine.
So Buddhist monasteries had for centuries been important elements in local Chinese economies
and they were well supported by the local communities because of this.
But Buddhism posed additional challenges to traditional Chinese and Eastern beliefs.
Buddhism continued to place great emphasis on written texts as the point of departure
for speculation about the nature of the human soul, for example.
We know that Confucianism also valued written texts, but Taoists had little or no interest
in written texts.
Buddhists continued to call for individuals to seek perfection by observing an ascetic
ideal whereas Chinese morality was centered on the family, on the obligations of filial
piety and thus rejected the self-focus of the Buddhists.
And we have clear evidence that many Chinese intellectuals resented the fact that the Buddhist
monasteries paid no taxes.
Not only did this mean that they were not contributing to state revenues, but they used
this advantage to proselytize and convert.
Buddhism responded to these objections as it had always done by trying to tailor its
message to Chinese audiences.
We've already seen, of course, that Buddhists had become adept at translating the concept
of dharma to the original meaning of the Dao, the way, and also translating the Buddhist
notion of nirvana as being the same as the Daoist notion of huiwei or non-competition
and disengagement in action.
Buddhists also offered their ideology as a faith that would reinforce family values.
One particularly powerful argument they promoted was that if a family sent just one son into
a Buddhist monastery to become a monk, this would bring salvation for ten generations
of his kin.
The result of all these compromises and adaptations was, as we've seen in several earlier lectures,
the emergence of a syncretic version of Buddhist faith.
We've looked at Chan Buddhism before, known as son Buddhism in Korea or zen Buddhism
in Japan, versions of the faith that emphasized intuition and insight over written texts in
the search for enlightenment.
For all these reasons, these complaints against Buddhism's foreignness and syncretic adaptations,
many Song scholars actively advocated for native Chinese beliefs, mostly Confucianism, in the
hope of limiting the attraction of all foreign religions, but particularly Buddhism.
Yet to me there is something ambiguous about all this, because at the same time the Song
Confucians are also becoming increasingly well read in Buddhist scripture.
As they read more, they could not help but admire the systematic way in which Buddhist
scripture tried to deal with complex issues such as the nature of the soul, the relationship
of the individual with the cosmos.
These are topics that were not generally explored by Confucianism.
These intense intellectual investigations of Buddhism led eventually to the emergence
of a form of Neo or New Confucianism, which became so prevalent that it has gone on to
dominate much Chinese intellectual thinking through to the present day.
Indeed, you might remember from a lecture very early in this course that many intellectuals
and even government officials in the People's Republic of China today are strongly advocating
for more Neo-Confucian values in modern Chinese society.
And much of this, frankly, stems from the Song dynasty, when revitalizing Confucianism
was seen by many as the best way of strengthening core Chinese and thus core Eastern culture.
Thus Song scholars discussed how to improve the Confucian civil service exam system, for
example, how to make it more relevant to contemporary life.
Other Song intellectuals worked on developing philosophical frameworks for Confucianism
that might stand up to the sophisticated metaphysical challenges of Buddhism.
Increasing attention was also paid to building a more ideal society by starting at the bottom,
by reforming families and local communities along Confucian lines.
This led to a general call for the re-establishment of family values.
Isn't this a phrase that sounds strangely modern, the sort of appeal that's consistently
made by conservative politicians all over the world in the 21st century?
We need to get back to family values.
One result of this, as we'll see in a moment, was the tightening of patriarchal structures
as a means of enhancing family solidarity and promoting these idealized traditional values.
But another result was that the veneration of family ancestors became much more elaborate
during the Southern Song, with descendants diligently seeking out the graves of their
earliest traceable ancestors.
Before long, whole extended families were traveling great distances all over Southern
China to attend elaborate graveside rituals of filial worship.
The most important Song neo-Confucian scholar of all was Zhu Xi, who lived quite a long
life from 1130 to 1200.
His reputation today is of a brilliant intellectual who sincerely attempted to reconcile both
Buddhism and Taoism with Confucian values.
He was immensely learned in all the classics and the commentaries and all the great histories
of China, all the teachings of his predecessors.
Zhu Xi managed to hold down several important government jobs while writing about 100 books
of sophisticated philosophy.
He wrote extensively on metaphysical themes such as the nature of reality.
Like his near contemporary Thomas Aquinas in Europe, who was faced with a different
but similar dilemma of having to reconcile the compelling logic that he found in his
reading of classical Greek philosophy, particularly of Plato and Aristotle, with the Christian
scriptures, in that same sort of vain Zhu Xi attempted to synthesize faith and reason
by arguing that real self-knowledge could only be attained through an investigation
of the natural world.
Not surprisingly, this essentially Aristotelian argument led to a spectacular growth in the
physical and practical sciences in Song China.
So Song doctors discovered and used inoculations against smallpox, for example.
They had hospitals far in advance of anything in Europe in the 12th century.
Song scientists also made tremendous advances in astronomy, chemistry, zoology, botany,
cat-making, and their algebra was the most sophisticated anywhere in the world.
However, Zhu Xi's insistence on the correctness of his own interpretations offended many
other scholars as pretentious.
Towards the end of his life, even the Southern Song government had condemned his work as,
and I quote, spurious learning.
But within a few decades of his death, the government reversed its condemnation and gave
Zhu Xi's ideas unprecedented political support.
In 1241, the emperor himself credited Zhu Xi with illuminating the true way, and students
for the Confucian exams were now ordered to study his commentaries on the great Confucian
texts as preparation for the test.
But this support reflected a new political reality rather more than an ideological shift.
By this stage in the Song dynasty, the Mongols had already overrun the Jinn in the north
and the Song state was in grave, indeed, mortal jeopardy.
By promoting these conservative Confucian values, the hope was that this would stiffen
citizens' resolve against yet another group of foreign invaders.
Subsequent dynasties also found it expedient to promote Zhu Xi's neo-Confucian school as
orthodox, often for political reasons.
And this, I think, explains its long influence on East Asian intellectual life.
Let's turn now to the next topic in this lecture.
Return to a foundational theme that we pursued throughout this entire course, the role of
women this time during the Southern Song dynasty.
Because of the development of printing during the Southern Song, and as I mentioned, the
subsequent widespread dissemination of various forms of literature, we actually have more
written evidence about women's lives during this period than at any other stage in the
long history of Eastern civilization.
All kinds of women are found in these fascinating Song sources, widows managing inns made to
a running away from abusive masters, midwives delivering babies, nuns, singers, courtesans,
work mediums, farmers' daughters skilled at weaving silk.
We read about women poets, happily married wives, elderly widows.
The list is quite extraordinary.
The impression we get from all these sources is that within the home, women appear powerful
and important, but outside of the home, in commerce and government, for example, women
had far less power.
With the explosion of printed materials, many women did become better educated than ever
before and learned to read and write.
Increased wealth in society also meant that women were now purchased in large numbers
by families to become, for example, servants, concubines, even prostitutes.
Upper class families could sell their daughters to prospective husbands now by offering large
dowries.
And as the legal status of women gradually improved, it was the wives and widows that
increasingly gained control of these dowries rather than the husbands and their families.
Now all this seems to indicate that gender developments during the song were positive,
were generally favorable to women.
But other practices paint a much harsher view of the lives of women under the song, particularly
the appearance of the practice of footbinding.
During the tongue, powerful women like Empress Wu and Yang Guofei had promoted an ideal in
which it was fashionable for women to engage in physical activity like riding horses, even
playing polo.
Now under the song, notions of beauty shifted to promote a more delicate and restrained version
of the ideal woman.
So women began to veil their faces and ride in curtain sedan chairs.
The only examination a doctor was permitted of his female patient was to take the pulse
of a delicate wrist extended through a curtain.
These changed notions of beauty help explain, I think, the emergence of this practice of
footbinding during the Song Dynasty.
It actually began with dances in the Northern Song period and soon spread to elite families.
By the Southern Song period, wealthy mothers everywhere were tightly wrapping the feet
of six and seven-year-old girls with cloth, which prevented natural bone growth and resulted
in tiny, malformed, curved feet.
Women with bound feet could not walk easily, they needed canes or servants to carry them
around in litters.
The practice was largely confined to wealthy families where it was thought that a girl
with bound feet would be more attractive to potential suitors because her movements
would be more, I guess, more dainty, more ladylike.
It was not at all common amongst the peasants and other classes where women were needed for
their physical skills around the farms, of course, and weaving in the factories.
We have to say, I think, that footbinding was clearly being used as a mechanism for controlling
the behavior of elite girls.
Like the practice of veiling in the Islamic world, it placed women of privileged classes
under tight male control, both emotionally, certainly, but now also physically.
Neoconfusionism, with its conservative insistence that women should have no desire to own property
or to feel any jealousy if their husband took a concubine, profoundly influenced and supported
this mechanism of physical control.
With the appearance of footbinding, a practice that would continue until the Communist government
banned it in the mid-20th century, we must conclude that, on balance, the Southern Song
era was a harsh one for Chinese women.
Let me quickly begin to conclude this lecture now by returning to the larger question, the
impact of the Southern Song on the global economy.
Remember, by the 12th century, China was the wealthiest, most surging, most powerful
economic state on earth, a situation that continued, frankly, for several centuries
following the Song, including under the Mongols, as we'll see, and the Ming dynasty.
At the same time, Europe was barely emerging from what historians used to call the Dark
Ages.
We'd call that, I guess, the High Middle Ages today.
As we'll see in a lecture fairly soon, when Marco Polo visited China late in the 13th
century, he and his colleagues were utterly astonished at the wealth, the complexity,
and the sophistication of Chinese civilization, and at the standard of living being enjoyed
by this huge population, so far in excess of anything in Europe.
The Song economy was so dynamic that it could not be contained by China's borders.
As I mentioned last time, a huge global demand developed now for Chinese exports.
At the same time, wealthy Chinese consumers also developed a taste for exotic goods that
further stimulated trade throughout much of Afro-Eurasia.
So spices from Indonesia, kingfisher feathers and tortoiseshell from Vietnam, pearls and
incense from India, and horses, of course, and melons from Central Asia were in huge
demand in China.
But having said that, it was Chinese exports that were driving global trade that were so
valuable that they became status symbols of success everywhere.
Over much of Asia and East Africa, wealthy merchants wore Chinese silk now and set their
tables with Chinaware as a sign of their success and their refinement.
All this wealth increased productivity and commercial activity had a significant interregional
impact.
So Song economic success stimulated trade and production throughout much of the Eastern
Hemisphere until late in the 13th century.
So I think a really important, really interesting historical question we could ask is, what
if all those Song technological and financial innovations had spread?
Is it conceivable that an industrial revolution could have started in East Asia 800 years
ago?
If so, if these levels of production, of innovation, of export had been sustained, the industrialization
of the world would have been led by China, not by Europe, which means we would all be
speaking Chinese today and certainly wearing East Asian clothing.
Fascinating question.
Why did innovation not spread from China, given that the Chinese economy was interacting
so much with the wider Afro-Eurasian economy?
Ironically, I think the reunification of China was at least partly to blame.
As we'll see in a future lecture, after 1279, China was unified again under the Mongols
and then by the Ming and Qing dynasties.
Each of these governments had less need now for revenues from commerce and indeed the
Ming and the Qing eventually attempted to ban all foreign trade.
At the same time, global communications were still very slow in the 12th and 13th century.
So Chinese innovations, even extraordinarily useful ones like gunpowder, like printing,
like the compass, actually spread very slowly by today's standards.
The bottom line is that the world was not yet unified enough or commercial enough or
interconnected enough for an industrial revolution to take place.
So when an industrial revolution did eventually happen, it occurred, as you know, in Europe
rather than China.
And this in turn meant that Europe eventually acquired the economic, the technological, the
military strength to use these extraordinary East Asian innovations like gunpowder to
utterly dominate and colonize all of East Asia.
With that thought in mind, folks, we conclude our brief examination of this fascinating
Song Dynasty period and its impact on Chinese society, Eastern civilization and world history.
I might as well say it one more time.
By the 13th century, China was the largest, wealthiest and most powerful state that had
ever existed in the history of the world.
And that of course is why it was such a glittering prize for the new and formidable power that
was emerging in the steps of Central Asia.
The Mongols.
The Mongol invasions would not only profoundly influence Chinese and Eastern civilization,
but would also change the course of world history.
Please join me next time as we begin a two lecture series on the extraordinary Mongols.
