Hello and welcome to the first of two lectures in which we take a look at the mighty Mongols
and how their campaigns of conquest altered the course not just of eastern civilization
but of all world history.
The Mongol invasions are a quintessential example, I think, of the processes of cultural evolution
and cultural syncretism that so characterized the history of the vast Afro-Eurasian world
zone during the first and second millenniums of the common era.
Early in the 13th century, the Mongol hordes moved out of their homeland to eventually
conquer Central Asia, all of China, Korea, parts of India, parts of Russia, much of the
Middle East and even regions of Eastern Europe, establishing the largest contiguous empire
ever seen.
It was the Mongol leader, Chinggis Khan, who lived from 1162 to 1227 and who claimed to
have a Chinese style mandate from heaven to rule the world that was responsible for creating
the Mongol Empire.
Although history still tends to remember the Mongols as mass murderers or destroyers
of cities, a more nuanced view today reminds us that the Mongols also fostered trade and
exchange between East and West.
They patronized the arts, they promoted religious tolerance and they provided security and cultural
unity across much of Eurasia.
Because of this, some historians even go so far as to claim the Mongols as one of the
principal architects of the modern world.
The Mongols were Central Asian nomads of course, like so many others we have met in this course.
The great unsung heroes, frankly, of history who had been interacting with the agrarian
sedentary communities since at least the second millennium before the common era.
Like most of these great nomadic confederations, within the Mongol world decisions were made
by a council of warriors.
And this meant that although the chiefs or Khans had great power, they were still regarded
as essentially the first among equals.
Mongol women had considerable freedom, respect and influence, particularly when compared with
the status of women in most sedentary civilizations as we've seen throughout this course.
And there are several examples known to us of Mongol women who gained great political power.
As we will see, like all militarized nomads, the Mongols held a distinct military advantage
over sedentary military forces through their advanced cavalry tactics and of course their
supreme horse riding skills, also their mobility, their field craft and of course their extraordinary
prowess with the composite bow and arrow.
And eventually, as I intend to show you in these two lectures, the Mongols became sedentized
and acquired the languages, the religions, cultural patterns, even the administrative
structures of many of the peoples they had conquered.
The precedent and perhaps even the inspiration for the Mongol invasions came from the Turkic
peoples who did not originate in modern Turkey, but thousands of miles to the east in the
Altai mountains of Central Asia.
Now because their impact upon the Mongols and Eurasia was so profound, I think we need
to spend a few minutes considering the Turks here first.
The Turks are justifiably renowned for several reasons of course, and not the least of which
is that they established an enormous Turkic empire in Central Asia.
Indeed, between the sixth and eighth centuries before the common era, the Turks were powerful
enough to compete with the Chinese for control of Central Asia.
The word Turk actually appears for the first time in Chinese annals in the year 542 of
the common era, where it's used to refer to a nomadic people who were in the process
of building this great steppe empire, which eventually stretched from Mongolia all the
way to the Black Sea.
This first Turkic empire lasted for almost 30 years from 552 until 581.
But with the rise of the powerful Tang dynasty in China, the Turks were forced to accept
Tang hegemony for the next century until the year 683 when Turkic forces under the leadership
of Khan Kutlug defeated Tang forces and recaptured much of the original realm.
This second Turkic empire then lasted right through until the year 734, and it was during
this era that the oldest known Turkic inscriptions appeared.
Dated to the 720s, these inscriptions were carved into stone by the ruling elites who
used them to record the creation myths and the history of the Turkic peoples.
These marvelous accounts are written in a series of inscriptions on funerary stele,
which are inscribed upright stone slabs that were discovered near the river Orkon in northwestern
Mongolia.
Here is the inscription of one great and powerful leader, Turk leader Bilga Khagan.
When the blue sky above and the dark earth below were made, human beings were created
between the two.
My ancestors, Boomen Khagan and Istami Khagan rose above the sons of men, having become
their masters, they governed and established the empire and the institutions of the Turkic
people.
They had many enemies in the four corners of the world, but waging military campaigns,
they subjugated and pacified them, making them bow their heads and bend their knees.
In the mid eighth century, the Turks entered a period of decline.
Perhaps some scholars suggest because of their conversion to the Central Asian religion
of Manichaeism that we've mentioned several times in the course already.
As the Turks lost control of their empire to other Central Asian peoples, such as the
Uighurs, they began to migrate away from their homeland, moving to the southwest initially.
They settled in Sogdia to the north of modern-day Afghanistan.
The Uighurs who took the Turks' place in their former homeland then settled themselves in
the modern Chinese province of Xinjiang, the great western province of China, where they
remain to this very day.
The Uighurs later converted to Islam, and to this day the relationship between the ethnic
Han migrants who've moved into Xinjiang and the Muslim Uighurs remains tense and often
quite violent.
Another group of Central Asian peoples that were displaced, sorry, that displaced the Turks
were the Kyrgyz.
The modern country of Kyrgyzstan is, of course, named after the Kyrgyz people, and all this
just demonstrates how relevant these events of 1200 years ago remain in the 21st century.
The steppe empires established by these different Turkic-speaking peoples were very well organized
and were administered through a combination of, I guess, old tribal government traditions,
but centralized bureaucracies and also provincial governors.
It was to say the Turks borrowed many of these ideas from the Chinese, particularly from
the Tang, and many Turks also adopted Chinese-style Buddhism, further evidence of just the widening
influence of Eastern civilization as it continued to spread throughout Central Asia, a process
that had commenced with the establishment of the First Silk Roads by the early Han dynasty
almost a thousand years before.
Right in the 8th century, the religion of Islam came roaring into the steppes through
a series of vigorous military campaigns that plunged deep into Central Asia, proffering
an alternative to Chinese and Eastern civilizational influences.
The Turks responded aggressively, they launched invasions of the Middle East and invasions
into India that lasted well into the 15th century, but at the same time the Turks eventually
and inevitably converted to the religion of those they were attacking, Islam.
It's beyond our scope here to follow the history of the Turks into the pre-modern and modern
world, but suffice to say that under a series of powerful leaders, they defeated almost all
who came up against them and ultimately established formidable Islamic Turkish regimes from India
into Turkey.
What is relevant to us today is that it was the ability of the Turkic people to create
and effectively administer vast regions of Inner Eurasia that acted as an inspiration
to Chinggis Khan and spurred the Mongols to try and emulate their achievements.
Now early in the 13th century, the Mongols began their own campaign of conquest and during
the following century that they subdued much of Eurasia, all the way from Korea to the
Danube River.
After building their enormous empire, the Mongols established what historians have come
to recognise as the Pax Mongolica, a Latin term for the Mongol peace.
This facilitated trade and exchange across Eurasia actually for centuries after the Mongols
had disappeared.
At roughly the same size as the former Soviet Union, the Mongol Empire was by far the largest
empire the world had ever known to that point and it is still recognised today as the largest
contiguous empire in all of world history.
But if I can sort of jump ahead and give you a brief preview of the end of their story,
in the end the Mongols became victims of their own success.
When their empire expanded far beyond its administrative centres, it began to weaken
because it inevitably became so dependent on provincial governors who of course used
their positions to amass their own autonomous power and wealth.
And we see in that story unfold often in the history of China.
It's also become something of a historian's rule of thumb ever since I think, at least
until the empires of the industrial age, that empires become more and more difficult to
hold together once they expand beyond the distance that the ruler's army can march in
a single season.
But I am getting ahead of myself here.
Let's return to the beginning of this story.
Let's point out again that the Mongol success owed much to the guiding genius who launched
his people into history, Chinggis Khan, son of a minor Mongol chief.
He was born in, we think, the year 1162 and named Temujin, which means man of iron.
When his father was killed by enemies, Temujin spent years in exile on the steppes, gathering
followers and using tribal war, tribal diplomacy to patch together a new Mongol confederacy.
His efforts were crowned in the year 1206 when he was recognized by the entire Mongol
confederation as Chinggis Khan, a title that can be interpreted as great ruler or universal
ruler, both of which hint at the aspirations to world power held by the Mongols.
This began the era now of unified Mongol imperial rule by launching his first campaigns of conquest
against the Uyghur people and also the Tanguts in Central Asia and then turning south against
the Jin dynasty, which was ruling in the northern regions of China.
So it was Chinggis Khan himself who first attempted to bring Mongol rule into China.
As you'll remember from our previous pair of lectures, since 1127, the nomadic Georgian
people had been in control of the north, ruling as the Jin dynasty, while the Southern Song
dynasty, of course, continued ethnic Khan rule in the south of China.
Mongol armies first began to raid Jin dynasty China in the year 1211 and four years later
by 1215, they had captured the Georgian capital, which was near modern Beijing, forcing the
Jin court to relocate elsewhere.
This capital city was now renamed Khan Balak, or city of the Khan, and this became the capital
of Mongol China.
Now if you visited Beijing, you'll know that Mongol influence on architecture and urban
design can still be seen today in parts of old Beijing.
By the time of Chinggis Khan's death, the Mongols had control over large regions of
northern China, but as we'll see in the next lecture, it would be up to Chinggis' sons
and grandsons to complete the conquest of the Jin and then press on against the powerful
Song in the south.
Leaving part of his army to control northern China, Chinggis Khan then led Mongol forces
west into parts of Afghanistan and eastern Persia.
At the time, these central Asian regions were still being ruled by the Turks, specifically
a group called the Quatsum Turks.
The Mongols offered the Quatsum Shah the chance to avoid conquest and to establish trade relations
with the Mongols.
But when the Shah tried to have Chinggis Khan murdered, the Mongols sought bloody revenge.
In the end, the Quatsum Shah was trapped and killed on an island in the Caspian Sea and
his armies were shattered.
To make sure that Quatsum state could never again be a challenge to his own empire, Chinggis
Khan then wreaked violent destruction on the region.
Mongol forces ravaged dozens of cities, demolishing buildings and killing hundreds of thousands
of people.
Frankly, it's impossible to ever know exactly how many.
The Mongols also destroyed the delicate Khanat irrigation system with severely reduced agricultural
production.
This human and infrastructure devastation wrought by the Mongols in this region was felt for
centuries afterwards.
By the time Chinggis Khan died in 1227, he had laid the foundations for a vast Mongol
empire.
Through his own charisma, an obvious military skill, he had united the Mongols into a new
confederation and had established Mongol supremacy in northern China, much of Central Asia, even
parts of Persia.
But Chinggis was content to rule through his control of the army and never attempted to
establish any form of central government or serious provincial administration for his
empire.
His heirs would continue the campaigns of expansion the great Khan had started, but the burden
now also fell on them to take up the task of somehow designing a more durable imperial
structure.
For his death, acutely aware of the potential for dangerous power struggles amongst his
sons and grandsons, Chinggis had divided the empire into four sections or four Khanates,
each to be administered by a son or grandson.
He was then succeeded as great Khan by his third son, Ogadai, who was proclaimed supreme
leader of the Mongols in the year 1229.
Under Ogadai's leadership, Mongol expansion continued in all directions, deep into western
Afghanistan, further into Persia, deeper into China, to finally subdue the Jin Dynasty,
and then far east into Korea, events we discussed in an earlier lecture.
Also northwest into Armenia and Georgia, and eventually deep into Eastern Europe.
Indeed, only Ogadai's death may have prevented the complete conquest of Europe by the Mongols.
The great Khan had given his permission to conquer all of Europe as far as, and I quote,
the Great Sea, which means the Atlantic Ocean.
And when Ogadai died on December the 11th, 1241, formidable Mongol forces were actually
on the outskirts of Vienna, about to launch a winter campaign into Austria and Germany.
Ogadai was a powerful and unifying leader who, through sheer force of character, was
able to control the sort of internal power struggles that Chinggis Khan had feared.
But after his death, virtual civil war broke out between the other Khans, and the four
Khanate structure Chinggis had originally planned resulted in the very real division now of
the vast Mongol realm into four regional empires.
From 1241 on then, a group of Khans known as the Great Khans would rule China, which always
remained the wealthiest part of the empire.
A descendants of Chagatai, another of the sons of Chinggis Khan, took control now of
the Central Asian realms.
Persia was ruled by a group of Mongols known as the Il Khans, and the Khans of the Golden
Horde dominated much of Russia for the next two centuries.
But despite this mutually agreed upon four Khanate system, for as long as the Mongol
Empire existed, ambition fueled constant tension between the four Khans that controlled
their various regions.
Now in the rest of this lecture, and also part of the next, we're going to follow the
messy and confusing fortunes of these Khanates through to the end of the Mongol Empire.
It was Mongols of the Golden Horde under Ogadai that launched the invasions of Russia and
Eastern Europe in the 1230s, which continued after his death into the 1240s.
When Ogadai died in 1241, by the way, his widow took over as ruler.
And there was a second period of female rule in 1248 when Gaiokhan died.
This reminds us, of course, of the relative gender equality that was a feature of Mongol
society, indeed a feature of all Central Asian militarized nomadic confederations.
The Mongols of the Golden Horde prized the steppes north of the Black Sea as prime pasture
land for their horses.
So they raided the small Russian states to the north of these steppes frequently, but
they chose never to occupy the region, mostly because they saw Russia as an unattractive
land of deep forests, which made the steppe dwelling Mongols who lived in these wide-open
spaces of grasslands most uncomfortable.
Despite this, the Golden Horde did maintain hegemony over Russia right through until the
mid-15th century, when the princes of Moscow finally rejected Mongol domination and began
to build their own powerful and eventually formidable and expansionary state.
But even after that, Mongols descended from the Golden Horde, continued to rule the Crimea
until the late 18th century, where they played a significant role in many a military campaign
of the pre- and early modern period.
Further south, Chinggis' grandson, Monkey, led armies into Tibet between 1251 and 1259
and continued to harass Korea, as we have seen.
At about the same time, Monkey's brother Hulagu defeated the Islamic Abbasid Caliphate
that controlled much of Persia, much of Palestine, Syria.
This was a monumental victory that brought to an end the great classical age of Islam
that we've discussed so many times in this course.
But in 1260, Hulagu's attempts to conquer all of the Middle East and on into Egypt were
confounded when the Mongol tide in Western Asia was stopped in Syria by the powerful
Egyptian Mamluq army.
Hulagu's army was amazingly cosmopolitan.
It included groups of specialists from all different peoples the Mongols had conquered,
but particularly brilliant Chinese catapult operators who could build and then use siege
machinery right on the spot.
Hulagu proved remarkably effective at integrating these various soldiers, but also the artists
and professional administrators of all the peoples that he conquered to create a very
effective and a very syncretic military force.
When it came to governing their vast realm, the Mongols adopted different tactics in the
different lands that they controlled.
So in Persia, they made major concessions to local interests.
The Mongols themselves occupied all the highest positions, but Persians served as ministers,
as provincial governors, and as high-ranking state officials.
In essence, the Mongols allowed the Persians to administer the Ilkhanate so long as they
delivered tax receipts to the Mongol rulers and maintained order.
Over time, the Mongols themselves assimilated to the ancient and sophisticated Persian Islamic
traditions.
Initially, all the Mongol rulers observed their native shamanistic sort of spiritual
beliefs, but they were remarkably tolerant of all faiths, including Islam, Nestorian
Christianity, Catholic Christianity, Buddhism certainly, even Judaism.
But in Muslim Persia, the Mongol elites gradually converted to Islam.
This culminated in the year 1295 when Ilkhan Ghazan publicly embraced Islam and most of
the Mongols in Persia followed his lead.
The tide of Mongol religious tolerance turned at this point.
Ghazan's conversion led to large-scale massacres of Christians and Jews in the Ilkhanate and
the restoration of Islam to its formerly privileged position throughout Persia.
The conversion to Islam posed a problem for the independent Mongol women, however.
They agreed to adopt some aspects of Islamic women's culture, but by no means all.
So in Persian miniature paintings from the mid-14th century that I've seen, we can sometimes
see Mongol elite women on horseback promenade.
The Persian women in the background of these scenes have their faces veiled, but the Mongol
women have refused to veil their faces.
Let me turn to another question now as we begin to sort of conclude this lecture.
How was it that a relatively small Mongol military force numbering perhaps 130,000 mounted
archewarries at best?
How was this small force able to carve out the largest empire the world had ever seen?
Now, the first reason obviously has to do with Mongol military organization, which was
incredibly effective, I think because of its simplicity.
This structure was based on the ancient tradition of militarized steppe nomads and utilized the
decimal system.
The smallest unit of the army was a squad of ten men called an arban.
Ten arbans then constituted a company of a hundred men called a jaghun.
Ten jaghun's made up the equivalent of a regiment of a thousand, a minghan.
And ten minghans constituted a huge force of 10,000 mounted warriors called a tumen,
the equivalent, I guess, of a modern division.
Military discipline also distinguished Mongol soldiers from all their peers.
All males who were aged from 15 to 60 and who were physically capable of undergoing rigorous
training were eligible for conscription into the army.
These forces were then exquisitely tailored for mobility and speed.
To facilitate this mobility, the soldiers were lightly armored when compared to the
heavy armor used by many of the armies they faced.
And because they were so adept at living off the land, Mongol units functioned independently
of supply lines, which of course dramatically sped up the movement of their forces.
The movement was also brought to a very high level, inculcated in the traditional hunts
that all the cavalry participated in, even in times of peace.
And nor were Mongol military campaigns sort of slap-dash, ill-considered affairs far
from it.
All their campaigns were preceded by very careful planning, careful reconnaissance,
and by the gathering of information on enemy territories and military strength.
These advantages then of organization of mobility and discipline also allowed the Mongol forces
to fight on several fronts at once.
Unlike many other mobile fighters in history, such as the Xiangnu, the Huns, even the Vikings,
the Mongols were also very comfortable in the art of the siege.
As I noted earlier, they were careful to recruit skilled military professionals from the cities
they plundered.
The experienced Chinese engineers that Hulugu conscripted provided the Mongol forces with
experts at building and operating a wide variety of siege machines, which as I said, were mostly
built on the spot using local trees.
Another advantage the Mongols possessed was their ability to traverse large distances
quickly, even in appallingly cold winters.
So frozen rivers were actually like interstate highways to the Mongols, providing rapid
passage into the heart of large urban settlements on the banks.
And in addition to standard siege engineering, the Mongols also became very adept at river
work, at river engineering.
A couple of examples in April 1241, Mongol forces crossed the Eastern European River
Seihull in spring flood conditions with 30,000 cavalry during one night before the Battle
of Mohi, which allowed them to easily defeat the Hungarian king Bela IV and lay waste to
half of Hungary.
Similarly, another example, in the attack against the Kwatsamshah during the first phase
of Mongol expansion, a flotilla of barges was constructed across the river to prevent
the escape of their enemies.
But I don't want to forget or gloss over the fact or ignore the fact that the Mongols
were also brutally skilled in their use of terror tactics to control conquered peoples,
particularly in the early stages of expansion.
Mongol commanders certainly practiced what we will call mass murder today, torture, the
forced resettlement of hundreds of thousands of conquered peoples.
In Baghdad, Hulagu, wishing to make an example of a city which had refused to surrender,
it could close to 100,000 men, women and children.
Sofowl was the stance from the ruined city that Hulagu was forced to move his camp upwind.
He also destroyed the ancient irrigation systems in a region that had constructed some of the
first large-scale irrigation structures in all of world history thousands of years earlier.
And this seriously damaged and set back Mesopotamian agriculture for decades, perhaps centuries.
But when monkey came to power, he moderated Mongol policies.
He restored economic productivity to the regions.
He provided security for trade.
In the next lecture, we will certainly explore the impact of this restoration of economic
productivity and commercial activity on the empire in general, and also focus in on the
150-year-long rule of the Mongols in China.
So join me next time, please, as we look at the influence of the Mongol Yuan dynasty on
Chinese and Eastern civilization, and also try to critically evaluate the legacy of the
Mongols to subsequent world history.
Thank you.
