Hello and welcome to this second lecture on the Mongols and on their impact on Eastern
civilization. Last time we looked at the origins of the Mongols and the conquest and migrations
of their Turkic predecessors whose centuries before the Mongols had created their own formidable
Turkic Empire throughout much of Inner Eurasia. We also followed the Mongol conquest through
various expansionary phases and the military organization and skills they used to construct
and administer the largest empire the world had ever seen to that point in history. But
as fascinating as all this is particularly to an historian like me in a course primarily
focused on Eastern civilization we need in this lecture I think to sort of zoom in more
closely on the impact of the Mongols on Chinese history and culture in particular and thus
on the very heartland of Eastern civilization. We've already seen in previous lectures the
impact of the Mongols on Korea and I've mentioned the good fortune the Japanese enjoyed in
avoiding Mongol invasion through the intervention of the divine kamikaze wind. I'll return to
that attempted invasion a little later in the course. But let's return to China now for the bulk
of this lecture and then conclude by panning back out again and taking a world historian's
perspective to consider the ramifications of the Mongol conquests for subsequent Eurasian
and indeed global history. As we saw last time although Chinggis Khan did not give any
serious thought to imperial administration the Mongols did eventually learn to administer
to govern the largest empire ever seen. This required so many languages of course and also
considerable intercultural knowledge and it was under Khan monkey that Mongol terror tactics
were moderated that cultural differences were accommodated and that serious thought was given
to the skills required for competent imperial rule. So during the reign of monkey and his
successes the Mongols learned to mint coins for example to collect taxes in an orderly way to
have censuses taken of the huge number of cities and states they now controlled and also to
establish a Mongol courier system that connected the vast reaches of Eurasia. Even more importantly
for commercial and trans-cultural exchange the Mongols regularized all trade tolls,
they improved roads and they guaranteed merchant security all of which gave a tremendous boost
to trade and commercial and diplomatic travel. So after centuries of fragmentation the silk roads
began to operate again and much of Eurasia was effectively unified under Mongol rule and Mongol
law. In fact the period of Mongol rule is regarded as the third great silk roads era. Government
within the empire was generally conducted now by tributary vassal rulers who were rewarded with
lavish gifts and Mongol law was enforced naturally by the constant threat of brutal military
retribution. Throughout this period the nucleus of the of the military remained the cavalry of
some 130,000 highly skilled Mongol horsemen augmented as we saw last time by infantry and
also siege troops from captured states. Of course the Mongols were not always successful in their
campaigns of imperial conquest as we've seen in earlier lectures they failed dismally in their
attempted invasions of both Japan and Vietnam. But they were far more successful in China where
Chinggis Khan's early campaigns against the Jin dynasty that I mentioned last time were only the
first step in a process that eventually resulted in the incorporation of all of China into the
Mongol Empire. In a series of violent and bloody campaigns between 1213 and 1220 Chinggis succeeded
in bringing most of the the region of China north of the Huanghe north of the Yellow River under
Mongol control. After the great Khan died in 1227 his son Ogadai continued the attacks against the
Jin until the Jin dynasty finally fell in 1234. Ogadai's younger brother Tolui had four sons
or grandsons of Chinggis Khan. Each of these boys was raised by their extraordinary formidable
mother Becky to be skilled in the arts of warfare but she also made sure they learned to read and
write the Mongol script. Now as a daughter-in-law of Chinggis Khan and his mother of four grown powerful
sons Becky held enormous prestige in the Mongol world. She was also a skilled politician who
used tribal politics and clever diplomacy to ensure that her oldest son Monkey became great
Khan of the Mongols a position that he held for only eight years before his death in 1259. Monkey
was effectively the last Khan to have supreme control over the Mongol world which now divided into
the four Khanates that we discussed last time. Another of the sons of the extraordinary Becky
was Hulugu who as we saw was responsible for the destruction of Baghdad and the end of the Islamic
Abbasid Caliphate in Persia. But a third son of Becky is probably the most famous Khan of all after
Chinggis. This is Kublai Khan who was initially granted control of some wealthy landed estates in
northern China. Kublai then worked hard to secure allies amongst the Jin and Han Chinese elites
as he prepared to launch raids against the formidable Song dynasty which was still in power
in the South. He was so successful at building this sort of series of alliances that several
generals eventually defected from the Song came over to the Mongols and this played a key role in
the total conquest of China. Kublai and Becky were efficient and effective administrators in
northern China. They encouraged and supported farming for example. They tried to build a strong
and reliable population of tax-paying farmers. Although a Nestorian Christian by faith, Becky
also exemplified the tolerant Mongol attitude towards other religions. She supported Taoism,
she supported Buddhism and she supported Islam. For much of this period Kublai was something of
an absentee landlord but gradually he became more involved in the government of northern China.
The first military campaigns against the Song began in 1258 and were led by Monkey Khan personally.
After Monkey's death, civil war broke out amongst the Mongols. Kublai Khan was claimed or proclaimed
the title of Grand Khan in 1264 but not all the hordes recognized his authority. Nonetheless,
with his power secure in China, Kublai now turned his full attention to the enormous
riches and resources of the Southern Song. In a series of bloody and hard-won campaigns,
beginning in 1267, Kublai used huge forces and actually thousands of ships as well as skilled
Persian and Uighur engineers to eventually defeat the well-armed Song forces. In the year 1271,
Kublai Khan declared himself emperor of a reunified China. Although the great Southern
Song capital of Hangzhou did not finally fall to his Mongol forces until five years later,
in February 1276. He constructed a new capital now in the north where modern Beijing is today
and apart from a very brief period early in the Ming, a Beijing has remained the capital of China
from that moment until today. The capital of the Yuan, of most of the Ming and all of the Qing
dynasties and of course the capital of the People's Republic of China. The design of the
capital was carefully and intentionally based on descriptions in the book of rights. One of the
classics of Zhou dynasty literature that had been around for about 2,000 years by this point and
of course one of the books that we met very early in our course. In fact, Kublai intentionally used
the the Zhou classics to validate his reign. The name he chose for his new Yuan dynasty was also
drawn from ancient Chinese tradition. The word Yuan is found in the Zhou book of changes and means
the origins of the universe. Ruling a vast and complex agricultural and commercial state like
China was a new challenge for the Mongols. Never really trusting local Chinese administrators,
Kublai and the later Yuan dynasty emperors tried to maintain political order, social stability and
regular tax revenue by creating a balance of ethnic power in government and by combining Mongol and
Chinese techniques of administration. To help facilitate this, the people of the Yuan dynasty
were now divided into four categories or classes based on their ethnicity. Mongols on the top of
course, a group known as diverse peoples second, then the vast Han Chinese population and at the
bottom the southern Chinese. With the Mongols as the elite group in this hierarchy, the categorization
categorization was clearly designed to keep them at the top of the social and political pecking order.
To further emphasize this, all Mongols living in China enjoyed substantial legal and tax advantages.
The emperor and the court centered their administration on the capital and they ruled the
provinces through subordinate officials who were supervised by other specially appointed
imperial officials. To guard against the building of local power bases and sort of regional autonomy,
provincial administrators needed the permission of these imperial supervisors
before any major decisions could be made. Now many of these supervisors were actually Persian
because from the moment that the Mongols had encountered the Persian officials of the Abbasid
Caliphate, they had been deeply impressed with their skills in government. So Kublai Khan dismantled
the ancient Confucian exam system that had provided China with high quality bureaucrats for 1500 years
and instead brought many Persian and other West Asian Muslims to China where they were given
high administrative posts in Yuan dynasty government. From Chinese sources, we actually know something
about one of these Muslim administrators in particular, a Muslim named Ahmed from Tashkent
in Central Asia who became a high Yuan government official. Ahmed was able to maximize tax revenues
through a series of reforms that greatly enriched the government and of course also enriched Ahmed
and his family. Yet despite the best efforts of Ahmed and other Persian and Central Asian officials,
history has judged the Yuan administration of China as inefficient. The Mongols certainly did
their best to root out corruption. Corrupt officials were flogged by the Mongols. This is in
stark contrast to the much more civil atmosphere that had characterized the Song dynasty court.
But despite their efforts to oversee provincial administrators, the provinces were ruled with
a considerable degree of independence and self-governing, self-serving authority. The only
important function of regional officials was to keep the tax revenues and other goods and services
flowing into the imperial government and frankly the Mongols did not really care how this was done.
The Yuan dynasty did introduce some new laws but these were so ineffectual that even
hand Chinese officials claimed they were too lenient. In fact, Mongol government eventually
became so laxadaisical that even those Chinese hand officials employed to work with the Mongols
openly criticized the Yuan government for its decentralization and its inefficiency.
But other than government, what do we know about how Chinese society
functioned under Mongol hegemony and what if any were the long-term impacts of
Mongol rule on the foundational ideas of Chinese civilization?
Much of our knowledge of Yuan China actually comes from the famous Venetian traveller
Marco Polo. Polo was born in or about the year 1254. He was a member of a very successful
family of merchants who operated in the Venetian Republic during the 13th century.
In 1271 accompanied by his father and his uncle, the then 17-year-old Marco set out on an epic journey
across Asia arriving three and a half years later at the court of Kublai Khan in 1275.
Upon meeting the Khan, the Polos presented him with sacred oils from Jerusalem and a letter
from the Pope. Now Marco Polo knew several languages and he had acquired a great deal of
political and geographical knowledge in his travels. So according to Marco's own account,
these credentials and skills were so impressive that he was employed by the great Emperor Kublai
Khan for the next 17 years as the Emperor's trusted advisor, which allowed him of course to
observe a great deal about Chinese society and Chinese government. Marco did eventually return
to Venice in 1295 after another epic journey. In fact scholars estimate that in all Marco Polo
probably travelled a total of 15,000 miles on these twin journeys. But upon returning home,
Marco found himself caught up in a bitter war between Genoa and Venice and he was imprisoned
for several years before being released in 1299. It was while he was in prison that he dictated
to his cellmate the famous account of his travels and his many years in China, now and ever since,
as the travels of Marco Polo. Marco Polo's detailed descriptions of the sophisticated
Chinese court and way of life seemed so absurd to 13th century Europeans that they were dismissed
as a pack of lies. But his accounts of the great canals of China, the granaries, social services,
advanced technology, even the regular bathing of all Chinese, all of which of course were
completely unknown in Europe, was so astonishing that his book became a bestseller and it has
remained one to this very day. Polo reported for example that China's social welfare system
took care of sick, aged and orphaned citizens. He also noted that the great emperor had 12,000
personal retainers. Polo also noted that ethnic animosity was intense in Yuan China.
He wrote and let me quote Marco Polo here, all the Han detested the rule of the great Khan
because he set over them Mongols or still more frequently Muslims whom they could not endure
for they treated them just as slaves. Those ethnic Chinese who did work with the Han
often prospered but many others had their lands confiscated or were forced into serfdom, even
slavery and often transported far from home. In fact, I mentioned this briefly last time,
modern historians have been pointing out and tracing more recently the fact that the Mongols
substantially redrew the ethnic map not just of China but of much of Eurasia by forcing literally
millions of people of different ethnicities to leave their native lands and resettle far away.
Before we leave our important guide Marco Polo, let me tell you that after being released from
prison Marco did eventually become a successful and wealthy merchant but although he sponsored many
other successful expeditions into Asia he himself never left Venice again until his death in 1324.
By the late 13th century economic problems were beginning to beset
several parts of the Mongol Empire. In Persia excessive spending gradually drained the treasury
and tax revenues began to dry up. In the early 1290s the Ilkans tried to resolve these financial
difficulties by introducing paper money in the hope that this would drive precious metals back
into the hands of the government but merchants closed their shops rather than accept the worthless
paper and commerce quickly ground to a halt. After the death of Ilkhan Ghazan in 1304 the
dynasty went into a steep decline blighted by intense factional disputes. When the last Mongol
ruler of Persia died without an heir in 1335 the Ilkhanate collapsed and local governors then ruled
Persia until the arrival of the Turks late in the 14th century. Similar financial problems beset the
Yuan administration in China at about the same time. The Mongols also used paper money in China
as we've seen so did the Tang and the Song dynasties before them but unlike the Chinese dynasties
the Yuan did not maintain adequate reserves of bullion to back up the paper currency.
So the people quickly began to lose confidence in the economy as prices rose sharply. At the same
time as was the case in the Persian Ilkhanate political infighting in the Yuan court also
hastened Mongol decline in China. From the 1320s on power struggles assassinations even civil wars
blighted Mongol China and in the midst of this chaos a nationalist rebellion broke out in the
south in the year 1352 led by a young Buddhist ruler named Hong Wu. As we'll see next time Hong
Wu went on to establish the powerful Ming dynasty which would rule China for almost 300 years until
1644. In 1368 Hong Wu's forces captured the Yuan capital and the Mongols departed China for good
to return to the steppes from whence they had come. Under the Ming government was stabilized
and China was defended from further invasion including as we'll see from the occasionally
still restive and aggressive Mongols for three centuries. We'll explore this in the next two
lectures of the course and as we'll see under Ming China China prospered and its indigenous
culture was fostered in an era that strongly supported and promoted again the core values
of eastern civilization and also attempted to block out any unwholesome and increasingly
unwelcomed foreign influence. But first of course I need to try and wrap up these two
lectures on the Mongols by assessing again their impact on eastern civilization and their impact
indeed on all of world history. From the early days of their empire the Mongols prized commercial
and trade relationships with neighboring economies and they continued this policy
during the cycles of expansion and consolidation that followed. This meant that all merchants
and foreign ambassadors traveling anywhere in the Mongol realm who carried proper documentation
I mean passports really proper authorization from the Mongols were protected this greatly
increased overland trade. So during the 13th and 14th centuries thousands of Europeans and
Islamic merchants made their way from Europe and West Asia to the distant lands of China.
Marco Polo was only one of the best known of these and his account of his travels
certainly inspired many others to follow in his footsteps. The well-travelled and well-maintained
roads throughout the vast Mongol Empire thus linked lands from the Mediterranean basin to China
just like during that the heyday of the first great Silk Roads era.
But we must also note that the Mongol Empire had a negligible influence on seaborne trade
because they did not control the sea lanes and it's because of this fact that some world historians
part company now on the question of Mongol global influence because maritime trade was much larger
both in value and volume than the overland trade that passed through the territories
directly under the control of the Mongol Empire. Historians now intensely debate whether the
century of Mongol rule really did have such a profound impact on trans-Eurasian cultural exchange.
But it is indisputable that during the century-long Pax Mongolica the Mongol peace
east and west Eurasia were closer perhaps than ever before. Mostly this was because
Mongol rulers positively encouraged travel and communication. I mentioned they established
this courier network that rapidly relayed news information and and government orders across
Eurasia. With this sort of direct encouragement from the Kans missionaries traders and adventurers
like Marco Polo now began to journey with ease to and fro all over Africa, Arabia, Central Asia
certainly, China, even Europe. Despite periodic outbreaks of civil war throughout the Mongol
era the great Kans of China, the ill Kans of Persia and the Kans of all the other regions under
Mongol control maintained close communication with each other by means of diplomatic embassies.
But at the same time the Karnates also had diplomatic relationships with rulers and states
much further afield. In Korea, way to the south in Vietnam, in China of course, in India, Russia
and even Western Europe. We know of several European ambassadors who traveled all the way to the
Mongol realm and into China to deliver messages from authorities in Europe seeking to form alliances
with the Mongols. We also know that diplomats traveled westwards including Raban Selma,
a Nestorian Christian monk who was born in the Mongol capital of Khan Balak and who then went on
to visit Italy and France as a representative of the Persian ill Khan. And just like the earlier
Silk Road's eras, Transurasian trade routes during the Mongol era also served as highways for the
transmission of religions through missionaries. Several Christian missionaries journeyed to the
Mongols. One of the most famous is John of Plano Capini who was sent by Pope Innocent IV
to visit the great Khan in 1246. I'll have something more to say about John or Giovanni
in the next two lectures from now. Later the famous Flemish Franciscan William of Rubrik
visited Monkey's Court in 1254 and John of Monte Corvino made thousands of converts during his
extensive visits to China between 1289 and 1322. This was the beginning by the way of a sustained
attempt to spread Christianity into China that continued under the Ming and the Qing as we'll
shortly see. Between 1325 and 1354 the famous Muslim traveller Ibn Battuta, perhaps one of the
greatest travellers who ever lived, also travelled extensively through Afro-Eurasia benefiting from
the Pax Mongolica, the Mongol Peace. Ibn Battuta visited Constantinople and every Middle Eastern
Islamic State, also India, Sri Lanka, Indonesia and even China. He several times noted in his journals
that the merchants of Eurasia benefited enormously from lower tariffs under the Mongols and that silk
and spices were flowing from east to west along the old silk roads both by land and by sea.
And so although justifiably renowned notorious really for the slaughter for the havoc wrought
by their invasions historians today tend to focus more on the stability and the connections established
by Mongol control of their vast empire. Undoubtedly the Mongols encouraged trade, they
borrowed all sorts of ideas from old established civilizations, they helped spread the technological
knowledge of eastern civilization, knowledge of gunpowder for example, shipbuilding techniques,
medicine, printing, all the way from China to Europe with dramatic implications for subsequent
world history. In the Middle East the Mongols patronized art and superb architecture, the writing
of important histories. To China the Mongols introduced new crops, Islamic ideas about astronomy
and ceramics. The Pax Mongolica also gave Europeans a new awareness of the wider world
which certainly acted as a powerful spur or incentive to European exploration, European
expansion and ultimately European colonization of much of the world.
Time and again in this course we've considered the critical role of militarized
steppnomadic peoples in diffusing eastern culture, eastern technology to the west.
And also diffusing western religions, western beliefs into the east, people like the Xiongnu,
the Uaicha, the Scythians, the Huns. In the 13th and 14th centuries it was the Mongols
who facilitated an intensive exchange of goods and ideas that helped lead directly to the emergence
of a sort of pre-modern interconnected world system. This system many world historians now argue
was the forerunner to the emergence of capitalism of enhanced global connections
and the forerunner to the subsequent age of European hegemony.
But the largest empire ever seen was fleeting and it could not endure because of logistical
problems and difficulties of imperial administration and so the mighty Mongols
slipped quietly from the stage of world history. The ultimate impact of all this on eastern
civilization is intriguing and equally significant I think. Despite all the negatives associated
with the rule of pastoral nomads and other outsiders, Chinese civilization actually gained
something during its period of Mongol domination. This I think was a confidence in its ability to
survive, to bend just enough to ward off the worst blows and defeats that these alien barbarians
could throw at them. Chinese civilization survived by strengthening those core facets of cultural
identity independent of who was wearing the mantle of the Son of Heaven. So far from the
court of Kublai Khan, Confucian and Taoist teachings continued and circles of artists
and poets found ways to maintain confidence I guess in the core foundational ideas of eastern
civilization. Next time we will see how this hidden repository of distinctive culture would
resurface to guide China's fortunes during 300 years of Ming dynasty rule.
