Hello everyone and welcome to this, the first of two lectures on the Ming Dynasty of China,
a dynasty perhaps best known to you for its famous porcelain and other artistic achievements,
but a dynasty that should also be recognized for the remarkable job it did in stabilizing
Chinese fortunes and in preserving many of the foundational elements and ideas of eastern
civilization when they threatened to unravel.
However, as I also want to argue in this pair of lectures and the following two actually
on the Qing Dynasty, the stabilization and preservation came at an enormous cost and
resulted ultimately in the surrendering of Chinese power, innovation and global leadership
to the new and rising power of world history, the Europeans.
As we've just seen during the 13th and 14th century, China experienced the trauma of rule
by detested outsiders, the Yuan dynasty of the Mongols.
The Mongols largely ignored Chinese political and cultural traditions, they dismantled the
Confucian exam system for example and they replaced many Chinese bureaucrats with Central
Asian, Persian and other foreign administrators, many of whom were Muslim.
So when the long Yuan reign was finally ended and the Mongols had been driven back to the
steps, the Ming emperors who followed attempted in turn to erase all signs of Mongol influence
and restore traditional forms of culture and governance to China.
In order to do this, they looked back to the great Chinese dynasties that had preceded
the Mongols for inspiration.
Like the Tang dynasty in particular, the Ming built a powerful and centralized imperial
state.
They revived the ancient Confucian civil service exam and the whole idea of the scholar bureaucrat
and they promoted Confucian values, values that had first emerged 2,000 years earlier
in the late Zhou dynasty at the expense of any and all outside ideas.
As we will see in the subsequent pair of lectures, the rulers of the Qing dynasty that followed
the Ming, although they themselves were manchus of nomadic origin and thus technically also
outsiders, nonetheless also worked hard to promote these traditional Chinese ways.
So both the Ming and Qing dynasties were deeply conservative, their focus was on maintaining
stability and tradition in a huge agrarian society and to a certain extent on isolating
and protecting China from unwholesome outside influences.
By adopting policies that favored these classical Chinese traditions, these two dynasties collectively
maintained a successful and stable state for half a millennium, something that was certainly
appreciated by Chinese intellectuals and by the common people at the time.
Modern historians have come to view the Ming and the Qing as dynasties that ultimately
acted like a dead weight to slow Chinese innovation and entrepreneurship, just when real global
competition from European states was about to appear.
It's a profound irony that at the same moment, tiny European countries like Portugal began
to send their fleets into the Indian Ocean and eventually onto China, the Ming government
was attempting to actively withdraw their fleets from the seas, as we'll shortly see.
And just as Europeans began putting Chinese inventions like printing, gunpowder and the
compass to very good use, China let its technological superiority slip and gave up its position
of global scientific leadership.
Undoubtedly the Ming dynasty preserved peace within China and much of East Asia for centuries,
an achievement for which they deserve enormous credit.
But ultimately, the peaceful and conservative stagnation of China under the Ming was to have
disastrous consequences for China under the succeeding Qing dynasty, as we'll shortly
see.
Let's pick up our story now with the end of Mongol rule in China.
After the Yuan dynasty collapsed in the mid-14th century, you'll remember because of internal
dissonance and also enormous pressure from peasant uprisings, the Ming dynasty moved quickly
to restore native rule to China.
Hongwu, the leader of the uprising against the Yuan, ruled as the first Ming emperor for
30 years from 1368 to 1398.
As founder of the dynasty, he chose the name Ming, which means brilliant for the new dynasty.
And after driving the Mongols out, he set to work to build a tightly centralized Chinese
run state.
Hongwu was the third of only three peasants ever to become leader of China, by the way,
part of a very select group.
As emperor, Hongwu decided to make extensive use of a new class of bureaucrat called Mandarin's.
These were imperial government officials whose job was to travel throughout the land and
supervise the implementation of government policies, sort of eyes and ears I guess for
the emperor and the court.
Hongwu also decided to place great trust in eunuchs, men I'm sure you remember from
previous lectures who had been castrated usually at a young age.
Because this meant they could not generate families and therefore could not build power
bases that would challenge imperial authority, eunuchs were trusted with a variety of sensitive
positions within government.
But this was a trust that many eunuchs learned to abuse.
Three of the most famous, infamous perhaps eunuchs in China's long history served the
imperial court during the Ming dynasty.
Now one of these deservedly famous, the great Muslim admiral seven foot tall Zheng He, about
who I will have quite a bit to say in our next lecture.
That was Liu Jin who served Prince Zhu Houjiao when the prince was quite young.
After the prince became emperor, Liu Jin was promoted to the position of leading eunuch
in the court.
He then used his power to control access to the emperor and is said to have had 56 ethical
Confucian officials removed from their positions.
His corrupt behavior is blamed by many Chinese historians today for seriously undermining
the credibility of the dynasty.
The third famous or in this case definitely infamous eunuch of the Ming was Wei Zhongxian,
a former illiterate hoodlum who used the art of flattery to get close to Emperor Wanli.
Despite being a eunuch, Wei was apparently able to maintain an intimate relationship
with the nanny of the emperor's grandson Zhu Youjiao who later became Emperor Xi Zhong.
Zhu Youjiao was proclaimed emperor, eunuch Wei Zhongxian became the real power behind
the throne, jailing and killing his enemies and leading the monarchy which towards the
end of the Ming was being totally manipulated by these eunuchs to the brink of collapse.
But let's leave this sorry tale of corruption for a moment and concentrate on the vigorous
and successful rule of the early Ming period, including one of Hongwu's finest successes,
Emperor Yongle who ruled from 1403 to 1424.
Yongle is renowned for launching a series of naval expeditions that sailed throughout
the Indian Ocean Basin and would show Chinese colors as far away as East Africa, expeditions
led by the eunuch Admiral Zheng He.
But Yongle's successes discontinued these expensive maritime expeditions although they
did maintain the tightly centralized state that Hongwu had established.
I promise to tell you more about the world historical ramifications of this decision
to end the naval expeditions in our next lecture.
One of the reasons the expeditions were stopped is because the Ming emperors were determined
to prevent new invasions of China.
In particular they were very concerned about the Mongols who although they had been driven
back to the steppes remained very active and dangerous just to the north of the Great Wall.
Because of this concern in 1421 Yongle decided to move the early Ming capital from Nanjing
in the south back to Beijing in order to keep a closer watch on the Mongols and also other
nomadic peoples of the steppes.
As I mentioned last time I think Beijing has remained the capital of China ever since for
almost the last 600 years.
The early Ming emperors did indeed command powerful armies that were able to keep the
Mongols under tight military control.
But later emperors were far less able, far less efficient and by the mid 15th century
Ming military forces had lost much of their effectiveness.
Powerful Mongol forces actually massacred several Chinese armies in the 1440s and in
the year 1449 they captured the Ming emperor himself, a clear demonstration of the lack
of prowess of the Ming military.
The later Ming emperors in their desperation to protect their realm from the Mongols and
other militarized nomads decided to invest much of their resources into rebuilding and
extending new fortifications in the ancient Great Wall system.
I'm sure you remember from earlier lectures in the course that it was the first emperor
Qin Shi Huangdi who way back in the third century before the common era had first connected
many of those smaller Zhou dynasty warring states period walls together into the first
Great Wall system.
Various dynasties since then, particularly the Han during the Silk Road era, had maintained
and extended the fortifications but these ancient walls had largely fallen into ruin
by the period of the Southern Song.
In their desperation to keep out the Mongols and in the context of an increasingly less
effective military, the Ming administration made the reconstruction of the Great Walls
a major defensive priority.
Hundreds of thousands of workers were employed to labor mightily throughout the late 15th
and early 16th centuries to build a truly formidable stone and brick barrier that in
the end ran for some 1550 miles.
Now the Ming Great Wall was a lot more standardized in its construction than its ancient predecessors.
It averaged generally between 33 and 50 feet in height.
It included watch and signal towers at regular intervals along the wall.
It included accommodation for troops of course stationed along this very extensive border.
If you've been fortunate enough to walk on any of the sections of the Great Wall near
Beijing then you have definitely walked on part of the Ming Great Wall.
These military defeats and subsequent defensive policies pursued by the Ming rulers were part
of a larger determination not just to eradicate Mongol and indeed any foreign cultural influence
from China but also to create instead a stable society in the image of the classical Chinese
past.
So with Ming government encouragement individuals now gave up the Mongol names and the dress
that they had adopted during the Yuan dynasty.
The government also sponsored the study of Chinese cultural traditions that the Mongols
had suppressed or ignored especially no surprise Confucianism.
They provided financial support for the establishment of imperial academies and regional colleges
all over China to teach the foundational ideas and philosophies of Eastern civilization.
Most importantly the Ming restored the ancient civil service exam system that the Mongols
had dismantled.
This is a subject I'll return to in a little more detail in just a moment in this lecture.
But the vigor of the early Ming emperors like Hong Wu and Yongle did not survive beyond
the mid 16th century after a series of problems combined to weaken the dynasty.
One of the most difficult challenges the government had to deal with was an outbreak of vicious
piracy in the Yellow and South China Seas.
Indeed for several decades between the 1520s and 1560s pirates and smugglers mostly based
in Japan operated almost at will up and down the entire east coast of China.
The Ming navy and coastal defences proved woefully ineffective in dealing with this outbreak
and conflicts with pirate gangs severely disrupted coastal regions sometimes well into the interior
as well.
Let me give you one graphic example for which we have clear and indisputable literary evidence.
In the year 1555 a gang of 67 pirates went on a three month rampage looted a dozen cities
in three different coastal provinces and killed more than 4,000 people.
Ultimately it took more than 40 years to suppress the pirates.
We can see further evidence of this ineptitude in the fact that the later Ming emperors lived
more and more extravagantly in the Forbidden City, a vast imperial enclave built in the
heart of the capital Beijing.
The Forbidden City was built over a 14 year period between 1406 and 1420 and modern engineers
estimated probably required the labour of one million conscripted labourers to construct.
When completed the complex contained 980 separate buildings and covered an area of close to
8 million square feet.
Perhaps many of you have also visited this extraordinary imperial enclave which was
proclaimed a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1987 because it houses the largest collection
of ancient wooden structures anywhere in the world.
If you have walked through the Forbidden City as I have it's easy to imagine the Ming emperors
living their sheltered lives deep inside this vast imperial complex, owner receiving news
about the outside world through UNIX and servant administrators, news that was heavily filtered,
heavily censored.
Most later Ming emperors adapted to this situation by frankly ignoring government affairs often
for decades while satisfying their various appetites for wine, women and other pleasures.
So the real reason that it took more than 40 years to suppress the pirates I think we
have to say is because the government was increasingly inept and disinterested.
Another example of this ineptitude is that when a series of famine struck China in the
early 17th century the government proved itself incapable of organising relief efforts.
As the famine worsened and as no aid was forthcoming from Beijing the desperate peasants were
so hungry they had to resort to eating grass roots and tree bark.
By the 1630s angry peasants were organising revolts and as they gathered momentum city
after city withdrew its loyalty from the Ming.
At the same time Manchu invaders in the north decided to seize this opportunity to invade
China again but also by joining forces with the peasants to make a concerted attack upon
the Ming.
By the early 1640s they combined rebel and Manchu forces controlled much of China and
they turned finally in a calculated pincer movement towards the capital Beijing.
But the last emperor of the Ming was so sheltered from the bad news by court eunuchs and mandarins
that he had no idea of the seriousness of the situation nor even of the location of
the rebel forces until it was far too late, almost until they were actually climbing over
the walls of the Forbidden City.
In April 1644 with the forces of rebel leader Li Zicheng about to capture Beijing the last
Ming emperor Chongzhen organised a feast and invited all members of the imperial household
except his sons to attend.
And then using his sword he killed all of them to prevent them falling into rebel hands
except for his second daughter Princess Changping who watered off the sword blow but
lost her arm in the process.
Then still wearing his glorious imperial costume he ran to the eastern foot of Jingshan Hill
inside the Forbidden City and hanged himself from a Japanese pagoda tree many of which
had been planted inside this imperial enclave.
The forces of Li Zicheng then captured the inner city.
The original pagoda tree no longer exists by the way but a replacement tree with a historical
storyboard attached to it has been erected in the Forbidden City perhaps you've seen
it to explain the final days of the Ming era of Chinese history.
But the explanation is simple enough as rebels prepared to capture the imperial quarter the
emperor and his family essentially committed suicide and the Ming dynasty came to its tragic
end.
Let me return now to the system of imperial administration that operated under the Ming.
Both the Ming and the later Qing dynasties attempted at least in their early days to create
and then preside over a well-organised and tightly centralised state.
The actual administration of the empire of course was handled by a vast bureaucracy staffed
by Confucian scholars.
With this structure in place for more than 500 years the autocratic state created by
Hongwu effectively governed China's fortunes.
At the head of the state was the emperor not quite a god perhaps but certainly way above
any mere mortal.
As we've seen from the really the earliest lectures in this course according to the ancient
traditions of eastern civilisation the emperor was the son of heaven a human being designated
by heavenly powers to maintain order on earth blessed to wear the mandate of heaven.
The emperor lived a privileged life within the Forbidden City with hundreds sometimes
thousands of concubines certainly thousands of eunuchs to take care of his every desire.
His day was completely orchestrated and all performances in which he participated or rituals
were carefully choreographed that included audiences inspection certainly banquets whatever.
Everything about the emperor's person and the institution he represented conveyed a
sense of this awesome authority.
His clothes and personal effects bore designs forbidden for other people to wear and even
the written characters of the emperor's names were taboo throughout China.
Any individual with the rare privilege of meeting the emperor personally had to kowtow
which meant three kneelings on the floor and then nine solid head knockings on the floor.
Even minor offences in the vicinity of the emperor would be severely punished the highest
official in the land could have his bare buttocks flogged with bamboo a legalist punishment
so brutal it sometimes caused death and reminding us of this long tradition of legalist punishments
in China.
Below the emperor and the imperial eunuchs the day today governing of China was the job
of the scholar bureaucrats the most senior of which had been personally appointed by
the emperor.
These were mostly gentlemen from the class of well educated and highly literate men
known as the scholar gentry a class we've seen we've met we've discussed many times
before in this course.
In the best tradition of Confucianism at least since the days of the early Han dynasty these
men had earned academic degrees by passing rigorous civil service examinations.
You remember that this is something Confucius himself had argued for way back in the late
Zhou dynasty this idea that education in the Zhou classics could create leaders the junsa
the princelings who had attained a high level of ethical and intellectual cultivation.
These were the men who dominated China's political intellectual and social life for
more than 2000 years.
Under the Ming preparations for the Confucian exams began at a very early age sometimes
classes in the classics took place in local schools which like the the exams themselves
by the way were only open to males but it's interesting that the fact that many wealthy
families employed tutors to help their sons prepare for the exams had a very positive
spin-off effect for women because the presence of these professional tutors within these
households also made formal education more widely available for girls during the Ming.
By the time students were 10 or 11 they had memorized the several thousand Chinese characters
written language characters that were necessary to deal with the Confucian literature including
the Anilex of course and all of the Zhou dynasty classics.
The candidates also had to have studied calligraphy, poetry, essay writing and students had to
know a very large corpus of commentaries now also histories and other literary works that
had been written on these Zhou classics over 2000 years they had to know all of this before
sitting the exam.
The examinations themselves consisted of a series of tests administered at different levels
as the district exam then the provincial exam and finally the most rigorous the metropolitan
level exam.
Stiff official quotas restricted the number of successful candidates in each exam.
The quota insisted for example that only 300 students could pass the final metropolitan
exam each year so we know from various sources that students frequently took the exam several
times before they finally earned a degree.
The actual writing of the exams was a grueling process I remind my students about this all
the time.
At the appointed hour candidates would present themselves at the examination compound carrying
with them a water pitcher, a chamber pot, their bedding, their food, an inkstone, ink
and calligraphy brushes.
After they were verified and then searched for cheat sheets that is the candidates were
led through narrow corridors to small cells that contained a bench, a bed and a desk.
For the next three days and two nights they spent their time writing essays in eight distinct
sections on questions that were posed to them by the examiners.
There were no interruptions, there was no communication allowed between candidates.
Even if a candidate died during the exam his body was wrapped in straw and tossed over
the compound walls for his family to come and collect.
But of course the possibility of high bureaucratic service with rich financial and social rewards
meant that despite the grueling nature of the exams competition for degrees was ferocious
at all levels.
We have evidence from the period which demonstrates that the exam system was not perfect, sometimes
cheating candidates and corrupt examiners did compromise the entire Confucian system.
Even so obtaining a degree did not necessarily ensure employment.
During the Qing dynasty for example historians of that period estimate that there were around
one million degree holders at all the various levels of course at any one time and all of
them were competing for about 20,000 government bureaucratic jobs.
Students who only passed the district level exams usually spent their careers teaching
in local schools or as private tutors for these wealthy families.
But those who passed the metropolitan exams could at least hope for powerful positions
in the imperial bureaucracy.
By opening the door to the possibility of honor, power and rewards the exam system also
encouraged the serious pursuit of formal higher education.
China under the Ming was undoubtedly the most highly educated society that had ever existed
to this point in world history.
The Confucian exam system also provided an avenue of upward social mobility because the
exams at least in theory were open to all males regardless of age or class.
But in reality the cost of private tutors and the expense of traveling to the examination
sites meant that wealthy families had a distinct advantage.
The system also molded the personal values of those who governed China by ensuring that
it was the ethical philosophy of Confucianism that remained at the heart of Chinese education
and Chinese government as it had done often on now for more than 2,000 years.
But let me begin to conclude this first lecture on the Ming dynasty by noting again that by
driving out the Mongols China was able to control its own affairs throughout the early
modern period and in so doing avoid the sort of turmoil that afflicted, well the Americas
for example, certainly Africa after the arrival of the Europeans.
The rulers of the Ming dynasty built a powerful centralized state and worked hard to eradicate
all vestiges of Mongol rule and as we've just seen they restored traditional values
of Eastern civilization by reviving Chinese political institutions, particularly the ancient
Confucian exam system.
What I want to show you in the next lecture is that for several decades early in the 15th
century the government also provided state support for a quite astonishing burst of naval
expeditions but as I mentioned after the later Ming emperors moved to restrict foreign
expeditions and also the access of foreign merchants and missionaries to China things
changed dramatically.
Next time we're going to go to sea, we're going to explore these great naval voyages,
we're going to see the period when Chinese fleets rule the oceans of the Eastern Hemisphere.
You also look at attempts by Jesuit missionaries to bring Catholicism in a very serious intentional
way into China.
I look forward to seeing you soon.
