In the early 15th century, Ming Emperor Yongle set out to establish a Chinese presence in
the Indian Ocean Basin by sponsoring a series of massive maritime expeditions.
Led by the seven-foot-tall eunuch Admiral Zheng He, this Chinese fleet was enormous,
up to 62 vessels, manned by some 28,000 men, and four of these ships were gigantic, measuring
400 feet long by 160 feet wide.
Welcome to this second lecture on the glittering world, perhaps we should say brilliant world,
of the Ming Dynasty, which will begin with an exploration of these extraordinary naval
expeditions.
Last time we noted that after driving out the Mongols, the Chinese were back in control
of their own affairs.
The Ming Dynasty then built a powerful, centralized state and worked hard to restore the traditional
values of eastern civilization by reviving Chinese political institutions, such as the
ancient Confucian exam system.
So in this lecture we pick up the story in the early 15th century when Chinese fleets
ruled the oceans of the eastern hemisphere.
We will explore the impact of these voyages and also the ramifications of the decision
made by later emperors to disengage from exploration at precisely the same moment that Europeans
were stepping out onto the world stage.
An example of this European disengagement with the world that did directly affect China
was the attempt by Jesuit missionaries to convert the Chinese people to Catholicism
during the Ming period.
We will also take a look at this Jesuit attempt in this lecture because it's very instructive
I think about the ability of the core concepts of eastern civilization to withstand the influence
of even the most powerful, even the most persuasive foreign ideologies.
And we'll conclude with a few brief remarks again about the verdict that both Chinese
and world historians have delivered on the ultimate impact of the Ming on both eastern
civilization and global history.
But first then to these seven remarkable maritime expeditions that sailed between the
years 1405 and 1433 led by the eunuch Admiral Zheng He, who is frankly an absolutely fascinating
character.
Zheng He was born in Yunnan province in southern China to Chinese Muslim parents who actually
named him Ma He, Ma being short for the prophet Muhammad.
The Mongols you might remember had tolerated Islam and indeed tolerated all the religions
in China during the reign of the Yuan dynasty.
But the Ming with their renewed focus on core Chinese ideologies launched a series of persecutions
against Muslims and Ma's parents were killed in a Muslim uprising in Yunnan province.
When Ma He was about 11 years old he and many other children were captured by a Ming army
who had been sent to the south to attempt to re-establish control of Yunnan.
At the age of 13 Ma He and the other boys were castrated and Ma He was then placed as
a servant in the household of the current emperor's fourth son Prince Zhu Di.
As I've mentioned several times now because eunuchs were unable to father children and
thus established their own powerful families they were trusted with all sorts of sensitive
government positions.
They were court servants, high officials in many cases, even advisors to the emperor
as we've seen or as members of the imperial choir and of course as guardians in the imperial
harems.
Ma He proved himself to be an exceptionally competent assistant and military advisor to
the prince who renamed him Zheng He after the eunuchs horse was killed in battle outside
the city of Zheng Lumba.
When Prince Zhu Di came to power as the emperor Yongle in the year 1403 he was captivated
to hear Zheng He recount seafaring stories that he had heard from his grandfather.
Now his grandfather was a Persian who'd served as an administrator in the previous Mongol
Yuan dynasty, one of many Persian administrators brought in by the Yuan.
During his lifetime he had travelled to Mecca by sea to undertake the hajj, the holy Muslim
pilgrimage.
Yongle became intrigued by these stories and also by the possibility of extending Ming
prestige throughout the region by sponsoring diplomatic and exploratory maritime expeditions.
The emperor decided to authorise Zheng He to oversee the construction of a fleet of massive
treasure ships as they were called treasure ships and begin to plan a series of maritime
expeditions.
Zheng He, who as I said was said to be seven feet tall, a giant of a man, was certainly
the first eunuch in China's long history to be given such an important diplomatic and
military position.
After construction, fitting out and manning of this enormous fleet, the first expedition
embarked in July 1405 from Liujia Harbour near Suqiu.
The agenda for this first voyage was threefold, to establish relations with foreign countries,
to expand trade contacts of course and also to look for exotic treasures for Yongle and
the imperial court.
Under the command of Admiral Zheng He was a fleet of 62 ships, manned by more than 27,800
men.
This included sailors of course, but clerks, interpreters, officers and soldiers, artisans
that were medical men, meteorologists and so on.
Four of these ships as I mentioned were truly huge, 400 feet long and 160 feet wide.
By way of comparison, Columbus' flagship the Santa Maria, in which he sailed from Spain
to the Americas nearly a century later, measured a mere 85 feet in length by perhaps 20 feet
in width.
The great Ming fleet included horse ships that carried nothing but horses.
It included water ships that carried fresh water for the crew and for the horses.
Supply ships, various troop transports, there were naval fighting ships and a host of other
specialised vessels.
The cargo carried on board by the fleet was so extensive it needed to be broken down in
the manifest into more than 40 different categories.
So there were silk goods of course, Ming porcelain, which you'll find today in all the great museums
of the world, gold and silverware.
There were copper utensils, iron implements, cotton goods, mercury was carried, umbrellas,
straw mats, you get the picture.
This massive fleet sailed ponderously south along the coasts of Fujian province and then
visited Vietnam, then the island of Java and Malacca.
From here, Zheng He crossed the vast eastern Indian Ocean to eventually visit Sri Lanka
and a number of trading cities around the south coast of India.
Given the overwhelming size of this fleet, we can only imagine the awe it must have inspired
as the 62 ships came over the horizon and turned into the harbours of these great port cities.
Wherever his ships sailed on this expedition and the six that followed, they collected
rare treasures to take back to China.
They also demanded that local rulers recognize the power and dominion of the Ming dynasty
and Emperor Yongle.
On the return journey, the fleet sailed back across the Indian Ocean to the islands of
Indonesia but was actually held up there for several months, battling pirates near the island
of Sumatra before returning triumphantly with the pirate captain in captivity to the port
of Nanjing in 1407 after a voyage of two years.
Over a period of 28 years between 1405 and 1433, Zheng He eventually led seven of these
magnificent massive maritime expeditions visiting at least 30 different countries and regions
to the south and west of China.
Every single time he commanded a massive fleet and a staff of tens of thousands.
Subsequent voyages, they flew the Ming flag in Yemen, in Arabia, inside the Persian Gulf.
They visited Mecca and many ports along the East African coast including Mogadishu.
He presented gifts of gold, porcelain and silk to foreign dignitaries and collected
all manner of treasure and exotic items to take back to the emperor including ostriches,
zebras, camels and a giraffe that was considered so extraordinary by the Chinese when it arrived
back in the court that they took this animal as proof that heaven itself had sanctioned
these voyages.
Zheng He also intervened in local conflicts in Sumatra and Ceylon.
As I've just said, he suppressed piracy all around the waters of Southeast Asia.
The intimidated local authorities with a show of massive strength in Arabia and these
various African port cities, he generally made China's presence strongly felt throughout
the Indian Ocean.
Some scholars believe that Zheng He may actually have traveled as far south down the coast
of Africa as the Cape of Good Hope.
But while this is certainly plausible, I should tell you that there is absolutely no evidence
to support the argument advanced in a recent and very popular book that Zheng He's fleet
crossed the Pacific to the Americas.
No evidence whatsoever.
Here is how Zheng He himself described his voyages and achievements on a tablet he had
erected in Fujian province in the year 1432.
Let me quote from Zheng He.
We have traversed more than 100,000 li of immense water spaces and have beheld in the
ocean huge waves like mountains rising in the sky, and we have set eyes on barbarian
regions far away hidden in a blue transparency of light vapours, while our sails loftily
unfurled like clouds day and night continued their course as rapidly as a star traversing
those savage waves as if we were treading a public thoroughfare.
Under the reign of Yonglu, however, Zheng He's faction fell out of favour in court,
and the Ming government eventually decided to withdraw its support for expensive maritime
expeditions, partly because some scholar bureaucrats argued that in some way they violated the
principles of Confucianism.
The government ultimately moved to suppress all knowledge of the fleet and its expedition,
and Zheng He probably died on his last voyage to be buried at sea.
Conservative Confucian factions in the Ming government even tried to ban Chinese merchants
from dealing with foreign people, again to eliminate the unwholesome foreign influences
on the core Chinese values, and eventually, as we will see next time, the Qing government
tried to outlaw maritime travel altogether.
All this leads to a critical question that's often asked now by world historians.
How might subsequent global history have been different if the voyages had not been so abruptly
curtailed by this change of government policy?
Would Chinese influence in the Indian Ocean have counted and even surpassed that of Portugal,
for example?
The expeditions of Zheng He absolutely dwarf those of the Portuguese navigator Vasco de
Gama, who began his voyage to India in 1497, nearly a century after Zheng He's first voyage.
The Gama had only four small ships compared to Zheng He's vast fleet of enormous vessels.
But ironically, it was this tiny Portuguese voyage that had a much deeper impact on world
history than those of the Chinese.
Now, certainly, Zheng He's expeditions brought back exotic treasures and won him many friends
in the Ming court.
But the voyages did not bring in enough revenue to justify their enormous cost.
And this, along with renewed threats from the Mongols that we discussed, and also these
concerns of some of the Confucian scholars as why the government stopped supporting them.
So soon after Emperor Yongle's death, the voyages came to an end, and the world lost
the chance to see how differently global history might have played out if the Chinese had come
to dominate Indian Ocean trade rather than the Portuguese.
And what might have happened if the Chinese had reached the Americas before Columbus?
Even though official support for Zheng He's expeditions did dry up, maritime trade did
still continue to play a significant role in the Chinese economy.
Indeed, despite the objections of these conservative Confucian officials, during the Ming and into
the early Qing dynastic eras, burgeoning global trade brought tremendous prosperity
into China to feed an insatiable demand for Chinese exports, Chinese workers labored to
produce vast quantities of silk, glorious Ming porcelain, lack of wear and tea for customers
all over the Indian basin, also the Islamic world, and even on into Europe.
The silk industry was particularly well organized during this period.
Employees worked in very well managed workshops that paid regular wages for the production
of high value products like fine sattons and brocades for export.
And Chinese silk exports were extensive in volume.
We know of one Spanish galleon in the late Ming period which sailed from China to the
Americas carrying 50,000 pairs of silk stockings.
These imports on the other hand were relatively few.
Some spices, exotic birds, animal skins, some woollen textiles from Europe also made their
way into China, but these are much lower in volume than the levels of export.
And payment for the Chinese exports was usually demanded by Chinese merchants in the form
of silver bullion which supported a silver based economy in China.
So China was effectively importing vast quantities of silver bullion and silver coin that was
being dug out of the mines in Spanish controlled Peru and Mexico, famous mines like Potrosi,
and then sent via Manila in the Philippines back into China.
As I'm going to show you in our next pair of lectures on the Qing dynasty, this insistence
on silver bullion for payment led to effectively a Chinese monopoly of global silver.
And this in turn led to increasing resentment on the part of foreign merchants, particularly
English merchants, at what was a very one-sided trade.
This resentment had enormous consequences, indeed disastrous consequences in the end,
particularly for China in the 18th and 19th centuries, as we'll see in our next pair
of lectures.
All this commercial growth and expansion of trade took place in an atmosphere of tight
government control, which partly explains the government's sponsorship of this series
of expensive naval expeditions.
But of course, as we've consistently seen in this course, once China began to connect
with the world in various ways, it was impossible to control the flow of ideas back into the
state.
China's participation in trans-eurasian trade during the Han dynasty and now their involvement
in genuinely global trading systems from the 16th century on meant that it was not
only foreign goods that entered China, but of course, also foreign ideas.
Under the Ming, many of these foreign ideas now came from Europe, most notably Christianity.
Of course, as we've seen, Christianity in one form or another had been in China for a
long time before the Ming dynasty came to power.
We've noted several times that the Nestorian version of Christianity had established churches
in China as early as the 7th century of the common era.
And I mentioned in our lectures on the Mongols that Catholic communities were quite prominent
in China under the Yuan dynasty.
We know of several Christian missionaries, I mentioned them in the previous lecture,
who journeyed from Europe to visit the Mongol courts.
One of the most famous was John of Plano Cappini, who was sent by Pope Innocent IV to
visit the Court of the Great Khan in 1246.
John or Giovanni, to use his proper Italian name, had been a companion and disciple of
no lesser Christian luminary than St. Francis of Assisi.
And as part of this very important Catholic mission to the Mongols, was one of the first
Europeans to actually enter the court of a great Khan.
He and his companions rode some 3,000 miles in just over 100 days.
And although they barely survived the rigors of this journey, John was still strong enough
to try and convert Gaiok Khan to Christianity, an invitation the Great Khan refused.
But Christianity then disappeared from China after the collapse of the Yuan dynasty because
of the Ming's insistence on promoting core Chinese ideologies.
This meant that when Roman Catholic missionaries started returning in the 16th century, they
had to start more or less from scratch in their efforts to re-establish a Christian community.
The most prominent missionaries of the Ming period were the Jesuits, who worked hard to
strengthen Catholicism in Europe and also to spread their faith abroad.
The founder of the Jesuit missionary to China was the great Italian Matteo Ricchi, who had
the declared and ambitious aim of converting all of China to Christianity, beginning at
the top with the then-Emperor Wanli.
Now Ricchi was a learned, brilliant and polished individual who became a very popular figure
in the Ming court, as indeed did many of his Jesuit colleagues.
Arriving in the Portuguese trading colony of Macau in the South in August 1582, Ricchi
then delayed his journey into Ming China proper in order to immerse himself in Chinese language
and Chinese texts.
By the time he was invited by the Emperor to attend the Ming court in Beijing almost 20
years later in 1601, he was so adept at the language that he could write learned classical
Chinese he could converse at the highest intellectual level with the Confucian scholar
bureaucrats.
Ricchi's expertise in Chinese language and Chinese ideology opened doors for the Jesuits,
who literally dazzled their hosts with both their intellects but also their mastery of
European science, European technology.
Ricchi and his colleagues, all of whom had an advanced mathematical and scientific education,
were able, for example, to correct Chinese calendars that had been consistently miscalculating
solar eclipses.
The Jesuits then prepared accurate maps of the world with China in the centre, maps whose
accuracy was based on the knowledge that European explorers, European cartographers had now been
accumulating for a century by this stage.
The extraordinarily practical Jesuits even supervised the casting of high quality bronze
cannons for both the Ming and the early Qing dynasties.
They introduced their hosts to finely ground glass prisms which became immensely popular
because of the way they refracted sunlight into the component parts.
This is a 16th century version of a kaleidoscope and it was an enormous hit in the court of
the Ming.
Even harpsichords were also of great fascination to the Chinese court and the skilled Jesuit
musicians dazzled the court with compositions written specifically for and about their hosts.
The Jesuits then played on Chinese curiosity for mechanical devices.
The most popular device of all was what the Chinese called the self-singing bells.
These are spring-driven mechanical clocks that kept accurate time and chime the hours
sometimes even the quarter hours, another great hit in the Ming court.
But of course the Jesuits were using all this technological wizardry simply to capture Chinese
attention.
That wasn't their true reason.
Their ultimate goal was to win converts to Christianity.
In order to facilitate this, they actually adopted some of the ideas that Buddhists had
used centuries before.
They portrayed Christianity as a high faith similar to the greatest achievements of the
Eastern cultural tradition.
Mateo Ricci even wrote a treatise called The True Meaning of the Lord of Heaven in
which he argued that the doctrines of Jesus and Confucius were actually very similar.
He further suggested that the adoption of Christianity would represent a return to a
more pure and original form of Confucianism.
The Jesuits decided, not without much discussion I can assure you, to hold their Christian services
in the Chinese language rather than Latin.
And this allowed converts to continue the practice of ancestor worship.
But in spite of all this, their linguistic and scientific skill, their genuine respect
for their hosts, and their ideological flexibility, the Jesuits ultimately attracted few converts
to Christianity.
And we've got some pretty good statistical evidence of this, actually from a census
taken in the mid-18th century during the succeeding Qing dynasty.
Chinese Christians numbered about 200,000 out of a total population of 225 million.
The heart of the problem was that the Chinese disliked the exclusive nature of Christianity.
For centuries they had honoured and reconciled various spiritual ideologies, including as
you folks know, Confucianism, Taoism and Buddhism, none of which was mutually exclusive.
But Christianity, like Islam, claimed to be the only true religion.
So conversion implied that all these other creeds were wrong.
An idea that frankly most Chinese were simply unwilling to accept.
But ultimately it wasn't the failure to attract converts that brought an end to this Roman
Catholic mission to China.
It was squabbles between the Jesuits, the Dominicans and the Franciscans who all competed
with each other for converts in China.
Jealous of the influence of the Jesuits in the Ming court, their rivals began to complain
to the Pope about the fact that the Jesuits were conducting services in Chinese and were
even encouraging ancestor worship.
In the ultra politicised environment of the Vatican, the Pope became convinced to side
with the Jesuits' critics and he issued proclamations ordering all missionaries to suppress ancestor
worship and to conduct services now in European languages.
In response to this demand, the Qing Emperor Kangxi ordered an end to the preaching of
Christianity in China and by the mid-18th century the Christian missions had all but
disappeared.
But even though the Roman Catholic mission to China did not convert large numbers of
Chinese, it did have important cultural and historical ramifications both for Europe and
for China.
Besides making European science and technology known in China, the Jesuits also made China
known to Europe.
In letters, reports and other writings distributed widely throughout Europe, the Jesuits described
China as an enormous, orderly and rational society.
The Confucian civil service exam system attracted the attention now of European rulers who also
began to design their own civil service bureaucracies in the 18th century.
The rational moral philosophy of Confucius first translated into Latin by the Jesuits
also appealed to the Enlightenment philosophers of Europe who began to seek alternatives
to Christianity as the foundation for ethics and morality.
Indeed, for the first time since Marco Polo and on a much, much larger scale, the Jesuits
made first-hand observations of China available to Europeans, which stimulated an enormous
and ongoing European interest in China and indeed all East Asian societies.
Let's begin to conclude this lecture now by noting that the Ming period tends to be judged
harshly by historians today, and I'm talking about both Chinese and Western historians,
who frankly struggle to find any significant achievements or even historical heroes from
the period.
Historians argue that Ming governments suffered because of tensions in the bureaucratic system
between the absolute monarchs and their inner court of advisors and surrogates, divisions
which reached a point that effectively demobilized the government.
We've seen in this course many exceptional rulers in Chinese history, many great emperors
who were able to manage the imperial system and these tensions with great skill, getting
officials like eunuchs and mandarins to perform their tasks efficiently without letting them
take over and serve their own interests.
But the Ming offers no such examples, Hongwu and Yonglu perhaps as exceptions.
Apart from these two early emperors, most later Ming emperors delegated these management
chores to officials like eunuchs with, as we've seen, highly variable results.
And several emperors frankly simply opted out of their responsibilities altogether,
giving themselves over to wine women and other pleasures.
From the perspective of the world historian, the Ming dynasty does not come off much better.
Global historians view the Ming not only as weak and inefficient, but as I mentioned at
the beginning of the first lecture, a dead weight, that slow Chinese innovation, Chinese
entrepreneurship, just when real global competition from Europeans was about to surface.
At the same moment that European countries began to send their fleets into the Indian
Ocean and on to China, the Ming were attempting to withdraw from the sea altogether, at least
officially.
And just as Europeans were putting Chinese inventions like printing, gunpowder and the
compass to good use, China was letting its technological superiority slip and giving
up its position of global scientific leadership.
But having said all that, we need to remember that the arbitrary behavior of emperors and
their eunuchs did little to affect village life.
And the millions of Chinese people were largely left to run their own affairs.
The Chinese population grew, more and more people became literate during this period
through the widespread dissemination of printed materials.
And this tended to strengthen the ties of common beliefs of a long shared history and
of core ideologies within the villages and the town communities.
At the same time, various new regions such as Yunnan and Guizhou were also effectively
absorbed into the enormous Chinese state.
And let's not forget that the Ming preserved peace within and outside China for more than
two centuries, which is no mean feat in itself in an increasingly hostile world.
But as we will see in our next two lectures on the Qing dynasty, the last dynasty destined
ever to rule China, the peaceful stagnation of China under the Ming was to have disastrous
consequences for Chinese sovereignty.
