In the year 1759, Emperor Qianlong of the Qing Dynasty moved to try and restrict European
commercial presence in the great southern port city of Guangzhou, which had been home
to thousands, often tens of thousands of foreign merchants for about a thousand years
to this point.
Qing authorities were determined to bring the activities of foreign merchants more closely
under government control and also to more tightly regulate the terms of trade which
had become increasingly independent of Qing authority.
So the Qing government passed a series of laws which insisted that foreign merchants
could now deal only with specially licensed Chinese firms known as kohongs.
Not only was this inconvenient for the European merchants, but they also had to cope with
a market in which, as we noted last time, there was little demand for European products.
This trade was very much one way.
Because there was such small demand for European imports into China, European merchants had
been forced to pay for Chinese silk, porcelain, lacquerware and tea, mainly with silver, which
was dug out of the minds of Central and South America.
By the late 18th century, seeking ways to increase their profits and in response to
these restrictive Chinese trade practices, officials of the British East India Company
began to look for alternatives to silver to exchange for Chinese goods.
They settled on a profitable but highly illegal drug called opium.
He was a product that the Chinese themselves did not produce, but for which there was a
tragically ever increasing demand.
Under the auspices of the British East India Company, British merchants now purchased the
cheap opium that was growing in the great poppy fields of India and they shipped this
on to China.
British company officials, particularly those working for companies such as Dent, Jardine
and Matheson, then used this opium instead of the silver to buy Chinese products in the
port city of Guangzhou.
This meant that silver coin, which the Qing merchants had demanded as payment for Chinese
exports, now began to flow back out of China and into the coffers of British merchants.
One set of statistics demonstrates just what a reversal of the former arrangement this
new opium policy was.
In the decade of the 1830s, for example, only 7 million US dollars worth of silver flowed
into China, while some 27 million dollars worth of silver coin and silver bullion now
flowed out of China.
Obviously, this was an incredibly profitable arrangement for the British merchants and
the opium trade expanded rapidly.
We have some statistical evidence of this too.
In 1820, the number of 150 pound chests of this narcotic imported into China by British
merchants was around 9,700 chests for the year.
But in 1835, an astonishing 35,445 chests of opium entered China in that one year to
satisfy the habits of a vast and growing number of drug addicts.
With the help of all this opium, the British mercantile companies were soon able to pay
for luxury Chinese products without using any silver whatsoever.
Now, the trade in opium was illegal, of course, but it continued unabated for decades because
the Chinese made little effort to enforce the law, partly because corrupt Chinese officials
also benefited enormously from the situation, and partly because no one in the Qing government
wanted to risk an all-out confrontation with the British merchants.
But by the late 1830s, the Chinese government was acutely aware that this was causing a
major economic as well as drug addiction problem.
Opium trade was draining massive amounts of silver bullion from China, but it was also
having major social consequences, particularly in southern China where addiction was widespread.
Chinese officials estimated that some four million of their countrymen were addicted
to opium by the late 1830s, but a British doctor based in Canton in southern China suggested
the number was probably closer to 12 million.
When Qing government officials took tentative steps to try and stop the illicit trade in
1838, British merchants immediately started losing money.
Qing efforts were stepped up the following year in 1839, an incorruptible official named
Lin Zesu was put in charge of attempts to destroy the opium trade altogether.
National Lin was well aware of the financial and social costs that widespread Chinese addiction
to opium was causing.
He's quoted as saying, if we continue to allow this trade to flourish, in a few dozen
years we will find ourselves not only with no soldiers to resist the enemy, but also
with no money to equip the army.
So Lin Zesu acted quickly, confiscating and destroying 20,000 chests of British-owned
opium and arresting 1,600 foreign merchants and their Chinese accomplices.
Ultimately, this uncompromising policy ignited a war that ended in humiliating defeat for
China and made it obvious where the new balance of global power now lay.
Outraged by Chinese action against them, British commercial agents pressed the British government
for a military response.
The ensuing conflict has been known to historians ever since as the opium wars.
In the opening stages of the wars, British naval gunboats demonstrated their clear superiority.
Equipped only with swords and knives and occasionally muskets, Chinese coastal towns could not defend
themselves against gunboats and well-trained English military forces armed with rifles.
Even so, the Chinese refused to sue for peace, so British forces broke the stalemate by attacking
China's jugular with steam-powered gunboats which headed directly for the ancient Grand
Canal of China.
In June 1842, a British armada of 70 ships advanced up the Yangtze River and by the time
it arrived at the intersection with the Grand Canal, the Chinese had sued for peace.
China experienced similar military setbacks throughout, frankly, throughout the remainder
of the 19th century against Britain and France in the 1850s, France again in the 1880s and
then against Japan as we'll see in 1894 and 1895.
In the wake of these defeats, the Qing government was forced to sign several humiliating unequal
treaties which curtailed Chinese sovereignty and effectively guided Chinese relations with
foreign states right through until the end of the Second World War.
The most famous of these treaties was the first one, forced upon the Qing by the British,
the Treaty of Nanjing signed on August 29, 1842.
As a result of this unequal treaty, China agreed to cede the island of Hong Kong to
Britain for what ended up being a period of 156 years and also to open five ports, including
Guangzhou and Shanghai, to British commerce and British residence, to grant most favoured
nation status to Britain and to ensure that British residence would no longer be subject
to Chinese law and to pay $9 million in reparations to merchants whose chests of opium had been
burnt.
China, France, Germany, Denmark, the Netherlands, Spain, Belgium, Austria, Hungary, the United
States and Japan all forced the Chinese to conclude similar unequal treaties with them,
how the mighty Qing had fallen.
Collectively these treaties legalised the opium trade, they permitted the re-establishment
of Christian missions throughout China, banned you might remember earlier in the Qing dynasty,
they opened the treaty ports and they prevented the Qing government from levying tariffs on
imports of foreign goods.
Christian missions were now re-established all over China in the wake of these treaties,
all the way from the imperial court to the provinces.
We actually have some statistics on this too.
By the end of the 19th century, there were around 750 Catholic and 1300 Protestant missionaries
in China who between them had converted around 200,000 Chinese to Christianity.
By the first year of the 20th century, alongside this proliferation of Christian missionaries,
some 90 Chinese ports were also firmly under foreign control, foreign merchants now controlled
much of China's economy and foreign gunboats patrolled Chinese waters.
Of course, as is generally the case in world history, this humiliating debilitation of
the Chinese empire in the late 19th century was as much due to internal problems as it
was to foreign infusion and foreign demands.
Large-scale rebellions in the 19th century reflected the people's increasing poverty
and discontent with the government.
As population continued to explode between 1800 and 1900, the population rose from 330
to a staggering 475 million people, which placed an incredible strain on resources.
The concentration of arable land in the hands of elite families, the corruption of government
officials and of course the increasing drug addiction problems throughout China because
of the opium trade all led to widespread peasant discontent.
Rebellions broke out in Nian between 1853 and 1868, a very lengthy rebellion, and a
Muslim rebellion in Yunnan province lasted from 1855 to 1873, almost 20 years.
But the most dangerous of all these peasant uprisings was the Taiping Rebellion, which
lasted for 13 violent years between 1851 and 1864 and which brought the Qing dynasty
to the brink of collapse.
The catalyst for the rebellion was actually a schoolteacher named Hong Xu Kuan.
And there is an interesting connection with the renewed Christian missionary activity and
also with the United States here.
Having failed the Provincial level civil service exam, Hong became involved with a Baptist
missionary from Tennessee.
Hong became convinced he was actually Jesus Christ's younger brother who had been sent
to earth by God to expel the foreign devils, namely the Manchu Qing from China.
So Hong began calling for the destruction of the Qing dynasty and for the radical transformation
of Chinese society.
And this was a cry that appealed to millions of Chinese in 1851.
By now many Chinese despise the Manchu ruling class as foreigners anyway.
And the Taiping reform program contained features that appeal to the discontented masses.
Let me give you a partial list of the demands made by Hong and the Taiping's demands that
in some cases seem to call for the abandonment of many of the ideals of traditional Chinese
society but in other cases seem to reinforce some of these ancient ideals of Eastern civilization.
For example, they call for the abolition of private property, for communal wealth to be
shared according to need, for the prohibition of footbinding and concubinage, for free public
education, for simplification of the written language and for increased literacy for the
masses, for the establishment of democratic political institutions, the building of a
modern industrial society and the equality under law of men and women.
Now after sweeping through Southeast China, Hong and his followers captured the great
southern city of Nanjing in the year 1853 and made it the capital of their Taiping which
means Great Peace Kingdom.
From Nanjing they campaigned vigorously throughout much of the rest of China and as they passed
through the countryside whole villages and towns flocked to them to join them, sometimes
voluntarily, sometimes under coercion.
By 1855, one million armed Taiping were poised to attack Beijing but Qing forces were able
to repel them.
So the Taiping's turned their attention to the south again and by 1860, firmly entrenched
in the Yangtze River Valley, the Taiping's threatened Shanghai itself.
The conservatives in Chinese society determined to preserve classical Chinese culture naturally
sided with the government.
After imperial forces of Manchu soldiers failed to defeat the Taiping's, the Qing then
created a series of regional armies of Chinese soldiers led now by these conservative Confucian
scholar bureaucrats.
With the aid of European military advisors, these regional armies gradually overcame the
Taiping's.
In June 1864 Hong committed suicide and the Taiping stronghold of Nanjing fell just a
few months later.
Government forces slaughtered 100,000 rebels in the bloody retribution that followed.
So the Taiping rebellion was over but it had cost somewhere between 20 and 30 million Chinese
lives and caused massive declines in agricultural production.
Starving peasants were so desperate they were forced to resort to eating grass and there's
even evidence of cannibalism just to survive.
Although ultimately unsuccessful, the Taiping rebellion changed the course of Chinese history.
Dealing with aggressive foreign powers and surveying lands ravaged by domestic rebellions,
the Qing rulers finally came to realize that reform was now absolutely necessary if their
empire was to survive.
For three decades following the end of the Taiping rebellion from 1865 to 1895 the Qing
authorities tried to recreate an efficient and benevolent Confucian government in an
attempt to solve their social and economic problems while at the same time adopting foreign
technology to strengthen state power.
The most imaginative reform was called the self strengthening movement of the 1860s to
the 1890s.
Funded by money from the Qing authorities, local leaders all over China were encouraged
to raise troops, to levy local taxes and to establish modern military forces.
Using a fascinating slogan, Chinese learning at the base, Western learning for use.
So Chinese learning at the base of this but Western learning for use to reform the self
strengthening movement leaders tried to blend traditional Chinese culture, Eastern civilization
if you like, with modern European industrial technology.
So while maintaining the great ancient Confucian values that had now been guiding China's fortunes
for some 2,500 years, the leaders also wanted to build modern shipyards, modern railways,
modern weapons, factories, steel mills and academies now of science and technology.
Although the self strengthening movement did ultimately lay the foundations for eventual
Chinese industrialization later in the 20th century, it brought only superficial change
in the late 19th century.
The movement was not able to introduce enough industrialization to bring real economic and
military strength to China and it was based on two contradictions frankly.
One was that somehow industrialization could bring social change to what was still essentially
an agrarian land and the other was that despite claims to the contrary it was inevitable that
education in European curricula would undermine Confucianism.
Now at this point in our story we need to introduce another key player in the failure
of these attempts at reforms, another of the extraordinary women that we've seen throughout
this course.
This is the Empress Dowager Sishi who lived from 1835 to 1908.
Sishi was a former concubine who became the consort of Emperor Shanfeng and who gave birth
to his successor Tongzhi in 1856.
After Shanfeng's death in 1861 Sishi set herself up as the sole regent over the five
year old boy emperor.
When Tongzhi died in 1875 with no heir, Sishi named her three year old nephew Guangsu to
the throne.
All of this manipulation of the throne meant that it was Empress Dowager Sishi who was
effectively the true ruler of China during the last 50 years of the Qing dynasty.
Now Sishi was a conservative, she was bitterly opposed to reform.
One example of this, quite extraordinary, is that she personally diverted funds from
the self strengthening movement that had been intended to be used to modernize the navy
to build instead a magnificent ornamental pavilion no one ever since as the marble boat
to grace the lake in the old summer palace in Beijing.
Perhaps some of you have seen it there as I have.
The original stone and wood structure had been erected by Emperor Qianlong back in 1755
but had been destroyed by the British during the opium wars.
Sishi now had it rebuilt in 1893 like its predecessor it's actually made of wood but
the wood has been painted to make it look like marble.
It is a supreme irony that the funds that were used to build this traditional Chinese
pleasure pavilion were diverted from the money that had been set aside to modernize the navy.
Actually Prince Chun's appointment as the controller of the Admiralty had been arranged
by the Empress Sishi so the prince probably had no choice other than to go along with
this frankly this embezzlement.
Further evidence of the failure of the self strengthening movement is that foreign powers
maintained their firm hold on Chinese affairs despite these attempts at reform.
Indeed the imperial states of Europe effectively dismantled the Qing Empire in the decade
between 1885 and 1895.
In 1885 as we saw in an earlier lecture on Southeast Asia France incorporated Vietnam
into its colonial Indo-Chinese Empire.
The following year Britain incorporated Burma into its empire in 1895 Japan forced China
to grant independence to Korea to Taiwan to parts of Manchuria in the north more on this
in a subsequent lecture.
By 1898 foreign powers had effectively carved the Chinese homeland itself into various spheres
of economic interest.
It was only mistrust amongst the foreign governments that prevented the total dismemberment of China.
Powerless to resist foreign demands the the Qing government was forced to to grant exclusive
rights for railway and military development to Germany in Shandong province to France
in the southern border regions north of Vietnam to Britain in a wealthy Yangtze River Valley
of course to Japan in the southeastern coastal regions and to Russia in Manchuria.
These humiliating setbacks sparked one last ambitious but ultimately abortive attempt
to save China from further subjugation the so-called hundred days reform in 1898.
To liberal Chinese scholars Kang Hawei and Liang Qichao published treatises reinterpreting
Confucianism now and and justifying radical change in the imperial system.
Their intention was nothing less than an attempt to remake China as a powerful modern industrial
state precisely the same way that the Japanese were doing under the Meiji government as we'll
also see in a lecture very soon.
Impressed by their ideas the young Qing emperor Guangsu launched a sweeping series of reforms
to try and transform China into a constitutional monarchy.
Now his reform agenda included guaranteeing civil liberties eliminating corruption remaking
the educational system encouraging foreign encouraging foreign influence in China modernizing
the military and doing whatever they could to stimulate economic development.
But the young emperors aren't Daoja emperors Sishi staged a coup to stop these reforms
she nullified the decrees she imprisoned the emperor deep in the forbidden city and
she executed six leading reformers while the scholars Kang and Liang fled for their lives
to Japan.
Sishi then threw her support behind an anti-foreign uprising known as the Boxer Rebellion and
even declared war against all foreign powers.
The movement was headed by militia groups who called themselves the Society of Righteous
and Harmonious Fists that were actually called the Boxers by foreign newspapers.
In 1899 the movement went on a rampage to rid China of foreign devils killing foreigners
killing Chinese Christians killing any Chinese who had ties to foreigners.
In the summer of 1900 140,000 Boxers besieged all the foreign embassies in Beijing but a
heavily armed force of British, French, Russian, US, German and Japanese troops quickly crushed
the Boxer movement in bloody retaliation.
The Chinese government was forced to pay a punitive indemnity was forced to allow foreign
troops to be stationed permanently in China not only at the embassies but also along all
the major routes to the sea to the seaports.
Because Sishi had supported the Boxers many Chinese now saw their government as completely
morally bankrupt.
New revolutionary movements broke out and gained widespread support throughout the country
including now from the Conservatives.
In 1905 the ancient Confucian exam system was abolished and thousands of Chinese students
actually were sent abroad to study Western technology, Western philosophy.
Sishi herself died in November 1908 one day after the mysterious death of the Emperor
himself and therein is a fascinating tale.
Now court officials immediately declared that Emperor Guangsu had died of natural causes
but of course rumours of foul place swirled about the Forbidden City especially after
Sishi herself died just 22 hours later.
But rumours were all that historians had to go on until a very recent scientific analysis
of the Emperor's hair and bones took place and this revealed that the Emperor had died
of arsenic poisoning.
In the year 2008 on the 100th anniversary of the Emperor Guangsu's death the director
of the National Committee for the Compilation of Qing History announced that on one 10 inch
long hair of the Emperor scientific tests had discovered arsenic content 2,400 times
higher than normal.
Suspicion falls on Sishi who was concerned that Emperor Guangsu would undoubtedly carry
out modern reforms if he had outlived her.
Anecdotal evidence also pointed to a court unic of Sishis surely the last in a long line
of infamous unics that as we have seen repeatedly had so influenced China's history.
This unic was seen coming out of her quarters carrying a bowl of yoghurt with instructions
to take it to the Emperor and two hours later he was dead.
Of course it's intriguing for historians to wonder how the course of modern Chinese history
indeed the course of world history might have been different had Guangsu been able to carry
out his reforms and turn his country into a constitutional monarchy.
Just before the Emperor and his aunt's death the Qing court did indeed issue the outline
of constitution which contained a blueprint for the transformation of China into a modern
constitutional monarchy complete with a statement on the rights and responsibilities of the
people.
But it was all too late of course and in her last act Sishi appointed the two year old Puye
to the imperial throne in the hope that he would continue to rule as an old style traditional
emperor.
But revolution broke out again in the fall of 1911 which resulted in the founding of
a new government the Republic of China and on the 12th of February 1912 the last Qing
emperor the last emperor ever to rule China Puye abdicated his throne at the ripe old
age of six.
You might remember seeing these events depicted in a magnificent 1987 film directed by the
Italian filmmaker Bernardo Bertolucci called The Last Emperor.
This film accurately follows the life of Emperor Puye from his ascent to the throne as a small
boy through to his imprisonment and eventual political rehabilitation by the Chinese Communist
authorities.
Puye eventually died in 1967.
With the abdication of the last emperor of China 4,000 years of dynastic rule came to
an end in 1912.
Throughout this series of lectures we have followed the magnificent course of Chinese
imperial and dynastic history all the way from the semi-legendary Shah dynasty which
came to power in perhaps 22, 2100 BCE through now to the end of the Qing dynasty early in
the 20th century.
More than four millennia of dynastic rule and this makes China undoubtedly the oldest
continuous civilisation in all of world history.
Imagine if the ancient Egyptians or Sumerians were still ruling into the 20th century.
Imagine if the Romans and their system of government had operated more or less continuously
from the 6th century before the common era through to the 20th century.
Such was the extraordinary longevity of Chinese history, the extraordinary longevity of East
then civilisation.
As we've noted it was Ming and Qing conservatism that caused China to withdraw from the world
at precisely the same moment that Western powers and the Japanese were aggressively
engaging in it.
One stark example of the changing face of global power by the beginning of the First
World War in 1914, some 84% of the surface of the globe was under the political, military
and economic control of a handful of small industrialised countries.
The problem facing China and all the other East and Southeast Asian nations at the beginning
of the 20th century was how to respond to European imperialism.
Ultimately, it would take an industrial revolution in Japan, a communist revolution in China
and two global wars before East Asian states were able to once again gain control of their
own destinies.
But before we consider these most recent pages in the epic tale of Eastern civilisation,
we need to go back to Korea and Japan to also bring the histories of those regions up to
the present century, to the 20th century.
So please join me next time as we return to Korea and the 500 year rule of the Choson
dynasty.
