Hello everyone and welcome to the first of another of our two lecture mini-series in
which we return to Korea to bring our story of that region's role in the development of
eastern civilization through from the 14th to the 20th century.
When we last left Korea earlier in the course it was still under Mongol occupation but by
the mid 14th century the tide was turning against the Mongols actually throughout most
of the vast areas of Eurasia that had been under Mongol occupation for more than a century.
More recently in the course we saw how the Ming dynasty in China under the leadership
of Hongwu was eventually able to drive the Mongols back to the steppes although they
remained a constant threat right throughout the Ming dynasty period.
In Korea it was the Koryo King Kong Min who reigned from 1351 to 1374 who was the first
ruler to openly oppose the Mongols and who became determined to destroy the power of
the families who had been enriching themselves by working closely with the Mongols.
When the Ming dynasty was declared in 1368 the Koryo King Kong Min immediately adopted
a pro-ming anti-Mongol policy.
His decision fed into the general chaos that enveloped the final years of Koryo rule even
as the Mongols were being forced out.
During this chaotic period King Kong Min was actually assassinated, peasant revolts broke
out all over the peninsula.
One of the peasants had been bearing a double tax burden of taxation by the Koryo state
and also by the Mongols and Japanese pirates known as the Waigu began raiding the Korean
coast devastating the villages.
The Waigu were only lightly armed but their ability to unexpectedly turn up and raid the
coast at will drove many peasants to flee inland and to abandon the rich coastal farmlands.
You might remember from one of our lectures on the Ming dynasty that the impact of these
pirates on the coastal regions of China was just as severe.
Repeated diplomatic representations to the Japanese government failed to end the attacks
so the Koryo decided to launch a major military campaign to try and defeat the pirates.
Two different commanders were appointed to lead the Koryo armed forces, Choyong and Yisongai.
Their almost immediate success against the Waigu, which quickly lessened the impact of
the devastating raids, resulted in both commanders gaining high status and influence in the Koryo
capital.
But the two military leaders, colleagues up to this point, soon fell out over the question
of whether to attack or support the Chinese Ming dynasty which had just declared its intention
of taking over part of the Koryo's northeastern territory.
While Choyong was leading an expedition against the Ming forces, Yisongai, who had adopted
a pro-Ming policy and was opposed to the expedition, surprised everyone by suddenly leading his
forces into the capital and staging a military coup against both Choyong and the king.
Following this overthrow of the last Koryo king, Yisongai quickly established the next
dynasty of Korean history, the Choson dynasty.
The Choson, the last dynasty to rule Korea, and the subject of this pair of lectures went
on to rule for more than 500 years from 1392 until the 22nd of August 1910 when, as we
shall soon see, Korea was annexed by the rising power of Japan.
Yisongai chose the name Choson for his new dynasty, which he borrowed from the most ancient
of all Korean kingdoms.
We discussed this first Korean dynasty much earlier in the course.
The name Choson actually means the land of morning calm, a reflection of the sublime
and tranquil landscape of Korea.
Yisongai then decided to move the capital to Hanyang, which is modern Seoul, where it
has been ever since.
Although, of course, since the Second World War, Seoul has been capital of South Korea
only.
The Choson elites adopted neoconfusionism as their guiding political doctrine and worked
for the next 500 years to create a neoconfusion state, reminding us once again of the extraordinary
longevity and wide political and social influence of Confucian philosophy, which had first emerged
2,000 years earlier in late Joe dynasty China.
The Choson also worked with the military to expand the area of Korean territory, bringing
it close to its present size.
The emergence of a new neoconfusion literati class in Choson, Korea resulted in an intensifying
repudiation of Buddhism, by the way, which was now seen as destructive to families and
ultimately ruinous to the state.
Although Yisongai had used military power to stage his coup and seize the throne, it
was the support of the neoconfusion literati class that validated his reign.
Yisongai ruled the Choson dynasty as King Taijo for only 6 years from 1392 to 1398.
But during his short and incredibly effective reign, the literati power brokers worked with
the king to create a new body of administrative law deeply infused with Confucian ideology
and this became the blueprint for the Choson system of government.
Not everyone was on board, of course, and strong opposition to this new neoconfusion
orthodoxy persisted in certain elite aristocratic circles, abating only after Taijo's fifth
son assassinated the main anti-confucian critic.
This was just the beginning of a long and bitter struggle between the neoconfusion literati
and their critics.
When King Sejong came to power in 1418, he gave even more status to the Confucian scholar
class by establishing an elite position for the Confucian literati known as the Hall of
Worthies.
Sejong was a ruler of extraordinary vision and we will see shortly why he remains one
of the most revered rulers in Korea's very long history.
After Sejong's death in 1450, the kingship was dominated by the literati for five years
until the throne was seized in 1455 by King Sejong, who went on to rule until 1468.
Sejong was determined to reduce some of the power of the Hall of Worthies and to try and
transfer more power back to the kingship, so he killed many opponents.
After a plot against him was discovered, he carried out a bloodbath in which the elite
six martyred ministers and many other members of the Hall of Worthies were killed.
Sejong then completed work on compiling the statutory administrative code of Choson government
which culminated in the production of the national code during his reign.
This code clearly delineated the structure of Choson government as a sort of constitutional
monarchy in which the governing process was directed by civil and military bureaucrats.
This new elite political and social bureaucratic class in Choson, Korea became known as the
yangban, yangban.
These were members of the two orders, both military and civil, who in conjunction with
the king now controlled government.
The duties of the yangban were to devote themselves deeply to the study of Confucianism, to hold
themselves accountable to the highest ethical standards of Confucianism and of course to
hold elite public office.
The yangban did not perform duties like medical officers, interpreters, astronomers, accountants
or law clerks.
These became the hereditary preserve of the Chungin class, literally the middle people.
The yangban were thus the quintessential Confucian scholar bureaucrat, functioning at the highest
levels of government, attempting to fashion an ideal Confucian state through the moral
cultivation of the entire society.
As the super elite of Choson society, the yangban married only members of their own
class and they lived in separate quarters in Seoul and in the villages surrounding it.
There were even distinctions within the yangban.
The civil order was much more prestigious than the military order, for example.
And descendants of a yangban by their secondary wives found it difficult to gain access to
the Confucian exam system, which was similar to the exam system operating in Ming China,
but was restricted to elites only, more about this in just a moment.
These limitations and distinctions were part of a, I guess, a self-selection process designed
to prevent the dilution of yangban privileges and prestige.
The highest organ of Choson government was the State Council, in which three high state
councillors, obviously all elite yangban, made joint decisions.
Below this were six ministries which had direct policy access to the king through the royal
secretariat.
An office of inspector general was also created to act as a surveillance organ that criticised
public policy where necessary and also as a watchdog against corruption which even censured
the moral behaviour of the king on occasion.
This system of checks and balances was impressive and complex, in fact just as impressive as
the many complex and well-organised bureaucratic systems of government which we have seen the
Chinese put in place, reminding us again of this long and ancient tradition of sophisticated
government that is such a hallmark of eastern civilisation.
But sometimes the Choson system worked too well, leading to so much internal oversight
and strife between these various organs of government that decision-making became difficult
even stagnant.
To administer the now expanded Choson state, the Korean Peninsula, Korea was divided into
eight provinces and these were in turn subdivided into counties.
Each province had its own governor appointed and also a magistrate whose job was to collect
taxes.
Each province also had its own six ministry structure based on the national model.
Because the sophisticated system of government in Choson Korea was so strongly influenced
by the great bureaucratic Confucian tradition of Chinese government, it was inevitable that
a Chinese Confucian exam system would have to be at the heart of the appointment of officials
at all these levels of Choson government.
But one big difference between the Korean and the ideal Chinese model was that in the
Choson dynasty access to the exam was restricted to sons of officials of the second Yangban
rank or above, which meant the path to higher office was effectively closed for most Koreans.
According to the law, the exam should in theory have been open to anyone but in practice they
were effectively monopolized by the Yangban.
The approach to government and the appointment of officials had obviously major implications
for the structure of Choson society and this is a subject I'd like to turn to next.
By the late 18th century the Yangban had acquired most of the traits of hereditary nobility
except that their status was based on a mixture of family position, access to the Confucian
examination system and their place in the civil service bureaucracy.
For most of the 500 year long Choson period the Yangban and the King effectively controlled
the central government and the military.
But if this was not a tiny elite minority estimates are that the Yangban may have constituted
as much as 30% of the total Korean population by the year 1800.
This meant that most Yangban became gentry of high social status but not necessarily
of high income because access to the top positions in government became increasingly competitive.
At the opposite end of the social spectrum were slaves and other low-born who may have
constituted as much as 30% to 40% of the total population of Choson Korea.
Indeed slavery was hereditary under the Choson but it was also used as a form of legal punishment.
The slave class consisted of both government owned and privately owned slaves.
Sometimes the government gave slaves to citizens of higher rank as a reward for exemplary behaviour.
We also have evidence that privately owned slaves could be inherited as personal property.
Despite their lowly status successful slaves could and often did own property and successful
private slaves could eventually buy their way to freedom.
In the 18th century with the emergence of a new merchant and artisan social class the
tide of opinion gradually turned against the practice of slavery.
In 1801 all government slaves were emancipated by decree and the institution of slavery was
completely abolished as part of the Gabo reforms of 1894.
Between the elite Yangban and the slaves most of the remaining 30 to 40% of the population
were farmers and because Korean agriculture was efficient and productive most farming
was commercial not just for subsistence.
This middle class of free farmers also included merchants and traders, local government,
quasi-governmental clerks, craftsmen, laborers and textile workers.
Indeed given the relatively small size of this free born middle class it's not surprising
that individuals often had more than one role in life.
They might for example have worked as a farmer certainly but also as a merchant or a textile
worker.
Not to the argument advanced by as we've seen by several Chinese dynasties the Chosun
government regarded most land as belonging to the state.
So in return for having land to farm the peasant farmer had to pay a land tax to the government.
Originally this was set at 10% but under King Sejong it was lower to a very reasonable
5% of total produce.
Although this does sound very generous we need to remember that as well as his obligation
to the state the peasant farmer also had to pay taxes to their local landlord plus a local
tribute tax a sales tax really on all manufactured products that they purchased utensils, fabrics,
paper, woven mats and so on.
Still the rapid expansion in the cultivation of cotton in Chosun Korea led to the emergence
of a thriving cotton textile industry and this became the principal household industry
of the period.
Along with creating this rigidly stratified social structure the neo-confusion orthodoxy
of the Chosun state also had serious implications for gender relations.
The status of women was strongly influenced by the Yang-Banz attempts to create an ideal
Confucian patriarchal society.
To the Yang-Banz the law of nature and their very conservative interpretation of Confucian
ideology explicitly sanctioned female subordination and inferiority.
So Chosun Confucianism drew a clear distinction between the public sphere of men and the domestic
sphere of women.
As a result of this careful delineation of spheres and roles women in Chosun Korea were
considered to be of very low status indeed.
In fact women were not permitted to make any major decisions about their own lives.
According to the policy of Samjong or the three obidiences before marriage a woman was
expected to obey her father.
During marriage a woman must obey her husband and after the death of her husband a woman
was expected to obey her son.
So at no point in her life was a woman ever able to make her own decisions about anything.
According to another policy governing women's behaviour the Chilgo or seven injunctions
a daughter in law or wife could be disowned if they demonstrated any of these seven behaviours.
Disobedience to the parents in law, not being able to bear a male son, adultery, jealousy,
having an incurable disease, stealing or talkativeness.
Despite these rigid gender and social distinctions the Chosun dynasty remained strong, successful
and vigorous throughout the 14th and 15th centuries.
During the long reign of the 4th monarch in particular the revered King Sejong who I mentioned
a couple of times already in the lecture who sat on the throne from 1418 to 1450 not only
was government very stable but quite extraordinary advances were made in the arts, science and
technology.
Let me just give you a few examples, a sort of list of Chosun technological achievements.
So Korean scientists developed a gauge to accurately measure rainfall in the year 1442.
This is about 200 years before something similar appeared in Europe.
Wind streamers were in use in Chosun Korea to help gauge the direction and the velocity
of the wind.
A magnificent and very sophisticated observatory was constructed on the grounds of Kyongbok
Palace perhaps you've seen it there to make accurate celestial observations.
A triangulation device and a surveyors rod were developed to measure land elevations
and distances and all kinds of complex extraordinary astronomical clocks, sundials, water clocks
and so on were designed and built.
Now Sejong is also the monarch who promoted and helped create the unique form of writing
for the Korean language.
The creation of Hangul script and an indigenous alphabet for the Korean language was actually
a monumental achievement then of the early Chosun and King Sejong himself became convinced
of this need for a writing system designed specifically to record the language of everyday
Korean speech as opposed to the language of the elite Yangban which was of course written
in classical Chinese.
So the king himself was the driving force behind this development of a new written language.
He enlisted the services of elite scholars in the Hall of Worthies to help him create
the new alphabet.
Hangul was thus developed quite explicitly, quite intentionally in this atmosphere of
scientific enlightenment that characterized the 15th century particularly during the rule
of King Sejong.
The new alphabet was proudly proclaimed by the king in the year 1446 during his 28th
year on the throne.
This native writing system of Korea uses a phonetic alphabet organized into blocks
of syllables by the way and each block uses at least two of the 24 letters.
There are 14 consonants and 10 vowels.
For reasons I'll explain in more detail in the next lecture despite its invention in
the mid 15th century the Hangul system only came into common usage in the 20th century
as a direct response to Japanese colonization of Korea and so it remained largely unused
for almost five centuries after it was devised.
Now let's begin to conclude this lecture by turning to the decline of the Choson dynasty.
After Sejong the dynasty fell into the hands of weaker kings and ended the period of decline
characterized by several violent succession struggles, by bitted division amongst the
Yangban elites, by increasing corruption of the civil service exam, by increasing and
crushing tax burdens on farmers and also by raids on Korea by the Japanese first in 1592
then five years later in 1597 and also by the Manchus repeatedly between 1627 and 1636.
Despite this litany of disasters, no surprise here, the most severe problems of the 16th
and 17th centuries were internal that were actually caused by the confrontation between
two different factions of officialdom.
The Yangban now split into two factions, the Easterners or Tong-in and the Westerners
or So-in and violent conflict and purges between the two took place.
As generation followed generation, resentment was carried over for decades so that factional
politics eventually became bound up with blood lineage, with blood feuds really.
The fact that students were also expected to follow the instructions and the factional
orientation of their teachers without question helped further factionalize the elite population
for all the generations that followed.
This also ensured, by the way, the entrenchment of a Confucian-style master-disciple relationship
that still resonates in both North and South Korean educational institutions to this day.
These factional problems led to the emergence of a new intellectual movement in Chosong,
Korea, one that began to advocate for the practical use of human knowledge.
This movement was pioneered by a Confucian scholar Yi Su-Kwang.
It was called the Sihak, Sihak or Practical Learning Movement and it was inspired by
knowledge of the physical sciences that he had acquired on official visits to Beijing.
The Sihak movement flourished well into the late 18th century supported by discontented
scholars, officials, by former bureaucrats and also by commoners.
Of course, continual innovation in science and technology has been one of the hallmarks
of Eastern civilization for millennia.
But as we've seen in recent lectures, under the Ming and Qing dynasties, China began to
give up its position of global technological superiority to the West.
In many ways, despite the conservatism of Korean and Japanese cultures, the mantle of
practical innovation in Eastern society was transferred now from China to both of her
East Asian neighbors during this early modern period.
I guess I could sum up the main tenets of Sihak thought like this.
This was a much more practical application of the traditional approaches to government
and to ways of administering the land.
There was an increased emphasis and an advocacy for commercial and manufacturing activity.
Sihak promoted a renewed interest in Korean history and language.
In reality, the interests of the Sihak scholars were many and varied, but they all shared
a focus on reality, on the practicality of the application of ideas as a way of solving
real life problems as opposed to obtuse metaphysical speculations.
The Sihak movement was determined to use these practical skills to solve the problems
facing Korea, and this began to push Choson thinking in new directions.
So one Sihak school focused on reforming the institutions of the Choson.
They focused on land policy, on education systems, on government and bureaucracy, on
salaries, on military service, until eventually Sihak had replaced neoconfusionism as the
dominant school of political thought.
Other Sihak scholars focused on science, on researching the varieties of marine life,
for example.
They studied the smallpox virus and so on.
Knowledge of western science and technology acquired by Korean embassies to China, where
they learned many of the ideas that the Jesuits had introduced, you'll remember our discussion
about that from a previous lecture, helped further inspire the Sihak scholars.
Some specific examples of western-inspired advances include the promulgation of a new
and much more accurate calendar, the adoption of a complex, extraordinary European pulley
mechanism to aid in construction, and also some very advanced studies on the movements
of planets in the solar system.
But as Choson government became less and less effective in the 19th century, another western
invention, Catholicism, also began to spread more widely through Choson society.
This spread was not initially because of the activities of Catholic missionaries, but because
native Koreans had converted to the faith while visiting Beijing late in the 18th century
and used the text that they brought back to baptize many of their countrymen.
Initially many Yang-Ban were attracted to Catholicism, but after a series of government
persecutions of Catholics, the elites mostly turned away.
But more and more converts came from the peasant and artisan class, attracted to this creative
equality which argued that all humans, regardless of class, were children of God.
And it was precisely because of this egalitarian message that a brutal persecution was carried
out in the year 1801.
But later in the reign of King Sun-Jo, who reigned until 1834, Catholicism was less
severely repressed.
By the end of the 19th century, specialists estimate that perhaps 20,000 Koreans had converted,
French missionaries were certainly active throughout the peninsula, and various Catholic
books were also being published.
As we'll see in our next lecture, attempts by the government to shut out Catholicism
were part of a larger movement within the Choson state to keep Korea isolated from outside
influences in a manner not unlike the conservative factions of the Qing dynasty at the same time,
as we have so recently seen.
Despite all this, the expansion of Western powers into East Asia in the 19th century
was destined to alter the ancient established order of Korean foreign affairs, which can
be summed up, frankly, as essentially the domination of Korea by China.
China under the Qing dynasty was now in serious decline, having lost sovereignty and power
to Western nations, including France, Britain and Russia.
Shortly in the course, we will consider how Japan responded to European imperialism by
modernizing its government and its economy rather than submitting to the West after it
was humiliatingly forced to open its ports by Commodore Perry of the US Navy in 1853-1854.
But as we will see in the next lecture, despite Western attempts to interfere, Korea was
able to remain dormant and relatively isolated, closing itself to outside contacts in the
19th century until the Japanese turned up very early in the 20th.
Next time we conclude our look at Choson Korea and we continue our journey through the long
and complex story of Eastern civilization.
