Early in the 19th century, Western nations came knocking at the door of the Hermit Nation.
As Korea was often described in Western newspapers, determined to establish contact with and a
foothold in Korea for trade and other commercial purposes.
English merchant and warships began appearing off the coast in 1832, when the British East
India Company ship, the Lord Amherst, arrived seeking trade.
The Choson government was extremely wary of these foreign overtures and described the
foreign vessels as, I quote, strange looking ships.
In June 1846, three French warships dropped anchor off the coast, left a letter to be
forwarded to the Choson court protesting the government's persecution of French Catholic
missionaries and then departed.
In April 1854, two Russian warships sailed along the coast of Hamyeong Province and interfered
with Korean commercial shipping, causing some injuries and deaths amongst the ships they
encountered.
This incident prompted the Choson government to issue a ban forbidding the people of Hamyeong
to have any contact with foreigners.
And then 12 years later, in August 1866, an American trading ship, the General Sherman
appeared off the coast and sailed brashly up the Taidong River to Pyongyang, where the
captain asked permission to trade.
Local officials refused the overtures to enter a trade relationship and in fact demanded
that the General Sherman depart immediately.
The Americans responded by taking a Choson official hostage and by firing their guns
into civilians on shore.
Not contempt with this, the crew came ashore to plunder the town of Pyongyang and murdered
seven Koreans in the process.
In response, the governor of the province ordered his men to attack the ship.
In the melee that followed, the General Sherman ran aground on a sandbar, the ship was burned
to the ground and the entire crew of 20 was killed.
The government later denied that this was an American vessel that had been destroyed,
describing it simply as another of those aggressive, strange looking ships.
Of course the Korean people and the Choson government were only too aware of the fate
that had befallen China through the opium wars and other clashes with the militarily
far more powerful Europeans.
This was the context in which the Choson government decided that its best hope of avoiding a similar
fate was essentially to reject all Western overtures for trade and try and shut the foreigners
out.
As I also mentioned in the last lecture, since the 1830s, French missionaries had been actively
pursuing converts in Korea, so it was inevitable that this foreign religion would also soon
be targeted.
Indeed, Catholicism gained more ground amongst the peasants, the Choson government's attitude
hardened until finally a full-scale campaign against Catholicism was launched in 1866.
And this turned into a bloodbath.
By the time the persecution was over, nine French missionaries and perhaps 8,000 Koreans
had been killed, or of course martyred as the church claimed.
China's doors were now as tightly shut to foreign ideology as they were to foreign trade
and military contacts, but just as the Chinese had experienced it ultimately proved impossible
to keep the determined and well-armed foreigners out.
One of the French missionaries who had managed to escape the persecution made his way to China
where he persuaded the commander of the French Asiatic Squadron to take punitive action against
the Koreans.
A fleet of seven warships entered Korean waters in October 1866, two months after the destruction
of the General Sherman.
The French seized, pillaged and looted the administrative centre on Kanghua Island, but
a contingent of French military forces sent to the mainland was beaten back and in the
end the French squadron was forced to withdraw.
This victory earned the jubilant Koreans a reprieve from foreign intervention for five
years until 1871.
During that year, in response to the destruction of the General Sherman in 1866, the United
States Asiatic Squadron was ordered to send a squadron of warships into Korean waters.
As a result of the French incident five years earlier, the Choson government had worked
hard to seriously strengthen Korea's coastal defences.
So when the US warships tried to steam through the Kanghua Straits between the island and
the mainland, shore batteries opened fire.
Shocked, the US fleet decided not to engage and instead withdrew back to China.
The failure of these two attacks by two modern military fleets only strengthened further Korea's
isolationist attitude and steely resolve to shut out foreign intervention.
The government now did all it could to encourage uncompromising resistance amongst the people
and intellectuals like Yi Hang-no used a sophisticated Confucian argument with the
Choson elites to support armed resistance should the foreigners show up again.
The failure of the attacks was undoubtedly due at least in part to this very stubborn
Korean resistance, but it was also partly due to the fact that Western powers were too
preoccupied at the time to really press their military strength upon the Choson.
But the Japanese turned out to be very different, a very different matter indeed.
Having overthrown the Tokugawa Shogunate in 1867 through a revolution known as the
Meiji Restoration, events we will follow in our next pair of lectures in the course.
The leaders of Japan decided to adopt an increasingly aggressive attitude towards Korea.
Part of the reason for this was the need to find an outlet for the energies of the samurai
who as we will see had been banned in Japan, but who remained restive and discontented,
a constant threat to the Meiji government's stability.
But the Japanese were also looking for a market for their manufactured goods in the same way
that European imperialist powers were using their colonies all around the world now as
captive markets to sell their mass produced manufactured goods, products of course, of
the industrial revolution.
A third reason for the heightened Japanese interest in Korea is that the Japanese government
was also determined to try and stop the encroachment of the Russians into East Asian affairs.
But with these reasons in mind, it's no surprise that by 1873 Japanese leaders were publicly
calling for an expedition against Korea.
And this leads me to our second subject for this lecture, how Japanese aggression ignited
a reversal of previous Korean isolationism and a decision to actively seek re-engagement
with the world.
It was the Japanese military then, not any European or American force that became the
first foreign power to penetrate Korea's defensive war.
In 1875, the Japanese government provoked a naval incident as a pretext for this direct
intervention.
They followed this up by dispatching a powerful force of warships and soldiers which landed
on the east coast of Kanghua Island.
Choson court officials could not resist these heavily armed Japanese forces and they had
little option other than to sign the Treaty of Kanghua in 1876.
This unequal treaty cleared the way for the increasing involvement of the Japanese in
Korean affairs and at the same time it attempted to limit interference from China, which had
of course historically claimed suzerainty over Korea for most of the previous 2000 years.
The signing of this treaty produced a sea change in the attitude of the Choson government.
Faced with the probability of ongoing aggressive Japanese intervention, the Choson now decided
that it was probably in Korea's best interest to actively engage more closely with the rest
of the world as a counter to this Japanese interference.
The first result of this foreign policy sea change, I guess we can call it, occurred in
October 1880 when the Choson sought to establish diplomatic relations with the United States
of America.
At the same time, the Koreans sent a study mission to China and to Japan with the express
aim of learning more about modern weapons technology.
In 1882, the Korean American Treaty was signed and the Choson government hoped that this
would discourage both Russian and Japanese aggression against Korea.
Indeed, the treaty included a specific clause which implied that the United States would
come to Korea's aid under a range of circumstances.
The Choson King reportedly danced for joy when the first United States ambassador to Korea
arrived in May of 1883, believing that the Americans would be the salvation of his country.
Similar treaties with other foreign powers quickly followed with Britain and Germany
in 1883, Italy and Russia a year later, 1884, France in 1886 and even with the Austro-Hungarian
Empire in 1889.
But these international outreach efforts sparked a real pushback from the conservative elements
of Korean society who preferred the old hermit nation approach.
Some of these conservative Confucian elites became so outraged they demanded a reinstatement
of an isolationist government.
And this is in fact precisely what happened after a violent soldiers riot and other civil
and military unrest broke out.
But the victory for a return to reactionary isolationism was to be short-lived because
both the Chinese and Japanese governments used this abrupt about face as an excuse to intensify
their military interference in Korea.
With Japanese forces still stationed in parts of the peninsula since the signing of the
Treaty of Kanghua back in 1876, the Qing Dynasty in China quickly dispatched its own force
of 4,500 men to the peninsula in 1882.
By August that year, the Chinese troops were firmly entrenched in Seoul.
Eventually after something of a standoff, a treaty was signed that temporarily removed
both the Chinese and the Japanese troops from Korea.
And this allowed the Chinese to remain the major cultural influence at least on the country
for the next decade from 1885 through to 1894.
While this competition for Korea was being waged by the Japanese and the Chinese, the
Russians were not idle and were also becoming increasingly involved in Korean affairs.
The Korean king and queen became convinced of the advantages of this Russian interest
because they saw the involvement of a third party as an effective means of balancing Japanese
and Chinese influence.
But this pro-Russian attitude immediately provoked suspicion and resentment within China and
Japan, particularly afterward of a secret treaty having been signed between Korea and
Russia began to circulate.
As a result of all this, by the late 19th century, the Korean court was deeply split
into rival pro-Chinese, pro-Japanese and pro-Russian factions.
These tensions came to a dramatic and brutal head in 1895.
In that fateful year, the Japanese ambassador to Korea masterminded nothing less than the
brutal assassination of the Choson Queen Min, who with her clan was vocally opposing
the Japanese-supported politicians in court.
The Queen was attacked in her palace, dragged outside and publicly hacked to death by Japanese
thugs.
This brutal attempt to squash opposition backfired, however.
The Korean king immediately and publicly rejected Japan and the reform measures being demanded
by the pro-Japanese lobby and turned instead for support to one of Japan's enemies, Russia.
The king, in fact, fled to the Russian legation in Seoul to avoid Japanese plots against him
and conducted the nation's business from there, protected by diplomatic immunity and
by Russian armed forces.
All this led to the organization of a massive national campaign launched by political leaders
and intellectuals to try and gain Korean independence from foreign control.
Advocates now argued for reform in Korean politics and to customs to try and bring them in line
with Western practices, and it was in this atmosphere that the ancient and indigenous
Korean writing system of Hangul finally gained widespread public acceptance.
You'll remember that Hangul had been developed during the enlightened reign of King Sejong
back in the mid-15th century as an indigenous alphabet and script explicitly designed to
record the speech of everyday Koreans, but the system had not been widely used until
this critical moment in Korean history, a moment in which nationalists were rejecting
foreign intervention and demanding the advancement of indigenous Korean culture.
And so in 1894, the first newspaper to use the Hangul writing system and the vernacular
Korean language was published and it rapidly attracted a growing audience.
At the same time, under the influence of modern education being provided by Protestant mission
schools, hundreds of young men started holding mass meetings on the streets demanding democratic
reforms and an end to Russian and Japanese domination.
Conservative and often pro-Japanese forces inside Korea responded by attacking the newspaper's
offices and jailing reformist leaders in an attempt to suppress this reform movement.
In the midst of all this general chaos, if you like, a major peasant rebellion, the Tong
Hak rebellion broke out and blighted the country between 1894 and 1895.
This was a rebellion that had major international repercussions.
The peasant Tong Hak army gained early victories and the uprising spread quickly from southwestern
central Korea, menacing the capital of Seoul.
The Korean court felt unable to cope with the rebels and asked China to send troops to
help quell the rebellion.
This request interpreted of course by the Japanese government as a direct breach of the earlier
treaty gave the Japanese government the pretext it had been waiting for to dispatch troops
to Korea, ostensibly to quell the rebellion but really to keep the Chinese forces out.
Japan and China were soon at war.
The first Sino-Japanese war was fought between August of 1894 and April of 1895.
After six months of continuous Japanese victories, the Qing government was forced to sue for
peace demonstrating not only the total failure of the Qing to modernize their military and
of course waste money intended for the purpose of building the navy on building the Marble
Boat as you'll remember but it also showed that the balance of power in East Asia had
clearly shifted now for the first time really from China to Japan.
The victorious Japanese now established their complete hegemony over Korea via the Treaty
of Shimonoseki signed in 1895.
This treaty dictated to the Korean government a wide-ranging series of measures to prevent
further domestic disturbances.
During the war and immediately afterwards the Choson government passed a series of reforms,
the Gabbo reforms aimed at modernizing Korea along Japanese lines.
You remember we mentioned these in the context of the abolition of slavery in the last lecture.
These reforms included the abolition of the hierarchical class system, the opening up
of the exam system and government positions to all men of talent regardless of class and
a decree that all official documents would now be written in Hangul not Chinese.
Throughout this entire period Russian influence was also on the rise in East Asia and of course
Russian expansion was in direct conflict with the Japanese desire for expansion in the same
region of the world.
In alliance with France and Germany, Russia forced Japan to return the Liaodong Peninsula
to China which Japan had seized during the First Sino-Japanese War.
The Russians then promptly leased the territory back from China and this of course was a direct
provocation to Japan.
This secret Sino-Russian treaty signed in 1896 also gave the Russians the right to build
and operate the Chinese Eastern Railway across parts of Manchuria in the north and this served
as a link in the enormous Russian trans-Siberian railway complex to Vladivostok.
The treaty also served as a defensive pact between China and Russia in case of Japanese
aggression but despite this tensions between Japan and Russia continued to increase for
the next decade exploding into open conflict during the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-1905.
Contrary to the expectations of all of the diplomats and military experts around the
world who frankly had no idea just how strong and modern the Japanese military had become,
the Japanese easily defeated the Russians in a conflict some historians have called the
first great war of the 20th century.
In the wake of this conflict US President Theodore Roosevelt quietly acquiesced to Japanese domination
in Korea as part of a quid pro quo arrangement for Japan's recognition of US hegemony in
the Philippines.
The treaty resulting from the Sino-Japanese War acknowledged Japan's right to take appropriate
measures for the, quote, guidance, control and protection of Korea but not contempt with
these arrangements the Japanese moved to bring Korea even more firmly under their yoke following
the the signing of a new agreement forced upon the Koreans in 1907 Japan dissolved the
Korean army and in May 1910 the Japanese Meiji government appointed General Terauchi Masataki
as the new resident general of Korea Masataki's first order was to dispatch 2000 Japanese police
to be stationed in Korea his second was the suspension of all Korean newspapers.
Finally on August the 22nd 1910 Emperor Sun Jong of Korea was forced to issue a proclamation
in which he relinquished both his throne and his country bringing to an end the Choson
dynasty of Korea.
Japan had now officially annexed Korea as a colony and a period of harsh colonial rule
of Korea by Japan had begun Korea was occupied and controlled by Japan for 35 long years
from 1910 to the surrender of Japan in August 1945 at the end of the Second World War during
the occupation the Japanese built up Korean infrastructure modernizing the the street
and railroad systems for example because of this even today some Japanese historians
try and argue that the Japanese occupation was good for Korea I've heard these arguments
promoted myself at conferences in East Asia but at the same time as Korean historians
like to remind us the Japanese rule with an iron fist and attempted to eradicate many
some say all elements of Korean culture the Korean people were forced to adopt Japanese
names now they were forced to convert to Shintoism they were also eventually forbidden to use
Korean language altogether in schools and businesses nine years after the initial occupation
a populist independence movement emerged in Korea in March of 1919 but it was brutally
suppressed by Japanese troops this crackdown ultimately led to the death of seven thousand
protesters to the maiming and imprisoning of tens of thousands more and the destruction
of hundreds of churches temples schools and private homes the movement was actually inspired
by US President Woodrow Wilson's great post First World War speech of 1919 in which amongst
other things he demanded an end to colonial rule worldwide but neither Wilson nor the
US government ever commented upon the Japanese repression of the independence movement.
The Japanese did build hundreds of schools in the first decade of its rule and because
of this hundreds of thousands of Korean students went to school for the first time but there
were two sets of schools those for Koreans and those for Japanese and only five percent
of Korean students ever moved on past the elementary level.
Eventually Japanese language was taught in all schools as the national language a Korean
was only now a secondary language and Korean history was taught with a strong Japanese interpretation
of events because of these policies a widespread fear emerged that the Japanese appeared intent
on completely eradicating Korean culture on destroying all traditional elements that thousands
of years of Korean history and a close relationship with China had created as this fear of cultural
genocide spread anti-Japanese uprisings intensified and this led to a further strengthening
of Japanese military rule in 1931.
After the outbreak of the second Sino-Japanese war in 1937 followed by the beginning of the
of World War II in 1939 Japan further stepped up its efforts to eradicate Korea as a unique
cultural entity or at least again this is certainly how the Koreans saw it and many
Korean historians to this day continue to see it.
The observance of virtually any aspect of Korean culture now became illegal a worship
at Shinto shrines was made compulsory school curriculum was more radically modified to
eliminate teaching in the Korean language and the teaching of Korean history and as
well as the use of Korean language itself being more or less banned now all Koreans
were forced to adopt Japanese names but something else was going on at the same time the large
scale disappearance of Korean historical and artistic artifacts indeed modern Korean authorities
have long been aware that something like 70,000 Korean cultural and historical artifacts
were either destroyed or taken back by the Japanese to Tokyo during the occupation.
This remains a source of serious tension between Japan and Korea although a number of these
stolen Korean treasures were recently returned by the Japanese government.
In December 2011 in fact more than 1000 royal archives and other historical artifacts were
all flown back to Seoul from Tokyo but even after this goodwill gesture a study by South
Korea's National Institute of Cultural Heritage estimates that still some 61,000 Korean cultural
artifacts are probably being held in Japan.
In the last phase of colonial rule between 1941 and 1945 during the Second World War the
Japanese found themselves increasingly distracted by fighting a war on several fronts to help
bolster their ranks the Japanese Imperial Army had started accepting Koreans into their
armed forces back in 1938 but after 1943 and increasingly desperate Japanese military introduced
a general conscription law that resulted in thousands of Korean men being drafted into
military service for the Japanese.
But by far the greatest involuntary contribution Koreans made to the Japanese war effort was
as forced laborers in the mines and factories of Northern Korea and of Manchuria and back
in Japan.
Labor conscriptions were so severe that historians estimate that by 1944 close to four million
people which is about 16% of the total population of Korea were living outside its borders as
virtual slave workers.
But let's not forget that at the same time Korean resistance groups were fighting guerrilla
warfare with the Japanese in Korea with the assistance of the Chinese Communist Party.
The leader of these anti-Japanese guerrilla units was none other than Kim Il-sung founder
of the Democratic People's Republic of North Korea.
Tens of thousands of Koreans also joined the People's Liberation Army and fought the Japanese
in China.
As well as the huge numbers of men that were conscripted into Japan's military around 200,000
girls and young women were also conscripted into sexual slavery with the name Comfort
Women.
Many of the surviving Comfort Women are still protesting today to the Japanese government
for compensation, as I'm sure you're aware, casting a continuing shadow over the bilateral
relations between these two countries.
The surrender of the Japanese on 15 August 1945 was a day of jubilation throughout Korea.
But as a result of three and a half decades of Japanese colonial rule, Korean society
in 1945 was a chaotic mix of old and new classes, ideologies and of course political factions.
Traditional Korean culture had been turned on its head by Japanese imperial rule, which
had transformed the political ideologies and loyalties of the Korean people.
On the left of the political spectrum were thousands of dedicated communists determined
to transform Korea into a more egalitarian society.
On the right were landlords, businessmen and many Japanese collaborators determined
to preserve their privileged place in Korean society.
In the final few lectures of this course, as we try and wrap everything up, we will
see how these political tensions became mixed up with Cold War geopolitics to create the
two Koreas, North and South, that continue to play such a critical role in the world
of the 21st century.
