Hello folks and welcome to this lecture number 45 if you can believe that in our 48 lecture
course.
We are rapidly approaching the end of what has been an epic and I trust rewarding journey
through the great sweep of eastern civilization and the foundations it was built upon.
Through 44 lectures now we have explored the rich and fascinating history of the East
Asian region from ancient times through to the 20th century.
We have done this by considering a number of I think key foundational themes which collectively
have defined what we mean by eastern civilization.
These have included ideas about the most effective form of government, the best way
of organizing an economy, the critical role of Korea, Japan and Southeast Asia in eastern
civilization and of course changing ideas about society and the roles of different groups
within East Asian social structures that have occupied great thinkers for thousands of years.
It is this scheme I think that provides a roadmap for the best way to conclude our course.
That is we need now to return to these enduring themes and consider the most recent developments
in the political, economic, social and cultural history of the major eastern nations.
Developments which it goes without saying have turned that region into one of the most
dynamic zones on earth.
So in this particular lecture I want to return to Chinese ideas about government and political
organization.
Ideas that as we have seen in this course have occupied government officials and intellectuals
for so many thousands of years.
Ideas that have profoundly influenced the development of governance throughout most
of the eastern hemisphere.
Early in our course we looked at the very first cultures of China and we saw the emergence
of leaders who had learned to combine shamanistic and secular power through the use of ritual.
The Shang dynasty for example used both human sacrifice and oracle bone divination as mechanisms
for effective governance.
We followed this with a consideration of the mandate of heaven first promoted by the Zhou
dynasty.
The extraordinary idea that an impartial heaven sits in judgment of affairs on earth and bestows
its mandate upon a new dynasty when the old one has lost its legitimacy.
This was a political ideology that lasted for more than 3,000 years right through to
the 20th century.
And let's not forget that the three great and enduring philosophies of eastern civilization
that all emerged during the chaotic later Zhou dynastic period, I'm talking of course
about Confucianism, legalism, even Taoism in its way, well each of their core ideologies
about the best practices of governing people and also of social organization.
Consider also the great parade of powerful autocratic emperors we've met in this course.
Each of whom had to essentially decide which of these three political ideologies or what
combination of them would be his and in just one case her philosophy of government.
For the first emperor, Qin Shi Huang Di, it was legalism.
For Wu Di, the great martial emperor of the early Han dynasty, it was Confucianism with
a dash of legalism and Taoism thrown in.
Following the age of disunity, rulers of the Sui and Tang dynasties used a mixture of homegrown
and imported philosophies, particularly Buddhism now, to try and restore unity and effective
government to China.
In the Song dynasty you remember Buddhism and Confucianism competed for the attention
of rulers and intellectuals alike even as the government was focused more pragmatically
on economic growth and innovation.
Later after the external imposition of somewhat disinterested and inefficient rule by the
Mongol emperors of the Yuan dynasty, it was the often naive and corrupt rulers of the
Ming and Qing who opted to be kept isolated from the real world of politics by their
eunuchs, by their mandarins that led to China's demise in the 18th and 19th centuries and
to the domination of that great nation by Western powers.
This was the situation when we last left China in this course.
Poor quality government and Western imperial aggression had led to a loss of sovereignty
and to the virtual dismantling of the Chinese state by the early 20th century.
Let's pick up the story again now in the year 1912.
In the decades that followed we will see the appearance of new experiments in Chinese governance,
experiments like republicanism, nationalism and of course communism.
We will also see the emergence of a group of new leaders who vied for power over the
vast Chinese state and its untold millions of men like Sun Yat-sen, like Cheyenne Khaisek
and the young communist revolutionary Mao Zedong.
The first thing we need to say is that during the first four decades of the 20th century,
China was in a state of almost continuous political upheaval.
With the abdication of the child emperor Puyi in 1912, the last emperor of the Qing, China's
dynastic era came to an abrupt end more than 4,000 years after it had begun.
4,000 years of rule by more or less the same dynastic system of government is just another
example of the extraordinary longevity of both the Chinese state and also of this concept
we've been trying to define throughout our course as Eastern civilization.
Can you think of any other political structure devised by humans that has lasted virtually
without interruption for four millennia?
One year after Puyi's abdication, a leading opponent of the old Qing regime, Dr Sun Yat-sen,
better known in China by the way by his revolutionary name of Sun Zhongshan, proclaimed the establishment
of a Chinese republic.
Sun Yat-sen is a fascinating figure in modern Chinese political history and actually an
individual who had close ties to the United States.
At the age of 13, Sun moved to Hawaii to live with an older brother.
He studied English in a private Christian missionary school on the island of Oahu.
After returning to China, he studied Western medicine but he was soon swept up in the ferment
of revolutionary politics which swirled about China during the last decades of the Qing
dynasty.
In 1894, Sun organized the Revive China Society, then spent the next several years working
tirelessly raising funds and promoting his revolutionary cause in Southeast Asia, in
Japan and certainly back in North America.
Some historians argue that Sun was inspired by Abraham Lincoln's famous description of
government as being of the people, by the people, for the people when he described his
own revolutionary manifesto as the three people's principles, nationalism, democracy
and the livelihood of the people.
Sun later gained US citizenship apparently by using a forged birth certificate that showed
he had been born in Hawaii.
On October the 10th, 1911, while Sun was in Denver, Colorado raising funds, his colleagues
in the Revive China Society along with soldiers loyal to the movement rebelled against the
Chinese government and captured the city of Hankau.
Almost immediately several Chinese provinces declared their independence from Beijing and
from the Qing dynasty.
The abdication of the last emperor was actually part of a negotiated agreement between the
revolutionaries and the Qing government.
A Qing general, Yuan Shikai was appointed president in the emperor's place.
So the old dynasty was dead but it would be a very long time indeed before a durable structure
would appear to take its place.
Declaring a republic as one thing but achieving stability through political revolution is
quite another of course.
With the dissolution of central government, the republic was soon plunged into a state
of political and economic anarchy marked by a return of the rule of the warlords.
How many times have we seen this occur in China's history?
The central government managed to run a few agencies from Beijing like the post office
for example but the warlords reestablished themselves as the new provincial rulers.
With these warlords in control, irrigation was neglected, the opium trade was revived
and the Chinese economy began to collapse.
No stable government was created nor did any semblance of political order appear.
Sun Yat-sen and his president Yuan Shikai soon fell out which didn't help matters anymore.
Even after the general died in 1916, Sun and his revolutionaries were unable to restore
any order.
With the warlords in control of various parts of the country, the relationship between foreign
powers and the Chinese state also disintegrated.
As we've seen, it was a series of unequal treaties that had effectively guided Chinese
relations with the industrialized world during much of the previous century.
Foreign control of China had prevented economic development and their privileged status had
obviously impaired Chinese sovereignty.
Now in the first decades of the 20th century, the foreign imperial powers took full advantage
of Chinese instability by establishing new spheres of interest along the coast of the
China Sea.
But this continuing foreign interference actually fostered a strong nationalist sentiment throughout
the country.
Intellectuals wanted a new democratic form of government but they also wanted to revive
traditional Chinese culture.
The Peking University became a hotbed now of intellectual activity among students and
faculty with increasing demands made for modern government for the introduction of scientific
principles and for the modernization of the Chinese written script.
These same intellectuals and students looked forward optimistically to the 1919 peace conference
in Paris as the start of a new era for China, hoping for the termination of the treaty system
and the restoration of Chinese sovereignty.
But these hopes were shattered when Japan was given approval for increasing interference
in Chinese affairs, a situation we discussed in a previous lecture.
The so-called May 4th movement quickly erupted all over China as citizens protested against
Japanese interference.
Despite these protests, the Treaty of Versailles signed on June 28, 1919 explicitly sanctioned
Japanese control over all its Chinese territories.
In response, the May 4th movement's leaders pledged to rid China of imperialism and began
to seek out radical ideologies that might help them to do so.
And much such ideology, of course, was communism.
Disillusioned by the cynical self-interest of the United States and the European powers,
one group of Chinese radical intellectuals became increasingly interested in Marxist-Leninist
thinking.
Inspired by the success of the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution in Russia, by 1921 the Chinese
Communist Party had been proclaimed in Shanghai, organized very much along Soviet lines.
Among its early members was Mao Zedong, a young man destined to become one of the iconic
figures of the 20th century.
Mao had been born in Hunan province in 1893.
His father was a poor peasant who made good and became a successful farmer and a wealthy
grain dealer.
The young Mao divided his time between working on his father's farm but also acquiring first
a provincial, elementary and then a secondary education.
After a brief period as a member of the Revolutionary Army, Mao gained employment as an assistant
librarian at Peking University where he attended the lectures that were being given by these
key revolutionary intellectuals, those who were demanding political, economic and cultural
reform in China.
On July 23, 1921, the now 27-year-old and married Mao attended the first ever session
of the National Congress of the Communist Party of China.
And within two years Mao had been elected as one of the five Commissars of the Central
Committee.
The Communist argued that a Marxist-inspired Revolution was the only cure for China's problems.
They also questioned many of the foundational social elements of Eastern civilization, championing
equality for women, for example, in opposing arranged marriages and footbinding.
Sun Yat-sen, still the most prominent nationalist leader, did not share the Communist's enthusiasm
for Marxist ideology.
Instead, he promoted his own platform for modernization, the elimination of special privileges
for foreigners, national reunification, rapid economic development and the establishment
of a democratic Republican government based on universal suffrage.
Sun also realized the importance of having a strong military force to support his movement,
so he established a military academy to train loyal troops.
The man appointed head of this academy was a young soldier also destined to play a key
role in this chaotic period, Chiang Kai-shek.
Sun was determined to bring the country under the control of his nationalist party called
the Guomindang, but this was made more difficult after it was infiltrated by members of the
Chinese Communist Party.
Advisors from the Soviet Union helped reorganize both parties, I mean really hedging their
bets in an attempt to ensure that Soviet influence would be strong in China, whoever
won the political struggle.
After the death of Sun Yat-sen in 1925, leadership of the Guomindang fell to the now general
Chiang Kai-shek.
Chiang Kai-shek quickly launched a major offensive known as the Northern Expedition
that attempted to defeat the warlords and bring China under Guomindang control.
Finally he left the communists alone, but in 1927 he unexpectedly turned against them,
a brutally suppressing Chiang Kai's communist-led labour movement and bringing to a bloody end
a period of, I guess we could say, cautious cooperation between the two parties.
The communist forces retreated to an isolated region of southeast China where they tried
to reconstitute their forces.
In 1928, with both the warlords and the communists weakened, nationalist forces occupied Beijing,
established a central government in Nanjing in the south and declared the Guomindang to
be the official government of a reunified China.
Chiang Kai-shek and the nationalists ruled over China for the next nine years from 1928
to 1937 as a one-party dictatorship that they claimed was readying the country for democracy.
Despite some limited success on the international front, including, for example, regaining Chinese
control of trade tariffs and revoking many of the more humiliating foreign concessions,
the nationalists never gained the support of the Chinese peasants whose lives did not
improve and who looked instead to the communists for relief.
In September 1931, as we have seen, the Japanese used a pretext of Chinese sabotage of the
Manchurian Railway to invade parts of northern China where they declared a puppet government
ironically under the leadership of the last emperor of the Qing, Puyi.
The communists meanwhile tried to rebuild their strength despite repeated military campaigns
sent against them by Chiang Kai-shek.
One such campaign occurred in October of 1934, a relentless attack by the nationalist forces
which used 700,000 soldiers to surround the communist forces and trap them in Jiangxi
province.
The result was the death of about one million people, most of them communist sympathizers
and the defeat of the communist Red Army.
Mao Zedong and the 86,000 remnants of the army managed to escape the military blockade
and begin a strategic retreat known ever since as the Long March.
During the first three months as the Red Army marched north, it was bombarded and decimated
by the nationalists.
As the march continued, Mao broke from his colleagues who favoured a more traditional
approach to military strategy and Mao advocated instead for the adoption of guerrilla tactics.
By the time the communists had reached Guizhou province, Mao was widely recognised as the
leader of the movement.
With Mao at the helm, the communists continued towards Shanxi province by a harrowing and
dangerous route.
By the time the Red Army ended its Long March, it had crossed 18 mountain ranges and 24 rivers
in a journey of 12,500 kilometres, almost 8,000 miles.
These statistics, by the way, which have passed into historical law, have been challenged
by modern historians who estimate the march to have only been some 6,000 kilometres in
length.
But the Chinese media has stuck by Mao's figures, making them now an indelible part
of the historical record.
One other set of statistics reinforces the compelling tale of the Long March.
Although some 86,000 Red Army members began the march, only 8,000 survived the journey
to Shanxi, where the new communist headquarters were established.
As a result of the Long March, Mao Zedong, who later uttered the famous lines, the longest
march begins with the first step, was now the undisputed leader and principal theoretician
of the party, with Zhou Enlai as his loyal deputy, a situation that changed little over
the next 40 years.
Mao now began to articulate a Chinese version of Marxism, soon called Maoism, which argued
that oppressed peasants, rather than the urban proletariat, were the true foundations of
a successful communist revolution, particularly in China.
China was now on the brink of an unknown future, but with the Second World War about
to intervene, it would be another 14 years before that future would be determined.
The Chinese mounted staunch resistance to the Japanese invasion of China, because as
I mentioned in our previous lecture, Japanese aggression further ignited Chinese nationalism.
By September of 1937, the nationalists reluctantly and the communists had agreed to work together
against the Japanese, forming a combined army of some 1.7 million fighters.
As I mentioned last time, although the Japanese had naval and air superiority, this ragtag
Chinese army managed to tie down half of the Japanese army by 1941.
Of course, the tenuous coalition of nationalists and communists threatened to tear apart many
times throughout the war, and there were numerous military clashes between the two.
The nationalists tended to shy away from direct confrontation with the Japanese and
kept their government alive by moving inland to Chongqing.
But the communists carried out full-scale guerrilla warfare against the Japanese from their mountain
bases, sabotaging bridges and railroads and harassing Japanese troops.
These tactics captured the loyalty of millions of Chinese peasants, and by the end of the
war, the communists were poised to take control.
With the defeat of Japan in 1945, civil war in China immediately resumed.
Between August 1945 and December 1946, communists and nationalists fought each other and raced
to take over areas previously occupied by the Japanese.
In 1948, the momentum swung to the communists after the People's Liberation Army inflicted
very heavy defeats on the nationalists.
With the writing now on the wall, Chiang Kai-shek and about two million nationalists
fled the mainland and sought refuge on the island of Taiwan, where they proclaimed themselves
China's legitimate government.
On the mainland, meanwhile, on the first day of October 1949, Mao Zedong proclaimed the
establishment of the People's Republic of China.
This brought to an immediate end the long era of imperialist intrusion in China and led
to the establishment of a close relationship with the USSR.
To further cement this relationship, Mao actually travelled outside of China for the
first time in his life in December 1949 to meet with his Soviet counterpart Joseph Stalin
in Moscow.
Mao Zedong now set out to reorganise China by imitating the organisational structure
of the Soviet Union.
A new constitution was declared in 1954, which stipulated a national assembly chosen by popular
election.
But in reality, political power was now monopolised by the Central Committee and the Politburo
chaired by Mao.
To protect its authority, the party orchestrated campaigns to remove from power individuals
likely to be a threat, particularly those who had been affiliated with the old nationalist
government.
In 1951 alone, tens of thousands were executed and many more were sent to labour camps.
The same time, the economy of China was utterly transformed when land ownership was declared
collective and rapid industrialisation instituted.
More about this in a subsequent lecture.
Radical social reforms also quickly eliminated many Chinese traditions which, as we have
seen, had been in place for centuries, in some cases millennia.
More about this too in our last couple of lectures.
Moscow and Beijing worked closely together during the early years of the Cold War.
Both saw the USA as their common enemy, of course.
But as we'll see in our next lecture, cracks soon began to appear in this relationship.
By 1964, the CCP was declaring the USSR under Nikita Khrushchev to be revisionist for pursuing
a policy of peaceful coexistence with the USA.
And the Soviets were calling Mao a dangerous left-wing adventurist because he insisted
war between communism and the West was inevitable.
Mao then decided to embark upon a series of programs to try and distinguish Chinese communism
from Soviet communism.
The great leap forward between 1958 and 1961 was an attempt to have the Chinese economy
match that of more developed nations by collectivising all of agriculture and industrial production.
But the abolition of private ownership had a disastrous impact on agricultural production
and a deadly famine ensued.
In 1959 and 1962, up to 20 million Chinese died from starvation.
After this disaster, Mao tried in 1966 to reignite the revolutionary spirit of China
with a cultural revolution designed to root out revisionists.
Millions of people now, particularly teachers, professionals, managers and intellectuals,
were singled out by the Red Guard for humiliation, persecution and death.
Victims were beaten and killed, jailed or sent to labour camps in the country.
The Cultural Revolution cost China years of stable development and gutted the education
system.
Although the 9th Party Congress in April 1969 ended the most radical phase of the Cultural
Revolution, it did not completely die down until Mao's death in 1976.
During the early 1970s, political struggles within the Party gradually undermined Mao's
power.
When he died in September 1976, four of the most influential supporters of the Cultural
Revolution, the so-called Gang of Four, which included Mao's wife, staged a coup and tried
to seize control of the Party, but the gang was arrested and the Cultural Revolution was
finally over.
From the 1920s until his death, Mao Zedong was the global epitome of a great revolutionary
leader, a larger-than-life character, very much in the vein of the charismatic, inspirational
and even autocratic emperors of Chinese history.
Remember Mao's two extraordinary swims across the Yangtze River that we discussed way back
at the very beginning of the course, symbolic of the power of nature certainly, but also
of Mao's ability to inspire his people by pitting himself against one of the greatest
rivers on Earth.
And even today, despite the excesses of the Cultural Revolution, Mao Zedong remains one
of the iconic figures of the 20th century, still widely respected in China today.
His image looks down upon Tiananmen Square.
I'm sure many of you have seen this.
His tomb is one of the most visited tourist sites in the country, and Mao hats, Mao badges
and the Little Red Book are ubiquitous at shops throughout the country.
The Chinese people have been able to reconcile the complex personality of Mao Zedong by treating
him as a split personality.
I've had many educated Chinese say this to me personally.
There is a good Mao and there is a bad Mao, but the good clearly outweighs the bad.
It remains for us to see how the next generation of Chinese leaders would deal with the cultural,
political and economic legacy left by Mao Zedong following his death in 1976.
But first, please join me next time as we investigate the tragic impact of the Cold War on East
Asia, including the ramifications of the fateful split between the People's Republic of China
and the USSR, and the outbreak of bloody conflicts in Korea and Vietnam.
