Hello friends and welcome to our final lecture of the course.
We have made our way together through 47 lectures and nearly 24 hours in this exploration of
the rich and fascinating history and culture of East Asia.
Or I guess I should more accurately say our exploration of the entity we attempted to
define in our very first lecture as Eastern Civilization.
Perhaps you remember some of the challenges we encountered in that initial lecture when
we tried to unpack the three key words in the name of the course, Foundations, Eastern
and Civilization.
We were able, after some discussion, to fix the geographical scope of our course on China,
Korea, Japan and Southeast Asia.
But as we have repeatedly seen over the past 47 lectures to truly understand events in
these regions, it has been necessary to frequently trace connections between the Eastern Hemisphere
and the rest of the world.
I'm sure you remember Jiang Chen, the brave Han dynasty envoy who first breached the formidable
barriers of China's West in his journey to Central Asia.
He was captured by the Shownu twice, he was rejected by the U.H.A., but he still managed
to make his way back to the court of Han Wudi and encouraged the Emperor to begin to expand
Chinese interests westwards.
As a direct result of that expedition, China was linked into the great trading system of
ancient Eurasia and the Silk Roads began to flourish.
This connection in particular made possible the spread of Buddhism out of India and into
China and then on to Korea, Japan and Southeast Asia.
Buddhist monks from all these countries later undertook their own journeys back to India,
seeking knowledge, seeking inspiration.
The Tang dynasty monk, Xuanzang, who undertook his journey to the west in the company of
an extraordinary collection of characters, a pigsy, a monkey, sandy and the dragon king,
is just the best known of these traveling monks.
Later again we saw how the Mongols connected East Asia into a vast trans-Eurasian empire
that made possible the transmission of many Eastern technological and intellectual inventions
to the west, where they had a profound impact upon subsequent world history.
The Europeans have been able to create their vast global empires without Chinese inventions
like gunpowder, the rudder and the compass, do you think?
There is another perhaps surprising connection to the Americas here.
The Italian navigator, Christopher Columbus, claimed to have been inspired to become an
explorer after reading Marco Polo's epic account of his visit to China and the Mongol
Yuan court of Kublai Khan.
In the later stages of our course we trace the often torturous connections that developed
between all East Asian countries and the imperializing nations of the west.
So despite the fact that our geographical interpretation of Eastern has been fixed upon China, Korea,
Japan and Southeast Asia, this has also been a course about Eastern civilization in a global
context.
In our first lecture we came up with another interpretation of the word Eastern, those
regions of the world that had been profoundly influenced over thousands of years by the
culture of China.
Now we trace this influence in all sorts of ways through the powerful influence of Chinese
language and writing on the language and writing systems of Korea, Japan and Vietnam for example.
Or the impact of early Chinese ideas about governance and administration that was soon
picked up by all the other states of the region.
We have seen the overwhelming influence of Chinese philosophy on the entire region, particularly
Confucianism and influence just as profound in shaping Eastern civilization as classical
Greek philosophy was in shaping civilization in the west.
The same is true with Chinese ideas about social organization, economic management, technological
interventions.
The impact of China has been profound in so many ways.
But we have also seen that despite the size, power and wealth of China, the other states
of East Asia constructed their own impressive societies that were a lot more than mere
carbon copies of China.
The Korean, Japanese and Vietnamese peoples all managed to resist being swamped by a Chinese
cultural tidal wave to develop their own unique ideas and customs, Chan Buddhism, Shintoism,
the Samurai tradition and so on.
But I don't want to retreat from the essential premise that China has been the cultural giant
of the region.
And it's because of this we can talk with some justification I think about an Eastern
hemisphere unified for thousands of years by common cultural ideas, practices and customs
that first emerged in China and that continue to bind the region together through to the
present day.
We also had some fun in that first lecture trying to unpack a word that most historians
are extremely wary of today.
That word is civilization.
We know that in its original Latin context the word simply pertains to cities and their
citizens.
So strictly speaking when we use the word civilization we are describing regions of the world in
which cities are the largest and most important communities.
And haven't we visited some splendid cities in this course by the way, particularly the
great imperial capital of China, Chang'an.
We first became aware of this extraordinary city when Qin Shuo Huang Di was constructing
his vast mausoleum there and later when Han Wu Di had the first ever Confucian College
constructed inside the city.
By the time the Tang dynasty came to power, Chang'an had already been an imperial capital
for 2,000 years.
During the reign of Xuanzong in the Indian Dynasties century you remember that we entered
Chang'an through the Great Southern Gate.
We walked together along the huge central avenue four miles long, 500 yards wide all
the way to the imperial palace and the lavish cultured court of the emperor.
Home to 2 million residents, foreign dignitaries from all over Asia, students from Korea and
Japan, Buddhist missionaries from India, Muslim merchants and their bacteria and camels.
Imagine the noise, the color and the atmosphere in what was undoubtedly the largest and most
splendid city on earth.
Chang'an, now called by its modern name of Xi'an, is still one of the most extraordinary
cities on earth, home to over 10 million people.
Perhaps like me, you have wandered through this extraordinary metropolis full of so
many ghosts and memories from China's ancient past.
But of course there have been so many other extraordinary cities.
A Beijing with its labyrinthine forbidden city, sold under the Choson dynasty with its magnificent
palaces occupied by the elite Yangban scholars.
The court city of Nara in Japan where we found we explored one of the greatest collections
of Eurasian art ever assembled in the log cabin Choson and the Todaiji Temple which
housed the gigantic bronze Buddha cast from thousands of bronze mirrors that the ladies
of the court had donated.
So cities and the power structures that sustain them have certainly been a major focus of
our exploration of the civilization of the East.
But we also discussed some of the dangers of the classical use of the word civilization
where it was used to make a value judgment to suggest that these particular people were
civilized but these other people were not.
They were backward, they were barbaric.
Historians run a mile from those sorts of judgments today.
Who are we to value the achievements of one human community over another to suggest that
one is civilized, the other uncivilized, one superior, the other inferior?
Now we also considered a third way of understanding civilization as a concept that describes the
entire culture of a complex society.
The complete set of ideas, customs and arts that makes that culture distinctive even unique.
So we can talk about Chinese civilization as a genuine cultural entity and we can define
those characteristics that collectively add up to Chinese civilization.
Confucianism, Taoist, legalist and Buddhist ideology, imperial dynastic government, a
strong emphasis on education, a collectivist as opposed to individualistic mindset, particular
types of food and clothing and so on.
And we can also, as we've done throughout this entire course, talk about Eastern civilization
as the sum total of all the complex societies that emerged in the region, the complete set
of ideas of customs and arts of China, Korea, Japan and Southeast Asia that make Eastern
civilization so special and so unique.
The last thing we did in that introductory lecture was to consider the meaning of our
third keyword, foundations.
We talked about foundations as axioms or principles upon which something stands, the principles
of geometry of mathematics.
We talked about foundations as the underlying base or support for something tangible, the
foundations of a building.
But in the end I think a vaguer definition has been more useful for us, a one that emerges
from both these ideas.
In our search for the foundations of Eastern civilization we attempted to identify, define
and trace the development of all these significant cultural axioms, ideas and principles that
emerged within this construct that we defined as Eastern civilization.
And then we tried to see how these core foundational ideas, principles and technologies went on
to influence the development of society and civilization within the East Asian region
and eventually right around the world, including inventions like gunpowder, printing, the compass
and silk.
You folks know what these foundational elements are now, essentially the same core axioms
or principles that have defined all civilizations throughout history.
But whilst many of these foundational elements have been common to all civilizations, the
peoples of East Asia thought about them differently.
They faced the same big challenges that all civilizations faced, the same enormous questions,
but they answered them from their own unique environmental and cultural context, resulting
in a radically different and fascinating set of solutions.
These big ideas of Eastern civilization emerged so many thousands of years ago that they endured
and they shaped the long history of these regions all the way through to the present.
My great joy, and I mean that sincerely, my great joy has been to explore these ideas
with you, the evolution of these ideas across vast areas of geographical space and through
eons of historical time as we followed in the footsteps of great adventurers of warriors
and emperors, peasants and exotic women and some of the greatest minds of all time.
In the last three lectures we have been intent on bringing our discussion of the evolution
of all these ideas up to the present day.
So in lecture 45 we focused on government and politics, on the chaotic period in China
following the collapse of the Qing dynasty, on the civil war between nationalists and
communists, on the triumph of the communists, of the split between the People's Republic
of China and Taiwan, on Mao Zedong and his successes.
In lecture 46 we returned to our theme of global connections but also of bitter division
as we traced the impact of the Cold War on all the states of East Asia, including the
outbreak of bloody wars in Korea and Vietnam, the only time the Cold War ever turned hot.
And in our penultimate lecture we focused on the economy, on the development of a surging
socialist market economy in China, on Japan's spectacular economic rehabilitation after
the Second World War, on Korea and all the other economic little tigers that emerged
during the same period and on the prospects for continuing economic and technological
growth in the future.
At other places throughout the course we have commented upon philosophy, upon the continued
relevance of Confucianism in China today, for an example, an idea that has received
strong support even from within the highest echelons of the Communist Party.
We have discussed developments in language and written script, such as the adoption
of Hangul in Korea as a direct response to Japanese occupation and the development of
Pinyin in mainland China after the Communist Revolution as a script for all the people.
And we've had quite a bit to say about the development of rich streams of art and literature
all the way through the course, from the ancient Joe Dynasty classics, the magnificent poetry
of the tongue, through the Kabuki drama and even the early modern erotic novels of Japan.
So in what remains of this lecture I would like to return to two other linked foundational
themes that have occupied us often throughout this course, the themes of social and gender
relationships.
For as much as this has been a course about powerful dynasties and emperors, it has also
been about the ordinary people, their lives, their hopes, their relationships.
So in the brief time left to us, what can we say about society in East Asia, particularly
in China today?
Are people content or unhappy?
How do they feel about living under a one-party government, for example?
And how do they feel about the ancient traditions that have shaped their societies for so many
thousands of years?
In seeking answers to these questions, perhaps a brief consideration of the events that occurred
in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989 might be useful.
What can we learn about the relationship between the individual and the collective society
of which he or she is a part and about the attitudes of well-educated young Chinese towards
the ancient notions of filial piety, for example, respect for elders, particularly respect
for government officials from the events in Tiananmen?
The demonstrations actually began on the 14th of April 1989 during a momentous year in world
history that saw the rapid collapse of communist governments around the world.
But unlike many European governments, the collapse of the communist government of the
People's Republic of China was not to be the ultimate outcome of the protests in Tiananmen
Square during that same extraordinary year.
The protests in Beijing were sparked by the death of Hu Yaobang, a People's Republic of
China official known for tolerating dissent, whose death students and intellectuals wanted
to mourn.
Of course, many of these students were part of the same cohort that, as we saw in our
last lecture, had been sent to study at universities in Australia and the United States as part
of Deng Xiaoping's modernization program.
On the day of Hu's funeral, 100,000 people gathered in the vast Tiananmen Square in the
heart of Beijing, including many liberal reformers who were against the government's authoritarianism.
Demonstrations quickly spread to the streets around the square, and large-scale protests
also broke out in other cities throughout China, including Shanghai.
The protests lasted seven weeks until the government, driven by concerns for stability
and perhaps also a very real fear of being overthrown, decided to pursue a classic legalist
response by sending troops into the square on June 4.
The number of deaths that ensued is not known.
No video footage or written evidence of violence in the square has ever surfaced, although we
have all seen the iconic scenes of lone individuals standing defiantly in front of Red Army tanks.
Intelligence reports received by the Soviet Politburo estimated that perhaps 3,000 protesters
were killed, but this number is impossible to verify.
The government followed up the military assault by conducting widespread arrests of protesters
and their supporters.
They also cracked down on the other protests around China, they banned the foreign press,
and they strictly controlled coverage of events in the Chinese press.
Those members of the party who had publicly sympathized, in a way like good Confucian leaders,
with the protesters were purged with several high-ranking members placed under house arrest.
Widespread international condemnation, I'm sure you'll remember this, of the PRC government's
use of force against the protesters quickly followed, but Deng Xiaoping and the Chinese
government tufted out and made little official reference to the event, which is known in
China today as the June 4 incident, by the way.
Of course China continues to grapple with the question of human rights, with regular
demands being made by individuals within the country and around the world for more participatory
government and greater individual freedom.
Commentators debate whether China will eventually democratize or remain a totalitarian one-party
state under the control of the CCP.
Some even argue that the very idea of democracy itself might ultimately be undermined by the
success of China and by other smaller successful communist countries like Vietnam.
They point out that China is becoming a model of booming development, of political stability,
affordable housing, successful social welfare and nationalized medicine, and also of sustainable
technology, a gradually cleaner environment and widespread prosperity, all of which is
being achieved under the control of an authoritarian, non-democratic regime.
This is something like the classic model of a benevolent dictatorship promoted by so
many philosophers from Plato to Hegel as a better system of government than democracy.
And frankly, this is not that different to China's long history of Confucian dynastic
government as we have seen many absolute emperors, none of whom was ever elected of course, adopted
an explicitly Confucian commitment to governing for the benefit of the people whose care they
are morally expected to pursue through policies of benevolence.
Of course as a result of US involvement during the Cold War democracy remained strong in
South Korea, Japan and Taiwan, the peoples of these states seem absolutely committed
to the maintenance of their participatory political system.
North Korea on the other hand is an entirely different story.
But many other China watchers argue that a second Tiananmen Square uprising is probably
inevitable because of problems like increasing inequality in China, land ownership rights,
political degradation and corruption amongst officials.
Certainly the government has adopted many policies to try and solve these problems,
to try and improve the lives of the people, for example increasing spending in rural areas,
abolishing onerous taxes, cracking down on corruption and attempting to increase the
standard of living for all sectors of China's vast population.
These policies too are remarkably similar to those adopted by many of China's ancient
dynasties, reforms to the tax system as we've seen many times, the equal field system, establishing
ministries to root out corruption and so on, demonstrating again the continuing relevance
of so many foundational ideas even in communist China today.
In thinking of China's huge population and also of attempts to improve its standard of
living, perhaps we should also briefly mention now the One Child policy, first introduced
back in 1978 as the latest in a long history of attempts to control and care for the largest
population on the planet.
The policy restricts urban families to just one child, there are many exemptions for rural
couples and minorities by the way.
The government claims that the policy has prevented more than 250 million live births
between 1978 and the year 2000 and this is pretty significant because at the time of
writing this lecture China's population stands at a whopping 1.34 billion people.
The policy is often criticized in the West for encouraging abortion and female infanticide
for creating a serious gender imbalance in China and for a dramatic increase in female
adoptions to the West.
But interestingly, a 2008 Pew Center survey of a pretty large sample of the Chinese population
showed that some 76% of the Chinese people actually support the policy.
The gender imbalance is seen as a serious problem because sex specific abortions mean
that according to 2010 statistics 119 boys were being born for every 100 girls, which
projected forward would mean that 24 million men of marrying age would have no chance of
finding a female partner by the year 2020.
But just a month or so before I completed this lecture, the head of China's National
Population and Family Commission announced the introduction of a series of measures
to correct the imbalance, particularly a crackdown on illegal prenatal gender tests
and selective abortions.
The government also recently announced that the policy would remain in place until the
year 2015 and then be reassessed.
In conversations I personally have had with people in China, I've actually found fairly
widespread support amongst educated urban dwellers for the policy, but also some very
real frustrations with the complexities of the system.
Gender roles and gender relationships are also changing in China and frankly the rest
of East Asia today.
In our course we have often looked at the influence of Confucianism on attitudes towards
women, attitudes that stressed morality, cleanliness, womenly duties you remember, and proper and
differentiated roles for men and women.
Later conservative neo-Confucians used their interpretation of the philosophy and also
of yin and yang ideals to argue for female subordination, which was partly responsible
for the practice of footbinding.
The success of the Communist Revolution led to a significant reevaluation of women's roles,
although frankly the inherent contradiction between a woman as a reproductive agent and
as a woman as equal partner and worker in society has hardly been resolved.
But I think it is fair to say that under Communist rule in China the social status of women has
considerably improved.
Women are more empowered to work outside the home, footbinding, child marriages, prostitution
and arranged marriages have all been banned.
China has also seen a decrease in domestic violence due to government supported grassroots
programs to counter these practices.
But women in rural areas still remain largely uneducated and in the cities employers are
often reluctant to hire female workers because Chinese law requires that employers cover
the costs of maternity leave and even childbirth.
But certainly for educated Chinese women living in the great metropolises like Beijing, Shanghai
and Guangzhou, including many students and educated professional women that I have met
in my travels, there are far more opportunities available today than at any previous time
in China's history.
So our investigation of the foundations of Eastern civilization has come a very long
way since we began our course 47 lectures ago.
Together we have explored many thousands of years of history and culture, actually millions
of years if you include our discussion of the migration of hominids like Homo erectus
and Homo habilis to East Asia.
China has enjoyed one of the longest and most continuous histories of any society on the
planet and traditions that emerged thousands of years ago continue to guide and influence
Chinese development to the present day.
At the same time we have seen other East and Southeast Asian societies develop their own
fascinating and unique cultural traditions, part in response and even in resistance to
the powerful influence of China.
This is a story rich and diverse.
This is a story of triumph and tragedy without parallel in world history.
This is a story of emperors and peasants, princesses and concubines, confusions and legalists,
Taoists and Buddhists, of camels and silkworms, of revolutions of war and peace.
Who can say with any certainty how the story will continue to unfold into the 21st century?
Whatever happens, I'm sure it will be just as rich and fascinating as the story of all
the previous millennia of Eastern civilization.
As we finish our journey, my greatest hope is that this story will continue to resonate
with you for the rest of your lives.
Ultimately, perhaps your greatest reward from this course will be a much deeper understanding,
appreciation and curiosity for this long and rich history of Eastern civilization and
also some enhanced insight into how and why the story might develop into the future.
I hope that when you read a fascinating article about China or Korea or you hear in the news
about some extraordinary event in Japan or Vietnam, you might say, ah, I know where that
story comes from.
I hear in that event the echo of thousands of years of struggle, discovery, war, triumph,
isolation and finally engagement.
Thanks for being such wonderful friends on this long journey.
I wish you well and I hope that we might all get to meet again in the future.
Goodbye for now.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
