Let me give a briefly call from the previous two talks.
So the following is our setup.
So we start with the final quiver queue
and we fix a two-sided idea i of the pass algebra kq
and we denote the quotient algebra by a,
namely this kq mod i.
And then by Choki's solotas result,
we know that they exist deduction system
satisfying diamond condition for ideal.
And then once we fix the deduction system
satisfying the diamond condition,
then we have a useful pass, right?
So by an inducible pass,
I mean the pass in kq,
which does not contain subpass in the S, in this S, okay?
And then by diamond lemma,
we can identify the vector space
spanned by the inducible pass with the algebra a.
So we have a, and this is more for them
is induced by the natural projection, right?
If we have a pass,
then we look at the image in the quotient
and we denote the inverse by sigma.
So somehow sigma send an element in a to the normal form.
So we should get like linear combination
of a inducible pass, okay?
So from the deduction system satisfying diamond condition,
we can construct a infinity algebra,
we call it PQR.
And then we also get the infinity cross isomorphism
from this infinity algebra PQR
to the classical Hawkshaw Coaching complex.
And then on the left hand side, it's a DG Lee algebra.
The bracket is given by the Gessner Haber bracket.
And on the left hand side,
the A infinity structure is constructed
by homotopy transfer theorem.
So we transfer the Gessner Haber bracket
on the right hand side to the left hand side.
So we get a higher knee brackets.
In order to study the deformations
from this L infinity algebra,
we need to look at the following space in degree zero,
in degree one and in degree two.
So in degree zero,
we have the home space of KQ zero by module
from the arrows to the algebra A.
And then in degree one,
we have the home space from S to two A.
And then in degree two,
we have the home space from S three to A.
And here S three is the set of all overlaps.
So by overlap, I mean,
so it's a path which contains two sub-paths in S
and there should be overlap.
So this means that they have a common non-trivial path.
Okay.
And so now we can use L infinity algebra
to we can compute the molecular element
for this L infinity algebra.
So the molecular element lies in this space
in degree one, right?
So we take,
so then we pick an element formally.
So this means G one, G two is in P one, Q R.
So this just means the home space from KS to A.
And then in order to study,
to check the molecular equation,
we should first introduce a combinatorial stop product.
So we denote by star G.
So this star G is defined using rightmost reductions.
Here rightmost reduction means if we have a path
and we can contain sub-paths in S,
then we can perform reduction by replacing the sub-paths S
by FS.
And the rightmost just means
we always choose the rightmost sub-paths in S
and then replace this sub-paths by F.
So this means this is the rightmost reduction.
And once we have this combinatorial stop product,
then we can check the molecule G, the molecular element,
if and only if the stop product is associative
with respect to, for any element in the overlap.
So here W one, W two, W three is a path in S three.
So this means here we W one, W two is in S two
and W two does W three is in S two.
And the W two should be a path, non-trivial path here.
Okay, so this means then we can split these three sub-paths
and we get this two different stop product.
Okay, so this associative, right?
This is just associative identity.
And moreover, if G is a molecular element,
then by the L infinity quasi-isomorphism, GK,
and we can send the molecular element to a molecular element
in the Hawkshaw Coaching Complex, right?
And by the general fact, the Hawkshaw Coaching Complex,
the molecular element in the Hawkshaw Coaching Complex
gives a stop product, gives an associative product,
namely here.
So this means if we denote the left-hand side
by like A star prime B,
then A star prime B should be associative
because G is a molecular element.
And actually by computation, by direct computation,
we check the left-hand side also
equals the combinatorial stop product.
So in particular, this implies
the combinatorial stop product is associative, okay?
And also, we can talk about a homotopy equivalence
or gauge equivalence of two molecular elements.
And for the L infinity algebra,
this notion of homotopy equivalence
is just given by computing the molecular element
in the big L infinity algebra.
So here tau in degree zero and d tau in degree one,
and this is just the dG, community of dG algebra
with differential determinant by sending tau to d tau, okay?
And if we have a molecular element
for this L infinity algebra,
then we can take tau to be zero, d tau to be zero,
and we get a molecular element for PQR, tensor T.
And if we take tau to be one, d tau to be zero,
we should get another molecular element of PQR tensor T.
And then we say these two molecular elements
are homotopy equivalence.
And actually, similar to the molecular element here,
the molecular element for this big L infinity algebra
can also be described in a very combinatorial way.
So this means essentially,
in order to compute the molecular element,
essentially we need to compute the L infinity bracket
between elements in P0, QR, and P1, QR, okay?
So, but the L infinity bracket between these two space
is also, has also combinatorial description.
So somehow in practice, maybe for some specific example,
we can compute the molecular down space explicitly, okay,
by using this idea.
Okay, as an inclusion,
we get the deformations of the reduction system,
I mean up to homotopy equivalence,
is a equivalent to the deformations
of the social algebra A.
Why this, for the left hand side,
actually we should look at like the molecular down space
associated to the L infinity algebra, right, P, Q, R.
But this molecular down space just describes the formation,
the formal deformations of the reduction system
because if we have a G, an element G,
we can change the reduction system R
by sending S to FS plus this GS, okay, here.
So then we get the, we get the,
and we can talk about like, we can see,
okay, the formal, the formal reduction system
is like formal satisfy some kind of formal diamond condition,
right, so this gives the formation problem
for a reduction system.
And this deformation problem is controlled
by the L infinity algebra, P, Q, R, okay.
And as we know, we have an L infinity cross isomorphism
between P, Q, R and the whole coaching complex.
So, and this induce the isomorphism
between the molecular down space, okay.
Okay, so this is what we discussed in the previous two talks
and let me give a remark.
So in general, the combinatorial stop product
is the infinity sum, right,
it's just the formal power series of T.
Even G like is a polynomial, it's just like here,
if G, even G is just have a G1T, G2T square.
So if we have only finite, even we have a finite many terms,
this stop product might be infinity sum.
So we are interested in the following question
for which G is a stop product,
always a finite sum for any AB, okay.
So, and in this talk, in this lecture,
we try to look at this question from two point of view.
So the first idea we use
some idea from a non-commutative global basis.
So we can choose this G in a subspace,
not the whole space P, Q, R, just a subspace.
And this subspace somehow depends on
so-called admissible order on the path in Q.
So later I will define,
I will give the definition of admissible order, okay.
And the second idea we can still start
with the formal stop product G,
like G here, G element G in the whole space,
but we can take small values of G,
like we can take G to be one or maybe half,
and maybe in this case, the stop product is well defined,
right, we have finite sum, okay.
So then we can define this, okay.
So, okay, then let's give the definition
of algebraization.
For this, I need the definition of algebraic deformation.
So algebraic deformation is just KT algebra, AT star,
and such that the stop product
is just the original product for the constant, okay.
And here on the line space, it's just AT,
and this means we give a new product
on this polynomial algebra, okay.
So this looks like a formal deformations,
but we just replace the formal power series by polynomials.
And then we have an observation, right.
And algebraic deformation defines a formal deformation,
by taking the completion, right.
We can complete this KT algebra, right, fine,
in this way, right, okay.
And yeah, I think the notion of algebraization
goes back to 18 in 16, nine.
So this, so an algebraization of formal deformation
is an algebraic deformation,
and such that the completion is isomorphic to this,
to our AT star, as a formal deformation.
By this, I mean, by isomorphism as a formal deformation,
I mean, it's these two KT algebra, AT and A prime hat
are isomorphic as a KT algebra,
and which restrict to A is identity of A, okay.
And let me give a remark.
So if we have a formal deformation, AT star,
and such that the stop product
always lies in the polynomial, I mean, for any AB,
then this AT star admits an somehow obvious algebraization,
namely, we can just take AT together with this star, right.
Because this star is very defined, right, here.
Can be restrict to this subspace, okay.
But in general, the converse need not hold,
because the reason is here.
When we define the algebraization,
then you will find the notion of algebraization
is invariant on the gauge equivalent, right.
So this means there might be a formal deformation,
which has infinity sum with the stop product
has infinity sum,
but it might be gauge equivalent to a formal deformation
whose stop product is finite sum, right.
So we can find, it's very easy to find an example for this.
Okay, so let's look at the first point of view
with respect to the question.
So we start with a PBW deformation, okay.
So now let's go back to previous relation.
So now A is just KQ mod i,
and we fix a reduction system,
R satisfying diamond condition.
And then we have the following observation.
So if we pick G in PQR,
so namely in the home space from S to A,
and satisfying the following condition.
So GS always lines in the subspace of the past algebra.
So here Q smaller than S,
I mean the subspace, a subset of past whose length,
strictly smaller than the length of S, okay.
And the sigma is just,
we just take the normal form of an element in A, okay.
So this is just the inverse of the natural projection, right.
And if G satisfies this condition,
we know star G is finite, right.
We only get the polynomial of G
because when we perform reductions using F and G,
the length of the past algebra
should decrease, so it should stop, right,
when we perform reductions, okay.
So somehow this means the new reduction system
is the reduction finite.
So this star product should be finite, okay.
And if we further assume Gt is a molecular element
of our area infinity algebra,
then we should get a natural algebraization
of the formal deformation, A t star Gt, okay.
Just restrict to the polynomial algebra, okay.
So, and for this algebra, we can take values, right.
Like we can take G to be one
and actually we can take G to be any lambda in K, okay.
And then we still get the associative product here.
And in this case, the associative product,
the associative algebra on the left-hand side
is isomorphic to another quiver with the relations here, okay.
So we just change the ideal by minus lambda Gs, okay,
for each S.
Yeah, here.
So let's denote this by A g lambda, okay.
And yeah, if I, the ideal is homogeneous,
I mean, with respect to the path length,
and if G satisfies the length degree condition
and the Gt, the molecular element,
and then this algebra, it's as we see.
So then we have this algebra, right.
And we also have this isomorphism.
And actually in this case,
this algebra is just a Pbw, the formation of A.
And by Pbw, the formation, I mean the,
so this A g lambda here is a filtered algebra.
So we look at the associated graded algebra,
and which should be isomorphic to A.
So this is the definition of Pbw, okay.
And in this case, the Morricadone equation
of the N infinity algebra coincide with the
Brouwman-Gesquiry criterion,
which is a very useful criterion in Pbw, the formations.
But in the context of the deduction system,
yeah, we just need to check the Morricadone equation.
So it's equivalent to check this criterion, okay.
So this is equivalent.
And yeah, so here I should remind you this isomorphism.
Yeah, actually, this isomorphism is just given by
identifying the, the irreducible path,
because here, left-hand side, we have a basis
given by the irreducible path, right.
The image of the irreducible path, right.
And on the right-hand side,
we also have a basis given by the image
of the irreducible path, okay.
So we can identify this.
And so we should get like isomorphism of a vector space.
And then we transfer the product here
and we get exactly this star product.
So somehow this means this identification
is exactly, it's an algebra isomorphism, okay.
And let me give you an example.
So let's look at the polynomial algebra.
So probably you have a thing from the first talk.
This polynomial algebra is also given by,
can be given by a prevar with relations, right.
Namely, we look at the prevar with one vertex
and the n loops.
And the relation is just the commutative relation,
namely here.
And then we can choose a natural induction system,
satisfying in diamond condition here.
And now we pick a G and we send X G X I
to be a linear combination of X K, okay.
So here C G I up K is just a scalar in the field,
in the base field.
And then we find G T is a molecular element
of the infinity algebra.
If and only if this is a linear algebra.
So we have a linear structure on the space
spanned by the arrows of the prevar, okay.
And the bracket is given by this one, okay.
So we send X G X I to this sum, okay.
So somehow this C G I K is just a constant, right.
The structure constant of the linear algebra.
And moreover, in this case, the star product, okay.
The associative product given by the star product
is isomorphic to the universal and whirling algebra
of this linear algebra, okay.
And similarly, this isomorphism is given by
identify the irreducible paths, okay.
We send the irreducible paths here
to the same irreducible paths here.
Because the image of an irreducible path
for my basis for these two vector space, okay.
And this is the isomorphism of algebra.
And actually in this case, the star product
can be expressed using conservative graph
without cycles.
And you will see more details in the next talk.
And actually in this case, this G,
this molecular element G,
induce so-called repersonal structure
on the n-dimensional alpha space a n, okay.
And more generally, we can look at
the combinatorial star product
for some special person structures, right, okay.
So anyway, you will see this in the next talk.
Okay, so now, so this just, so for this PBW deformation,
somehow we have some order, right.
We have some, we give a, we give order for the path
and this order just given by the path length.
But more generally, we can give a,
yeah, more general order.
So this called admissible order.
So this by definition is a total order on the path
and satisfying the following condition.
So for any, for every now empty subset of Q
has a, should have a minimal element.
And for, and also this admissible order should compatible,
should be compatible with the multiplications, okay.
So look at here.
So, so like if P bigger than Q,
then PR should be bigger than QR, okay.
And similarly, if P bigger than Q,
then RP should be bigger than RQ.
And also here, this looks like the path length degree, right.
Okay, so now, yeah, we go back to the KQ mod I
and we fix the reduction system satisfying diamond condition.
So here are either, yeah, should satisfy diamond condition,
okay, and then we fix the admissible order on Q
and such that the FS should align in the, in the subspace.
And here Q smaller than S just means the subset of paths,
which are strictly smaller than S
with respect to this order, this admissible order, okay,
for each S.
And then we can, we can choose G,
satisfy the following condition.
So we just look at G satisfying this condition, okay.
So G S also lies in this space for each S, okay.
We just look at the subspace, okay.
We just, so G is just in the subspace.
And then if G satisfies this order condition,
we know we, similar to the PBW case,
this star product should be a finite sum, right.
Because once we perform reductions,
the order of the path should decrease.
So it should stop because we,
because here we have a minimal element, okay.
And then we have a proposition similar to the,
so this proposition is completely, yeah,
similar to the PBW case.
So we just replace the path length
by this admissible order, okay, here.
So if G is a molecular element,
and then this formal,
this formal deformation admits algebraization.
So this is obvious algebraization, right.
Because this star G T is very defined, okay, in this case.
And moreover, we can take value for this T,
like to be lambda,
and then we should get algebra isomorphism.
And this algebra isomorphism is given
by identifying the inducible paths, okay.
So this, yeah.
Okay, why we need this?
Because if we use this,
we will get more deformations.
I mean, more deformation than PBW deformation, okay.
So let me give you an example.
So let's look at the so-called deform quantum
pre-projectural variables.
For this, let's just look at the extended
the dinking quiver of type A and T.
So this quiver contains n plus one vertices.
And we can see the double quiver of Q.
So this means for, so here,
alpha zero, alpha one, alpha two, alpha n.
So it's an arrow, are the arrows in Q.
And then for each arrow, we add the inverse arrow,
like here, alpha two, we add alpha two bar.
Okay, so this is the inverse arrow here.
So this is called a double quiver.
And then we look at the pre-projective algebra.
So this is given by the path algebra of Q bar here,
and modulate the pre-projective relation.
So this pre-projective relation is given for each vertex,
like look at the vertex zero.
So we have this path, alpha zero and alpha zero bar.
So this path parallel to this E zero, right?
Alpha zero, alpha zero bar.
And we also have a path, alpha n bar and alpha n.
So we look at the difference, okay?
And for this pre-projective algebra,
we have a natural reduction system,
satisfying diamond condition, namely here.
We just pick the first entry to be S, okay, here.
And then take the second entry to be F S, okay?
And you will find that this reduction is reduction finite,
because when we perform reductions,
we just move this bar from right to left, right?
It should stop, right?
Here, you see the bar here,
the bar here is on the right,
and then we move to the left, okay?
And so you will check this reduction finite,
and then by the Bergman diamond lemma,
you know, in this case, we have no overlaps.
So then by Bergman diamond lemma,
we have a, so we know this reduction finite.
And the reduction unit,
so this means it satisfies diamond condition, okay?
So anyway, so this is very easy to check.
And then we give a admissible order,
which is determined by the order on the arrows, okay?
And I mean here, determined by,
I mean, it's determined by so-called
length lexical graphical order, okay?
Determined by this given order.
And then we can see the,
we look at all the G satisfying the order condition, okay?
And then we will find G has the following forms.
So here, we have a lambda I,
because this lambda I just correspond
into the PBW deformation, right?
Because the length of EI,
it's strictly smaller than S, half I, half I bar, okay?
But using this admissible order,
we also get this mu I, okay?
Because the length of alpha bar I minus one,
half I minus one, it's smaller than this one, okay?
Strictly smaller, right?
And so, so this G, yeah,
it satisfies the length degree, okay?
And then, because as I said, there is no overlap,
so any element in this space
should be a molecular element, right?
Because we don't need to check,
so that, I mean, the molecular equation is trivial, right?
So, then we get a associative product.
Here, we get a formal deformation, okay?
Associates to GT.
And also, because this G satisfies the length,
the order condition, so this means this star GT
should be a finite sum, okay?
So it is just a polynomial about G, okay?
The stuff product.
And then this means we have an algebraization,
obvious algebraization, okay, this.
And actually, if we compute the homotopy equivalence,
actually we can just take all the mu I to be zero,
except mu zero, okay?
So then we denote q by mu zero plus one, okay?
And then we can take t equals one,
then we get the actual deformation of pi q.
So this means this algebra has a basis
given by the irreducible path, okay?
So this is the infinite dimension algebra, right?
Let me remind you.
Yeah, it's obvious maybe for you,
but if you look at the induced path,
then we know there are infinite many reducible paths, right?
Because we can, we have a,
we can go alpha bar, right?
Many times, and then go use alpha, right?
Many times, okay?
So anyway, so we have a nice basis for this,
for this algebra.
So this is so called the form,
deformed quantum p-projectual algebra, okay?
And actually if q equals zero,
then this just deformed p-projectual algebra,
which was introduced by Chloe Bowie, Holland.
And the if q is actually then,
which was studied by Martin Clark in his master thesis,
and also by Crawford in his PhD thesis, okay?
And this algebra is very interesting,
I think in both in representation theory
and also in geometry.
Let me give you some remark,
which I think it should be interesting.
So if we take q equals one,
and take all the lambda i to be zero, except lambda zero,
and then here we make lambda zero to be a formal,
so we denote we will lambda zero
to be just a formal parameter g,
and then we get this,
we look at the algebra along E zero, okay?
So we have this, okay?
So here E zero is here, okay?
We look at the algebra along this vertex, right?
And then we know this actually is a deformation
quantization of the symbolic structure
on the singularity, okay?
Which we studied.
And we can also like,
now if we take lambda i to be zero for all the lambda,
for all i from zero to n,
so this means here we have no pbw deformations,
just here zero and zero,
and we take actually q, okay?
And then we still look at the algebra
along the vertex E zero,
and you will check that this algebra actually is isomorphic
to the quantum hypersurface here.
So this is the non-committal algebra, right?
Because, yeah, sorry, if q is not one, right?
But if q is one, right,
we get just this a n singularity.
Right, because q equals one,
then we have a x, y, z is a commutative variable.
And then we have this hypersurface, okay?
So you will see, we don't change the hypersurface,
just change the commutative relation, okay?
And I think in the last talk,
we also mentioned this example,
but from more geometric perspective.
And also in the last talk,
you will see more applications of algebraization
with respect to some admissible orders
in algebraic geometry and the non-committal geometry.
In particular, we will talk about
non-committal resolution of some singularities.
And we will mention reconstruction algebra,
which was introduced by Michael Williams.
And we will study the commutative deformation
and the non-commutative deformation.
And also actual deformations, okay?
For this example, in the next talk.
Okay, and yeah, so now I would like to study
the deformations, somehow,
I would like to study the deformations of monominal algebra,
but with respect to some fixed admissible order, okay?
So for this monominal algebra,
I will introduce a variety.
So this variety was introduced by Green-Killer-Schwoller,
and I will give the definition later.
But before this, let me introduce some notation.
So if I have an element in the path algebra, KQ,
we denote, we define the tip of X,
just the path appearing X,
which has the maximal length with respect to this order, okay?
And then we look at the, then for general,
if we have a subset of KQ,
we denote the tips of the subset in this way.
So we look at all the tips of X,
of the element X in X, except zero, okay?
And so here's the definition of the variety, okay?
But a purely it's not a variety,
so just a set of adjuvant with the form KQ mod I,
sorry, here S should be here, okay?
I should remove this path, this assumption, okay?
Okay, S is just this minimal relation of the monominal ideas.
And then we look at the,
we can define this KQ mod I,
and I is just idea of KQ,
and such that the two-sided ideal
generated by this chip I here, right?
We replace X by I,
coincide with the two-sided I generated by this S, okay?
So somehow this means the algebra in this set,
like KQ mod I has a reduced non-commutative global basis, G,
whose tips are just S, okay?
And in this paper, yeah, here you can click the Glim Box,
and you will find the link of this paper, okay?
In the hand out version.
And so there is a theorem by, in this paper,
they proved actually this set is an affine algebraic variety.
And so this means this set is given by some equations
in some affine space, okay?
And actually, if we, actually this,
you will see the dimension of the algebra in this set
are the same, right?
Because we have a, somehow we have the same
irreducible path as basis.
So this means we can use, somehow this means the algebra
in this variety is a deformation of this monominal algebra.
I mean, the actual deformation of the monominal algebra, right?
So, yeah, actually we can, this affine algebraic variety
can be given by the Morricadone equation
of the N infinity algebra, okay?
But here we, here the finite needs condition just make sure
like these equations, we have only finally many equations, okay?
This is a very natural condition,
so about the irreducible path, okay?
Yeah, I will not give the detail,
but later I will give you example.
So look at this.
Okay, so yeah, before giving the example,
let me mention some properties of the variety.
So actually, the adverbs in this correspond to the point
in this variety share many common properties.
So like all adverbs in this variety have the same dimension, right?
I think this is clear because as I said,
the adverbs in this variety just actual deformation
of the monominal algebra, right?
The initial monominal algebra.
And also you will see the, yeah, okay, the A.
So if A is a finite dimensional, yeah.
And then all adverbs in this variety
have the same codon matrix.
So codon matrix just means a matrix with entry,
with entry ij, ij is just the dimension of E i, A E j, okay?
We look at, so this means just the number of irreducible paths
start with E i and ends with E j, okay?
So this is the entry of the matrix in ij, okay?
And why this, we have this, the same codon matrix
because our star product, if you look at the star product,
we will find the star product is the id important.
So this means the star product,
so the deformation does not change the dimension of E i, A E j, okay?
So actually, if we have a deformation of A,
and this also induce a deformation of E i, A E i, okay?
So this, the property of our star product.
And also we can, there is a result, yeah,
see to compare the global dimension in this variety.
So somehow the global dimension of the algebra in the variety
are bounded, are upbound by the global dimension
of the monominal algebra, okay?
And then if the global dimension of the monominal algebra,
the initial monominal algebra is finite,
and then the codon determinant conjecture holds
for all algebra in this variety, okay?
So this looks very interesting, right?
Somehow in order to check the codon determinant conjecture,
it's enough to look at the variety
studying with the monominal algebra
whose global dimension is infinite, okay?
Yeah, by codon determinant conjecture,
I mean the same, it's that for,
a finite dimension algebra with finite global dimension
who the codon matrix has a determinant one, okay?
And the last, yeah, there is also a result
about quasi-hardy property.
So if A, I mean the monominal algebra is quasi-hardy,
Italy then all algebra in the variety are quasi-hardy, okay?
So actually there are more properties in this paper,
common properties, but I just list this five.
Okay, let me give you an example.
So we start with this quiver, okay?
We have A, L, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, G, K,
and then we give an order determined by this,
by the order on the arrows, okay?
We set A bigger than B and bigger than C and so on.
And then we pick the minimal relation
of the monominal ideas to be A, B, A, B,
and also B, A here and also C, B, I here, okay?
And then by the, in the paper,
so this example from this paper,
and they compute the Greenfield Scholar
computes this variety just given by this equation, okay?
So this thing in five dimensional affine space.
And okay, we can, yeah, let me show you
how to use the molecular equation
to get this one, this equations.
So now we pick an element in this PQR one,
integral one, right?
So namely the home KSA.
And then we look at all the possibilities, right?
Like A, B, so C, D, E, F bigger than a smaller than A, B,
so we can pick these two elements, right?
Satisfying the order condition,
the admissible order conditions, okay?
And also we can pick this, okay?
And in particular here GH is somehow this looks
like a PBW deformation, right?
Because it's the length of, here the length is two
and here the length is three, okay?
So we have only one PBW deformation here.
A possible PBW deformation, right?
We have to check the molecular equation, okay?
And then you will find, actually we have only one overlap
for this S3, okay, here, right?
We have only ABI, overlap ABI.
And then the molecular element,
so in order to check the molecular element,
it's enough to compute this,
the stop product is associated for this S3, okay?
And you will find the left-hand side is zero
because when we compute the stop product of B
and I, we get zero because, you know,
here G send the BI to be zero
and also the initial deduction system
send the BI to zero as well.
So we get the zero on the left-hand side
and if you look at the right-hand side
and then we compute AB first
and then we can use a regional deduction, F,
then we get zero, right?
Because AB send to zero
and then we use this new deduction, G
and we get CD plus EF, okay, here.
And then we compute the stop product with I
and then you will find this equation, okay?
Okay, so, yeah, in the, so I have 10 minutes,
so I will, in the last 10 minutes,
I will mention the, talk about the second idea.
So, namely, we can, we can start,
we can still start with the, with formal deformations
and then try to evaluate T for small values.
So, so for this maybe,
yeah, we have to work on the field of real numbers
or complex numbers, okay?
Before talking about this, the general result,
let me give you an example.
So we look at the following previous relations.
Here, and we, so here,
we have a natural deduction system for this ideal,
which satisfies the diamond condition.
So it's very easy to check because,
so somehow this, so this deduction finite
because we reduce, we reduce a longer path
to a smaller length path, right?
So you have to look at this,
you have to look at this,
to smaller length path, right?
So short path.
And then you will check, there is no overlap
between, for this deduction system.
And now we can pick any element in,
in PQR, like you can pick this one for, for example.
And then we will check because we have no overlap.
So this G satisfy the molecular equation, right?
Namely the molecular equation is trivial in this case, right?
Because we have no overlap.
And then we can compute the star product in this case,
like for A star BC,
and we get a formal power series, right?
And actually, like for if T small enough,
we get this, right?
We get this like rational functions.
It's one over one minus T squared.
Okay.
And then we can take value, right?
For like, for lambda,
like for lambda to be any scale.
And now we denote the algebra,
induce the algebra given by the,
by the new quiver,
given by quiver with new relations here, right?
For the original one, we have AB minus D,
but here we should add this one.
And then we take T to be lambda.
So we get this.
And for this one,
now B prime say reduce to lambda BC.
So we get this new idea.
And then you will say,
if lambda is
in here,
then we, we, we, we get the algebra is more for them, right?
Because if lambda is not one and minus one,
we know the star product.
It's very defined, right?
Yeah.
And here we also have a algebra.
And in this case,
we have algebra as morph them.
And this is morph them.
Yeah.
Similarly to the,
to the,
to the PBW deformations.
This algebra is given by identifying the,
in useful paths, right?
Because both,
both of the algebra have a basis given by the image of
individual paths.
But the four,
if lambda equals one and the minus one,
the,
actually the new deduction system,
the new deduction system,
it's not deduction finite.
So we have to change the deduction system.
So somehow for this,
for these two points.
Okay.
But,
but yeah,
and also for this,
for this case,
so yeah,
because the left hand side is,
it's not very fine.
Okay.
Okay.
Actually we find,
somehow this,
this phenomena,
it's a,
yeah,
it's very can be generalized to any quiver relation.
So,
so yeah,
let's take the result.
So if we start with any,
algebra,
not necessarily finite dimensional.
So just any picture model.
And then we fix the deduction system,
satisfying the diamond condition,
and also set it by this,
this,
the length condition.
So here,
S,
the absolute of S just means the path of S.
And so the,
we have this condition.
So,
so here,
if the absolute value of FS just means we will,
it just the maximum length appearing,
the maximum length of the path appearing FS.
Okay.
So we have,
we should add this condition if,
and yeah,
if we pick a molecular element in this,
in this,
in this,
in this,
and also satisfied this kind of condition,
this length condition.
And we also assume GS is a polynomial,
for each S.
I think this,
this is the natural,
right?
If GS is a,
if GS is a like a formal power series, then,
yeah,
as we said,
it's a,
in general,
we should get a,
also get a like very strange,
formal power series,
right?
For the star product.
So yeah,
let's just,
we should,
I think this,
this condition,
it's,
it's natural.
Okay.
And then on this conditions,
we have a,
we can prove the star product,
the function in T as coefficients,
okay?
Like here, right?
So this is the example, right?
You can,
of course here we only compute A star BC,
but we can also compute like AB prime star C.
And in this case,
it's zero, okay?
So,
so somehow we only get this one rational function here.
Okay.
And,
if,
if A is a finite dimensional as well,
here,
and then the study is convergent on the neighborhood of zero,
because by this result,
we know,
there are only finite many rational functions appearing in the,
in the star product, right?
Namely,
because we have a,
this is the finite dimension algebra.
So we have only finite many unidusable paths.
And,
and here the rational function,
just the coefficients of the,
of the unidusable paths, right?
So we have only finite many rational functions.
And this means we have only finite many a pose.
And then this means that,
yeah,
we can,
we can find a uniform bond, right?
We can find a bond and the,
and the,
and the star product is convergent in this,
in this region,
smaller than this bond.
And actually this,
the above result is motivated from an open question on the
convergency of conservative star product.
So which is a,
like a formal product,
a star product for positive person structures.
I think we will talk about this in the next talk.
We will also mention like convergent,
the result for,
yeah,
for positive,
for some positive,
special positive person structures in the next talk.
Okay.
And so at the end of the talk,
I,
I would like to ask a question.
So,
so what about the infinite dimensional case?
Okay.
So here,
compared with the,
the first remark,
we know the study is always convergent near,
or near zero,
but what,
what convergence properties does a study have,
right?
When it's infinite dimensional.
And for this,
I think we might,
we might try to prove like the number of rational functions
appearing in the,
appearing in the star product,
it's finite.
I mean up to polynomials,
or maybe you can prove,
or maybe you can prove like,
maybe it's not the number of rational functions.
It's not finite,
but maybe the poles,
the number of poles are finite.
So anyway,
so this is our ongoing work.
So yeah,
thank you very much.
