Well, thanks a lot for the introduction, it's an honor and a big pleasure to speak here.
So my talk will be about the relationship between two actually quite different, apparently
quite different things, locally symmetric spaces and color representations.
So those are two things linked by very strong conjectures, something that fits into the
realm of the Lengen's program.
And by now there are also some pretty general theorems and what I wanted to do in the talk
is to explain some of the general features of this kind of theorem, those kind of theorems
that we can prove in a very specific example, but which is somewhat representative of some
of the features of the general situation.
And so let me start by giving you an instance of this relationship between locally symmetric
and color representations, which is a very concrete example.
So let's say it's a following specific hyperbolic stream manifold, so we look at some kind of
geometric object, the hyperbolic stream manifold, I will say more about how this is constructed
in a second, let me just say that it's called a Bianchi manifold and so they were introduced
by the differential geometry of Bianchi already in the late 19th century, so they're quite
classical objects.
And so what I'm interested here in here is the homology of this hyperbolic stream manifold,
so it's something which somewhat belongs to the world of topology or geometry.
So here H3 is the hyperbolic stream space, I will define it later.
And gamma is some very specific group, I wrote it down here.
So it's a subgroup of SL2 of the Gaussian integers and so those we can represent by
some matrices A, B, C, D, where all these A, B, C, D are Gaussian integers or some complex
coordinates plus the imaginary part are integers.
And I put some very specific congruence conditions on the entries in this matrix.
So that's some thing.
And the other object I want to consider is some very specific polynomial, some polynomial
of force degree with integer coefficients, so certainly an object of the field of number
theory or algebra.
And so I claim that there is some direct link between these two objects, which is not very
clear where it comes from.
And so some of our starters, probably the first relationship you will recognize between
these two objects is the appearance of the number 183 both somewhere in the congruence
condition there, and as a discriminant of this polynomial, it's not a coincidence.
But of course, there's more to this.
All right, so let's, I should say that this example was computed by Figueredo in the
thesis in 1998.
Although even in this example, what Figueredo could observe was some empirical evidence that
there is a relation between these two gadgets, but to prove this, actually, he couldn't prove
it then.
So I'm talking about locally symmetric spaces, so let's first recall what symmetric spaces
are.
So symmetric spaces are some connected remanian manifolds, so manifold equipped with a metric,
with a condition that at any point of the space, there is an isometric reflection.
So on the tangent space, it's minus the identity at this point.
And so all of these symmetric spaces are of the form that they're highly symmetric, so
in particular, there's a lead group G of isometries of X, which acts transitively on
the space X, and the stabilizer of any point will be a compact subgroup of this lead group.
All right, and so maybe the first example of such a thing, well, the sphere would be
an example, but also hyperbolic two-space would be an example, so that's the, you can
think of this as the upper half plane, so all complex numbers whose imaginary part is
positive.
I also wrote down the metric, and I hope I have this right.
And then if you want to represent it in this way, you can let SL2 of the reals act on this
by fractional near transformations, and then the stabilizer of the point I in the upper
half plane will be SL2, or plus or minus SL2.
So this is a very well-studied object in many areas, and I mean, number theory in particular
gives rise to what we call the modular curves.
So in this case, you could let SL2 of the integers act on this to produce a modular
curves, but I want to step up one dimension for the stock and look at hyperbolic three-space.
And so because there are several phenomena that are quite different between these two
cases.
So it's a three-dimensional manifold.
You can define it, say, as a product of the complex numbers and the positive reals.
And so the metric takes a very similar form, so it's one of the y squared with these coordinates.
And so you can somehow regard it as somehow everything living over the ground, and I will
draw a picture.
So in this case, a group of, a free group of asymmetries of the sky is given by SL2
of the complex numbers now, so replaced with reals by the complex numbers, and we need
to replace this compact subgroup here by the maximum compact subgroup of SL2 of the complex
numbers, which would be SU2, and that's the stabilizer of the point.
All right, and so what we're doing now is we take some arithmetic subgroup of SL2 of
the complex numbers.
So the ones I want to consider are the following forms.
So you take matrices, which are somehow where the entries to live in some imaginary product
number field.
So you take some imaginary product number field K. For most of the talk, actually, I would
just take the square root of minus one.
And then by OK, I denote the swing of integers.
So for example, if K was square root of minus one, then OK would just be the Gaussian integers,
C to the term I. And then I look at a subgroup of SL2 of this, where I put some congruence
conditions on A, B, C, and D. And if you put enough congruence conditions, you can ensure
that this is a torsion free subgroup, which is important.
So if you want to take the quotient of this upper, so X here was the upper half planer,
I can consider X gamma, the quotient of X by the action of gamma.
So recall that some SL2 of the complex numbers acted as isometries on the hyperbolic three
space.
And so if you have a subgroup content quotient, you still have some remanian manifold.
And it's actually a manifold because I assume this is torsion free.
This means that this action has no stabilizers here.
And so it's free action.
You have a very nice quotient.
So the quotient turns out to be a finite volume, but non-compact hyperbolic three manifold.
And I think now comes the picture that I tried to draw.
Let me try to say what this means.
So I here looked at the example where I take the full congruence subgroup.
And so then it will actually not be a manifold, which is related to the strange cusp that
you see here.
Those would go away if I pass some finite index subgroup given by some congruence conditions.
And so what happens here is that hyperbolic three space, some of everything that lies
on top of the ground.
The ground itself is a plane.
You can identify it with the complex numbers.
And inside the complex numbers, you somehow have this Gaussian lattice given by the points
somewhere of z on i.
So here it might be 0, 1, i, 1 plus i, et cetera.
And then you draw these half circles around these points.
So those will somehow be minimal surfaces inside hyperbolic three space.
So you might be a little bit more familiar with the two-dimensional picture of two-dimensional
hyperbolic space where you would have these half circles which correspond to geodesics
in that space.
So drawing all these half circles, half spheres around these points, and then you also take
the rays on top of these points, and they turn out to bound the fundamental domain for
this quotient.
So you get the manifold you're interested in by somehow identifying the front and the
back of z, et cetera.
And as part of this picture, you maybe recognize the fundamental domain which is probably the
more famous picture if you just do this for SL2 of the integers acting on two-dimensional
hyperbolic space.
So if I just take this part here, then this will somehow exactly correspond to this more
classical picture.
All right.
So that's my object of interest on the geometric side.
And so as I said, I wanted to consider the homology groups of these guys.
I'm interested in the homology of these Bianchi manifolds.
And these are some finely generated B groups.
They are non-zero only.
Well, in general, they might be non-zero from zero up to the dimension, which would be three.
But because this guy is non-compact, it only actually goes up to two.
And there's some punk radiality which relates what happens in degree one with what happens
in degree two.
So the most interesting one is actually the first homology group.
But the first homology group we can actually define without knowing anything about homology.
So it's just the unification of the fundamental group of this manifold and maximally being
quotient.
But it's a fundamental group.
Well, you know what the fundamental cover is because hyperbolic three-space maps to this
is contractible.
So it must be the universal cover and the group of deck transformations is gamma.
So it's just the unification of this group gamma.
So it's something quite explicit that you could also define without reference to this
hyperbolic three manifold just in terms of gamma.
But to study these homology groups is actually very useful to have this hyperbolic three
manifold inside because otherwise already the statement that these are finally generated
to be in groups would be very non-zero.
And so as any finally generated to be in group, you can decompose it into a torsion-free
part and some torsion part.
And the rank of the torsion-free part is called the first Betty number of this gadget.
And so quite a bit is known about how large this torsion-free part is and how large the
torsion part is.
And so for example, it turns out that the first Betty number is actually usually quite
small.
So for example, there's a theorem of look which says that as you let the congruent subgroup
become smaller and smaller, you somehow get a sequence of hyperbolic manifolds which are
covers of each other and become larger and larger in some sense converge to the hyperbolic
three-space, then look proofs that the first Betty number grows slower than the volume
of the hyperbolic three manifolds.
As gamma goes to zero, the first Betty number over the volume is zero.
On the other hand, for these Bianchi manifolds, it turns out there's a whole lot of torsion
in these Bianchi manifolds.
And I just wanted to give you an impression.
I want to show you this example computed by Sengun.
So in SL2 z a join i, I take some congruent subgroup, you might say that this is quite
a large modulus already, but it's not so big anyway, I mean, in this case, this very, very
large prime already divides the order of the torsion subgroup.
So this torsion subgroup contains torsion for some very sporadic, very, very big primes.
And if I would replace z a join i here by z a join squared of minus seven or something
like this, and take the same kind of modulus and the primes, I think, would be still three
terms more digits or something.
And in fact, this is expected to be quantifiable how large this is, namely, there's a conjecture
by Bergeron and Venkatesh, which says that the order of this torsion subgroup grows exponentially
in the volume of this manifold.
So the Betty number grows sublineally, but this grows exponentially in the volume, so
it's really big.
And there's a lot of evidence for this conjecture, both numerically and there are also theorems
in slightly different situations by Bergeron, Venkatesh, Bayon, Tempfaff, Rosrien, Bonn,
Jean Rambeau and others.
They all rely actually on Werner Müller's theorems on analytic torsion, so it turns
out that there's an analytic way of computing the size of this torsion subgroup, and that's
being used.
So that's one side of the picture, and now I want to speak about the relation to Galois
representation.
And so first experiments in this direction actually were made by Grunewald, who was also
here in Bonn, in the late 1970s.
Precise conjecture was made later by Avner Arsch in 1990, but I'm only going to state
a very rough theorem.
I will later make the statement more precise.
But the theorem says in particular as the following.
We assume you have some such strong one subgroup as we had, and assume that some prime divides
the order of this torsion subgroup.
Then the statement is that there will exist somewhere some Galois extension of this field
k we're interested in, I call it k-gamma p, because it depends on gamma under this prime
p I chose.
It actually depends on slightly more, but I'll suppress it.
This Galois group, so it's a group of automorphisms of this over k, is contained in this p-Gl2
of fp-bar.
fp is the field with p-element, fp is bar, so it's actually very close.
When generically it will actually be just p-Gl2 fp, which is in some sense associated
with this torsion class, and that's actually, you have to make this precise, but I won't
do it now, but in a second.
I mean this k-gamma p somewhere concretely just means that there is some polynomial as
I was writing down, like this x to the 4 minus 7x squared minus 3x plus 1, which has something
to do with this torsion class, and I wanted to say what the relation is.
Just now I want to make some comments on the theorem, so the theorem of course is more
precise.
It's also more general.
I was considering here the case of SL2 or GL2, it doesn't make a big difference over an
imaginary quadratic field, but actually you can replace GL2 by GLn, and this field may
actually be any totally real OCM field, so for example, it would also work for GLn of
the rational numbers, or for GLn of this imaginary quadratic field, or quite a large generality.
A similar result for the torsion free part had actually been obtained slightly earlier
by Harris-Landtaler and Soren, but as we saw in this case of this Bianchi manifold, this
hyperbolic sphere manifold, there's actually a lot more torsion than there is torsion free
part, so the better number is quite small, there's not so many, there's not so, a large
part of, I mean, there's a large part of the homology, I mean all the torsion that's not
covered by the result, but there's also forthcoming work of Boxer in the torsion case,
which I think reproves this result, I think it's not quite as strong, using the methods
of Harris-Landtaler and Soren, I mean, building on, so what's the relation between this torsion
class and the homology of this Bianchi manifold and this Guller extension, so I want to describe
some properties of the associated extension, so one property concerns ramifications, that
some of the statements that this 183 that you saw in the first part and the 183 that
you saw in the second part are related, so for this let's fix some n, which in this case
would be 183, such that you only put in congruence conditions moduloose number n, then what turns
out to be true is that this extension is what's called unramified and algebraic number
theory, at all primes not dividing n times p, so it's all, you must always allow ramification
that's prime p, whether it's torsion and otherwise only where you have level, so because of this
example of this very big prime dividing the torsion subgroup, it's some of the theorem
produces an interesting extension of Q adjoint i, which is ramified only at two primes,
but whose Galois group is this very very big group, and so if you try to write down by
hand something with these properties you will run into big trouble and actually the proof
of Fermat's last theorem was based on the fact that it's not possible to have something
similar over the rational numbers, so over the rational numbers it's usually not possible
to have such a Galois extension, which is only ramified at one small prime and a very
big prime whose Galois group is somehow GL2 of this very big prime, which is related
to the fact that for GL2 over the integers there would be no torsion in this localismatric
space, so the existence of these extensions of Q adjoint i is something very specific
to the imaginary quadratic case, or the case of fields other than the rational numbers.
Alright, but that gives you, I mean that's not a very precise statement about the relation
between these, the torsion class and the scalar representation, it just gives a very first
property that the scalar extension has, and so I want to describe more precisely the relationship
and for this I need to introduce HEC operators, and HEC operators, you have one for any prime
ideal of your number field, of this imaginary quadratic field here, which I should assume
is not somehow one of the bad primes here, so I look at the following subgroup, I impose
an additional congruence condition for this lower entry here, that it's 0 modulo of prime
ideal, and let's assume actually that this prime ideal is generated by one element, so
this happens for example for the Gaussian integers, which I'm interested in, then you
can conjugate by this element, which is now not in SL2, it's just in GL2, but conjugation
somehow preserves SL2 and actually gives a second map from gamma not p to gamma, so what
happens is that somehow divides c by this element xp, but because I assumed this congruence
condition is somehow now still integral and now b is multiplied by p, xp instead, and
so what you get from this is the self correspondence, so these are both finite covering maps, and
somehow you don't quite have a map from x gamma to x gamma given by the action of this
element, but some of the action of this element at least gives you a correspondence between
this, and this is still good enough, so if you add a map between too many folds you
would get a map on homology, it's covered, you still get a map if you just have a correspondence,
you can integrate along fibers, so push along this correspondence defines what's called
a HECO operator, so self map from the homology to itself, so this means that actually this
homology is not just a BN group without extra structure, it carries lots of extra endomorphisms
given by the HECO operators, and these operators commute for varying prime ideals, it's a basic
fact about them, and so in particular there exist simultaneous eigenvectors for these
tp, at least if you take homology and some other vector fields, and so now we can state
the theorem somewhat more precisely, so instead of taking, assuming that there's just some
p-torsion homology, let me actually look at, so if there's p-torsion homology, then in
particular the first homology group with fp coefficients is non-zero, now if I want eigenvectors
I better go to some algebraic closed fields, so let's look at homology with fp bar coefficients,
and then if it's non-zero then some of there are such eigenvectors for all the HECO operators,
and those I call a HECO eigenclass, and so then associated to this HECO eigenclass there
will be a Galois extension, which is somewhat what I call this case sub gamma and p previously,
whose Galois group is still somewhat contained in pg0 to fp bar, and now I should say something
about the relation between this Galois extension and these HECO operators, and so there's a
precise statement, I just want to make a slightly vague statement, that for any prime ideal I
can also look at how it decomposes in this Galois extension, so it makes it precise later,
for example you will see what this means, and this is related to the eigenvalue of the HECO
operator on this class, all right, so at this point I want to get back to the specific example
from the first slide, so in this example we had this specific congruence subgroup of SL2 and
join of the Gaussian integers, and then in this case the first betting number is actually zero,
so the first homology is just some torsion group, and I don't know whether it has now
been computed what precisely it is, but what figurators certainly computed is that it has
some non-trivial sweet torsion element, and so if I look at homology with f3 coefficients,
then there will be a HECO eigenclass alpha, it's actually already defined, the eigenvalues are
already defined over f3, I don't need to go to an algebraic closure, and so he explicitly
determined this HECO eigenclass, but as I said, this homology is just the idealization of this
group gamma, so I mean this is something you can really compute, and so for each prime which
does not divide these those bad primes given by 133, so actually in general I would also,
3 would also be a bad prime because I'm doing homology with coefficients and f3, but I mean
3 already divides 183, so I mean just 3 and 61 a bit, the eigenvalue of TP on this class
alpha will be an element of f3, or 3C, and so the element of this you can call 0 plus
minus 1, so the next slide will give you the first few primes of z a join i which do not
divide 183, and the corresponding eigenvalue of this HECO operator, and so this is something
you can easily compute on a computer, so the primes here are 1 plus i, so the norm of the
prime is always, it takes the norm of this element, so it's like in this case it's 3
squared plus 2 squared which would be 13, and so those turn out to be rational primes here,
and so over 2 there's just one prime over the other there are always two primes,
and then there would also be some which stay a prime, but I didn't go so far, and so
you can compute what the eigenvalues are, and for some reason it turns out that whenever you
have two primes which have the same norm, then the eigenvalue is the same which is not uproarly
clear anyway, so you get the sequence of numbers, for any prime you get the number which is either
one minus one or zero, so that's what you get from this purely topological business,
and there's no number zero yet, but there is a remaining row in this diagram, and so let's
fill this in, so I said that there should be a relation to this polynomial x to the fourth minus
seven x squared minus three x plus one, and more precisely there should be a relation to how p
decomposes, and concretely what this means is that one does the following, so one can look at whether
this equation that this is zero has a solution modulus prime, and you can check that what two
is x equal to one is the solution, because one minus seven minus three plus one is divisible by two,
gave some other solutions in the other cases, and in the last two cases you can check that there's no
solution, and you see that there's also a zero here, and that's not a coincidence,
oops, so let me get back to the question from the first slide, what is the relation between
the fourings, so the homology of the sky and this polynomial, and now I can give you the answer,
it's some non-ABN reciprocity law, so what happens in this example is that this color
extension corresponding to this Hecker eigenclass alpha I was considering will just be the splitting
field of this specific polynomial, and then the main result I discussed implies the following
quite concrete statement, that there is a solution to the equation that that that dies equal to zero
in this finite, I mean in mod p, if and only if the Hecker eigenvalue is non-zero,
so the way to look at this is that this is some instance of a general non-ABN reciprocity law,
which generalizes Gauss' quadratic reciprocity law, which just gives a
simplest case of here, so there's a solution to x squared plus one is equal to zero in the
mod of your p, say p is not two, p is somehow a bad prime for this equation,
and then only if p is one mod four, and so I guess this whole business of the relation
between locally symmetric spaces and color representations is somehow about generalizing
the ABN-represident reciprocity law, such as Gauss' quadratic reciprocity law,
to non-ABN extensions. What does non-ABN here mean? It just means that the Gauss group of this
extension k alpha over k is a non-ABN group, so actually the group will turn out to be the
alternating group on four letters, and what's interesting about this example is that it,
I mean this polynomial could, it's already defined over the rational numbers, in general the theorem
would only give you a polynomial with coefficients in this field k, so you could also already consider
the splitting field over the rational numbers, in that case it would correspond to what one
calls an even alternate representation over the rational numbers, and even alternate representations
they are very annoying to number series because they don't correspond to anything in the homology
of locally symmetric spaces, so it's very subtle to formulate the reciprocity law for this polynomial
over the rational numbers, but there is such reciprocity law if you go to an imaginary quadratic
field, because after you go to an imaginary quadratic field some of this evenness makes no
sense anymore. How much time do I have? A lot of time. So where does, where does this extension
actually come from? So I said that there's somewhere this, this Bianchi manifold is how
I've all extreme manifold, it starts off life as a purely topological object, and then there's
somewhere suddenly this, this polynomial generating this, which has, which has something to do with
the situation. The philosophical answer to this is that it's some kind of more key version of
the Langland's correspondence, let me briefly say what I mean by this. So if I, when instead look at
the homology not with FP, not P coefficients, but with integral coefficients or let's say with
complex coefficients, so this still somehow sees the first Betty number here, then in general by
a theorem of Franke you can relate this to the automorphic forms, well on SL2 or maybe on GL2,
doesn't really matter in this case, automorphic forms on GL2 over this field K,
and then the Langland's conjectures predict a very general relation between automorphic forms
and what in the most general case you would maybe call motives or so over this field K,
whatever they are, but concretely any motive at least gives you some Galois representation,
so some map into GL2 of QP bar, and so the idea is that if homology was QP bar coefficients
corresponds to, in some way to Galois representations with QP bar coefficients,
then maybe homology with FP bar coefficients corresponds to Galois representations with FP bar
coefficients. I mean at this point I should maybe say that I heard that at some point
van Grunewald made these computations in the late 70s, he was giving a talk which also Langland's
attended, and somehow Langland's somehow seemed to say that he totally didn't understand what he
meant, so Langland's wasn't convinced that there should be a smart P version, but it's still what
underlies philosophically this construction. So where does, okay but if he doesn't prove anything,
so where does this actually come from? How do we can we actually construct this extension?
And I mean I don't really have a good answer for this, I mean the construction for this is
extremely indirect, and I want to go through the rough construction in a second,
but I want to point out that there is a more familiar situation, a more and much more classical
situation where the relation between these homology groups and Galois representation is much
more transparent, and that's this example of the modular curve that I've been somehow running over,
so in the case where you would consider just the two-dimensional hyperbolic space and divide
by a congruent subgroup of SL2 of the integers, right, so if I take such a congruent subgroup
and I take this quotient, then hyperbolic space, two-dimensional hyperbolic space carries a canonical
complex structure because it sits inside the complex half plane, so it sits in the complex
numbers, has a complex structure which is preserved by the action, and so in fact this becomes some
Riemann curve, in fact a smooth and algebraic one, a smooth algebraic curve with the complex
numbers, and in fact this algebraic curve, if you define it through algebraic equations,
the coefficients, you can usually choose them over to be rational.
Abstractly, this may be considered as a modular space of elliptic curves, and this interpretation
makes it possible to define it over the rational numbers. Maybe I have to join some
roots of unity in general, but anyway. And so at this point, you can invoke this
Grottenich's etalc homology machinery, which says that whenever you have a variety which is defined
over the rational numbers, then there will be an action of the absolute Gaura group of q
on the homology groups, maybe not with z coefficients, but at least with zp coefficients for any p.
So in this case, the homology itself is the Gaura representation, and so you get this physical
Gaura action there, and hence these Gaura representations that you're interested in.
And so, I mean, I guess the names I should mention here are Eichler-Schmura,
Dillian, Langlunds, etc. And they are also higher dimensional, maybe I should say this,
so they are also higher dimensional analogs of this kind of situation, whereas this locally
symmetric space is defined over the rational numbers, it's an algebraic variety, etc. And
so everyone gets, again, Gaura actions on etalc homology, and this is the subject of Schmura
varieties, which studied extremely much in numbers theory, and by now we understand the
Gaura actions on the homology of Schmura varieties very well, and can construct a lot of instances
of such relations between locally symmetric space and Gaura representations, those cases which come,
which admits this algebraic structure. But in contrast, these Bianchi manifolds, they are
not at all algebraic, they don't even have a complex structure, right? I mean, if there's
something algebraic, it should at least be a complex manifold, because I'm going to pass to
the complex points, but it's real dimension is three, so there's no chance at all that this
has a complex structure, hence the algebraic structure, and there will not be any Gaura
action on its singular homology. So the Gaura action needs to come from somewhere different.
And so the steps of the construction are as follows, and I apologize that now a lot of
machinery will suddenly appear. So the first thing you do is you want to relate your, you
have this very non-algebraic guy, and you want to relate it to something which has an algebraic
structure to get your hands in any way on it. And that's done by embedding it as a boundary
component of some higher, I guess in this case, eight-dimensional manifold, complex four-dimensional
manifold corresponding to a unitary group of signature 2,2. So this locally symmetric space
for this unitary group of signature 2,2 will be non-compact, and in the Borussia compactification
that's a boundary, you will see, you will see these locally symmetric spaces for this imaginary
quadratic field. The funny thing about the Borussia compactification is that in general,
I mean it compactifies an algebraic variety, but in a very non-algebraic way, and so in the
boundary you have a chance of seeing very non-algebraic stuff. So you construct,
and there's a theory of Eisenstein series which is somehow related to the boundary, and so everything
that comes from the boundary in this business is somewhat called Eisenstein for this reason. So
Eisenstein class is just a number series named for stuff that comes from the boundary.
All right, and now you at least you are in some algebraic variety, so you feel slightly better,
but it's still a torsion class, you can't relate it to, you feel home as soon as you have some
classical automorphic representation, then you feel fine, and so that's the content of step two,
which is the only step that I contributed to here, that all cohomology classes on these
locally symmetric, I mean on these kind of locally symmetric spaces that emit a structure of algebraic
variety, on them everything can be approximated by classical automorphic forms, so technically I
said custom forms here, and so this means that we are somehow in the usual England's world now,
so we've lived, in particular we've lifted any torsion class to a characteristic zero class,
so in some sense for these kind of locally symmetric spaces which have an algebraic structure,
you can prove that there's not much torsion, all torsion can somehow be explained by stuff
that lifts the characteristic zero. What this also says is that so custom form is a technical
term for something that does not come from the boundary, so if you do it analytically then
some of custom forms are orthogonal to all the Eisenstein classes, but the theorem also tells
you that if you do this periodically then actually you can always find some congruence between stuff
that comes from the boundary, some Eisenstein class, and some custom form, so it's producing very
general congruences between stuff from the boundary and stuff from the interior,
and now you do a lot of Langdon stuff, so now you have this custom form on this unitary group,
and then there's something called automorphic functoriality, which in this case would go from
this unitary group to GL4 over this imaginary quadratic field, and actually it goes to some
specific kind of form there, and that's the kind of situation that falls into the realm of what's
called endoscopy by Langdon's, and in this case a lot of progress was made, and so for the specific
thing that I need you can get this from results of Labès, Morel in particular by Schinn, but on the
other hand because of the fundamental lemma was proved by Le Monde and Gau, and then there's a lot
of work of Alte-Bergé on the stabilization of the twisted trace formula and so on and so on and so
on, and there's a very long book by Arthur which was adapted to unitary groups by Morgh and so on,
I mean you have very general theorems of this formula that you can go from this unitary group
to GL4, and then you can go back from GL4 to a unitary group of different signatures,
we won, using essentially the same result, and then you find the Galois representation in the
etalcal module of the corresponding algebraic variety, so that's somehow the analog of what
happens for the modular curve, and so here the results are due to Kotwitz and Klosell and
then by Harris Taylor Schinn and Schinevier Harris the most general result in this case,
and so after applying all of these steps you somehow end up with a Galois representation,
but it's very indirect, all right, and so if I, yes I have time,
but in some sense steps three and four were well understood by, for some time now, even if some
of the, all the details of this were only very recently written, and the key new step in the
proof is the step two, that you can always lift everything to cost forms in this general setup,
so let me explain a bit more about this key step here, so here you have what's called a
Hermitian symmetric space, so it's one, where this also has a complex structure,
preserved as a group G, and so in this case this quotient x by gamma is a complex manifold,
but actually by a theorem of Bayesian Borel, it admits the structure of an algebraic variety
over the complex numbers, but like for the modular curve, it's even defined over a number
field, so in general it's certainly defined of a Q bar, which follows from a, from an argument
of faultings, and there are finer statements by Shimura, DeLine, etc, which I don't need this for
this, so some algebraic variety over some finite extension of Q, and to state this here I need
to make some technical assumption that this is a false type, which is satisfied in all cases of
interest. And the theorem says roughly the following, so whenever you have, so you replace
this Bianchi manifold by one, by a similar kind of gadget, which has a complex structure, an
algebraic structure, and now again you look at, so the homology was FP or FP bar coefficients,
I should have probably taken to get enough eigenclasses, so for any system of Hecker eigenvalues
which you can see in the small p-homology, you can lift all of them to the Hecker eigenvalues of
a classical cost form on x-gamma, so something which corresponds to an automorphic representation
for the scoop G.
And so this makes extensive use of the periodic geometry of this. So what I mean by this, so
the rational numbers can be completed in different ways, they can either be completed to get the
real numbers, or you can also put a different absolute value on Q, namely the periodic absolute
value, and if you compute for this you get the periodic numbers, and so because the sky lives
over the rational numbers essentially, you can also base change to a periodic field instead to
the periodic analog of the complex numbers called CP, and then there's also an analog of,
like over the complex numbers, if you have an algebraic variety, you can pass to a manifold
by taking the points, the complex points of the sky, and there's an analog of this of passing from
an algebraic variety of a periodic field to some kind of periodic analytic space.
They were first defined by TAYDAS, virtual analytic varieties, there are other formalisms now,
which work a bit more generally.
All right, so I want to, I can't go back, so
I want to, I want to say how one can get a hold of this guy here.
I just want to give you an impression of what the kind of objects are that are involved in the proof.
The first result one uses is a result from the P.A.D. Koch series. The P.A.D. Koch series is some kind
of analog of Hoch series over the complex numbers, so Hoch series over the complex numbers essentially
compares singular homology, which is a purely topological thing, with the homology of differential
forms, etc., which was suitable for certain things. For example, if you want to get the
relation between, like what Franke did, the relation between the homology of these locally
symmetric spaces and automorphic forms, you somehow have to relate the homology with some
actual functions on this space, and that's done by some form of Hoch series. And so similarly,
in this P.A.D. case, we use some form of P.A.D. Koch series, and so what this does is it compares
mod P homology or homology with this slightly weird object, the entire homology of mod P.C.U.S.
forms. I don't want to say what I mean by this. So such as the result was first stated by Falking's
2002 and a more general form was proved in my paper on P.A.D. Koch series.
And then one makes a very funny operation. So one can, so if in the comp, let me go to the locally
symmetric space again. So there if you shrink the level more and more, so in the inverse limit,
you get essentially back the symmetric space X. And there's some kind of analog of this
operation in the periodic world, where you don't need to shrink the level completely,
you just need to shrink it overall, putting more and more congruences at P. And it's not clear that
you can do such an operation in the world of periodic geometry, but there's this notion of a
perfectoid space, which is hard to explain intuitively, and this gadget turns out to be
an example of such a guy. And one of the weird properties of perfectoid space allows you to
replace this fancy etalc homology and what is arched by Grotendijk by a much more elementary
concept than the Czech homology, where you just cover your space by some opens and then build some
easy chain complex using the values of this, using some of the cusp forms on these pieces.
Something critical ingredient, the third critical ingredient is
a periodic analog of the embedding of X into its compact dual. Let me just say what this means
in the simplest case. So I said that this fancy perfectoid space here should be sort of as a
periodic analog of just the symmetric space X. And so the symmetric space X, say if it's
hyperbolic to space, it embeds into the one-dimensional complex projective line, which is some compact
variety. And so in the periodic world, you have a similar map to some classical compact variety.
If you did the modular curves, then here it would just again be P1. So you have this map.
And all right. Using this map, you can somehow actually get a hold on the complex that computes
these mod P cusp forms here. Technically, you get some, this map is a finite in some sense. So if
you take some nice cover of here, you can pull it back, get some nice cover here, use this to build
the cache complex. And then it's critical that this map has some nice properties with respect
to the hack operators. And these allow you to, well, sorry, it's the first step. You have a relation
to cusp forms, but they are still mod P. And what you need to do is somehow, and they only live on
some affinity pieces. And what you need to do is approximate them by characteristic zero global
cusp forms. And that's what possible, what is possible using this hot state period map. But I'll
stop here. Thank you very much for this lecture. All the questions.
There are no questions. Just to thank you. Can you roughly explain where the symmetry comes in,
where you need it? You mean like in these local symmetric spaces? Yes.
Um, no, I mean,
well, you need a space with a high group of symmetries because you want to take these
quotients by these arithmetic groups. So you need a space where this arithmetic group can act.
And so you need a space which is highly symmetric to begin with.
So you mentioned this conjecture, does it have some bearing on this conjecture?
No, I think those are just two different directions. But I think it's an interesting conjecture to
have in mind in order to appreciate what it means to talk about the torsion class.
Um, yeah. And I mean, the methods used to attack this conjecture are very different.
