Welcome back to Carnitides.org. Today we're going to be continuing with our
series on Bayesian epistemology. In this video we're going to be looking at
inductive rationality, also known as the Dutch book arguments for Bayesian
epistemology. Now if you haven't watched the other videos in this series and
you're unfamiliar with Bayesian epistemology, I would strongly suggest
that you go ahead and do that now. This is one of the most complicated series
that we've done so far, so you might want to look into some of the
background information before you dive headfirst into this. But if you're
confident or you've already watched those videos, follow me and let's get
started. So before we get going on what Dutch book arguments look like for
epistemology, let's talk about what a Dutch book is in gambling. So the house
or the casino or the person that's offering the bets has a Dutch book if,
no matter what the outcome of a gambling event, they will make money.
Basically, a Dutch book is a really good thing to have if you're a bookie or a
casino. So imagine a Greyhound race that has the following odds. So we have three
dogs in this race. Dog number one has even odds. Dog number two would pay two
to one and dog number three pays three to one. If you don't know much about
probability, basically that means if I bet $1 on dog one and he won, I would get
my dollar back and another dollar. If I bet $1 on dog two and he won, I would get
my dollar back and two more dollars. If I bet $1 on dog three, I would get my
dollar back and three more dollars. Okay? Now, the total number of bets that the
casino has for dog one are $100. Doesn't matter if it's individuals paying those
bets or one person who just bet $100 on dog one. For dog number two, the total of
number of bets is $66. And for dog number three, the total number of bets is $50.
Now, the casino will have to pay out if dog number one wins $200 because it's even
odd. So they just have to pay back the $100 that were bet plus another $100. Now,
if dog number two won, and yes, I'm fudging the mathematics here a little bit, it should be a
little bit less than 200, but let's leave it alone for now. The casino would pay out about
$200 because they would have to pay out the $66 plus two more 66s. 66 times three is
close enough to 200 that we're just going to call it even. And finally, if dog number three won,
the casino would also have to pay out $200 because 50, they would pay back the 50 that was
originally bet and then three more 50s, 50 times four equals 200. Note that the total number of
odds are more than one. This is important for this to work out correctly. Because the total
number of odds are more than one, the total number of bets, if the payouts are all going to be
equals in fact more than 200. So no matter who wins, the casino will pay out $200, but they've
already taken in $216. Therefore, they have a Dutch book. No matter what happens, no matter which dog
wins the race, they're going to make money. They're going to make $16. It may not seem like a lot,
but if you're betting with a lot more than just $100, it makes a big difference.
So before we get into exactly what Dutch books are in epistemology, we're going to talk about
contradictions and rationality for deductive logic, not for inductive logic. So if a person believes
that both P and not P, we might say that their beliefs violate the laws of deductive logic. We
might say that they are irrational. They are not rational. They believe both P and not P are the
case. We might also say this of a person, if they believe P, P implies Q and not Q, because even
though they don't believe a contradiction, they believe a set of propositions that using modus
ponens will lead to a contradiction. The question is, what can we say of a person that thinks it is
both likely that P and that is likely that not P? They seem just as irrational as the person that
believes both P and not P. And yet, nothing in the laws of deductive logic will allow us to
say that they are irrational or say that their beliefs in some way violate those laws.
This is what the Dutch book arguments are going to tackle. So to do this, we need to talk about
degrees of belief and exactly what those look like. The Dutch book arguments rely on the following
definition of a certain degree of belief. So you know, at the end of this video, we're going to kind
of step back from this definition and offer a broader one that will apply to all of Bayesian
epistemology. This one is just really good to get your intuition going and understand why these
Dutch book arguments are so important. So subject S has degree of belief X in proposition P, where
X is a number between zero and one inclusive, just like the probabilities, with one as certainty in P
and zero as certainty and not P, if and only if S is willing to accept buying a wager that pays
$1 for X dollars or less and would sell such a wager for X dollars or more. If that doesn't make
sense to you, that's okay. We're going to look at a couple of examples. So imagine that we have a
set of people, Clive, Lucy, Umi, and Nancy. They each have a different degree of belief in some
proposition P. Clive has degree of belief one. He is certain that P completely, unabashedly,
certain that P. Lucy, she thinks that P, she thinks it's likely that P, she has a 0.75 degree of
belief in P, but she's not 100% certain that P. Umi, she's split halfway and halfway.
She doesn't think that P. She doesn't think that not P. She's right in the middle. She has a 0.5
degree of belief in P, and Nancy has a 0 degree of belief in P. She is certain that not P. She is
certain that P is not the case. What this means is that Clive would buy a wager for up to a dollar
that would only pay back a dollar in P. He is so certain that P. He would pay a dollar with the only
possibility of winning back that same dollar that he paid on a bet that P. It also means that there
is no way he would sell this wager, or there's no way he would bet that not P unless he was allowed
to bet $0 and possibly win $1. Lucy, on the other hand, will buy a wager that P for up to
$0.75. She'd buy it for less, just as Clive would buy the same wager for less than a dollar.
But Lucy would buy it for up to $0.75, a wager that P. She would pay $0.75 with the only hope of
winning her $0.75 and $0.25 more back if P ended up being the case. She would also bet against P.
She would bet that not P for up to $0.25. She's not that sure that not P, but it's possible that
not P. She's not like Clive. She's not certain that not P is impossible. So she'd pay up to $0.25
with the possibility of winning basically on three to one odds or winning her $0.25 back and another
$0.75. Umi, because she's split halfway, is willing to buy the bet for $0.50 with the possibility
of winning $0.50 or sell the bet for $0.50 or bet against P for $0.50 with the possibility of
winning $0.50. She wouldn't bet more one way or more the other way. And Nancy, similar to Clive,
on the other end of the spectrum, will not buy a bet for P for anything but $0 with the possibility
of winning $1. On the other hand, she would bet that not P for a dollar with the only possibility
of winning back that one dollar. Hopefully, this gives you a little bit of a sense of what we mean
by degrees of belief and how these are going to play into the Dutch book arguments. Like I said,
this isn't exactly how or the most charitable way to understand the final definition we're
going to come to for degrees of belief, but it's a good helpful stepping stone on the way there.
So finally, we come to what is a Dutch book in epistemology? What is a belief Dutch book?
A person holds a set of degrees of belief that constitute a Dutch book, if and only if,
they would make a series of wagers, which would guarantee them a loss, no matter the outcome.
So unlike the casino, for which a Dutch book is a good thing, if a person has a Dutch book of
beliefs, that's a bad thing, because no matter what happens, it means that they would end up with
a loss. This should be making you think of the person that thinks it's both likely that P and
likely that not P, because if they made both of those bets, no matter what, it would guarantee
them a loss. If that didn't make sense, we're going to look at a specific example of something
called a synchronic Dutch book. This is the first type of Dutch book we're going to look at. This
is a set of degrees of beliefs that a person holds at the same time that will result in a net loss.
The person we're talking about here is Sven. So Sven has a .51 degree of belief in P, so he
would buy a bet up to 51 cents for P, with the hope of winning back his 51 cents and 49 more.
The problem is Sven is inductively irrational. He is in a synchronic Dutch book. He also has
a .51 degree of belief in not P. What that means is he would buy a bet that not P also for up to
51 cents. You should note that because his degrees of belief in P and not P add up to more than one,
he's going to end up having a problem in the same way that when all of our odds added up to
more than one in the casino example, they were in a Dutch book and they were doing well.
Basically, Sven has a Dutch book of degrees of belief. Imagine that we sold Sven a wager
that P for 51 cents and we also sold Sven a wager that not P for 51 cents. Right now,
we have a dollar and two cents of Sven's money. The most money that Sven can win because it's
impossible that both P and not P is one dollar back and we will always keep his two cents,
no matter what happens. Basically, no matter P or not P, Sven is guaranteed to lose two cents.
Therefore, he is in a synchronic Dutch book. Now, things are going to get complicated. So,
what we have now is a diachronic Dutch book. This, like I said, it's a little more complicated,
but this is where we're going to get into the conditional probabilities and bring back some
of the things we learned about Bayes' theorem and Bayesian epistemology. So, a diachronic Dutch
book is a set of degrees of belief that a person holds at different times that will always result
in a net loss. Usually, a diachronic Dutch book arises when someone incorrectly reassesses their
degrees of belief based on conditional probabilities. If that was confusing, we're going to try to take
it back and look at an example. So, imagine Fleur. Fleur has a set of degrees of belief of a series
of propositions. So, statement R, the initial probability Fleur has for R, the initial degree
of belief she has is 0.2, which means she would wage her 20 cents on a one dollar bet. Fleur
also has a degree of belief for statement Q. It also happens to be 0.2. Once again,
meaning that she would wager 20 cents for a dollar bet. Little i at the end of that means
that's her initial probability, that's starting out before she's gained any more information.
Her probability that both R and Q, she's going to assess as 0.1, so she would bet 10 cents on
a dollar bet that both R and Q. So far, so good. She's not irrational. This makes sense.
Now, she has the conditional probability of R given that Q of 0.5. If you go through and use
Bayes's theorem, you'll see that this is correct. We remember that that's going to be 0.1 over 0.2,
which ends up as 0.5. It's basically a half, which is the decimal points moved around a little bit.
So that is the correct conditional probability for her. The reason that Fleur is going to end
up in a Dutch book is because when she is shown that Q, instead of reassessing her probability
that R, 2.5, her final probability that R is going to be reassessed as 0.6. She's going to
incorrectly change her degree of belief in R. She should have changed it to 0.5 when she was shown
the Q. But she doesn't use Bayes's theorem. She doesn't use the Bayesian model we learned about
in the last video. So she's going to reassess it 2.6 instead. This may not seem like the same kind
of irrationality that we saw in the previous example, but in fact, it is. Let's take a look at
the way this works out with wagers to get a sense of why that is. So imagine the house
sells Fleur the following wagers. First off, a wager that will pay 10 cents if Q is true for
2 cents. This should make sense instead of paying 20 cents for a dollar wager. She's paying 2 cents
for a 10 cent wager. The percentages work out. We're just shifting it by an order of 10. The
house is also going to sell Fleur a wager that pays 1 dollar if not R is true conditional on Q
for 50 cents. This is going with her initial probability for R given that Q that was correctly
assessed using Bayes's theorem. So this wager will pay 1 dollar if not R is true and Q is true.
If Q is not true, the wager will be called off and Fleur won't win anything if Q is true and
not R is false or R is true. So there's a series of scenarios that might happen. First off, Q
might be false. We just had two wagers to assess them. First off, a wager that pays 10 cents if Q
is true for only 2 cents. Fleur is going to go ahead and lose 2 cents on this wager. And the second
wager is going to be called off because it was conditional on Q being true. Since Q is false,
the wager is called off and Fleur nets a loss of 2 cents. Now that we know Q is true, Fleur
reassesses her probability that R to 0.6 when she sort of reassesses it to 0.5. So the house is going
to sell Fleur the following additional wager, a wager that pays 1 dollar back if R is true for
60 cents. Note that if she had have correctly reassessed her probability 2.5, she wouldn't be
in this situation and she wouldn't pay up to 60 cents. And that paying up to 60 cents is what
sticks her in this diachronic Dutch book. So there are two more possibilities for us to assess.
Q is true and R is true. We have three wagers now to look at. On the first wager, Fleur is going to
win 8 cents because she was right and Q is true. On the second wager, she's going to lose 50 cents
because she was betting that not R is true and R ended up being true. And on the final wager,
she's going to win 40 cents because R ended up being true. She paid in 60, wins back a dollar,
so she wins 40 cents. Overall, she wins a total of 48 cents and loses a total of 50 cents. So she
is a net loss of 2 cents, just like in the previous example. Fleur is still netting a loss of 2 cents.
The only other possibility we have to look at is if Q is true and R is false now. We once again
have these three wagers to look at. Fleur is still going to win the 8 cents on the first wager
because Q is still true. On the second wager this time, she's going to win 50 cents because she
bet that not R is true, R was false, so she wins that 50 cents. But on the last wager, she's going
to lose 60 cents because she paid in 60, she didn't win it, so the 60 stays with the bank,
the 60 stays with the casino. So she wins a total of 58 cents and loses a total of 60 cents,
once again netting her a loss of 2 cents. The point is no matter what happens with R and Q,
based on these probabilities, Fleur is going to lose money.
Now, Fleur is in what we would call a diachronic Dutch book. No matter what the outcome is,
she will lose because she reassessed her probabilities incorrectly. Basically,
what this argument is for is to show that you need to use Bayes' theorem to reassess your
probabilities to stay rational. If you don't, you are irrational.
Just like believing a contradiction, if you hold a series of degrees of belief that constitute a
Dutch book, you're fighting against the laws of logic. They're the inductive laws of logic,
not the deductive laws of logic, but they're the laws of logic, nonetheless.
Now, it's important to note, and this is kind of the addendum that I mentioned earlier,
to take the arguments as literally talking about wages is going to be uncharitable because
no one in their right mind would bet a dollar on a wager that they're only going to win that
same dollar back. That doesn't make sense. The best way to assess them or understand them is kind
of as a tool for pragmatic self-defeat. If it happens that you hold a set of degrees of belief
that would constitute a Dutch book and would cause you, if you followed the wagering to
enter into those wagers, then you should revise those beliefs in the same way
that you would if you discovered you believed something that entailed a contradiction or that
you believed a contradiction. Alright, so that was the Dutch book arguments. In the next video,
we're going to take a look at how those arguments built into Bayesian confirmation theory. That's
going to be a two-part video because it's a lot of information. After that, we're going to take a
look at variations on Bayesianism and finally, some objections to Bayesian epistemology.
Watch this video and more here at Carnades.org. Check out the SEP for more information. This is
a complicated topic, so thanks for sticking with me and stay skeptical, everybody.
