Welcome back to carnades.org. Today we're going to be continuing with our series on
Bayesian confirmation theory and the paradox of dogmatism as part of our larger series
in Bayesian epistemology. In this video, we're going to be looking at entailment. This is
going to be conditionals and implications in Bayesian epistemology. This may be one
of the most complicated videos in the whole series, so if you're not caught up, you should
do that now. So, entailment is basically an implication, if there's an implication between
the hypothesis and the evidence that you're looking at. And what we're going to look at
is what you can conclude about the evidence and about the hypothesis if you have that
implication in place. So, if H entails E, then E is going to confirm H. In most cases,
think about that for a second. If H entails E, so if H implies E, if H then E, then seeing
that H is going to confirm, or rather seeing that E is going to confirm that H. This may
seem like assuming the consequent here, but it's not, and we're going to look at why.
The couple of caveats that we're going to put on this that we're going to examine near
the end of the video are, this works so long as our initial degree of belief in E is not
one or zero, and our initial degree of belief in H is not one or zero. If H entails E, then
basically what that means translated in a kind of Bayesian language is that our degree
of belief in H and not E is zero. We have no belief in H and not E because that's the
only way an entailment can be false if the antecedent is true and the consequent is
false. If our degree of belief in E is not one, then our degree of belief in not E and
not H has to be greater than zero. So our degree of belief in H contingent on E must be
greater than our degree of belief in H. If that was a little confusing, just spoken out
in words, we're going to take a look at some numbers and some specifics that hopefully are
going to put a little bit more of a face on this thing. So imagine that H is it is raining,
probability that it's raining, our initial probability of that, we're going to call that
X. Not E is going to be, John does not have his umbrella, probability of not E initial,
we're going to call Y. Now we have the entailment, if it is raining, then John has his umbrella.
If we look at all of these things, what that means is the probability of H and not E must
equal zero. If that entailment is true, there's no way that it could be raining and John not
have his umbrella. That's just what entailment means. It's also going to mean that Y is going
to be equal to the probability of not E initial and the probability of not H and not E. Because
basically the only possible outcome, if John does not have his umbrella, is that it is not
raining. Because it's impossible for John to not have his umbrella and for it to be raining,
if John does not have his umbrella, if that evidence is not the case, then the hypothesis
must not be the case. That's just following Modus Tolens. And the only possible outcome,
if it is raining, is that John in fact has his umbrella. If the last one was Modus Tolens,
this is Modus Ponens. It's basically saying the probability of E and H initial is always going
to be equal to the probability of H initial or X. So, with that in mind, saying that H implies E
and E and H don't equal one or zero, we'll look at those cases at the end. X is going to represent
H, Y is going to represent not E. We've already said that the probability of H and not E, so
the probability of this conditional being false is zero. We have zero degree of belief in that.
That means we can fill in this X also as the probability of H and E, remembering that that
can't equal zero or one, and Y as not H and not E, also remembering that can't equal zero or one.
Then we can fill in the probability of not H as one minus X, just going down that total column,
and in the same way we can fill in one minus Y as the probability of E going across that total row.
And finally, the probability of not H and E is going to be one minus X minus Y. The important
thing to note out of all this information is that our probability of E is going to be
less than one and greater than zero. Because Y can't be one, it's impossible for it to be zero,
because one minus one is the only thing that would give us zero. And because Y can't be zero,
it can't be one. The probability of E can't be one, because only one minus zero would give us one.
It has to be, in fact, some number in between one and zero, because our degree of belief are Y,
can't be anything other than zero through one inclusive. Once we've chopped off the end point,
it's just zero through one exclusive. It's important to remember for our next step.
So we already have the probability initial of H is equal to X, the probability initial of not E
is equal to Y, and the probability of E and H initial is equal to X. And we want to now check
out the probability of H final or the probability of H given that E. Well, we can use Bayes's
theorem once again to find this. This will go ahead and give us X over one minus Y,
which we found out from the last problem is going to be what our probability of E initial is going
to be. And we know that X over one minus Y has to be greater than X. How do we know this?
We can tell this because one minus Y is going to be a number in between zero or one. Anything
over a number in between zero or one is going to be greater than that number. It's going to get
bigger. So our final probability that H are X over one minus Y is going to have to be greater than
is going to have to be bigger than our probability that H initial or X, which means this has to
confirm our evidence has to confirm the hypothesis based on the entailment. Or in other words,
because one minus Y has to be a number less than one greater than zero, X over one minus Y has to
be bigger than X. Therefore, if the conditional if it is raining, then John has his umbrella is true,
and we are not certain if John has his umbrella or is raining, then John having his umbrella confirms
that it is raining. It provides support for that. It makes it more likely that it is raining. It
should, if we are being inductively rational, give us a higher degree of belief that it is raining.
So now that we've dealt with the general entailment case, we're going to talk about the specifics of
why certain things can't be zero or one. Imagine that you're certain that is the case that John
has his umbrella. You are certain that E. In this case, discovering that John has his umbrella would
not change your opinion on the subject at all. You're already certain. Therefore, such evidence
would do nothing to confirm the hypothesis. Therefore, the probability of not E initial
can't be zero. Let's take a look at that. So if we already have, because of our entailment,
that the probability of H and not E is zero, but then fill in the rest of our column for not E as
zero, there's no way we can confirm with E that H, because we've already said that E is the case.
No matter what we do, E has to be the case. We haven't seen the evidence, but we have the
certain degree of belief in E. So then seeing further evidence isn't going to make us be
more convinced that E. So it's possible for this not to confirm if we already believe that E.
If you have a degree of belief of E of one and a degree of belief of not E of zero,
you are not going to confirm H by believing that E or coming to believe that E or seeing
that E is the case. Basically, if you're already certain that some evidence is the case, then
that evidence being shown to you will not cause you to change your degrees of belief. That seems to
make sense intuitively. If you already believe something to be the case, it'd be strange if
you're seeing that change your degrees of belief in other propositions. Conversely, imagine now that
you're certain that it's not raining. You're certain that H is not the case. Once you've reached
this conclusion in order to stay Dutch book rational, no evidence can change your mind.
Therefore, if your initial belief in H is zero, then neither E nor any evidence will confirm H
for you. You can never come to believe it and be rational, because you're already convinced that H
is simply not the case, that it's not raining. So no matter what you see going on, you're never
going to be convinced that it's raining because you're already certain. Once again, we fill in
a zero here, but this time we're going to zero out that top row saying that H is not the case.
We're certain that H is not the case. It should be clear that changing our probabilities from
not E to E, there's no way we're going to change what our belief is in H, because our belief in H
is zero across the board. If it's zero total with or without E, it's not going to be anything
different with E or with not E. So the probability of H also cannot be zero for our evidence that E
to confirm H. In other words, if you're certain that a particular hypothesis is or is not the case,
then no evidence will ever confirm it, disconfirm it, or cause you to change your degree of belief.
Now this curiosity goes a little bit deeper and we want to talk more about these in the
objections to come. If you're certain that not E, then even if you're shown that E is the case,
you cannot stay rational and hold that E, nor would this evidence confirm the hypothesis or even
convince you of it. If you are certain that John does not have his umbrella, even if you see John
with his umbrella, you cannot rationally change your mind, nor will this confirm for you that it's
raining. In fact, you can't even rationally conclude that it's raining if you see rain,
because you're already going to be committed to a very specific situation. It'll go like this.
If E and H are both going to be zero, we zero out this column for E that causes H to zero out as
well. The only possibility that you can believe in, if you believe the conditional and believe the
probability of E is zero, is that John does not have his umbrella and it is not raining. And if
you are certain that that there is nothing that can change your mind about it. Similarly, if you're
already convinced that H, no evidence can ever confirm or disconfirm it, therefore E will not
confirm it. If you are already convinced it's raining, then seeing John with or without his
umbrella will do nothing to your belief that it is raining. Interestingly, you're actually committed
to John having his umbrella in the case and no evidence can rationally persuade you otherwise,
even seeing clear skies or John without his umbrella, which would seem to contradict that.
If we have our conditional at zeros out H and not E, but we're saying that we're certain that H,
we're certain of the hypothesis, so we have to put ones through there which will zero out our not
H row and our not E column. Having the only possible thing we can believe is that both H and E are
the case. Basically, unlike deductive rationality where once you discover that you hold contradictory
beliefs, you can change them. In inductive rationality, once you believe something for
certain, if you ever change that belief, you are irrational and you can't do anything to change that.
This is because the rational process of changing beliefs is exactly what's at issue. What we're
talking about with Bayesian epistemology is what you have to do to change your beliefs,
the rational process to change your beliefs. So if you change your beliefs for a reason
other than those proscribed in Bayesian epistemology, you are being irrational and we can show that
you're being irrational with a Dutch book. It may seem irrational to hold on to something in the
face of changing evidence, but if you're certain that something, that's what that means. To be
certain of something means that no matter what evidence you see, you have to hold on to that
belief. So that was entailment in Bayesian epistemology. Next up, we're talking about Bayesian
dogmatism and then the new paradox of dogmatism, which hopefully you've gotten a little hint at
already. Watch this video and more here at carnades.org. Check out the SEP for more information
on Bayesian epistemology. All of the information I'm getting from this series is coming straight
from the SEP. So if you want another source, check that out and stay skeptical, everybody.
