Welcome back to Carnedades.org. Today, we're going to be continuing our series on Bayesian
epistemology with the last part of this very long series, which is going to be objections
to Bayesian epistemology. Now, because these objections are pretty long and complicated,
we are going to be doing another mini series within our larger series on Bayesian epistemology.
In this video, I'm just going to introduce the objections we're going to be looking at.
And in the following videos, we will take a look at those objections in more detail.
So the first objection we're going to be looking at to Bayesian epistemology is the immutability
of logic, the requirement of Bayesian epistemology for logic to be certain or logic to be immutable.
Next up, we'll take a look at the problem of logical omnipotence, the requirement of
Bayesianism that you must be logically omnipotent to use it. Problem of uncertain evidence. And
then we're going to look at a possible solution from the Bayesian side called Geoffrey Conditionalization.
Pretty interesting. If you're up on Bayesian epistemology, it's a pretty cool thing to
check out. Next, we'll take a look at the problem of old evidence. Then we'll look at
the problem of prediction versus accommodation. How can we judge theories, one that predicts
versus one that accommodates. Then we will take a look at the problem of new theories
and how those are taken into account under Bayesian epistemology. And finally, we will
take a look at something called the problem of the priors, which to my way of thinking
is in itself a damning enough problem for all of Bayesian epistemology. It's very central
and very problematic. It really, to me, digs to the heart of why Bayesian epistemology
doesn't really work. So stay tuned for that. Once again, that's immutability, logical omnipotence,
uncertain evidence, old evidence prediction versus accommodation, new theories, the problem
of the priors. Watch this video and more here at carnades.org. Check out the SEP for more
information on all of these objections as well as some more. Stay skeptical everybody.
