Hi, welcome to our lecture on models involving logarithmic and exponential functions. Now
we've seen some models already. We talked about compound interest, radioactive decay,
and in the last lecture we even looked at a fairly complicated model involving the heights
of men and women. Today I'd like to show some models a little more complicated perhaps or
more interesting involving the exponential and logarithmic functions. Now this is a tough
topic because models often might seem very simple because it's difficult to explain a
complicated model in such short time. So you'll have to bear with me if the models look kind
of naive at times, but then I'll show you some models also that are very very accurate and hence
they'll have some ugly numbers in them. Perhaps the simplest model of all that is used in applied
mathematics is the exponential growth model and in its simplest form it's the function y equals
Ae to the Bx. A and B are constants to be determined by the model being considered. X is the
variable and B generally is greater than 0 if you have exponential growth and if B is less than
0 it would be exponential decay as in radioactivity. And in fact the simplest of all these models of
exponential growth would just be y equals e to the x. But now we'll massage it a bit and accept
models of the form Ae to the Bx. Here's our friendly graph of e to the x and the graph of Ae to the
Bx where A and B are constants to be determined will look somewhat like this graph. Okay let me
show you a simple example. This example is very very simple so you might complain a little bit
about how the numbers come out, but I want to illustrate the idea of how to model with an
exponential equation. Suppose you have a research experiment going on and you have a population of
fruit flies and it's increasing according to the law of exponential growth. And suppose after two
days you count the flies and you have a thousand and after four days you count them and you have
three thousand. So according to this model how many flies will you have say after five days? So
let's explore this model. We're going to assume that the fruit flies grow as the exponential model
Ae to the B and I won't use x now I'll use t because time. So we'll use Ae to the Bt. And we have
some equations we can form because we were told that at time two there were one thousand flies. So
when t equals two y is a thousand and also when t is four y is three thousand. So we plug those
numbers into the model. One thousand equals Ae to the two B, t is two, and then three thousand equals
Ae to the four B. Okay, two equations, two unknowns. Maybe we can solve for A and B. Let's try to do
it. Okay, the first equation, one thousand equals Ae to the two B, I can solve for A in that equation
in terms of B and get A equals one thousand divided by e to the two B. Now take the second equation
and plug in this new value of A. So three thousand equals Ae to the four B, but instead of A put in
one thousand divided by e to the two B times e to the four B. So now I have an equation with just
the unknown B. Good, let's simplify it. The three thousand and the one thousand's cancel to make a
three. And remember that exponent rule, e to the four B divided by e to the two B, you subtract the
exponents, don't you? So we're left with e to the two B on the right hand side. Okay, three equals
e to the two B. What's B? Ah, it's hiding up there at the next exponent. Bring it down to earth. Take
logs of both sides. The log of three would be the log of e to the two B by the inverse properties
that's equal to two B, divide by two, and we have the value of B. It's one half log three. Good, we
got one of the two constants. What about A? Well, go back to the equation for A as one thousand over e
to the two B and plug in this value of B. It looks a little messy, but some nice cancellations will
occur. A equals one thousand divided by e to the two B, and instead of B, I put one half log three.
Don't panic. It's not so bad. The two and the one half cancel, don't they? And you're left with e to the
log three. Oh, inverse functions. You're left with just three in the denominator. How pleasant. A is
nothing more than one thousand over three, or approximately three hundred and thirty three point
three three. Good. Here's our model now. We know the A value. It's three hundred and thirty three point
three three. We know the B value. It's one half log three, which on my calculator tells me it's
about point five four nine three. So my exponential model for this situation is three hundred and
thirty three point three three times e to the power point five four nine three t. Okay, so there's our
model. Not a very pleasant model. We ask the question, what happens after five days? Plug in five. When
you plug in five, and with your calculator, you determine that you have about five thousand one hundred
and ninety six fruit flies. Let's look at a picture of this model. Here I've used a graphing calculator to
graph the curve of the model that we just derived. Notice some of the features of this curve. At time
two, when t is two, the model says that y is one thousand. When t is four, the model is three thousand. And
the answer when t was five is five thousand one hundred and ninety six. Here's a question for you. Oh,
by the way, before I do the question, notice the shape. It's our exponential growth, isn't it? That
looks like the exponential function. Here's a question for you. What was the initial population of
fruit flies? What did we start out with? We'll look back at the model. When t is zero in this model, you
get e to the zero, which is one. And so y is nothing more than three hundred and thirty three point
three three. Now, you don't you can't have a third of a fruit fly. So it's approximately three hundred
and thirty three. So in this picture, the curve goes back and touches the y axis at about point or
three hundred and thirty three. There's something else you might notice here, kind of an interesting
side light. Look how this model works. At time zero, there's three hundred and thirty three. Two days
later, it tripled to a thousand. Two days later, it tripled again to three thousand. You could say
that two days is the tripling time for this model. Kind of neat. It's kind of like half life, but now
it's tripling time. Speaking of half life, let's turn to carbon dating again. In a living organism,
in organic material, it turns out that the ratio of the content of radioactive carbon isotopes,
that's carbon 14, that ratio to the content of non radioactive carbon isotopes, carbon 12, is
approximately one to ten to the twelfth power. In other words, there's not much radioactive carbon.
However, when the organic material dies, true, the carbon 12 content remains the same,
but the radioactive carbon, the carbon 14 begins to decay and its half life is five thousand seven
hundred and fifteen years. Well, that's kind of how carbon dating works. Let's look at a specific
example. Suppose you have a four gram sample of carbon 14. So here we are, four grams of carbon
14. How much will you have after a thousand years? How much carbon 14 will you have after a thousand
years? Let's solve this problem. Well, our model is radioactive decay. It's exponential decay.
So we'll use the same formula, y equals a e to the bt, but we expect b now to be a negative number,
don't we? All right, what's a? Well, a is the initial amount. When t is zero, e to the zero is one,
so I know a is four right away. The only question is what's b? Let's solve for b. I started with four.
The half life is five thousand seven hundred and fifteen. So when t equals that number,
the amount is two. So I have the equation two equals four times e to the power five thousand seven
hundred and fifteen b. And now we solve this for b. We've done this before, haven't we? b is hiding
up as an exponent. Let's bring it down to earth. How about if I first divide by four and I get one
half equals e to the power b times five thousand seven hundred and fifteen? Take logs of both sides.
You know the dance now, I think. And the log in the e cancel and I have log of a half equals b times
five thousand seven hundred and fifteen divided by that number. And we finally have the value of b.
It's approximately minus zero point zero zero zero one two one three. That's an approximation
of the quotient log of one half divided by five thousand seven hundred and fifteen.
Notice something here. It's a negative number, isn't it? Thank goodness,
because we have decay going on. Log of a half in the numerator there is a negative number,
isn't it? Remember, log of one is zero. But if you're below one in between zero and one,
logarithms there are negative. So thank goodness we got a negative answer.
So we now know the model. The model for radioactive decay of carbon-14 is given by y equals four e
to that power, to that exponential power, that decimal power. And to find out how much
radium you have, not radium, carbon-14 you have after one thousand years, plug in one thousand
with your calculator you determine it's about three point five four grams. You started out with four
and after a thousand years you still got a lot. You still got three point five four grams.
Here's a picture again of this situation and I did it with a graphing calculator.
Notice that at a thousand we have about three point five four. We started at four and then it
decayed off and I've also plotted the half-life. When time is five thousand seven hundred and fifteen
we have two grams. Okay, let's turn to a new class of models, Gaussian models. These are really
neat I think and a little more complicated unfortunately. These are commonly used in
probability and statistics and they represent populations that are so-called normally distributed.
That basically means the population is in the shape of one of those bell-shaped curves. In a
minute I'll show you a picture of a bell-shaped curve. So what do these models look like? Well
they involve the exponential function and some constants and here is the general model y equals
a e to a certain exponent and this exponent's a little ugly. It's minus x minus b squared
divided by c. So there are three unknown constants in the Gaussian model a b and c.
One of the most popular or well-known Gaussian models is when a is one over the square root
of two pi and a minute I'll tell you where that came from and then b is zero and c is two and that
would be one over square root of two pi times e to the power minus x squared divided by two. Here's
a picture of that curve. That's a picture of the model I just talked about. It's that normal
distribution. It's the distribution perhaps of heights of humans some of them the average
heights in the middle and then over to the right the humans are perhaps taller. There's not as many
over there and then not as many shorter and the average is right in the middle and an interesting
fact about this curve the area under that curve and above the x-axis is precisely one unit one
square unit. Okay so let's do a an example or a model using the Gaussian model. Here we go.
Maybe you've taken the SAT test. I took it when I was younger an unpleasant experience
and the scores of the SATs are published and it turns out that in 2005 the SAT math scores for
college-bound seniors roughly followed a normal distribution. They roughly followed a bell-shaped
curve and here was the the bell-shaped curve for the SAT scores that year and how did they get this
model? Well they knew it was going to follow a bell-shaped curve and they had all the data
and a computer then generated the model. It's kind of a messy model because this is a real life
application. This is based on true statistics and here it is y equals 0.0035 e to a power and the
power is minus the quantity x minus 520 squared divided by 26,450 and x is between 200 and 800
and that's the range of SAT scores between 200 and 800 at least back in 2005.
I like to tell my students the following when I do this. It's sort of a bell-shaped curve and the
average score is there is the high point and then you have students off there to the right
and the students off to the right I like to say are the University of Florida students
and then you have a few students over there on the other side of the average score and I like to
call them the University of Georgia or Florida State students. It usually gets a laugh from my
own students but I don't think my rival universities think it's very funny. All right good models so
far good models let's turn now to a model that appears a lot in calculus books now it's called
the logistic growth model and again it's an exponential function that describes a certain
kind of growth pattern of a population. The logistic growth models are usually used
when you have a population that might grow very very quickly for a while and then the growth rate
kind of levels off it doesn't grow as fast that could be due for example because the population
runs out of food so it grows real fast and then hey there's no more food left so the the reproduction
rate goes down or there's not enough room they they fill out the the petri dish and the bacteria
can't grow anymore because there's no room for them so these patterns are it has a low rate and
then it grows real quickly and then it kind of levels off again and the function that describes
this behavior is again not so pleasant but it's of the following form y equals a divided by one
plus b e to the minus r x power so it's a function of of that form and a b and r depend on the data
okay let's do an example of the logistic growth model and i'd like to do an example dealing
with college students again you might think this is um too simple but it illustrates how you can
use this model and in a real life situation the numbers wouldn't be quite as nice but the
principles would be the same so suppose the following scenario this by the way is a true
scenario um suppose you have 5 000 students on a college campus um university of florida is 50 000
but this is a small college 5000 students and after vacation one student comes back with a flu virus
a contagious flu virus and this student begins to infect other students sitting in the classroom
costs and other students start getting sick well many times this kind of contagious disease
will be modeled by the logistic growth model and in this case the model turns out to be
5000 divided by one plus 4 9 9 9 e to the minus point a t or t is non-negative so let's assume
that's the model for the spread of this virus again how did we come up with this model the data
would come up with those numbers but let's just accept those numbers as being the model
uh so why is the number of students infected after t days for instance
how many students are infected at the beginning when t is zero well plug in zero into this model
let's see what we get e to the minus point eight times zero is e to the zero which is one
four thousand nine hundred and ninety nine times one plus one that's the denominator it's 5000
the numerator is also 5000 so in the beginning one student has the flu and that's what we said
one student comes back from vacation starts coughing but in the beginning this student was
the only six student well how many students will be infected after five days say let's find out
according to this model all you have to do is take t equals five and plug it into the equation
so here we go the model was 5000 divided by one plus 4 9 9 9 e to the minus point eight and now
it's times five and then you multiply that out use your calculator you discover that the answer is
about 54 students so the the one student comes back starts spreading the virus and within five days
there are about 54 students infected and then it starts getting worse here's a graph of the
number of students infected at time t i've plotted the point 554 that's one of the bottom points
there because in the beginning not many students are infected but as more and more students become
infected everybody's becoming contagious and now the infection really gets bad and for a while
there's a growth rate there a very high growth rate of infection and then near the end it starts
leveling off again now this is kind of a frightening model because if we look closer
let me ask you this what's the horizontal asymptote to the right what's happening when we get back
say at time 20 what's happening here well let's look at the equation when t is large e to a negative
power a large negative power that term goes basically to zero and so you're left with 5000
divided by one in other words this is a a frightening virus every student gets infected
according to this model don't ask me what this virus is it's kind of scary but that's why it's
kind of a simple example but the the rate of infection is is very high for a while it levels
off but basically every student is going to get infected because there's a horizontal asymptote at
5000 kind of scary but again trust me these um these models of logistic growth occur all over
biology this is a very common example in biology courses now you've probably asked and I've talked
about it a little bit how do you come up with these models and a lot of it is fitting data to curves
and this is tough stuff my science departments and engineering departments biology statistics
etc are full of modeling courses this is big business in applied mathematics and now with
computers you can do much better modeling than you could say 30 years ago um some models
come from the law of physics and I'd like to show you a final model that comes from the laws of
physics um this model actually is a model from calculus courses in fact when I teach calculus
I always do this model it's one of my favorite problems in calculus now we won't be able to
do the calculus portion of this model so you'll have to kind of uh take my word for it a little
bit but you'll understand the the equation I come up with here so this is based on what's called
newton's law of cooling and again it's one of my favorite problems here's how newton's law of
cooling works the rate of change in the temperature of an object is proportional to the difference
between the objects temperature and the temperature of the surrounding medium the room temperature
for instance you could be baking a pie and it comes out of the oven at 400 degrees and you put it on
the table and your room might be 70 degrees 400 minus 70 is a pretty big temperature differential
so it's going to cool pretty quickly but the rate of change of temperature is not constant
as the pie gets cooler and cooler the rate of change lessens because the pie's temperature
is closer to the temperature of the room now what I do what I teach calculus is I bring in a coffee
cup I bring it in say full of coffee and it might say have be 100 degrees my coffee cup and I put
it on the table and I measure the temperature I have a device that you can put into the coffee
and it'll show the temperature of the coffee at various intervals and I can actually flash it
onto the wall so all my students can see the temperature of the coffee it starts at 100 and
then it goes to 99 and it starts going down and it obeys newton's law of cooling okay in my calculus
class and I'm sorry this is not the calculus class but again take my word for it you can use
calculus to derive the model for the cooling of my coffee cup and here's what it turns out to be
the temperature turns out to be 60 plus 40 e to a certain power and that powers again kind of ugly
it's the exponent is minus 0.02877 t again a real life problem has an ugly number in it an ugly decimal
but look at some of the features of this model what's the temperature when t is zero okay when t
is zero e to the zero is one 60 plus 40 is a hundred so the model kind of makes sense already
when I begin the coffee's at 100 degrees and now that's a negative exponential isn't it
so that term 40 e to that negative power will begin to decrease won't it it'll get smaller and
smaller that's because the temperature is going down so here's a graph of the temperature of the
coffee and this is the kind of graph my students would be watching during the calculus class they
would see this apparatus measuring the temperature and then putting the results on the blackboard
behind me and they would see the temperature at time 10 would be 90 degrees in this model
and then at time 20 it might be 82 degrees and it gets lower and lower notice that over there at
time zero it's at 100 degrees now of course depending on the room temperature and things
like that the numbers might be slightly different but this is sort of what happens and while the
students are watching the temperature go down I'm doing the mathematics required to derive this model
and it uses Newton's law of cooling and it uses calculus but here's the final result this equation
we had let's talk about some of the features of this equation we've already observed that when t
is zero y is 100 what happens when t is very very large mathematically speaking what's the
horizontal asymptote to the right well look when t is very very large the exponential term dies
off doesn't it starts to disappear and y turns out to just be 60 what's that 60 mean well that's
the temperature of the surrounding room when I lectured that day it was cold it must have been
winter time and it was 60 degrees in the room so the coffee cooled from 100 degrees and got closer
and closer to 60 degrees obeying Newton's law of cooling something else kind of neat about this model
notice that in the first 10 minutes the temperature went down 10 degrees 100 to 90
did it go down 10 degrees in the next 10 minutes uh-uh it only went down eight degrees how come
well the differential of temperatures is not as large anymore it used to be a 40 degree differential
between the coffee and the room but after 10 degrees it's now a 30 degree differential so the rate of
cooling is less okay nice model I think really fun uh the good news is when you finish this
pre-calculus course you'll be ready to take calculus and you'll see this kind of model
actually derive using calculus skills
okay congratulations we are now through with our lectures on exponential and logarithmic functions
now we aren't through with those functions they'll come back again throughout the course but
we finished pretty much the portion of pre-calculus that is often called algebra remember I said that
pre-calculus has another name sometimes called algebra and trigonometry well we've sort of done
the algebra part and now we're going to turn to trigonometry and that is really a the core of
this course almost I mean we're going to spend about 13 lectures on trigonometry and then after
those lectures we'll be using trigonometry um in other places uh the trigonometric functions
are another class of functions just like polynomials rational functions logarithmic functions
exponential functions now we'll have trigonometric functions and needless to say they are crucial
for success in calculus science engineering and pretty much all of applied mathematics
so I look really forward to the next few lectures when we begin to study trigonometry I'll see you
then
