Hey, y'all are back.
Okey-doke.
Did I get kicked?
Yeah, you got kicked out so let me go back.
I saw a little hanky-panky on the screen and I thought maybe somebody needed a bathroom break, but it was the system kicking me out.
So, all right, and we're right back where we were.
Okay, so there's 12 valence electrons that we should have taken full account of. So let's go down here and count.
Each line, each bond is 2. So 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12. So this has 12 valence electrons.
So we ended up accounting for all the valence electrons and this looks like a reasonable structure.
Okay.
You're muted. Everybody's muted. No, tax is not.
Not muted.
No, you're fine. I could hear you.
Okay.
All right.
Does that make sense now?
That does make sense because the valence electrons have to satisfy.
Yeah.
Let's do the next one. It says C2H.
Okay, and then that would just do the same one.
Okay, so I'm going to erase this one.
So C2H2.
Is that right?
C2H2. Okay. So let's count the valence. Let's do it in the right order. Valence electrons equal. Okay.
Carbon is in groups 4 and there's two of them. So that's eight valence electrons.
Plus hydrogen is in group 1A and there's two of them. So that's two valence electrons. So when we finish, we should have 10 valence electrons.
Okay.
So probably you'll never find anything with hydrogen as a central atom. So I would say start out with carbon and carbon.
They're probably going to be connected somehow. So let's do our four dots around here.
Three, four, one, two, three, four.
Okay. And we've got two hydrogens. So let's say I'm going to put the two hydrogens here. One, two.
It'll be easier to draw the dot on this side. Okay, so let's see what we can do like this. So let's connect this hydrogen to there.
That makes a pair and it gives carbon one more. Let's connect this hydrogen to there.
And that makes a pair. All right. Now what can we do with the two carbons? We can put this guy there.
So that's a double bond.
X.
I've got two electrons here and nothing to connect to them.
So let's see. Let's do this. We'll say C, electron, electron, double bond, C, H, H.
Well, this part doesn't look too bad, but you can't have, in this type of chemistry, you can't have unpaired electrons out here on carbon.
We got one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight. So we've accounted that has, wait, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10.
There's 10 valence electrons there. So that part's okay, but this structure is not okay.
Okay, so that's an example of taking some guesses and making the wrong decision.
Let's try another one. Let's still, let's say carbons are still probably the central atoms.
So this is try two.
How about if we put a hydrogen on each end?
Yeah, that would suffice.
That makes sense.
Okay.
Because...
Well, let's see if it all matches up. So this hydrogen can share with that.
It would have to be a triple bond.
And then this guy can share right there. This guy can share right there. And these two guys are buddies.
So yeah, so that means then that there's three shared pairs between the carbons.
One, two, three shared pairs. And then there's a hydrogen on the end and a hydrogen on this end.
Okay. Count the valence electrons. Two, four, six, eight, 10. It's got 10 valence electrons.
So we didn't lose any electrons or gain any.
This structure, so this carbon, let me go down and get another color.
Hydrogen's happy because it's got a pair of electrons around it.
This carbon's happy because it's got four bonds. This carbon's happy because it's got four bonds because it's sharing three so it gets to count them.
And then this hydrogen on the end is happy because it's got one bond.
So all four of them have their desired shell.
That should be a good structure. And in fact, this is a settling.
Okay, L E. Whenever something ends in L E any, that's triple bonds.
That makes a lot of sense now.
Because it's common. It's a it's got a special name.
I just wasn't understanding the triple bonds and double bonds, but I get it now.
Okay.
All right.
Anything else?
I think that's it. I really appreciate all your help.
Ninda, do you have any questions on anything?
No.
All right.
Well, hopefully y'all can get through all the problems and all that stuff and get ready for that test.
So.
All right, yo, y'all have a good weekend.
You're very good.
Yes, ma'am. See y'all later.
See you later. Have a good one. Dr. Biden.
Thank you so much.
Stop sharing.
Just connect, get rid of you guys.
And.
