Welcome to The Modern Scholar, where great professors teach you.
My name is George Wilson and I'll be your host.
Today we begin a course entitled Astronomy, Earth, Sky, and Planets.
Your professor is James B. Kaler of the University of Illinois.
Professor Kaler received his BA in astronomy from the University of Michigan and his PhD from UCLA.
He has taught at Illinois for over 40 years.
His research area, in which he has published over 120 papers, involves dying stars.
But Professor Kaler's interests reach far beyond this topic and he has published widely in the area of popular astronomy.
Among as many critically acclaimed books are Stars and Their Spectra, The Little Book of Stars, The Ever-Changing Sky,
The Hundred Greatest Stars, and Extreme Stars, which was the American Association of Publishers' Choice
for Outstanding and Scholarly Title in Physics and Astronomy for 2001.
Professor Kaler also served as a consultant for the Time Life Books Voyage Through the Universe series,
and he appears frequently on various radio and television programs to discuss topics in astronomy.
Currently, Professor Kaler serves on the board of directors of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific,
and as one of the world's greatest living astronomers, he continues to be a much sought-after speaker.
For almost as long as human history is recorded, man has looked to the heavens with wonder and amazement.
Indeed, astronomy is among the most accessible of all sciences, for at a primal level, all one needs to do is look up.
In the daytime there is the sun, our closest star.
Sometimes we see the moon, while at night we can feast our eyes on planets and myriad stars,
not to mention the occasional interloping meteor or comet.
But beyond this basic level, a world of fascination exists as we explore how over the centuries mankind has come to a better understanding
of his place in the universe by gazing at the heavens.
And that is what this course is all about, not just the natures of astronomical sites,
but how they all fit together, how they were created, how they effect us back here on Earth,
and what their fates, and perhaps ours, are likely to be.
For more information on this lecture, please visit the course's web page at www.modernscholar.com,
where you'll have access to links to related sites, a seminar room to share your thoughts with other students,
and yes, of course, a final exam.
And now we begin Astronomy, Earth, Sky, and the Planets.
And now, Professor Kaler, Astronomy, Earth, Sky, and the Planets.
Lecture 1, We and the Universe.
I'd like to welcome you to the first of 14 lectures in this course on the astronomy of the solar system.
We will look at everything from the sun out to the most distant reaches of the planetary system
and beyond going almost halfway to the nearest star.
The lectures here are going to cover the motions of the Earth around the sun,
the spin of the Earth, and the effect that it has for those of us upon it.
We're going to look at the physical natures of the planets.
Why is Mercury different from Pluto? Where is it?
Why is Jupiter different from the Earth?
We're going to look at all the planets of the solar system.
We're going to look at the debris of the solar system.
We're going to look at how this whole system was put together.
In this first lecture, however, we're going to look at the big picture,
not just the planetary system, which is going to be introduced,
but at the grand scheme of things where we look not just at the sun and our local area,
but we look at the stars around us, we look at how these fit into the entire galaxy,
we look at how the galaxy fits into the universe at large,
and most important, get some idea of the scale of things.
I like to think that I've been an astronomer for over 50 years.
Since the time I was eight years old, when I first got interested in this subject,
I got interested really because of the beauty of the nighttime sky.
I was walking with my grandma, and I said, stars have points, don't they?
And she said, no, they don't have points.
Look up and take a look.
And I looked up, sure enough, there's a star up there.
It's kind of orange in color, and it didn't have points.
It's kind of roundish and sparkly, and that orange color just fascinated me.
And I kept looking at it, and a year later, there it was again.
And I looked at it again, and I was gone.
I knew at that point that all I wanted to be in life as a professional was an astronomer.
It goes to many things that are very personal to me.
It goes to the beauty of the nighttime and the daytime sky.
The daytime sky is, the astronomer is equally at home in the daytime sky.
We have the sun, we have the moon, we have the blueness of the sky.
We have all manner of phenomena that we can see,
and the daytime we can see the earth and the daytime,
which of course is an astronomical body as well.
Why do we want to study astronomy?
For a variety of reasons.
Astronomy is a very good example of how a science works.
It's exemplary of all sciences, for that matter.
But it's the science in a sense of everything.
We study not just the planets, we study not just the stars.
We study the universe as a whole.
And to understand the universe as a whole,
we have to understand the very small,
going down to the very atoms that make us.
We are looking outward from an astronomical body.
We are one planet of many in our planetary system.
Maybe one planet of hundreds, maybe millions in our galaxy.
We still do not know.
We need to understand our own earth.
We can't experiment on our earth.
We would like to understand our earth better.
How do we do that?
We need to understand our earth better
by looking at the other planets
and getting some idea of what they're like
and why they are as they are
and feeding that information back
to understand our own precious planet.
The stars have a great deal to do with us.
We live because of sunlight upon the earth.
We live because the sun is a stable star
that will shine for billions of years into the future.
With that, the sun reaches out and touches with its matter
with a wind that it blows, that hits us,
forms the northern lights,
perhaps deposits more energy into the earth.
We came from out there.
All of what is out there fed back into us.
We came from out there because of the accumulation of material
from the galaxy that wound up forming our sun
and forming our planets.
We are children of the galaxy.
We are not isolated.
We don't understand our earth at all.
We have to understand our environment.
And that means not just near space,
the inner part of the earth.
It means understanding the moon.
It means understanding the planets
and the origin of all of this system.
And that is what this course is really all about.
Let me tell you a little about what we're going to do
over the course of these 14 lectures.
We're going to start with the earth,
with the rotating earth,
with the earth going around the sun
so we can get some idea of how things appear to move in the sky,
in the east and set in the west,
why the sun appears to move against the background of the stars,
why the seasons exist.
We're going to look at inner space.
We're going to look at the atoms that construct everything.
We're going to look at the light
that allows us to learn something about the natures,
the compositions,
and even the origins of the planets that are out there.
We're going to begin to look at the physical natures of the planets,
from the earth through the moon,
beginning and sweeping through the planetary system
from Mercury on out all the way to the distant planet,
the planet Pluto,
and then begin to look at the debris of the system
and finally at the end, in lecture 14,
put it all together and see how it was all made
and see how our earth was created
and why our earth is so special
within this marvelous planetary system.
So let's take a look at the planets.
Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus,
Neptune and Pluto.
Most school kids learn these things in order,
and that sort of gives you the idea
that all the planets are the same, that they're all alike,
and they aren't.
They're all natural experiments,
and by looking at the other planets,
we can tell something about ourselves.
They are all formed under different conditions
and different distances from the sun,
different sizes, different masses.
In an experimental science, you go into the lab,
you change, you tweak the input,
see what happens at the output.
We can't do that to the earth.
We don't want to do that to the earth,
but nature's given us several other experiments
and we can see what happens to Mercury.
Why is Mercury the way it is?
Why is Pluto the way it is?
What conditions have changed them?
And that leads us back once more
into understanding ourselves.
So look at the planets now in order outward from the sun
in a little bit more detail.
We'll keep increasing the detail
until we begin to understand them
better and better.
Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars,
they're all rather similar.
They're all made out of rock and metal.
They're unusual bodies.
We know of no other bodies in the universe
quite like ours.
There's a strong feeling
of people who begin to learn astronomy
that we are all insignificant
on this little rock
way out on the edge of an anonymous galaxy.
And one of the other themes
at this course is that that is simply not true.
We're in a very special place
on a very special body,
a very unusual one,
that is unlike anything else
that we know anywhere.
Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars,
the terrestrial planets,
after Terra, ourselves,
we're all similar.
Yet we're all different, we're all individuals,
and I don't mind throwing the moon into that as well,
making five terrestrial planets.
If you were walking on the moon,
you would feel very much like you're walking on the earth.
A little lighter, you'd bounce around a little bit more
because the body is less massive than we are.
But if it looks like a planet
and it feels like a planet,
if it quacks like the duck,
it's probably a duck, and that's what we have here.
If it looks like a planet, it's probably a planet.
So let's count the moon in on that as well.
So now we've got five in the inner part
of the planetary system.
And then you look out farther,
and you see these two giants,
Jupiter and Saturn, enormous bodies,
that are terribly similar to each other.
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune
are often put together
as the Jovian planets.
That's really not quite true.
Jupiter and Saturn are very similar to each other.
What we say about one,
you can pretty much rely
on being true about the other.
Giant bodies,
ten or more times the size of the earth
in dimension.
And then you move out farther to Uranus and Neptune,
and they're smaller.
They're very different from Jupiter and Saturn.
They're rather unusual bodies
in their own... We don't understand them very well.
In fact, we understand things less and less,
really, the farther away we get.
So now we've got three kinds of planets.
We've got the five in the inner solar system,
and we've got the two giants a little farther out,
and then we've got Uranus and Neptune,
which are farther out yet.
And then there's a little Pluto
about which everybody argues.
Is it a planet? Is it not a planet?
One of the most common questions I get from people,
is it a planet?
People seem to be very concerned about the fact,
well, in some ways it is, yes,
and you can, in some ways,
maybe we should exclude it.
We threw it out, and we threw that to the moon.
We'd have eight. You see what I mean?
There's no strict definition,
and that gives us a lot more freedom.
And then we can take the little bodies
in between Mars and Jupiter
that everybody's heard about,
or maybe read about in science fiction stories,
the asteroids, and we can collect them all together.
We could call them a planet, too,
if we really wanted to, and that gives us 11.
So the definition is free and floating,
and I'll continue to use it free and floating.
Remember when you were in
grade, maybe fourth grade,
elementary school and the teacher had,
your classroom had this
panel up on the wall
of the planets. It's a huge sun,
and the big planets all in a line outward
from the sun.
I hate to tell you this, but they lied.
It's not true. It's not the way they look.
We
have to deal
with scale in this business,
and
it's important at the outset
that we try to set
the sizes of these planets
in the context
of the distances between them,
because almost everything
is empty space,
or at least filled with, even if it's empty,
nothing is truly empty, of course,
but the separations between things
and astronomy are enormous
compared to their sizes.
A truly, truly underappreciated fact
that is rendered a falsehood
by the cartoon images
we generally see in classrooms.
And sometimes we really have no choice,
because it would be impossible
actually to draw a scale model
of the solar system in a classroom.
By the time you make the sun big enough to see,
or the separations big enough,
the Earth is so small you'd need a microscope
to see it. So let's really start
this particular lecture off, after this
introductory material, by
trying to put things into some kind
of scale and into some kind of context.
The sun is by far the biggest
body in the whole planetary system,
in the whole solar system. It is called
the solar system for a reason.
The planets are the satellites of the sun,
they're the moons of the sun.
The sun dominates everything
a thousand times more matter in it
than all of the rest of the planetary
system put together.
It's almost a million miles
across, one and a half
million kilometers across.
Its mass is 300,000 times
that of the Earth. It's a thousand
times more massive than the largest of the
planets, Jupiter.
We're separated from the sun
by about 100 solar diameters.
The distance between us and the sun
is a standard unit, which I'm going to
refer to a lot, and I'll try to remind
you of it off and on as we proceed
through the course. Standard unit called
the astronomical unit
with a capital A and a capital U, the
AU. It's 93
million miles. It's the average
distance between the Earth and the sun.
Yes, the distance between the Earth and the sun
does change a little bit. It has no effect
on us at all, no effect on the seasons
as you'll see later, but it is a minor
change by a few percent. So we use
the average and call
that the astronomical unit. 93
million miles, almost exactly
150 million kilometers.
And then we scale everything else to the
astronomical unit. It's the fundamental
distance unit that is used in all of astronomy
not just from the planetary system, but
ultimately through distances
to the stars, distances to the most distant galaxies.
The
distance is out, and we can get
pretty boring just listing
all statistics, so we'll try not to do that
too terribly much. Mercury
is four tenths of an AU out.
Venus is seven tenths of an AU out.
So we're kind of nice and symmetrical.
0.4, 0.7, and then us
at 1.0, and then Mars out at
around 1.5. And close
in to us, the Earth is something of a double planet
really. We have the Earth and the Moon, and the
Moon is a quarter of a million miles away.
We won't even deal with that in terms of the
astronomical unit. It's very close. And it's
kind of interesting thing when we look at all
these distances, and we are so proud of
ourselves for getting from here to the Moon,
that's all we've gotten. One quarter
of a million miles, that's it.
The Sun is almost 100 million miles away.
The Earth is as large
as it seems to a human being
is a terribly small body.
8,000 miles
wide, 13,000 kilometers
wide.
It's only a hundredth the size of the Sun.
The Sun is
109 times, actually if you want the real numbers,
109 times the diameter of the
Earth. The Sun is
1,100th of an astronomical unit across.
That makes the Earth 1,100,000th
of an astronomical unit
across. If you had the Earth a marble,
say a 1 centimeter marble about this big,
the Sun would be
a wagon wheel about a football field
away. You'd see it off there
in a great distance. Let's use this scale
for a little while and we'll start looking at where
the other planets are, because where Pluto
is, you couldn't even see it to be so distant
even on this scale, and eventually we'll have to shrink
down the scale to even begin
to put the galaxy on our home,
our collection of stars.
From here on out we go to Mars
at one and a half astronomical units,
and then we make a tremendous jump
to Jupiter. It's five
astronomical units away, five times farther
than we are from the Sun, and on
our Earth as a scale of about this big,
Jupiter would be about the size of a
oh, good
size softball, perhaps a little bit larger.
Located
this is 500 million miles from the Sun,
five astronomical units away.
That's five
football fields away, if you like, on this scale.
And then we make a tremendous jump
out to ten astronomical units
to see Saturn.
And then we make a farther jump out, we almost
double it again to
19 to get to Uranus.
We just keep going farther and farther away.
Now we're taking ourselves
all the way out to Neptune, which is
30 astronomical units away, which some people
think is sort of the end of the planetary
system, because again, Pluto sometimes
is included, sometimes it isn't.
It's a curious, strange, transition body
that is eventually going to tell us
a great deal about the planetary system
if we can ever get to it.
It's the only planet we have not yet visited
by spacecraft. We will eventually
know it's a long, long journey.
It takes about ten years for
spacecraft to get out there from here,
moving even fast enough to break free
of the gravitational field of the Earth
and the gravitational field of the Sun
so it can float forever out there,
moving off into the galaxy.
Pluto averages 40 astronomical units away.
Now
there's a lot of consistency in these planets.
They all go around the Sun in
pretty circular orbits.
The Earth quite circular,
a couple that are a little bit off
center, Mercury and Mars, but not terribly
much. Pluto is way off center.
It goes from
the orbit of Neptune all the way
to 50 astronomical units out.
One of the things that we thought
makes it not quite
in the same category as the rest of the planets.
It's also a highly tilted orbit.
It takes us out to the outer fringe
of the planetary system where we
find an enormous number of
icy bodies that are called comets.
There's a lot of
misconception in this business
and people are constantly confusing comets
with meteors.
Meteor is a small rock
actually a little asteroid for the most part
or a little piece of comet fluff as we'll see
that hits the Earth's atmosphere
and goes streaking across the sky.
Comets do not go streaking across the sky.
They're orbiting bodies that orbit the Sun
on long skinny orbits to take them
way out to the outer part of the planetary system
and then close to the Sun.
They're mostly out of ice.
We have found and can see now
a huge reservoir of these commentary bodies
out beyond the orbit of Pluto.
In fact, many of them share the orbit of Pluto
which means that we could put Pluto
out there in this band of icy bodies
which actually has a name.
It's called the Kuiper Belt
after Gerard Kuiper, an astronomer
of the mid-20th century who first
postulated it. A few of these things
work their way in. They're ice balls
that get heated up by the Sun.
Again, the pressure of sunlight,
the pressure of the wind from the Sun,
the Sun is blowing a wind from its surface,
pushes the gas and the release
dust and dirt particles in the comet
away and you see this long streaming tail
that very slowly works its way
around the Sun visible night to night
very much as the planets are.
So now we've expanded the planetary system
into the region of the comets
out beyond Pluto.
And it turns out that Pluto is one of them.
It's not a comet. Don't get confused on that.
It's a transition body. It's a body that
in a sense tried
a planet but because of lack of raw material
couldn't quite make it.
And then we've got another huge reservoir
that takes us almost halfway the nearest star
surrounding the Sun. It's called the Oort Cloud.
O-O-R-T after John Oort
another astronomer of the mid-20th century
who postulated that one too.
That's a reservoir of very long period comets
that were created in the planetary system
eons ago were tossed out
and still belong to the solar system.
So the solar system is vastly larger
in scale than the planetary system.
So now we've got the planets
where you can count Pluto, you can count or you can count the moon.
Doesn't matter.
We know what they are. It's what they are that counts
not exactly what you call them
and categorize them.
Then we've got this band of comets
outside the orbit of Pluto
and this huge reservoir of comets
around the Sun. And then we've got a whole bunch of little bodies
in between Mars and Jupiter
called the asteroids. The biggest one
is not terribly large
it's considerably smaller than the moon.
You roll them all together
you might have gotten an Earth or something like a terrestrial planet
it's kind of fair to call them a terrestrial planet
collectively and if you're walking on one
kind of the biggest one
certainly named Ceres
certainly feel like you were except you'd be a lot lighter.
So we now have at least something of an inventory
here of the planetary system
and we will over the course
of this course, over this set of lectures
be looking at
all of them in fine detail
beginning with the Earth in the middle
looking outward into the sky
at the context of the orbits of the planets
around the Sun, how they move
and then in detail about
their physical natures and eventually
where they all came from
and eventually where they're all going to go
too because nothing is permanent
everything is born and everything dies
and part of astronomy is learning how things are born
and how things die
where we came from
and how things are going to go
but we have to put the solar system
the solar system, the planetary system
make no sense
if you can't put it into a broader context
the Sun is a star
now generally we'll
the common phrase theologies
is talk about the Sun and the stars
and we talk about stars particularly
you're talking about all the other ones out there
but keep in mind always that the Sun is just one of their
one of their number
it will go outside on a nice clear night
the average human eye can see maybe
2,000, 2,500 stars
over the course of the
entire sky, the entire night
if you go around the globe there are probably
around 8,000 that are visible to the human eye
depending upon how old you are
and what your level of light pollution is
this is just the beginning
they all look pretty much the same
when you stand outside a night
and look at them
they just appear as little points of light
but look carefully, look very carefully
and you see colors
there's some that are little reddish
there's some that are kind of orange
even some take on a little bit of a blue tint
that reflect their temperatures
the blue stars hot, the red stars cool
the Sun is often considered
as kind of a yellow white star
it has that kind of cast to it
and temperature
of about 6,000 degrees
Kelvin
I hate to introduce a new temperature scale to you
because in this country in the United States
the Fahrenheit
and Celsius are centigrade
and in Europe and Canada and the rest
people stick with centigrade
it's a pretty simple system
centigrade that goes from zero at freezing
water, 100 at boiling
but then you go down and down and down to negatives
until you get down to a point that's called absolute zero
it's minus 273 degrees
centigrade
so we just start at zero and work our way up
that's all in centigrade units
and the Sun in that scale
that goes from 1,000 centigrade degrees above absolute zero
puts things in sort of a
context for you
stars range in temperature from
not much hotter
than that of a self-cleaning oven
believe it or not
about 1,000 degrees or cooler
so cool you can't even see them
with a human eye
to a maximum of close to a million
it's a spectacular range
in dimension
there's stars about the size of Manhattan
and there's stars the size of the orbit of Saturn
in other spectacular range
stars
little light things
perhaps not much bigger than Jupiter in mass
if you want to stretch the definition of a star
which it really requires
you see at some point
we have difficulty in even defining
what a star is sometimes
I like to define it as a body that
at some point in its career goes through this
nuclear fusion process
and you have stars that are 100 times as massive
as the sun
the sun we know is going to die out as a little body
the size of the earth
sometime over the next several billion years
you go to stars that are much more massive
than the sun
they blow up, they explode
the sun can't do that
one of the nice things that we have learned
the sun cannot explode
but some of them do
and the ripples of the exploding stars
spread throughout the universe
help create new stars
that created us
it's getting a little bit ahead of the story
let's look back at the stars
and a little bit at the scale
the nearest star
as close as it looks
this star called Alpha Centauri
and here you get into another argument
because Alpha Centauri is a triple star
two of them go around in orbit
about every 80 years, very close together
the brighter very much like the sun
rather curious, interesting coincidence
and then there's a little one a little bit farther away
a couple of
maybe 10,000 astronomical units away
from the double
which is called Proxima Centauri
and that's a little bit closer to us
but let's not quibble about this
call it Alpha Centauri
how far away is it
it gets difficult to use
astronomical units at this point
the star is about
270,000 astronomical units away
we need a new scale
you want to match your distance scale
that means being measured
otherwise you wind up with little bitty numbers
or you wind up with enormous numbers
so let's introduce the light year
and we'll scale it back to the astronomical unit in a minute
the light year is
the distance, not a unit of time
it's commonly taken as a unit of time
no, no, it's a unit of distance
it's the distance, array of light
will travel in one year
all is that hard to appreciate
light moves at a speed of
186,000 miles per second
eight times around the earth
one second
here to the moon in a second and a half
from the sun to here in eight minutes
we could say the sun
is eight light minutes away
Pluto is several light hours away
interesting aside
if you visited Pluto when you want to talk to the folks back home
you start talking
and your telephone message doesn't reach
back home for another four hours
long way to go
that is we see things as they were
in the past you do not see the sun
as it is now
you see it as it was eight minutes ago
the nearest star is four light years away
it's about 270,000 astronomical units
so the light year
and other units similar to that
become the standard
for interstellar use
and even for use
across the whole
universe for that matter
one of the more common questions
that I will get
is doesn't that bother you
you're looking at stars and your stars
four light years away you're seeing as it was
four years ago
what's it doing now
it could blow up which it can't
relax it can't
it could blow up
and you wouldn't know it for four years and yes that's absolutely right
and I don't care
because I can't know anything
until light gets to me anyway
so my now
is when the light gets to me
now if you want to walk around
your house
or your office in a daze think about this
you're looking at your colleagues
or at your family
light travels about a foot
in a trillionth of a second
you see everybody around you
as they were a few trillions of a second ago
you don't see them as they are now
and the people farther away from you
you see more farther
into the past
so you're not looking at anything in that
context that sense of now
now is when the light arrives
so none of this bothers us very much
we simply ignore the fact that there's a light travel time
we see things as they are when they get to us
and we're looking at all the stars in the sky
at different distances and we see them
as they were in the distant past
all at different stages
in their ages
and that's really not a problem because
stars live for far longer
than that little light travel time anyway
they live for millions and billions of years
about a few thousand here and there
just like when you're looking at your colleagues
a few trillions of a second in the lifetime
of a human being doesn't mean anything at all
so it really matters not
we can forget the whole thing
otherwise we wander around like this wondering
you're looking at everybody in the past
can drive you crazy after a little while
so we forget about it
four light years it's a long way to go
it's why we haven't gone to the stars
and why it's going to be very very difficult to go
the distances are spectacular
you can't even use this earth as a marble scale
let's take the sun as a marble now
we'll shrink it down from the wagon wheel down to the marble
and the earth is about that big
is about as big as a grain of sand
on that scale
the nearest star is 170 miles
about 250 kilometers away
the scale is really to take
small marbles
and put them in the major cities
of our country
now start them rolling around
because stars move relatively each other
the sun moves
about its own diameter in a day
so you have these marbles shifting
a diameter in a day and they're separated by
100 miles, 200 miles, maybe more
do you think they're going to crash into each other?
I don't think so
we're very safe out here
the separations are spectacular
compared to the sizes
we live in a very safe part of the galaxy
nothing terribly dangerous around us
stars aren't going to collide into us
as thick as they look in the nighttime sky
it is a grand illusion
the space between them is not empty by the way
the space between them is filled
it's perhaps a bad word
because it's almost a vacuum
but not quite, but it is filled with a thin dusty gas
you can see that in the Milky Way
we've lost the Milky Way in our time
you go into any city
almost any village for that matter
and the lights are so bright
that you can't see the dark skies anymore
my grandparents saw them
could walk out in the backyard
and see this wonderful band of light
going across the sky
Milky Way is the disk of our galaxy
all of the stars that you see at night
and 200 or more billion others
are spread into a thin disk
that is 100,000 light years across
now we're not talking 3 or 4 or 10 light years
we're talking 100,000
the sky is really in three dimensions
you lose that sense entirely
when you look up there at the heavens
all the stars look at the same distance
all the planets look the same distance away
no, the planets are close
shining by reflected light
the stars are self-illuminating
shining by thermonuclear reactions
all at different distances
some of the brighter ones that you see
are only a few tens of light years away
others like the Great Star Denim
many of the others that you see
are maybe a thousand light years away
or more
you use telescopes
you can see them vastly farther than that
and we've learned how we're structured
this thin disk
and we're sort of out at the edge
now the disk doesn't have a real edge on it
it just gradually fades away
but the majority of stars are in this disk
about 100,000 light years across
and we're roughly two-thirds or three-quarters
of the way out to the edge
now imagine yourself in the middle of this disk
and you look around
and you see the disk around your head
you can only see the individual stars
within a few hundred light years
maybe a thousand light years of you
and all the rest gradually blend
into a thick band of light
that surrounds you
the Milky Way
which is a thick mythology
wonderful mythology about it
the pathway of the souls
on their way to heaven
celestial rivers bringing the water
to irrigate our crops
and Galileo when he put his first telescope on it
back there in 16, 9, 16, 10
oh it's stars
it's just stars
200 billion of them
in a disk a thousand light years across
and we're just one of them
very special one
because we are part of it
and we can look out and see it
we can look out and comprehend it
up until 1920
we thought our galaxy was the only one
oh there were
inklings that maybe we weren't really alone
that go back a couple of hundred years before that
astronomers began to see little fuzzy things
it tells a technical term
little fuzzy thing
little fuzzy blobs out there in space
and some of them showed structure
some of them led spiral arms
which our galaxy does in fact
we didn't know that they were other galaxies
until Edwin Hubble
after whom the Hubble Space Telescope was named
was able finally to resolve one of these things
individual stars
and if they were anything like the stars in our own galaxy
these things had to be terribly far away
in northern autumn evenings
you see the great constellation Andromeda rising up
above the eastern horizon
and if you've got sharp eyes
you can see a little faint fuzzy blob in it
that fuzzy blob is the Andromeda galaxy
just friendly name M31
it goes by a variety of names
most distant thing you can see with the naked eye
without a telescope
two million light years away
a galaxy very much like our own
and then you look out farther
and you see more and more and more of these
several years ago the director of the Hubble Space Telescope
said let's look at a blank area of sky
and see what turns up
now the Hubble Space Telescope burns up money
at a pretty fierce rate
it is very difficult to get time
on the Hubble Space Telescope
and here the director wants to take a hundred hours
worth of this precious time
and look at something that's blank
he figured he'd get something
oh he did
in that little dot
which is only a tenth the angular size of the full moon
Hubble Space Telescope has a very small field of view
three thousand galaxies showed up
three thousand
if you could replicate that across the sky
it would be possible to see
over a trillion galaxies from the Earth
each one similar to our own
with maybe somewhere around 100, 200, 300 billion stars
not all of them are like some of them are big
some of them are small
you want to count the smaller ones
they're vastly more than a trillion
within the scale of the universe
we can actually see
vast numbers of them
clumping, clustering together
all of them coming out of a concept
that we refer to as the Big Bang
we look at the velocities of these galaxies
which we can easily find
we've been looking at this over the last century or more
and we find that with the exception
of a couple of galaxies that are close to us
they're all moving away from us
and more remarkably they're all moving away from us
with speeds that are absolutely
and directly proportional to their distances
you double the distance, you double the speed
and the speeds go up and up and up
till they approach the speed of light
some of these things are going away
at enormous velocities from us
and the only explanation
that seems to fit all of the data
is that at some point
numbers have been pretty well pinned down
to about 13 billion years
somewhere around 13 billion years ago
the universe was in a hot dense state
you can't say it was out there
you can't say it was like a pea
you can just say that all the matter
was crushed together into a hot dense state
from which it began to expand
it's not an explosion, it began a sudden
and violent expansion
and within that expansion
the galaxies which accumulated
in the clusters of galaxies
which formed stars
all of this
expanded away and we're seeing
the remnants of the expansion
where did the Big Bang start?
it started right here
it's in this room
everything is growing
now don't get the wrong idea
it doesn't mean that the earth is expanding
all this is held together by the glue of gravity
which will be the subject of a whole lecture
this wonderful concept
of how things are put together
it means the separation between large scale things
it's actually an expansion of space
it's not an explosion
it means that space itself
is getting bigger and bigger
and the galaxies are just floating along with it
the separation is increasing
why it happened or how it came together
nobody knows
we can speculate perhaps
but there is no hard data
on how all of this began
we're seeing the aftermath of it
and we're one part of it
we're a very important part of it
everything affects everything else
in this system
not just through gravity
but through radiation
through light
we're all tied together
the whole universe
universe
one
it means one thing
and we're not separated from it
we are the third planet out
from the sun
from an ordinary star
it's a very special star in our view
because it's ours
it keeps us alive
everything that we have
comes from the sun eventually
after the big bang
galaxies formed
stars formed within the galaxies
as stars age
they create
chemical elements within them
after all the sun is making helium
out of hydrogen
eventually they'll make carbon and oxygen out of helium
more massive stars can go farther yet
they can even create iron in their cores
stars like this explode
even stars like the sun will create
additional chemical elements
launch them to the surface
perhaps out into interstellar space
stars recycle themselves
the sun will lose about half of its matter
back into interstellar space
and more massive stars will lose even more
all of that becomes fodder
for the creation of new stars
new stars are born from the gases
of interstellar space
but these gases have been contaminated
by heavy elements
from the deaths of previous generations of stars
the galaxy is around 13 billion years old
it didn't take long to form galaxies after the big bang
it happened very very very quickly
reasons we still don't entirely understand
and then the deaths of stars
began to increase heavy element content
within the galaxies because the big bang created nothing
but hydrogen and helium
the lightest of the things
the sun came along 5 billion years after
excuse me, only 5 billion years ago
some 7 billion years or so after the creation of the universe
8 billion years
so we had about 8 billion years worth
of stellar death
to populate the gases of interstellar space
with heavy elements
the sun and the earth were born from that
the earth is a distillate then
of the deaths of exploded stars
so all of these little points out there
is not just
it's not just to beautify the sky
they all have to do directly with us
and through the course of these lectures
we'll look more and more and more
at what they are
and at our place among them
thank you
