Astronomy, Earth, Sky, and the Planets, Lecture 2, Reflections of the Spinning Earth
We ended the last lecture with the Big Bang, with the concept of the whole universe over billions of light years.
And now we're going to bring it back to home in this lecture called Reflections of the Spinning Earth.
We're going to look at our placement on it, and how things appear to move in the sky as a result of where we are, how we're moving on the Earth, and the spin of the Earth.
We'll look first at its shape, and then at its size, and then at its rotation, how it's moving.
And as the Earth spins, how the sky appears to spin above us, at the risings and settings of stars,
and how we use the stars to determine where we are on Earth, because we don't know, we can't navigate this body unless we use the stars.
Even in the modern day and age, we still need the stars.
And finally, at proving that the Earth actually spins, not an easy thing to do, something that was done only in relatively recent times.
So let's go right back to the beginning at this point, and what's the shape of the Earth?
The Earth is round, you say. Everybody knows the Earth is a sphere. How do you know the Earth is a sphere?
Well, your kindergarten teacher told you the Earth was a sphere, and you believed everything she said, and you still believe the Earth is a sphere, right?
Stand out, go on out and boat into the ocean. Stand out on the Great Plains sometime, and look off into the distance.
It sure looks flat, flat as can be, far as you can see, out to a horizon, where if you go far enough, clearly you will fall off the edge.
But you know that's not true. You drive along the highway, you look out to the horizon where the sky seems to come down to meet the land, and you can't get there.
You don't go off a cliff where there's a big pile of cars down there at the bottom. You can never get to the horizon.
As you walk, as you drive, it recedes in front of you. That was known to the ancients. You go back a couple of thousand years.
This was one of the first tips that the Earth is really round, or at least it's curved. What else?
Well, as you move along the surface of the Earth, the stars appear to move in the other direction. There's a reflection in the motion.
One of the themes that we have over the next couple of lectures especially is that as you move one way, everything in the sky appears to move the other way.
I think as anybody who hasn't had the experience of driving, you're parked at a red light, and there's another car next to you, and your foot's on the brake,
and gradually the car next to you starts to move up a little bit, and you feel, oh my goodness, I'm moving backwards, and you stop harder and harder on the brake, and it does no good at all.
Reflexive motion. Something moves this way, you appear to move the other direction. You're driving off into the country, you're going this way, the cows are going in the other direction.
It's exactly the same thing with the Earth. As you move one way, things in the sky appear to move in the other way.
So as you were walking this way, and if I were to walk this way, the ceiling would appear to move this way, but if you're walking on a flat Earth or on a round Earth, the motion is different.
If you're walking on a round Earth, the motion is extremely smooth in the opposite direction. That was known to the ancients as well. The Earth must be curved in some way or another.
The real tip-off, however, came with eclipses of the Moon, commonly confused with the phases of the Moon. We'll talk all about this in a later course.
I have a Sun. I have an Earth. I have a Moon. Shine the fleshlight on the Earth. I'm illuminating this hemisphere of the Earth, but the Earth is casting a shadow into space.
The Moon is on the other side of the Earth over here. If the Moon goes in back of the Earth, it goes into the shadow of the Earth and disappears.
It doesn't entirely disappear, but it gets very, very dark for a period of time.
The Earth must cast a circular shadow into space. As the Moon goes around the Earth, in back here, and loses its source of sunlight, its illumination, the outline of the Earth is projected onto the Moon as a circle.
This was known to Aristotle. No matter what the configuration of the eclipse, how the Moon goes in back of the Earth, the shadow is always a circle.
Therefore, the Earth must present a circular outline, and no matter in which direction the Moon appears, the Earth always has a circular outline and the only body whose outline is always a circle is a sphere.
We've known this for 2,000 years. How big is it?
Well, even that we've known since the third century BC.
A man named Eratosthenes, over 2,000 years ago, who lived in Alexandria in Greece, right here, and he knew that down here, in what we now know as the Sudan, there was a town where on the first day of summer the sun shone directly overhead like this.
It went right down to the bottom of a well, but he knew where he was up here in Alexandria that that never happened. On the first day of summer, the sun was a 50th of a circle off the overhead point.
Well, in going from the Sudan, and this place in Egypt, up to Alexandria, far to the north, you move the sun by a 50th of a circle.
The circumference of the Earth must be 50 times that distance between the two points.
Just multiply one number by another. We don't know how big the Greek system of measurement units were, but the best we know, Eratosthenes had it right to within about 10% or so.
We have known for over 2,000 years that the Earth is a sphere, and how big it is.
Columbus knew that the Earth was a sphere. Maybe the crewmen didn't know, but anybody who has educated knew the Earth was a sphere.
They had the wrong size by that point, but that's sort of irrelevant. They knew they could go all the way around and come back to the beginning.
And then, of course, Magellan demonstrated it again by going all the way around, and now we can take pictures from space, and we see the Earth actually turning, rotating around, always presenting a circular outline.
There's obviously no doubt at all that the Earth is a sphere. The proof is there. This illustrates an interesting point about science.
You know, not everybody believes it. There's an organization known as the International Flat Earth Society that consists of people who think that the Earth is flat.
This is not a hoax. They really believe it. There's a North American branch as well, and they will do almost anything to convince you that the Earth is flat.
Now, don't bring up arguments about going all the way around. Apparently, instead of going all the way around, you're going in a circle and coming back to your starting point, which you kind of are in three dimensions if you go all the way around.
But it's not like this knowledge is universal, and this is true of a lot of the concepts that we're going to be talking about over this course.
It doesn't have to do just with the sphericity of the Earth. It has to do with going all the way to the concept of the Big Bang. You can't convince everybody.
I think most of us, however, are convinced that the Earth is a sphere. Unfortunately, that's not true. The Earth really isn't a sphere.
It's close, but it is not a perfect sphere. It's not a perfect sphere because it's rotating.
The spin of the Earth causes it to bulge out a little bit at the center. I'll bet there isn't anybody who, when they were, say, eight years old, didn't like to spin.
You stand there and you spin slowly around in one direction, then you spin faster and faster and faster, and your arms come out at the side, and your body is flattening.
The same thing happens to the Earth. The same thing happens to all rotating bodies. It's nothing unusual at all.
The Earth flattens at the poles, and that causes it to bulge out at the equator. The difference isn't very much. It's only about 40 kilometers or so.
It was measured in the 1600s. It causes pendulum clocks to tick slower at the equator than at the pole, because the pendulum clock, the pendulum swinging back and forth as a result of the Earth's gravity,
and the Earth's gravity is actually a little bit weaker at the equator than it is at the pole because you're farther away from the center.
So you can actually measure it by time differences from the equator up to the pole.
You couldn't tell if you actually saw the Earth from space. If you look at the pictures made by the Apollo astronauts, you really can't tell. It's such a small amount.
It has some interesting effects, which we can look at later, but you can look at some of the other planets and see the same thing.
Saturn's polar flattening is very noticeable, even through a small telescope.
So the Earth, technically speaking, a little more technically speaking, is not a perfect sphere. It's an oblate spheroid.
It has the interesting effect of making the Earth wobble a little bit on its axis, something we can talk about when we look at the orbit of the Earth as it goes around the sun.
And then if you want to be even a little bit more technical, it's not even a prolate spheroid.
That is, the flattening at the poles causes the Earth to be in the shape of what is called a prolate spheroid.
If you look at it carefully, it's got all kinds of little lumps and ripples on it, which affect the gravity.
It affects the motion of the moon around the Earth. It affects Earth's satellites as they go around the Earth.
It all depends on how closely you look at it, and this is true of most sciences.
You go by a series of approximations. So a good approximation, yes, the Earth is a sphere, and we can talk about it as a sphere.
If we want to look at it a little bit more closely, not quite a sphere, it's something else.
If we want to look at it more closely yet, no, it's really something else.
This sort of thinking affects all of science. The closer you look at it, the more detail you see,
and you have to have names for these particular shapes and sizes and all manner of different detail.
But we can go back and be reasonably friendly about it over the rest of this talk.
Unless we need to deal with the Earth as a prolate spheroid, we can still call it a sphere,
and now we at least all know what we mean by the term. This is how science actually works.
We take a lot of data, we construct some kind of modeling theory,
and that, in principle, allows us to predict new observations we can make,
and if all of these new observations support the idea, then the theory is probably correct.
You can't actually prove a scientific theory, not really, not absolutely.
You can just hope never to disprove it if you think one is correct, and that is the case of the sphere of the Earth.
The Earth is a sphere because we've never proven it not to be a sphere, so obviously it is,
and we know how big it is, and we've known how big it is for over 2,000 years.
The spin is different. The Earth rotates on its axis.
If you look down from the north, there's an axis running right through the middle,
and it punctures through the sphere at the north pole and the south pole.
Again, there's something that goes back to early childhood learning.
It rotates in the counterclockwise direction as looking down from the north.
That means stars in the sky appear to move in the clockwise direction, in the opposite direction.
It's a rather amazing number of people who don't realize that the stars rise and set just like the sun.
The sun comes up more or less in the east. It sets more or less in the west. Everybody's familiar with that.
But watch the stars. They'll do the same thing. They take 360 degrees, go around 360 degrees in 24 hours.
That's about a degree in 4 minutes.
So you see a little shift. Go on outside some night. Go look at a star.
Wait 4 minutes. You'll see it shift by a full degree.
You don't even have to sit around in a way. Go in and watch television.
Come on back and look, and it will certainly have shifted its position.
Reflections of the spinning Earth.
Aha! But is it the Earth that's spinning, or is the sky this crystal globe around us?
And is it the sky that's spinning?
That's a little harder to determine.
Pythagoras, in ancient times, suggested that maybe it was the Earth that was spinning,
and we actually saw the motion in the sky as the reflection of the Earth, but he wasn't believed.
We actually didn't nail it down until the 1600s, surprisingly enough.
Although there were inklings of people, yeah, but Aristotle, the great thinkers, it's too big to move.
Look at the size of it. Go on outside. How can it move?
Besides, the argument was that if the Earth were spinning, think of the wind that would be blowing out there.
It would knock you down without, of course, realizing that the atmosphere is spinning at the same speed as the Earth,
and consequently, you don't feel this tremendous wind. Everything is moving along together.
We can prove it now, as far as you can prove any scientific theory, of course, but the Earth is spinning in this direction,
and what does that have to do with the sky?
Well, we have to use... Well, let's go back to it. Let's go back to the Earth first and define a few points and circles on it.
We've got the North Pole. We've got the South Pole.
In between, we've got the equator. The equator is where the Earth is spinning fastest.
We know that it's 8,000 miles across, 13,000 kilometers across, it's 25,000 miles around, and 24 hours.
The equator is spinning at around 1,000 miles an hour, about 1,600 miles an hour.
You don't notice that because we're all moving together.
We have to find out where we are on this planet.
If you drive from New York to Chicago or from any two points, it's not hard.
You follow a map, you follow guidelines, but try to do that out here in the middle of the ocean.
There's no X marks the spot. How do you know where you are?
The only way you know where you are is by looking at the stars, by looking at their locations at a given time,
and that will tell you where you are. It's a very dangerous place because there's no guidelines, there's no streets, there's no markings.
If you go in the wrong direction, you and your crew could easily die.
We have to have a way of marking position on the Earth, and we do it with a very simple grid of latitude and longitude.
Very simple. You start at the equator, you call that zero degrees.
You go up to 90 degrees, a quarter of the circle, up to here at the North Pole, and you call that 90 degrees north.
And you go down in this direction, you call that 90 degrees south.
And then it's 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and so on, right on up.
Most of the central U.S. ranges from about 30 to 50 degrees north latitude or so.
You go down south America, 30, 40, 50 degrees south latitude.
Very simple concept. Longitude is measured in the other direction.
It's measured around the equator, like so.
Latitude, the beginning is easy because you start at the equator and you go north and you go south.
You've got a physical reference, the spin of the Earth. Longitude, you don't. You've got to, where do you start it?
Where do you start it? Well, to get a longitude, what we do is draw a circle from the North Pole.
Pick a city, Kansas City, perhaps.
Draw a circle through Kansas City, crossing the equator to the south pole.
And you see where it crosses the equator.
Now what you do is you need a zero point on the equator, and what are we going to use?
Well, we could use a mountain, I suppose, but we have to find something everybody agrees on.
And what we have agreed on is to take a circle that starts at the North Pole, go through Greenwich, England,
and cross the equator, the south pole, where you have that intersection.
You call that zero and you measure the angle along the equator from this so-called Greenwich meridian
to the meridian, the north-south line, through your location at home.
Why Greenwich? Well, England was the big sea power when all of this was being set up.
You don't have to use Greenwich, the French use Paris, but England was the sea power and they said,
it's going to go here, and it went there. Completely arbitrary, and we've used it for the last few hundred years that way.
Latitude is easy to measure. Longitude isn't. How do you measure latitude?
Well, you have to look at the orientation of the sky to get that.
Take the Earth in your imagination and take the axis of the Earth and run it outward.
You stand out on a country evening. It looks as if you're standing in the middle of a giant sphere.
It's called the celestial sphere. It's an illusion. It's not real.
It looks gigantic and it looks like it's rotating around you, making everything rise and set.
You can do the same thing on a nice, clear, sunny day. You've had this blue dome over your head, the celestial sphere.
It is an illusion, but let's make use of the illusion.
As you stand in any location, there's a point directly over your head.
World's most venerable tool is a plumb bob to weight on a string, points directly downward,
and it points to the center of the Earth. If you run the string back in the other direction, it points to a point directly over your head.
The point over your head is called the zenith. It's yours. Nobody else has your zenith.
You simply point directly over your head away from the center of the Earth, away from where gravity is directing you downward,
and you locate your zenith in the sky.
Then you take the axis of the Earth and you point it out in both directions and see where the axis of the Earth punches through the sky.
As the Earth turns on its axis, the sky will appear to turn around its axis and around two points in the sky called the celestial poles.
The one above the North Pole of the Earth is the North Celestial Pole.
The one under the South Pole of the Earth or above the South Pole of the Earth, if you like, is called the South Celestial Pole.
And as the Earth spins around on its axis and its poles, the sky appears to turn around its own axis and around its poles carrying everything along with it.
Now, remember, it's an illusion. We know we're on the Earth and we know that that is the cause of the apparent spin of the sky.
So we'll still make use of the illusion.
Now, if you stand on any point of the Earth, it looks as if you're standing straight up.
It doesn't matter where you are.
We're standing straight up here in, say, North America.
And if you imagine your globe, well, the people in South America and Australia must be hanging on for dear life, trying not to fall off.
But everybody feels that way.
It's because gravity is pulling us all down toward the center of the Earth.
So we'll stand on wherever you live.
It appears you're standing on top of the Earth.
And that causes the axis of the Earth to be oriented such that the elevation in degrees above the northern horizon, if you're in the northern hemisphere, always equals your latitude.
It's the fundamental first rule of celestial navigation.
If you look to the north and you look up by an angle equal to your latitude, you will find the north celestial pole, that point of zero rotation of the sky around which everything appears to be moving.
If you look down in the other direction, of course, you would see the south celestial pole.
But if you're in the northern hemisphere, the south celestial pole would be below the horizon by that much and you can't see it.
So the sky is spinning around these two points here, carrying everything along with it.
Stars rising in the east, setting in the west.
The stars, sun and moon, wherever they happen to be, if they are north of the celestial equator, they will rise in the northeast, set in the northwest.
If they're south of the celestial equator, they'll rise in the southeast, set in the southwest.
Only things that are exactly on the celestial equator will rise exactly east and set exactly west.
Now, if you don't know your latitude and if you know your stars, you can then locate the position of the north celestial pole by its position among the stars.
You can then measure the elevation of that point above the northern horizon and determine your latitude.
You can find your latitude simply by looking at the sky.
Know where you are north or south.
If you look at old maps, you often find that they're very distorted and it looked like the map maker just wasn't very good.
That's not really true.
It's because they knew how to get latitude.
Look at all the proportions in antique maps.
They're fine in latitude.
They couldn't get their longitudes.
Longitudes are much more difficult to get than just the elevation of something.
The longitude requires the use of a clock.
Longitude difference is always equal time differences.
So if you want to get your longitude at any given location, you must know your time here and your time at Greenwich.
Subtract the two and make the conversion from hours, 15 degrees per hour, from hours to degrees.
That's a difficult thing to do because if you're in a wooden sailing ship and you set your clock at Greenwich
and then it takes you two years to go around the globe, your clock isn't going to keep very good time.
We couldn't get longitudes until we had good seagoing clocks, which we didn't have until the end, toward the end of the 1700s.
Back to the spinning earth.
We're lucky in the Northern Hemisphere because we have a star that's very close to the North Celestial Pole.
It's called the North Star Polaris.
It goes by a variety of names.
It's not the brightest star in the sky.
It's kind of a modest middle brightness star.
But you'll always see it elevated above your horizon by an angle equal to the latitude.
It's at the end of the handle of the Little Dipper, which we'll look at at a later lecture.
And it's easily locatable by anybody who knows the stars.
It's not exactly on the pole.
It's about three-quarters of a degree off the pole, but it's close enough that you get an approximate latitude.
And it's not hard as you go around the globe.
Once you understand your stars, you can go north to Alaska, south into Mexico, down into Argentina, into Australia.
You will see the sky changes aspect.
By the time you get down to the equator at zero degrees latitude, the North Celestial Pole is sitting right on the horizon.
The South Celestial Pole comes up.
And then when you get into the Southern Hemisphere, you're now looking at the South Celestial Pole and the North Celestial Pole is down.
Come back to mid-Northern latitudes and look up, and you'll see the pole up here.
Now, everything is going to be spinning around the pole in the direction opposite to which the Earth spins.
Northern Hemisphere will be going around in this direction, in the counterclockwise direction, looking at the North Pole.
And Polaris can't set.
It's always 40 degrees above the North or horizon.
Consequently, Polaris is 40 degrees above the pole.
No star within the latitude.
Let's say you're at 40 degrees North latitude.
Polaris will be 40 degrees up.
No star within 40 degrees of the pole can set.
So we have a whole bunch of what are called circumpolar stars that will never set.
These include for most mid-Northern latitudes, such things as the Little Dipper, most of the Big Dipper, and so on.
But there are a whole bunch of stars around the South Pole here that can't rise.
And they are never visible from mid-Northern latitudes, the Southern Cross, the nearest star to the Earth, Alpha Centauri, a whole group of them.
The only way you can see the whole sky is to stand on the equator of the Earth when the two celestial poles are on the horizon.
Then the whole sky is rotating about these two points here.
And over the course of the day, presuming you can see the stars in the daytime, which you can't.
If the sun weren't there, you would be able to.
Certainly over the course of the year, you can then see the entire sky.
That's the only point on Earth where the entire sky and all the stars are visible to you.
If you travel to the North Pole of the Earth, the equator is going to sit on the horizon.
The North Celestial Pole will be directly overhead at your zenith.
And the stars will appear to march around the sky like this parallel to the horizon.
The entire aspect of the sky will appear to change.
If you're on the South Pole of the Earth, the North Celestial Pole is down and the South Celestial Pole is up.
So you see different things in the sky at different latitudes.
It's entirely latitude dependent.
How do you really know that the Earth rotates?
Well, in your mind, use your plumb bob again.
Just a weight on a string, that's all.
And let it swing.
Pretend it's a pendulum swinging back and forth.
Go up to the North Pole in your mind and hang the string from a frictionless bearing.
You see a remarkable thing.
As you watch the plane of the swing, the direction in which the pendulum is going, will appear to change its directions.
Mysteriously, as if there's some odd force out there that you don't understand.
What is really happening is that you're swinging the pendulum free in space and the Earth is turning under it.
If you swing it toward a star out on the horizon, the pendulum will simply follow the star.
And it will take 24 hours to go all the way around, showing that the Earth is actually turning underneath the pendulum.
This experiment was first run a long time ago by Leon Foucault in Paris, who swung an iron ball from the top of the pantheon in Paris.
It became a sensation.
Now, it only works with this 24-hour motion at the North Pole of the Earth or at the South Pole.
The equator doesn't work at all.
At mid-latitudes, it takes longer for that pendulum to appear to go all the way around.
They're fascinating to watch.
You watch them swing and gradually it changes the direction.
You find these things in most good science museums around the world.
And if they're set up right, again, they're mesmerizing.
People will just stand there and watch it slowly change.
You can see the Earth turning beneath your feet.
It is the first proof we had, in fact, that the Earth does rotate on its axis.
Or I should say the first piece of evidence that we have that the Earth rotates on its axis.
There are others.
A concept known as the Coriolis effect.
If you were to shoot a cannonball north from your location toward, say, a city up north,
that cannonball would appear to curve to the right.
Because it's moving at a faster speed around the Earth than the target farther to the north.
So you have this mysterious force that makes all projectiles turn toward the right if you look toward the north,
in the opposite direction if you look toward the south.
This force isn't really a force. It's caused by differing rotational speeds of the Earth.
You're moving faster at the equator. You're moving zero at the north pole.
The effect has, the Coriolis effect, is visible in weather patterns.
It's largely what causes the circular weather patterns that you see in the fronts in the northern and southern hemisphere.
So the knowledge is ancient.
We know how the Earth spins.
We know its size. We know its shape.
We have evidence and proofs of all of these.
And at this point, we have to put it into some kind of context with the rest of the planetary system.
Because the Earth is also going around the Sun. It has not just one motion, but two motions.
And in fact, when you look at it in even more detail, it has many more motions than that.
So the next step is to watch the Earth orbit the Sun and see what effect that has.
As the Sun appears to go around the Earth, it doesn't. It's the Earth going around the Sun.
The appearance of the Sun going around the Earth, the tilt of the Earth's axis,
and the origin of the seasons, which we'll do next. Thank you.
After listening to lecture two, a student posed this question to Professor Kaler.
Can you explain what a nautical mile is?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
It's an interesting question. The Earth is 25,000 miles around in circumference.
On a great circle, which is the largest circle that will take you all the way around the Earth,
where the center of the circle is equivalent to the center of the sphere.
In ordinary statute miles, that amounts to about 70 miles per degree if you're going north and south.
So if you go from 40 degrees north latitude to 41 degrees north latitude, you've roughly gone about 70 miles.
And you divide degrees up into minutes of arc. You use the same words you use for time, except they're not time units.
60 minutes of arc in a degree, 60 seconds of arc in a minute of arc.
And that amounts to about one mile, slightly over one statute mile per minute of arc.
Now, you can actually use the minute of arc to define the mile, and that defines the nautical mile.
So if you've gone a nautical mile at the equator, for example, you've gone about a minute of arc.
And it makes it very convenient for navigation.
You always have to, of course, scale the physical units, miles, kilometers, for any planet relative to the angular units.
The angular units, you can measure longitude and latitude on the moon, on Mars, as long as you have your fundamental reference points.
But the sizes of the planets are different, of course, and then that amounts to a different size per degree.
And very closely on Earth, it's about one mile per minute of arc, or in nautical terms about 60 nautical miles, actually actually 60 nautical miles per degree.
