We left off the last lecture with the spinning Earth.
The rotating Earth causes us to watch the stars rise in the East and set in the West.
We're now going to add a second motion.
This lecture is called the Sun and the Seasons.
And we're going to look at the orbit of the Earth around the Sun and the consequences that
it has for life on Earth.
The orbit of the Earth and the tilt of the Earth on its axis is responsible entirely
for the seasons, for the fact that summer comes in in the northern hemisphere, winter
comes in in the southern, winter in the northern, southern in the summer, that the air temperature,
the ground temperature goes back and forth all as a result of the tilt of the Earth's
axis.
And the point of this lecture is to show why and to show that it has nothing whatever
to do with the distance between the Earth and the Sun.
Earth's orbit, the Earth orbits the Sun over the course of one year.
Not actually all that common knowledge, a remarkable number of people don't know that
the definition of the year is the time it takes the Earth to go entirely around the
Sun through a period of 365 and approximately one-quarter days.
The rotation of the Earth having very little, in fact, having nothing to do with the orbit
of the Earth around the Sun.
The orbit is very close to a circle, but it's not a perfect circle.
It's in the shape of what's called an ellipse.
The ellipse has a fairly simple definition.
You take two points, call each one a focus.
The definition of the ellipse is that the sum of the distances from each point on the
curve to the tuphosae is always a constant.
If you take the tuphosae and shove them together at the center, the ellipse falls into the
circle.
The circle is actually a special case of the ellipse.
And if you then stretch them out farther and farther from the center, you get an ellipse
of longer and longer and longer proportions, flatter and flatter and flatter.
Now if you could see the orbit of the Earth from space, actually look at the shape of
it, you probably couldn't tell that it's anything other than a circle.
It looks very close to a circle, but it's not perfect.
The Sun is offset from the center by a very slight amount.
The flattening is only a matter of about a percent or two.
But this does change the distance between the Earth and the Sun.
When the Earth is closest to the Sun, it hits a point in the orbit called perihelion, from
two Greek words, helios from Sun.
When the Earth is farthest from the Sun, it's at a point called aphelion.
Now perihelion takes place when you are closest to the Sun around January 2nd in the dead
of winter in the Northern Hemisphere.
This should tell us something right away, that the seasons have nothing whatever to do
with the distance between us and the Sun.
Aphelion takes place roughly on July 3rd or July 4th when we're farthest from the Sun.
There is a slight difference in the amount of sunlight falling on Earth, but it is overwhelmed
by other effects and we really don't feel it all.
The seasons are caused by the tilt of the Earth's axis against the perpendicular to
the orbit.
It sounds complex, it's not.
We'll look at it a little bit farther down the line.
But let's take a look first at how the Earth appears to move around the Sun.
As the Earth goes around the Sun, the Sun will appear to go around the Earth.
You're standing on the moving body and again you have reflexive motion.
Moving, if you can look down from the North, the Earth has a counterclockwise path around
the Sun.
And as you stand on the Earth, you keep seeing the Sun in different directions and it looks
as if the Sun has a counterclockwise path around the Earth.
Now all this is going on at the same time that the Earth is spinning.
So we have two effects.
Every time the Earth makes a 24-hour rotation, the Sun will appear to rise in the East and
set in the West.
However, as the Earth goes around the Sun, the Sun will gradually appear to shift its
position against the background stars.
Now we all know we can't see the stars in the daytime.
They're there.
They don't go away when the Sun comes up.
They can't disappear.
It's just that starlight is so faint and so feeble that you can't see it against the
brightness of the blue sky.
There are many planets that you can see, Venus with the naked eye.
You can even barely, if you've got really good eyes, nowhere it is, even spot Jupiter
with the naked eye during daylight hours.
If you have a telescope, you can even see some stars when they're there.
So let's at least pretend that we can see the stars in the sky with the Sun in the foreground.
As the Earth goes around the Sun, the Sun will appear to make a path around the Earth.
This path is called the ecliptic.
Word has nothing to do with ellipse.
It's just a coincidence.
It has to do with eclipses because the eclipses take place on the ecliptic.
The ecliptic is the apparent path of the Sun.
Now it takes the Earth 365 a little bit more, 365 days to go around the Sun through 360 degrees.
Now that's not a coincidence either.
Where do we think the 360 degrees came from?
It's an ancient concept of putting degrees in a circle equal to the number of days in
a year.
We have 365 degrees in a circle because that's not really very easily divisible by anything.
But 360 is a lovely number.
It's divisible by two, three.
It's divisible by just about everything.
You can cut it down to smaller and smaller proportions.
So we have 360 degrees in a circle for a 365 day year.
This means that the Earth very nearly goes through one degree of its orbital path, assuming
it's a circle, which is close enough, through its orbital path per day.
And that means the Sun will appear to move toward the left in the direction opposite
its rising and setting, toward the east, as you look at it, one degree per day against
the background stars.
Now everybody's familiar with the fact that the stars are in groups in the sky called constellations.
These patterns are used for ancient storytelling.
All cultures have had different groups of constellations.
We'll look at these in the next lecture.
But there's a very special group of constellations through which the Sun appears to go over the
course of the year, through which the ecliptic passes.
Because the Earth's orbit doesn't wobble terribly much.
The plane of the Earth's orbit is very constant from one year to the next.
And that means that the ecliptic is very constant from one year to the next.
The Sun just keeps going through the same path over and over and over again.
The ecliptic cuts through 12 ancient constellations called the constellations of the zodiac.
They are some of the oldest that we have.
They were sacred to many of the ancients because, after all, the life giver, the Sun, is found
within the constellations of the zodiac.
They're the homes of the Sun and of the planets because all the other planets have pretty
much the same orbital paths around the Sun and pretty much the same planes.
So we find the other moving bodies of the sky within these constellations of the zodiac
hence the rise of astrology, the idea that maybe we can tell our fates by where all these
bodies are against the background stars.
Of course, every culture makes them differently and we could make up anything we want.
But the constellation of the zodiac, the word zodiac, comes from circle of animals,
same root word as zoo.
It's an animalistic collection from very, very ancient times, many of which are fertility
symbols.
So the constellation of the zodiac holds the Sun.
The Sun appears to move through these constellations year after year after year.
Now you can't see the stars in the daytime sky but you can see them at night.
At night, you're in the shadow of the Earth.
As you rotate around, the Sun is setting on my western horizon and when I face in the
opposite direction, the Sun is to my back and it's night and I see the stars come out.
As I orbit the Sun, I continue to look in different directions at midnight.
Tomorrow night, the stars will appear to shift it over by that same one degree.
I am always at night looking at the stars that are opposite the Sun.
So over the course of the year, the stars will appear to shift their nightly positions.
If I look at a star at, say, eight o'clock tonight and I find it, let's say, due south,
you don't even need to know your constellations to do this.
Just go out and look.
Find something bright, align it against a lamppost or something at any given particular
time.
Tomorrow night, you go out and look at exactly the same time.
That star will have shifted over by one degree.
A week later, it will have shifted over by seven degrees and you can watch the stars
march around the sky, shifting nightly at the same time by one degree to the west.
At the same time, of course, rising in the east and sitting in the west, we have two
motions going on at exactly the same time.
So in that sense, you can actually watch the Earth go around the Sun with the shift of
the stars at night.
So the stars in the constellations become seasonal.
In the wintertime in the Northern Hemisphere, the Sun appears in the direction of the constellation
Sagittarius.
Now, loosely, we would say it's in Sagittarius.
It's not.
Sagittarius is a pattern of named stars.
The stars are all different distances, at great distances from the Earth and the Sun
is nearby, only one astronomical unit away.
So the Sun appears to be projected against the background of the distant stars.
When the Sun is in Sagittarius, at night, we see the opposite constellation Gemini,
high in the sky.
Six months later, the Sun has moved around to the constellation Gemini.
So what do we see at night?
We see the constellation Sagittarius.
Now the Sun is in Gemini in Northern Hemisphere summer, so Sagittarius becomes a summer constellation
because that's when you see it.
And vice versa, when the Sun is in Sagittarius in Northern Hemisphere winter, Gemini becomes
a winter constellation.
So we speak of the seasonality of the constellations, Pegasus and Autumn constellation, Leo, a
springtime constellation, all of these patterns and the roots behind them to be developed
in the next lecture.
Well, if I were to stand here, stand, or if you were to stand in your room and you had
the Sun directly in front of you, say shining overhead on your belt buckle, and you walked
around the room always perpendicular, which you would have to do, otherwise you would
fall down, the Sun would always be shining on your belt.
If the axis of the Earth were exactly perpendicular to the plane of its orbit, then the Sun would
have to shine overhead on the equator at all times, and life would be relatively boring.
The Sun would rise exactly in the east and set exactly in the west.
The equator of the sky goes from precisely east to precisely west, so that the equator
of the sky is always centered on the north and south celestial poles.
That isn't what actually happens.
The Earth is tilted through an angle of 23 and a half degrees relative to the perpendicular
to the equator.
This is the origin of the seasons.
It's a very difficult thing to get across because the common sense is going to tell
you that as you get closer to a fire, you're going to warm up.
As you get farther away from a fire, you're going to cool off.
So as you get closer to the Sun, it should get warmer.
As you get farther from the Sun, it should get colder.
And all other things being equal, that, in fact, is what would happen, but all things
are not equal.
The difference in distance is really pretty small.
You wouldn't really notice the effect very much, but look at what happens with the seasons.
First of all, perihelion and apelion in the northern hemisphere are completely out of
sync with the seasons.
You're closest to the Sun in the dead of winter.
You're farthest from the Sun in the middle of summer.
Not only that, the seasons alternate between the hemispheres.
When it is summer in the northern hemisphere up here, it's winter in the southern hemisphere
down here.
And if the distance of the Earth from the Sun had anything to do with it, the seasons
would be the same in both hemispheres, and they're not.
It has to do entirely with this tilt.
And that's why globes are placed upon stands the way they are.
This tilt relative to the perpendicular, which is here, is 23 and a half degrees.
The term for this tilt is the rather long one called the obliquity of the ecliptic.
All planets have obliquities of their ecliptics, and all planets have different ecliptics because
they're in slightly different planes.
Why 23 and a half?
No one really knows.
It's an accident of nature.
So we'll see in the last lecture.
The planets were formed, we're almost sure, by the successive collisions of larger and
larger bodies that built the planets up from tiny dust grains that were in orbit about
the early Sun four and a half billion years ago.
And the last collisions were humdingers.
They could have the effect of tilting the planets one way or the other.
And Earth came out with approximately a 23 and a half degree tilt in a way it's an accident
of nature.
So look at the effect that this has.
The axis of the Earth is tilted toward the Sun at this point, the Sun shining overhead
on the Northern Hemisphere.
And it will shine overhead somewhere in the Northern Hemisphere no matter what the rotation
of the Earth, all day long it will shine overhead in the Northern Hemisphere.
Three months later the Sun has gone through 90 degrees of its orbit, and the Sun now shines
overhead at the equator.
Three months later the Earth has gone another 90 degrees around and the Earth is tilted in
the opposite direction relative to the Sun, and the Sun now shines overhead in the Southern
Hemisphere all day long as the Earth rotates.
Three months later we're back to where we were again.
The result in the sky is that the ecliptic does not lie on the celestial equator.
The ecliptic is a tilted circle, the big circle tilted by 23 and a half degrees relative
to the celestial equator.
So what we see when we stand on Earth is that the Sun must cross the celestial equator twice
over the course of the year, once going north, once going south, and sometime during the
year it will be as far north of the equator as it can get by 23 and a half degrees, and
then it'll be as far south of the equator as it can get by 23 and a half degrees.
Viewing it from any given location on the Earth, we then see when the Sun is at these
crossing points which are called the equinoxes, the Sun will rise exactly in the east, be
up for 12 hours, set exactly in the west, and be down for 12 hours.
Days and nights are equal, hence the term equinox.
We have 12 hours of sunlight, 12 hours of darkness.
Now there are two crossing points, once where the Sun crosses the equator going north, once
we're across the equator going south.
At the crossing point going north marks the first day of spring.
The Sun crosses the equator northbound on roughly March 20th of every year.
We celebrate the first day of spring.
It keeps going north for three months until it hits its farthest northerly point, 23 and
a half degrees north of the celestial equator.
At that point it begins to turn around and go back.
That most northerly point is called the summer solstice.
The word solstice has to do with sol, Latin for sun, sol standing still.
It doesn't stand still, but for a long period of time it looks like the Sun is not changing
its angle relative to the equator.
So the Sun is going to be very high in the northern hemisphere sky.
It will rise in the northeast, it will set in the northwest.
You will have more than 12 hours at mid-temperate latitudes, you will have more than 12 hours
of sunlight, you will have fewer than 12 hours of darkness, so you have long summer days and
short summer nights.
The Sun is very high in the sky.
You will get your maximum heating.
Three months later the Sun is back to the ecliptic again and we are back now to the
autumnal equinox which the Sun passes around September 23rd.
It then plunges into the southern hemisphere of the sky, appears low from northern latitudes,
high in the sky from southern latitudes.
When it reaches its most southerly point, 23 and a half degrees south of the celestial
equator, we mark it as the beginning of northern hemisphere winter.
That takes place around December 22nd and then it goes back up again toward the equator
and we start the whole thing all over again.
Now you have a beam of sunlight.
Pretend the Sun is high in the sky.
The beam of sunlight is shining directly down on the Earth.
You have a shaft of light coming down.
The Earth is heated entirely by the Sun.
Oh, there is a little bit of geothermal energy, a little bit of radioactivity, but that is
very, very minor compared to the amount of energy that we get from the Sun.
It's basically sunlight that causes the warmth of the Earth.
As sunlight shines, pretend straight down that shaft of light will heat a small area
of Earth.
That is, you're concentrating the light into a small area, whereas if the Sun is hitting
the Earth like this, that same shaft spreads itself out over a very broad area and the
amount of heating you have per unit area is much lower.
Consequently, the Earth cools off when the Sun appears low in the sky and it heats up
when the Sun is high in the sky.
The tilt of the axis, the obliquity, is the entire cause of the seasons.
Northern hemisphere summer, the Sun passes not overhead necessarily, but very high and
you'll get your maximum heating for a very long time because the Sun will have a high
northerly position for many, many days, many weeks at a time and you'll get a lot of heating.
Maximum heating will take place a month or two after the solstice and then it will cool
off down to the first day of winter.
It'll continue to cool off as the Sun comes back up and by the time we reach March, it's
starting to warm up outside.
The difference in distance, the variation in distance from perihelion to aphelion does
make a slight difference.
All other things being equal, perihelion takes place in northern hemisphere summer and aphelion
in southern hemisphere winter.
So the southern hemisphere seasons on the Earth, all things being equal, would be a little
bit more severe than the northern hemisphere seasons because you have to add in the effect
of this varying distance.
However, if you look at the globe of the Earth, you'll see that things aren't equal at all.
Look at where the continents are.
Most of the continental landmass is in the northern hemisphere whereas most of the southern
hemisphere consists of oceans.
Water is a wonderful heat sink.
It absorbs and releases heat very slowly so it moderates out the seasons and the variation
in distance between the Earth and the Sun is completely lost in the difference in distribution
of the landmasses on the Earth so it has nothing to do with the seasons whatsoever.
The whole thing has to do with the tilt with the obliquity of the Earth's axis.
This has some other interesting effects.
Since the Sun can get no farther than 23.5 degrees from the Earth's equator, the Sun
can shine overhead on the Earth no farther than 23.5 degrees from the Earth's equator,
Tropic of Cancer, the maximum southerly limit where the Sun can be overhead.
The Sun can be overhead only between 23.5 degrees north, 23.5 degrees south.
The southern limit is called the Tropic of Capricorn.
In old times, you go back 2,000 years, 2,500 years, the Sun was in the direction of the
zodiacal constellation Cancer when it was at the summer solstice, another way of saying
that the summer solstice was in Cancer at that time.
That's why it's called the Tropic of Cancer.
Because of this 26,000-year wobble of the axis, very slow wobble called precession,
discovered over 2,000 years ago, because of that the vernal equinox slowly shifts its
constellation positions.
It used to be in the constellation Aries.
This is why Aries tops the newspaper horoscope charts.
It no longer is.
The vernal equinox is in the direction of the constellation Pc's.
The summer solstice is in the direction of Gemini.
It used to be in Cancer.
If you're doing this now, you'd call it the Tropic of Gemini.
It's a historical artifact.
Back in the old times, the winter solstice was in Capricornus.
Now it isn't.
It's in Sagittarius.
It's shifted over, but it's a memory of 2,500 years ago when people were first beginning
to learn their astronomy.
Go to the other extreme.
90 minus 23.5 is 66.5.
Remember circumpolar stars from the last lecture.
If you're a latitude of, let's make one up, 40 degrees north, the north celestial pole
is 40 degrees above the horizon, and any star within 40 degrees will not set.
It will be circumpolar.
Now go up to a latitude of 66.5 degrees north.
The north celestial pole is very high in the sky.
Any star, any body within 66.5 degrees of the pole is going to be circumpolar.
If it's within 66.5 degrees of the pole, it'll be 23.5 degrees from the equator.
That is, on the first day of summer, if you're at a latitude of 66.5 degrees north, a complement
of the obliquity, the sun becomes circumpolar.
It doesn't set, and you have a midnight sun.
We can look up here, and sure enough, there's a little dotted line around the earth at 66.5
degrees, called the Arctic Circle.
66.5 degrees south latitude, called the Antarctic Circle.
These are zones above or below which the sun can be circumpolar sometime during the year
and never set.
This includes a significant portion of the state of Alaska.
The northern point of Alaska up at Barrow, Alaska, at 71, 72 degrees north, has several
days of circumpolar sun, has a couple of months of circumpolar sun, in which it never sets,
and then it has an equal number in the winter time where the sun never rises.
If you go up to the north pole of the earth, if you stand on the north pole, the earth is
oriented like this, such that the equator of the sky is on the horizon.
If the equator of the sky is on the horizon, then on March 21st at the north pole, the
sun will rise.
And as long as the sun is in the northern hemisphere of the sky, you'll have daylight.
So at the north pole, you have six full months of daylight.
The sun reaches its maximum elevation above the horizon on June 21st.
It's not very high.
It's up for 24 hours, six months a day, and it's cold up there.
The duration of the sun above the horizon doesn't have very much to do with the temperature.
It all has to do with the elevation above the horizon and how much heating you're getting
per unit area on the ground.
So this is, in a sense, a demonstration again of the seasons.
On September 23rd, the sun will set at the north pole.
You'll have a period of twilight, twilight being that part of the evening where the sun
is illuminating the earth's atmosphere, not the ground, but the atmosphere, and it remains
light for a period of time on the ground.
So you'll have a period of time after the sun sets at the north pole, and then you'll
have about four months of perpetual darkness.
And when it's fully daylight at the north pole, it is dark at the south pole and vice
versa.
So the tropics are the places where the sun can shine overhead sometime during the year.
Above and below the Arctic Circle are the places where you'll get full sunlight for
at least 24 hours.
At the Arctic Circle, the farther north you get, more and more sunlight you get, the more
period of darkness you'll get in the wintertime.
The cultural history of this is very, very deep.
Imagine yourself as a tribesperson of long ago, or an old farmer from thousands of years
ago, and you don't understand what's going on.
The sun is a god.
Every year the sun gets lower and lower, and it doesn't take much to correlate, especially
if you live outside.
How far the sun is above the horizon with the temperature.
The sun goes down farther and farther and farther.
It's getting closer and closer to the horizon.
Your elders, the priests of the tribe, will say, it's okay.
It's going to be okay.
We'll do the magic incantations and we'll bring the sun back up again.
But maybe, maybe you've done the wrong thing, maybe the tribe has done the wrong thing,
and the sun will drop farther and farther down, and it will never come back, and it
will freeze, and it will all die.
It goes down farther and farther and farther.
And then once again, everything works right.
The sun comes back up again, and we're saved for another year.
Now what are you going to do if your life has been saved once again?
It's party time.
So we have a whooping party when we learn the sun comes back up again.
Do we have a holiday around that time?
Some people might jump in as New Year's, no, Christmas, Christmas.
Think of the cultural history of Christmas.
Christmas is a time that was taken by the early church fathers as a memorial in a sense
to the birth of Jesus Christ.
It had nothing to do with the origin of Christmas.
Think of what you do at Christmas time.
You bring out lights to celebrate the darkness, the bringing back of the light of the sun.
We bring a tree into the house.
That has a lot to do with Christianity, doesn't it?
Now you try to explain this to a Martian why we have these odd, odd symbolisms that
have nothing to do with one of the major religions of the earth.
And it has to do with the fact that Christmas as a solstice holiday long predates the religious
holiday.
You can find all manner of holidays that string out along these points, the winter solstice,
the vernal equinox at the time of the birthing of things, Easter, Passover, summer solstice.
Shakespeare wrote a play about the summer solstice, Midsummer Night's Dream, when all
the little people came out and froliced and had a party.
Many cultures celebrated an autumn holiday.
The Jewish New Year is around the time of the autumn holiday.
It's pinned to the autumn autumnal equinox, in fact.
And then back to the winter solstice again, and like most people, of course, that gives
us maybe a few parties a year, but we really like more parties than that.
So we, hey, how about a party in between the winter solstice and vernal equinox?
We can at least celebrate the vernal equinox on its way.
So we split the difference halfway between the winter solstice and the vernal equinox,
and I'll let you think about this a little bit.
Halfway between, we have a little celebration called Groundhog Day.
It's an astronomical, it really is, it's an astronomical holiday.
It comes to us from an old English holiday of a different name.
But it's a ritual of the coming of spring, May Day Eve.
Back in the old days, you'd wrap ribbons around your maypole.
It's halfway toward summer.
The English have a, and the Scots have another celebration in August, the halfway point.
We don't, but the big party, the big party is halfway between the autumnal equinox and
the winter solstice.
Let you think about that one a minute, too.
What do we do?
Oh, we have all kinds.
We dress up in costumes, we go out and get candy from the neighbors, and it's the celebration
of All Saints' Day Eve, Halloween.
Groundhog Day, Halloween, they are astronomical holiday, they're called cross quarter days,
and they're genuine astronomical holidays.
Everybody always wants a party.
The cultural history is incredibly deep, all over the world.
In the south of England is a ring of stones, three meters high, three meters high.
Doesn't matter, they're big stones, set up like this with calf stones on the top in a
big ring.
If you stand in the center, there is another stone to the outside, and on the first day
of summer, the sun rises directly over that stone.
It's a calendar, an ancient calendar, among other things, among other things.
It was a place of religious veneration for a people long gone.
In places in the United States, there are rings of stones where the Native Americans
did exactly the same thing.
Mounds, everybody has done this.
They have created part of their culture where the sun rises, where the sun sets.
We've sort of displaced ourselves by that now by simply the use of the calendar.
We do mark the days, we do mark the dates, we have to synchronize somehow the rotation
of the earth with the orbit of the earth.
365 is not a terribly friendly number, in fact, is 365 and a quarter, which makes it
even unfriendlier.
There are some cultures where they just put 360 days in the calendar, and then when the
360 days are up, everybody stays inside for five days and just ignores them, maybe they'll
go away and then walks outside and we start the whole thing all over again.
Our civil calendar tries to reconcile all of this by having 365 days in a year and then
adding an additional day every four years to make it 365 and a quarter, which is very
close to the actual number of days within the year.
But it's not exactly 365 and a quarter, it's 365.2422, we're just a little bit shy.
Julius Caesar's astronomers, showing how important astronomers are of course at all
times, because you could do this without astronomers, would set this up with the leap year every
four years.
But by this 15th, 16th century, the seasons were getting out of sync with the calendar.
So Pope Gregory XIII hired some more astronomers, we don't get employment very often as you
can see, hired more astronomers to figure out what to do with the calendar.
They jumped the vernal equinox from I think it was March 11th, back to March 21st, where
it was in the third century when there was a big religious council.
And then dropped three leap years every 400 years on centuries, not divisible by 400.
So the year 2000 was a leap year.
But for all of you who can live long enough, the year 2100 will not be a leap year to the
intense confusion of everybody at the time.
This averages things out to 365.2425, which makes it almost perfect.
It's called the Gregorian calendar.
The England and its colonies went over to it in the 1700s.
George Washington was born under the old calendar, died under the new calendar.
You'll sometimes see old style or new style for this.
We wind up with a very nice calendar.
The Jewish calendar tries to synchronize the motion of the moon within it, which is why
the holidays get a little bit offset from the civil calendar.
But there they solve it by putting in an extra month, the 13th month, which snaps the new
year back pretty much, or close at least, to the autumnal equinox.
The Moslem calendar, on the other hand, ignores the sun altogether and simply uses the moon.
The months begin at the new moon and the Moslem month cycle throughout the years.
There are a variety of ways of solving the problem.
The Mayan solved in a way that's still not entirely understood by everybody with an almost
hopelessly complex calendar.
All is a result of the earth spinning on its axis, going around the sun like this, like
a dancer, rotating as it goes.
We've set the sun now into the pattern of the sky.
It's time now, in the next lecture, to look at what these patterns are and the cultural
history of the constellations, where they came from, and how we organize all of this.
With 8,000 or so stars visible to the naked eye, you've got to start giving them names
and somehow.
So let's see how we organize it the next lecture down the line.
Thank you.
After listening to lecture three, a student posed this question to Professor Kaler.
What happened when Pope Gregory reset the calendar?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
The resetting of the calendar in Pope Gregory's time was kind of a traumatic event.
They had to drop 10 days from the calendar to skip from where the vernal equinox had
moved to, the date that it had moved to, back to March 21.
It had been originally set at March 25 in Julius Caesar's time, but for religious reasons
it was placed at the 21st in Gregory's time.
Well, this was commanded by the Pope.
So it had the background of religion to it, the impremature of religion.
So there weren't really any heavy problems at the time, except, of course, that the Catholic
countries went over to the new calendar, but the non-Catholic countries weren't about
to do anything that the Pope had decreed, so they stayed on the old Julian calendar,
so we were running two calendars at the same time.
This presents a serious problem for commerce, as anybody can imagine.
Finally, England and its colonies went over in the 1700s, by which time the date of the
vernal equinox had drifted 11 days away.
So they dropped 11 days out of the calendar, but since there was no impremature of religion
at this time, and this was basically a political event, there were calendar riots throughout
England and what became the United States, because people thought that days were being
stolen out of their lives, and in a self-fulfilling prophecy, many people died in the riots.
It's exactly what happened.
But politics reigns supreme.
We did go over, everybody went over to the civil calendar in roughly the mid-1700s, and
here we are today operating on an almost perfect system called the Gregorian calendar.
This ends lecture three.
