Astronomy, Earth, Sky, and the Planets, Lecture 5, Romance of the Moon.
The last lecture we looked at the constellations, the background of the sky, and one of the most
important sets of all the constellations, the ecliptic, which forms the background of
the motion of the sun.
But there are many other moving bodies of the sky as well, the most important of which,
certainly the brightest of which, that anybody can recognize as the moon.
This lecture is called the Romance of the Moon, one of the most beautiful objects in
the sky.
And in here we're going to look at the phases of the moon, what really causes the phases
of the moon, not what most people think cause the phases of the moon.
The correlation between the phases and the rising and setting times of the moon, why
you can see it in the sky sometimes, and why you can't.
Sometimes why you can see the whole outline in the early evening, why the moon looks so
big when it rises as a full phase, what it has to do with the calendars.
And then at the end we'll look at eclipses of both the moon and the sun to see where
they come from, and why we don't see them all the time either.
The moon is an orbit about the earth, it's our closest neighbor.
It's 238,000 miles, about 380,000 kilometers away from the earth.
It's the only other place to which humans have actually gone.
Sure, we've sent robotic craft all the way out to Neptune and beyond, but we've only
walked two of the planets of the solar system, the earth and the earth's moon.
Like orbits the earth rather than the sun, that is the earth and the moon together orbit
the sun with the moon going around the earth.
So we have to add additional movements here.
We have not just the rotation of the earth, but the orbit of the earth, but we've got
the movement of the moon going around the earth all at the same time.
The moon moves through a set of phases over the course of just about a month.
It takes 29 and a half days, namely just short of a month, which is where our month actually
comes from.
We speak of so many months, we say what we really mean is so many moons ago.
There are 12 months in the year because the moon goes around the earth approximately 12
and a half times a year, but we have on our civil calendar taken the phase month and stretched
it out to 30 or 31 days to get the months to fit the moon.
You can hear it in the word itself, month, moon.
You find the same thing in other languages of the world, that the term for the month
has come from the moon.
It is the most obvious calendrical pattern there is outside of the day and the year.
The phases are commonly misconstrued as having something to do with the shadow of the earth
falling on the moon, which is why the moon changes its parent shape and the sky.
That is confusing the phases of the moon with eclipses.
Eclipses involve shadow phenomena.
The phases of the moon are caused by our seeing different portions of the sunlit side of the
moon over the course of the month as the moon goes around the earth.
We can demonstrate it rather easily even in your mind by thinking of the sun out in space
at a great distance, the moon in orbit about the earth in different positions, and imagining
looking at the daylight side.
The sun illuminates one half of the earth's hemisphere.
It also illuminates one half of the lunar hemisphere at the same time.
Now, when the moon is situated exactly or more or less, I should say, in between the
earth and the sun, you are looking at the nighttime side of the moon and it disappears.
You can't see it.
That's a phase called the new moon.
You're beginning the new phase cycle.
Both the Jewish calendar and the Muslim calendars begin with the sighting of the new moon or
with the new moon, I should say, or sometimes with the sighting of the first crescent when
the moon first comes out of new moon.
Now, bring the moon a quarter of the way around.
Quarter the orbit.
Now, the moon and the earth are side by side with the sun illuminating the front half
of each.
From the earth, you will see one half of the illuminated face.
You'll see the other half in night, in other words, invisible, and you will see a half
moon in the sky.
Germany is famous for confusing vocabulary.
The word half moon and quarter moon mean exactly the same thing.
They just refer to two different things.
At the half moon phase, you are seeing half the illuminated apparent disc from the earth,
but the quartering means that the moon has gone a quarter of the way around the orbit.
It takes about a week to do that, which is one of the origins of our period of time of
the week.
That and the seven-day week coming from the seven moving bodies of the sky, all ancient
knowledge.
When the moon is halfway in between, or roughly halfway in between, the new phase and the
half phase, or the first quarter, as it's called, from the earth, you're looking at
mostly nighttime side and a little sliver of daylight, and the moon will appear to be
a crescent in the sky.
Now take the moon to the other side of the earth opposite the earth.
Now, from the nighttime side of the earth, you are seeing the full day-lit side of the
moon, and we call it full moon.
That takes about two weeks after the new moon.
We bring the moon around to its third quarter, three quarters of the way around, and again
you're seeing mostly daytime side, half the nighttime side, you have the third quarter
through the crescent, and then you're back to the new moon again.
In between third quarter and full, we call it the gibbous phase.
It's a growing, here it's a growing phase as it heads toward full, what we call the
waxing moon, and on the other side, it's a waning phase as it goes from full through
gibbous where you're seeing mostly daylight, a little sliver of nighttime, and then third
quarter and back to new again.
It all has only to do, and nothing more, with the amount of illuminated surface that you
see.
The moon goes through its daylight and nighttime phases, nighttime stages, I should say, just
like the earth does.
One of the curiosities about the moon, however, is that you can see dark spots on it.
These are, as we will find out later, large impact basins on the moon that have been filled
with dark lava.
They are the figures that make the man and the moon as seen from the earth, and you've
noticed, you will see that they never change their relative position.
They're always in the same place as the moon goes around the earth.
The moon is in what we call synchronous rotation relative to the earth.
That is, as it goes around, it keeps one face pointed toward the earth at all times.
This is a result of tides that are raised by the earth on the moon, something we'll talk
about when we get to discussing the physical natures of these two bodies.
But if the moon keeps one face pointed toward the earth at all times, it must rotate relative
to the sun.
So if we stand here at new moon, put the moon in between the earth and the sun, the far
side of the moon, the part that we cannot see is in full daylight.
The near side of the moon, the part that we can see is in night.
We can never see the far side of the moon from the earth because one face points us
at us all the time.
Sometimes it's called the dark side of the moon, which is a misnomer, because that far
side, it has to do more with hidden than anything else, that term.
The far side of the moon will see just as much daylight as the near side of the moon.
At new moon, the far side sees full sunlight.
At full moon, it's the near side that sees full sunlight, and the far side is in darkness.
If you were on the moon, when we go back to the moon, perhaps I should say, and if you
could live through a full face cycle on the moon, you would see the sun rise in the east
and set in the west just like it does on the earth, except that it would take 29 and a
half days for the whole cycle to go from sunrise back to sunrise again, whereas the earth would
just hover constantly in the sky, since the moon's one face of the moon points toward
the earth at all times.
The earth, at any given location on the moon, will have a constant position, and the earth
will go through its faces in the sky, just like the moon goes through its faces as viewed
from earth.
Rising and setting times of the moon are very strictly correlated with the phase.
Think of the moon at new phase.
It's in between the earth and the sun.
As viewed from the earth, the two must be lined up in the sky, so when the sun sets,
the moon sets along with it.
New moon rises with the sun, it sets with the sun.
Go to the first quarter.
Now the two are 90 degrees apart, a quarter of the turn.
You start at new and you go 90 degrees around.
There's a 90 degree or right angle separation.
When the sun is setting, the first quarter moon will be seen roughly to the south, fairly
high in the sky.
You can see it in the early afternoon.
In fact, the first quarter will rise on the average at noon, cross the sky during the
daylight, and then you'll see it in the evening, shortly after sunset, and the first quarter
will set shortly about six hours after the sun.
If it's in the growing or waxing crescent phase, in between the first quarter and new
moon, the moon may be only 30 or 40 degrees from the sun, the crescent sets immediately
after the sun.
Very quickly, you will not see the crescent, or it's very difficult to see the crescent,
because it's not all that bright, during the daylight hours.
As it grows and the moon gets brighter and brighter, then you begin to see the moon in
the daylight hours.
Now full moon is opposite the sun and the sky.
When the sun is on one side of the earth, full moon is on the other side of the earth,
and when the sun goes down, the full moon must come up.
So full moon rises at sunset, it sets at sunrise.
You can never see the sun and the full moon in the sky at exactly the same time, because
they're opposite each other in the sky.
When you go 270 degrees around to third quarter, when the sun sets, the moon is way down below
the horizon.
At midnight, the third quarter comes up, and then it's seen during the morning hours when
you go to school or you go to work.
The phase is then strictly correlated, entirely correlated with the rising and setting.
So sometimes you see the moon in the early evening, sometimes you don't, depends, you'll
see it in the early evening when it's in its crescent phase, when it's in its first quarter,
when it's in the waxing gibbous.
You see in the morning hours when it's at third quarter, when it's at the waning crescent
phase, and then you see it rising shortly before the sun.
So sometimes it's there in the daytime, sometimes it's there at night, sometimes it's not there
at all.
From the moon, the earth has to go through exactly the same phases, but in reverse.
If you are standing on the moon, at new moon, looking at earth, you are on the nighttime
side of the moon.
It's the far side that's illuminated.
Now you're on the nighttime side of the moon, looking at the full earth.
If the moon is in its full phase, where someone on earth will see the full illuminated surface
of the moon, then someone on the moon is looking at the nighttime side of the earth, and the
earth is then new.
The moon is quite a bit smaller than the earth, it's about a quarter the size of the earth.
So it doesn't have anywhere near as much reflecting area.
It's made of dark rock, it has no water to speak of, it has no atmosphere, no clouds
to reflect sunlight.
So it's quite dark.
The reflected moonlight has about the brightness of, say, Yosemite, going out to a dark granite
rock or even a lava plain on the earth.
The earth, however, is brilliantly reflective.
It's not only four times bigger than the moon, which gives it 16 times the reflecting area,
but its surface is covered with reflective water and in particularly bright reflective
clouds.
The moon reflects only a few percent, maybe ten percent or so of the light that falls
on it.
The earth reflects around 80 percent.
The earth is actually much, much brighter in the sky to an alien, let's say, than the
moon would be.
Now, I think everybody said the experience of going outside at night under a full moon
and being able to run, ride a bike, almost to be able to read.
Many times I've looked through the window on a winter night when the moon is high in
the sky in Gemini and it's illuminating the outdoors so brightly that it looks like it
snowed outside.
As bright as that is, imagine the brilliance of the earth from the moon.
When the moon's in its crescent phase, let's say it's waxing crescent phase, then someone
on the moon would be looking back at an almost, but not quite, an almost full earth.
The brightness of earth light on the moon is so bright that it lights up the nighttime
side of the moon enough that you can see it from the earth.
When you watch the setting, thin crescent moon, you can see the entire outline of the moon.
The bright crescent and then the nighttime side of the moon in a ghostly fashion illuminated
by reflected earth light.
It's not a rare phenomenon.
You can see it at every crescent.
By the time the moon has gone around to 90 degrees in first quarter, the effect disappears
and you can't see it anymore, but you'll see it again with the waning crescent when
the moon rises just before sunrise.
It's a startlingly beautiful sight.
Between that and the rising of the full moon, which is equally beautiful, many of the questions
about why is the moon so darn big when it rises.
You don't notice this effect at the quarters at the crescents, but you sure do notice it
at the full and the near full moon.
The subject is still being argued by the psychologist.
It is an illusion.
It has a name.
It's called the moon illusion.
The moon looks huge when it rises and then sometimes it rises red, changes its color as
it goes across the sky.
The color is simple to explain because when you're looking at the horizon out through
the earth's atmosphere, you're looking through 30 or 40 times more air than when you're looking
directly overhead and the air selectively absorbs the blue component of sunlight or
moonlight, and that's why the sun and moon tend to look reddish when they're on the horizon.
But the size is a rather different matter.
Nobody quite knows why the mind-brain combination does this, but it does.
The common explanation is that when you're looking at the moon on the horizon, you're
comparing it with other things on the horizon, whereas when it rises up in the sky, it simply
looks smaller because you have no point of comparison anymore.
The sun does the same thing.
Even constellations, you see Orion rising up above the trees, it looks enormous.
It gets up high in the sky, it looks smaller.
Its entire illusion has nothing to do with the size of the earth or anything else.
It's unfortunate that it has to be one, I suppose, but it doesn't take away from the
beauty of a full moon rise.
Now the distance and the angular size of the moon really do change.
The moon's orbit is fairly elliptical.
The distance between the earth and the moon changes by around 5% one way or the other,
close to 11% total.
So when the moon is closest to the earth at perigee, it really is angularly bigger than
when it is farthest from the earth at apogee.
The difference is about 10%.
That is entirely impossible to see with a naked eye.
You have to measure it, and it has nothing to do with the moon illusion at all.
That is strictly a problem with the eye and the brain.
Well, let's put the moon back at new moon.
When I talked about the moon being in between the earth and the sun, or at full moon, with
the earth being between the moon and the sun, everything casts shadows into space.
You cast a shadow at night on the ground, excuse me, in the daytime on the ground.
The earth casts a shadow, the moon casts a shadow.
The sun is vastly larger.
Any kind of demo you kind of rig up at home doesn't quite show the relationships.
The sun is enormously larger than either the moon or the earth.
The moon and the earth therefore cast long conical shadows into space.
The earth's shadow is many times longer than the distance between the earth and the moon.
The moon's shadow is just barely long enough to reach the earth.
Well, it's possible at full moon, one would then think that the moon should go entirely
into the shadow of the earth and disappear, be removed from light, and you would then
get an eclipse of the moon.
And then it's possible when at new moon, you would think that the moon would be right
in between the earth and the sun, and the shadow of the moon should fall on the earth,
you will then get an eclipse of the sun.
That is, the moon is getting in the way of the sun.
You are in the shadow of the moon.
Common experience shows that that doesn't happen very often.
The reason is that the moon is not exactly in the ecliptic, but is tilted at an angle
of five degrees to the ecliptic.
The moon is really not very big.
It looks much larger than it is because it's so darned bright.
The angular size of the moon is only half a degree across, which turns out to be the
same as the angular size of the sun, 30 minutes of arc, a half a degree.
You could actually stack 180 full moons from the horizon to the point overhead.
People don't believe you when you tell them that, but if you make the measurements, it's
absolutely true.
If you can find the Pleiades or the Seven Sisters star cluster in the sky in the constellation
Taurus, it looks so small, you could fit three full moons within that star cluster.
It's really a very angularly small body as seen from the earth.
It just fools the eye.
The moon shadow has a great ability to miss the earth, and the moon has an easy ability
to miss the shadow of the earth.
The moon's orbit is tilted by five degrees.
Normally at full moon, the moon will go up like this over the earth, and the shadow will
miss the earth, or under it, and the shadow will miss the earth.
Then it will come up around the other side, and the moon will be above the shadow, or
the moon will fall below the shadow, and we won't get an eclipse.
The only time you can get an eclipse of the sun or the moon is if the moon happens to
be crossing the ecliptic at the same time it goes through either the new phase or the
full phase.
Take a look first at eclipses of the moon.
They're the simpler to understand.
The moon's orbit is tilted by five degrees.
The moon's orbit is a circle in the sky, and it has to cross the ecliptic twice over
the course of the month.
Normally, it'll cross the ecliptic at some random point in between at the quarters, at
the gibbous phase, at the crescent or whatever, and you can't possibly get anything approximating
an eclipse.
If the moon is close to crossing the ecliptic at full moon, it will plunge through the shadow
of the earth and be eclipsed, and you will begin to see the shadow take a chunk out of
the moon until it's all disappeared if it actually gets immersed.
Sometimes only part of the moon gets immersed in the shadow for a partial eclipse.
Here we're talking about total eclipses, and then the moon moves entirely into the shadow
of the earth, and it gets extremely dark and practically goes away, the whole event taking
a few hours from start to finish.
That can happen about twice a year because there's a northern crossing point to where
the moon goes north of the ecliptic, another crossing point to where it goes south, and
the full moon can take place at either of those points, and typically you'll get on
the average a little fewer than two eclipses of the moon per year.
Now, half the time at least, it's going to take place during daylight when the full moon
isn't up, and you can't see it.
The people on the other side of the earth are going to see it, so you miss easily half
of them.
By the time you're done with all the ifs and buts, maybe every two years or so you get
to see a total eclipse of the moon.
Sometimes you go for a little longer period, sometimes it'll be a couple in a year, typically
separated by roughly six months, not quite six months.
The moon is actually visible during totality when it goes into the eclipse behind the earth,
into the earth's shadow.
It can be a fully immersed in the earth's shadow, but the earth is surrounded by a thin
atmosphere, and that air scatters and refracts light into the shadow.
The shadow is not completely dark.
During a total eclipse of the moon, if you were standing on the moon, you would see
a ring of sunlight surrounding the earth, in other words, the earth's illuminated atmosphere.
Some of that light then gets through to light up the moon, so the moon does not turn entirely
black.
It usually takes on rather a dull reddish color, depending upon the state of the earth's atmosphere.
Eclipses of the moon are not terribly interesting scientifically anymore.
They're used occasionally to catch meteorite flashes, bodies from space that hit the moon
and cause a flash of light, and they are often used to test the state of the air.
If the air is particularly murky, not much light will get through, and the eclipse moon
will be quite dark.
It mostly depends upon the state of volcanic activity on the earth.
If we've had a lot of it, and the air is filled with volcanic dust, then the eclipse moon
is going to be very dark.
It's almost impossible to see.
If we've been a few years without any kind of activity like this, the eclipse moon will
be quite bright.
The variation is considerable from one eclipse to the next.
After the major eruptions of Pinatubo, for example, many years ago, the moon turned almost
black.
You could hardly see it during totality.
Eclipses of the sun are something else again.
The moon's shadow is, on the average, just barely long enough to reach, to hit a little
shadow spot on the earth.
If whether that shadow spot actually reaches the earth or not depends upon where the moon
is in its orbit at new moon, you can only get a total eclipse of the sun at new moon
when the moon is positioned between the earth and the sun and crossing the ecliptic at the
same time, which will happen, has to happen actually at least two times a year as it turns
out from the geometry of the eclipse.
If the moon is at apogee, at its farthest point, five percent or so farther than average,
the shadow spot is not long enough to reach the earth.
It stops short of the earth.
Standing on the earth, the moon looks angularly smaller than the sun, and it fits over the
sun and you see a ring of sunlight surrounding the moon.
It's called an annular eclipse from annulus, having nothing to do with the year.
It's just a ring of sunlight.
Now, eclipses are dangerous to try to look at unless you have proper equipment.
This is true of any kind of eclipse of the sun.
There's a good time to put a warning in here before we talk about them a little bit farther.
It has nothing to do with the eclipse itself.
It has to do with the brightness of the sun.
Nobody would go out on a nice sunny day and say, hey, let's go look at the sun and just
stand there and stare at it.
You wouldn't have your vision for very long.
You would go blind very, very quickly.
It only takes a few seconds to burn the retina.
It's no different than taking a magnifying glass and holding it above your hand in sunlight.
You will get a burn very fast and the retina cannot be repaired and you are partially blind.
Do not try to look at the sun or eclipses without proper protection.
Now, the eclipse doesn't magnify the solar rays.
It's just that eclipses tend to draw the eye.
That is, there's an eclipse.
Let's go look at the eclipse, but to do that, you have to look at the sun.
Even if there is a small sliver of sunlight remaining around the edge of the moon, that
is just as dangerous as looking at the full sunlight.
You can still burn your eye.
Even in an annual eclipse where the moon is hiding most of the sun, that ring of sunlight
is dangerous to look at.
The best way of viewing an eclipse is not to try to look at it directly, but to take
a piece of cardboard, punch a hole in it with a pin, let the sunlight fall through
the hole onto another piece of cardboard or say onto the ground or something like that
and you project a pinhole image.
This is lensless photography.
It was some of the first way of producing photographs.
You can do it in a shoebox, put a little hole in a shoebox, put a piece of film here, expose
the film and you get a beautiful image of the outdoors.
In fact, it produces better images than lenses do.
So you are actually being able to watch the eclipse that way.
Now don't look through the hole.
People sometimes confuse it and then try to look through the hole.
No, don't do that because then you're looking at the sun directly again and you don't want
to do that.
This is a perfectly safe way to do it.
Another nice way of doing it is to go under a tree.
It's a nice summer day.
You're out with a romantic picnic with your partner.
On the ground are dapples of sunlight.
Now let's get unromantic for a minute and look at the dapples.
They're round.
They're round for a reason.
Dappling of sunlight through a tree is caused by little pinholes in the spaces between the
leaves.
You are actually projecting hundreds of images of the sun on the ground that overlap each
other.
Now when you watch an eclipse under a tree, you will get the shape of the sun.
As the moon goes across the sun, you will see a crescent and under the tree all the dapples
are crescents.
And an annular eclipse, all the dapples are little circles.
This is an extremely cute thing to look at and you can just stand under a tree and just
happily watch your eclipse without having to look at it.
You can also buy proper eclipse glasses that are professionally made.
Do not try to make your own.
It's a very bad idea.
Darken film does not work.
Do not trust it at all.
Or any kind of homemade filter or sunglasses.
It's a big mistake.
Do not do that.
Get professionally made solar filters and you're okay.
They are sold occasionally at times of total eclipses.
Now, for the kicker, is when the moon is near a perigee, when it's closest to the earth,
the shadow spot can reach the earth.
But that's all it is.
It's a little spot on the surface of the earth.
And as the moon goes around the earth and as the earth is rotating, of course, at the
same time, the shadow spot sweeps across the earth.
It's never very large, several tens of miles usually.
So you have to be in just the right place to get that moon positioned exactly between
the earth and the sun.
But when you do that and you hide the bright image of the sun, out pops this beautiful
solar corona.
You cannot see it in the blue sky.
The blue sky is too bright for it.
It's very difficult to see from earth.
It's a large, magnetically heated white crown around the sun that diffuses out and out and
out without any real edge to it all.
It's a stunningly beautiful sight.
At most, an eclipse, when the moon is very close to the earth at its closest point, these
total eclipses can last for only a few minutes, seven or eight minutes at the most, and it's
all over with.
But the corona is so interesting to scientists to look at that they will go almost anywhere
to view the outer corona during those few minutes.
So these things become scientifically very important.
Now that's totality.
Any given position on earth will average a total eclipse maybe every 300 years or so.
They're really quite rare for any given location.
Globally, they're quite common.
They're more common than eclipses of the moon.
They have to occur at least twice a year, and you can get as many as seven solar eclipses
a year if the conditions are just right.
But any given eclipse is at a very small location.
On the other hand, there's a region of partial shadow.
If the shadow spot is, say, at the equator, you can go up to, say, Spain, and you can
see the sun hiding part, excuse me, the moon hiding part of the sun, just not all of it.
This is called the partial eclipse of the sun, and that can cover a very large portion
of the earth, and that's what most of us see.
But generally, unless you're very lucky and have one pass over you, you have to travel
to see the total solar eclipse, something very, very well worth doing, to be able to
see the extraordinary phenomena that take place, especially the solar corona.
Knowing how all of this works hardly takes away from the beauty and the romance of the
moon.
I think the more you know about a subject, the more you're going to appreciate it, and
the greater the aesthetic quality of what you see.
There's little that is more beautiful than a moonrise in twilight, or an examination
of earth light on the setting crescent.
If you understand how the moon works and how the phases work, you can, night to night,
watch the day light division move across the moon, know where sunrise is on the moon.
You can imagine yourself on the moon looking back at the earth, going through the same
phases and imagining what it would look like from there.
We've looked at the phases, the rising and setting times, and correlated it most specifically
with eclipses, which can take place only when the moon passes new to give you a solar eclipse,
only when the moon passes full to give you a lunar eclipse.
Again, there's little more beautiful than the eclipses of the moon.
You can spend hours watching the moon plunge through the shadow, an appreciation of how
it works only enhances the beauty of the experience itself.
And again, there's little that's more lovely than the eclipse of the sun.
And to watch that glorious corona jump out at the instant that the moon covers the full
face of the sun.
No danger in looking at that because the eye is really quite a marvelous.
As soon as that first flash of sunlight appears, the eye automatically wants to turn it away.
And be sure you do because any look at the sun directly without the proper filtration
can be quite dangerous.
That doesn't take away from the beauty, of course, of the eclipse as long as you follow
the rules and understand what you're doing.
So go on out at some clear night and try to find the moon.
Half the time you won't be able to see it because it'll be below the horizon, but eventually
you will and you'll watch a climb above the western horizon getting a little bit higher
each night as it goes through its phases.
The first quarter swings around through gibbets to full and then begins to rise after midnight
as it goes through third quarter and back to the crescent and new.
The cycle perpetuating itself over and over and over again into the distant future.
This ends lecture five.
