Astronomy, Earth, Sky and the Planets, Lecture 6, Happy Wanderers, The Planets
In the last couple of lectures, we've looked at two of the moving bodies of the sky,
the brilliant sun moving against the constellations of the zodiac,
the less bright but still very nice looking moon,
doing very much the same thing, going through its phases and producing eclipses
of both itself and of the sun.
Now it's time to look at the other moving bodies of the sky,
the ancient planets, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn.
In this lecture, we're going to see how they move
and how the ancients dealt with this problem
and trying to explain some of the seemingly erratic motions
and how science began to convert itself,
how we really began to figure out how the planets are moving around the sun,
which led directly to the discovery of how gravity keeps it all tied together.
Start with the planets themselves.
The names are evocative of their appearances in the sky.
Mercury is seen close to the sun.
It zips back and forth with incredible speed.
Now you see it, now you don't.
It's no surprise that it was named after the messenger of the gods, Mercury.
Venus, the goddess of love and beauty,
one of the most beautiful objects in the sky.
It's creamy light in the morning, so bright it'll sometimes cast a shadow on the ground,
so bright you can see it in full daylight.
Sometimes seen as the classic morning star,
sometimes as the classic evening star.
Moving a little bit farther, Mars.
Not as bright as Venus, surely, but it can be number four,
although it usually is not quite as bright as Jupiter.
Brilliant reddish body moving through the sky.
Not surprisingly, the ancients named it after the god of war,
after its kind of orange-red color.
Jupiter farther out, usually the fourth brightest object in the sky after Venus,
taking 12 stately years to go around the sky,
one constellation of the zodiac per year.
Again, no surprise that it was named after the king of the gods, Jupiter.
Zeus, Zeus Potter.
Jupiter actually means god the father,
coming down to us from the ancient pantheon of the gods.
And farther out, Saturn taking a longer period of time,
moving slower.
Saturn was Jupiter's father in mythology,
and we'll deal with the other planets when we can talk about gravity
and like a little bit more sense about why, how they were discovered out there.
The planets move in odd, rather irregular ways.
The sun and the moon move methodically around the sky,
at least seeming to move methodically around the sky,
and their explanation is rather straightforward.
But the planets seem to stop, turn around, go backwards,
make erratic movements that were really rather confusing to the ancients.
Even though they came up with explanations for them,
their explanations were quite wrong,
it was, however, the observation of the movements of the planets
that finally led us to the discovery of how gravity keeps all of this together,
and we'll tell half of the story in this lecture
and the other half of the story in the other lecture in the next one to come.
The planets increase in distance in sort of a geometrical progression away from the sun.
Mercury is very close at four tenths of an astronomical unit,
the AU being the average distance between the earth and the sun.
Venus at seven tenths of an AU out, then you go to one and a half for,
one for us of course, one and a half for Mars,
then you make this rather big jump to Jupiter at five astronomical units,
then almost ten out to Saturn.
The orbital periods progress in very much the same way.
You get very close to the sun,
Mercury only takes a mere 88 days to go around.
This is called the sidereal period.
It's sort of the star to star,
if you actually stood outside and watched the planet from point to point,
going all the way around the sun back to its initial point.
The sidereal period for Mercury is but 88 days, very short.
For Venus farther out, it's 225 days.
For the earth, of course, it's our famous 365 days.
And for Mars, it takes a little bit longer,
almost two years, about 1.9 years for it to make the full journey around the sun.
The Martian year is quite long.
If you lived on Mars, all your seasons would be stretched out
about twice as long as they are on the earth.
Then you make the big jump to Jupiter,
twelve years from start to finish.
I've lived a little bit over five Jupiter years.
I've watched it go around over four times now.
It's a fun thing to do.
It's easy to find in the sky,
and it's progression from one constellation to the next to the next
through the twelve constellations of the zodiac, very easy to follow.
Saturn farther out, first magnitude most of the time,
still quite bright, very easy to see.
The next one out, barely visible to the naked eye,
and we'll discuss that one in the next talk.
Planets are divided into a number of different groups,
depending upon the context.
We sometimes speak of the ancient planets,
the ones I've just talked about,
and as opposed to the modern planets,
the ones that have been discovered in relatively modern times,
Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto.
We can also divide them physically.
Something we'll do more carefully later.
The terrestrial planets, the planets that are like the earth,
the Jovians that are like Jupiter,
and then the others that are similar to each other
when we get farther out into the planetary system.
They're also divided, and here is where it's important
in our lecture here today,
into groups that depend upon their position relative to the sun.
Mercury and Venus are called inferior planets,
not because there's anything wrong with them,
or they're any less better than the others,
but because they're, in a sense, below the earth.
They're in between the earth and the sun,
and their appearances, therefore, are quite different
than the superior planets,
which are the planets outside of the earth's orbit,
the ones, so to speak, above the earth,
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn,
and the others that have been discovered in modern times.
The first thing to do, and the easiest thing to do,
is to concentrate first on the superior planets
and try to make some sense of their motions.
The planets and the sun have various aspects
in relation to each other,
depending upon the angles in between them,
and there are two that are very important.
We can actually relate these to the phases of the moon
to some small degree.
The planet is opposite the sun and the sky,
with the earth and the middle.
We say that the superior planet is in opposition to the sun.
Here is the sun, here is the earth and the middle,
the sun is on one side, the planet on the other,
and when you are standing on the earth,
and the planet is at opposition,
it will rise at sunset, set at sunrise.
The moon, at its full phase,
is similarly in opposition to the sun,
although the term is not very often used
relative to the moon.
The other important one is conjunction.
Conjunction of the superior planet takes place
when the planet is aligned with the sun.
It will be on the other side of the sun,
not necessarily behind it exactly,
because the planetary orbits are all tilted a little bit,
and usually at conjunction with the sun,
the planet passes above the sun or below it
and never really gets hidden, not that it matters,
but because the sun is so bright, you can't really see it anyway.
So these points of conjunction and opposition
are important in terms of the visibility of the planet.
All planets have two kinds of period associated with them.
The sidereal period, which is the point-to-point period,
12 years for Jupiter,
88 days for Mercury,
365 days for the earth.
The other kind of period is called the synodic period.
The synodic period is the period of the meeting
of the planets with the sun.
We're coming from the Latin word synod for meeting.
The synodic period is the interval
between two successive oppositions
or two successive conjunctions.
Take Jupiter as an example.
Jupiter is at opposition to the sun.
Jupiter takes 12 years to go all the way around.
The earth only one year.
As the earth goes around the sun in its one-year journey,
Jupiter only moves one-twelfth of its way.
After one year, Jupiter has shifted a little bit,
and it takes an additional 12th of a year
to bring Jupiter back into opposition with the sun.
That means the synodic period of Jupiter is 13 months.
The synodic period is actually the lapping time.
A good analogy is a track meet.
Let's say that you are a fast, world-class runner,
and we all meet together to have a race at your local track.
You, the fast runner, are in the inside, the first lane.
You're running around at, let's say, 5-minute miles.
We'll make up a number.
I'm doddering along in the outside lane at 10-minute miles.
Now, we start off together.
That is, we are in line with the center at the starting line.
I am in opposition to the sun from your point of view.
The sun is in the middle of the loop.
Now, we both start at the same time.
You're going fast, not only faster than I am,
but you are going through a shorter journey.
And then you catch up to me.
When you catch up and pass,
I am again in opposition with the center of the track
or of the sun that's in the middle.
And the lapping time is the synodic time.
It's exactly the same thing
as any kind of horse race or a track meet,
just the lapping time of one planet relative to the other.
And, of course, it's always from our point of view
because we are the observer standing on the Earth.
So the synodic period of Mars is rather long.
It's a little slightly over two years.
The synodic period of Jupiter is only 13 months
because it's farther away.
The synodic period of Saturn is only 12 and a half months
because it's farther away yet.
The synodic period is the period of best visibility
for the planet.
Clearly the best visibility is going to be at opposition.
At opposition to the sun, the planet rises at sunset,
is up all night long and sets at sunrise.
We are also closest to the planet at opposition.
The best time to observe Mars is always at the opposition of Mars
because we are at its closest to that planet
and we can get a better view here from the Earth.
The same is true with all of the other planets.
Now, a curious thing happens
as a planet begins to approach its opposition point.
Generally, all the planets, in fact,
they all are moving in a counterclockwise direction around the sun
in the same direction with which the Earth goes around the sun.
Again, no accident, as we'll see in the last lecture of this course.
As the planet approaches opposition,
it is going easterly in the sky, in this counterclockwise direction,
but as it approaches opposition, the planet appears to stop
against the background of the stars.
It then reverses its direction
and begins to go in the westerly direction.
Now, this is entirely independent of the rising and setting.
Ignore the rotation of the Earth
and the rising and setting of the planets.
It's not what we're talking about.
We're talking about the motion of the planets
against the background of the stars.
They generally go in the same direction as the sun toward the east,
but near opposition, they stop, turn around, and go backwards.
That backward motion is called retrograde,
and it was of immense confusion to the ancients.
They didn't know why it happened,
but all these gods that populated the sky in the zodiac
decided to change their minds at the time of opposition
and reverse themselves,
having their fastest retrograde motion at opposition,
and then after opposition,
they would stop and turn around
and go back in the other direction, in the normal, easterly direction.
All the superior planets do this on a regular basis at opposition.
The inferior planets behave slightly differently.
They are closer to the sun than we are,
and obviously can't ever be at opposition.
You can't take a planet that is inside the Earth's orbit
and have it be outside the Earth's orbit at the same time.
So the inner planets, Mercury and Venus,
the two inferior planets,
do two different kinds of conjunction.
The first kind is when the planet passes in between us and the sun,
and again, it doesn't necessarily cross the face of the sun.
Generally, it will go above the sun or below the sun.
On occasion, it does do that.
It transits across the sun. They are rather rare, but it does happen.
That's a quibble.
When the planet is in between us and the sun,
it's called inferior conjunction.
Again, it doesn't mean that it's any worse than any of the others.
It just means that it's sort of below the sun.
It's in between us.
As the planet goes around the sun,
it then goes on the opposite side of the sun
and goes through another conjunction with the sun,
which is said to be at superior conjunction with the sun.
Now, the inferior planets can't ever get very far from the sun
in angle because they're inside the Earth's orbit.
Venus can never be any more than 47 degrees from the sun.
That's its maximum angle.
That can occur when you look tangent to the orbital circle of the planet.
When that happens,
Venus will be as far in angle from the sun as possible,
set shortly after sunset,
or rise shortly before sunrise.
The planet is therefore never visible at midnight
because it can't be opposite the sun.
It can't be at opposition to the sun,
so you'll never see it at midnight.
Venus is therefore either the evening star or the morning star.
Not a star at all.
Of course, the term is poetic.
It has nothing to do with this.
Planets all shine by reflected light
that are not visible in the optical spectrum.
They're not visible to the eye at all on their own.
You shut off the sun, the planets would entirely disappear,
whereas the stars would still continue to glow.
You watch Venus and it slowly moves up from the western sky
in the evening, getting higher and higher over the months.
It then reaches its maximum height above the horizon
in the early evening and then rapidly disappears,
passes through inferior conjunction,
and pops up in the morning sky as the morning star,
and then goes around the sun in the backside of the sun again
at superior conjunction.
It keeps doing the same thing over and over and over again.
Mercury is much harder to see.
A 47-degree angle is quite large.
You can easily see Venus in a darkened sky.
When it's at its maximum separation from the sun,
it's set well after sunset, well after the end of twilight,
or will rise well before the beginning of morning twilight.
But Mercury is greatest separation
because it's closer to the sun is a mere 28 degrees at best,
and that is not enough to get Mercury to clear twilight.
It's one of the reasons we know so little about the planet.
We get a very poor view from here.
Mercury is visible only in twilight,
shortly after sunset or shortly before sunrise,
making the planet very elusive, so elusive
that even though it's quite bright, it's very difficult to see.
Because these planets are in between the Earth and the sun,
they go through phases just like the moon.
At inferior conjunction, you're looking at the nighttime side of Venus
because it's in between us and the sun, so it's invisible.
As it swings around the sun, you first see a glimmer of crescent.
You begin to get a little bit of the daylight side.
When it's at the tangent point to the orbit,
you then see what appears to be a half Venus in the sky.
Now, you can only see this with a telescope, of course,
and then when it is at superior conjunction, it will be at its full phase.
The brightness of the planet, however, depends upon its maximum reflecting area,
which turns out to be when Venus is very close to us,
when it's in the crescent phase.
So Venus is at its brightest when it's visible in the daytime sky,
just before inferior conjunction in the evening
and just after inferior conjunction when you see it in the morning,
and then it fades gradually, way getting closer and closer to the sun
when it disappears around and back to the superior conjunction.
It too will go into retrograde motion,
but when it is passing inside the Earth,
when it is passing inferior conjunction,
when it is between the sun and the Earth,
then it for a short period of time, as does Mercury,
goes into retrograde motion as well.
Well, no one really quite knew what to make of these odd movements.
The theory developed finally by Ptolemy,
the man who set the constellations, the ancient constellations in order,
and who was reasoning for many other Greek ideas long before his lifetime,
suggested that all of the planets were in orbit about the sun,
around the orbit about the Earth, a geocentric system.
After all, the Earth was made by the gods, fashioned by the gods.
We must be the most important thing there is in the universe,
so all of these planets, which were not understood to be real worlds,
must be going around us, as does the sun and the moon.
The only way he could replicate retrograde motion
was by having the planet on an independent orbit,
whose center was in orbit about the Earth.
So as the planet went on the secondary orbit,
every time it passed in between the center of its orbit and the Earth,
it would appear to go in retrograde motion.
It's rather like putting a light on the bicycle rim
and watching the light move in this kind of flipped fashion
as the bicycle goes forward.
That is not putting it at the center, but putting it at the edge.
It made no physical sense, but it made some kind of mathematical sense
because you could at least use this to make some kind of predictions
about where the planets were in the future.
But the idea that the sun was really at the center of the solar system
goes back a very long ways, the heliocentric idea.
And this was captured by the first in a series of scientists
who led us finally to the understanding of the universe and how it worked.
The first of these was Nicholas Copernicus,
who lived in the middle part of the 16th century,
who was a Polish cleric,
and spent most of his life pondering astronomy
and putting together an enormous tome,
an enormous work called the Revolocione Bus Orbium Celestium,
known as the Revolocione Bus,
a big, thick book in which he developed some of the mathematics
for a heliocentric system,
where the explanation of retrograde motion,
backward motion simply fell out as a lapping of the outer planet
by the Earth or a lapping of the Earth by the inner planet.
Inner planets, he actually used the geometry of the system
to be able to measure the distances of Mercury, Venus, Mars,
Jupiter, and Saturn from the Earth in terms of astronomical units.
Now, nobody at that time knew the actual size of the solar system.
Going back to ancient Greek times,
there were attempts of measuring how big the system was.
By Ptolemy's time, we knew the size of the Earth,
from Eritocene's work,
we also knew the distance of the Moon from the Earth in Earth diameters.
We knew how far away the Moon was over 2,000 years ago.
Aristarchus tried to get the distance of the Sun
through an interesting trick of the exact timing of the quarter.
Turns out you can't do the experiment,
but his idea was brilliant and correct,
and he had the Sun placed farther away than the Moon,
although much closer than we know it was today.
Nevertheless, without this absolute scaling,
you can still get the distances of the planets from the Sun
and from the Earth at any time in astronomical units.
Copernicus's heliocentric theory,
however, didn't really work any better than Ptolemy's geocentric theory.
In fact, it was a little bit worse in terms of predicting
where the planets were in the future,
necessary in some minds, of course, for astrological predictions.
Yet, the idea was so aesthetically viable
that, in a sense, the cat was out of the bag,
and it couldn't be put back in by anybody.
Science was burgeoning at this point.
People were beginning to understand the nature of things around them,
and it became pretty obvious to everyone,
except perhaps the church at the time
that the Earth was not at the center of the system,
that it was really the Sun at the center of the system,
but how to prove it, how to go about improving it
and finding out how the orbits of the planets really were shaped
fell to a man named Johannes Kepler,
but first to a great observer before the age of the telescope named Tycho.
Tycho Brahe was a Danish nobleman
of the latter part of the 1500s,
slightly after Copernicus' time.
He was fascinated by astronomy.
He kept a record of the first really recorded exploding star.
He didn't know what it was. We do know now what it was, but not then.
And this really piqued his interest in astronomy,
and he convinced the Danish king to give him an observatory,
not consisting of any kind of telescopes.
The telescope had not yet been invented.
The observatory consisted of large quadrants,
angle-measuring devices,
basically big protractors that were run by a crew
to measure the positions of the stars.
And his idea was to measure the best possible positions of stars
and the best possible positions
in terms of the coordinate frame of the celestial sphere of the planets.
He developed a catalog, and this is no accident either.
You can see the mystical mind at work here of 777 stars.
Now, Tycho was by anybody's lights not a very pleasant person.
The rumors come down to us from ancient times, older times,
of him as a very contentious man, a war-like man,
one who liked to duel at the drop of a hat.
The stories are that he had his nose cut off in a duel,
then that to scare everybody, that he was such a tough guy,
he had a silver nose fashion so that everyone knew what had happened to him,
so they'd stay away from him.
When the king of Denmark died,
his son, the heir to the throne, was so sick of Tycho
that he threw Tycho off the island and Tycho went to Prague
to finish the reduction or the calculations of the data
so that he could get his precise positions in his catalog of 777 stars.
These stars were later taken, by the way,
by Johannes Bayer to produce his famous atlas, the Uranometria,
where he first put the Greek letters down on paper,
the same Greek letter system for naming the stars that we use today.
Well, at about the same time that Tycho was leaving Denmark,
Johannes Kepler, who was a teacher of astronomy
and sometime astrologer, actually, and mathematician,
was being forced to leave his home in Germany because of religious persecution
and wound up in Prague where he became Tycho's assistant.
When Tycho died around 161,
Kepler got the books, so to speak,
even though I think the family Tycho sued him to try to get in the back,
Kepler took them and went away with them
so he could finish the reduction of Tycho's data
and the manipulation of Tycho's data.
And I think it was Kepler who, more than anybody else,
set us on the path to what science is today
because instead of coming up out of the mind
with how the planetary orbits should be shaped,
he set out to find out how they were really shaped.
Copernicus' great mistake, and I don't even know if you could call it a mistake,
was going back to ancient Greek times
where the idea was that the circle was the perfect figure,
the sphere was the perfect figure,
and that everything could be understood out of pure thought.
You didn't have to look, you could just think about it
and understand how things work.
So Copernicus adopted circles for planetary orbits
and they didn't work very well.
Kepler said, however, let's use Tycho's data
to see what the orbits really were like.
He labored for almost a decade.
This was pre-calculus.
He had to do everything by almost trial and error.
It was a very difficult mathematical task.
He would try different shapes for the orbits
to see what would fit and what wouldn't fit
until finally one day in around 1609,
he said it was like it came to him in almost a dream.
He said, the orbits are ellipses,
Kepler's first law of planetary motion.
The orbits of planets are ellipses with the sun at one focus.
This means as the planet orbits the sun,
it gets closer to the sun,
and then it gets farther away from the sun,
closer and farther away.
This begins to explain the seemingly erratic motions
of the planets as they move against the background of the stars.
The other focus has no meaning at all.
None at all.
It's just the one that counts and the sun is at one focus,
and the planets go around the sun on their elliptical paths.
He got most of this from Tycho's observations of the planet Mars.
The second one, which he came up with,
in pretty much the same time,
was a little bit more difficult.
Imagine a planet connected to the sun by a line.
This line is called the radius vector.
And Tycho, excuse me, Kepler realized that the radius vector
sweeps out equal areas in equal times.
He didn't know why.
But this means that when the planet is close to the sun,
and it goes around the sun, this radius vector,
this line connecting the two,
to be of an equal area to when the planet is out here
at Aphelion away from the sun, the planet must move faster.
So the planet moves faster near Aphelion when it's closest to the sun
and slower at Aphelion.
And he quantified it.
The radius vector sweeps out equal areas in equal times.
This accounts for the changes of speeds of the planets
along the ecliptic path,
or close to the ecliptic path where they go.
The system worked beautifully.
He trusted Tycho's observations so much
that he came pretty close.
He came, he had a son of a squash circle at one point
that came within a few minutes of work of Tycho's observations
of trying to replicate Tycho's observations.
But he said the great man would not have made an error that large.
Tycho was able to get the positions of stars and planets
to close to one minute of work, a 60th of a degree,
which is the resolution limit of the human eye.
It was a spectacular feat that directly led toward Kepler's laws of planetary motion.
So Kepler kept working.
Many of Lesser Lights would have said,
hey, this is close enough.
I'm happy with it. Let's go with it.
But he kept working until he replicated Tycho's observations
to within about a minute of work.
The next step took him almost another 10 years.
Tycho's observations, his good ones, were primarily of Mars,
but he had observations of Jupiter and Saturn as well.
Kepler was something of a mystic.
He believed in the music of the spheres.
He actually thought the planets made music as they went around the sun,
and that there was some kind of harmony of the motions of the planets.
And he found it in a sense.
He found that there was a strict relationship between the period,
the sidereal period of a planet in its orbit, and the size of the orbit.
The size of an ellipse is characterized by the semi-major axis.
It's half of the longest line you can draw in the ellipse.
And it's pretty close to being the average distance of the planet from the sun.
Kepler said that the square, rather he didn't say it, he found it,
he discovered it, that the square of the period of a planet in orbit about the sun
in years that's relative to the Earth
is equal to the cube of the semi-major axis in astronomical units.
Well, how does this work? It sounds kind of complex.
It equals a cube, a theme that goes throughout all of astronomy.
We simply couldn't live without it.
For the Earth, it's pretty trivial.
P is one year.
Semi-major axis of the orbit is one astronomical unit.
That's the average distance between Earth and sun.
One squared multiplied itself, one cube, one equals one, we're done.
Take a look at it with Jupiter, which illustrates it a little bit better.
Jupiter's distance from the sun is five astronomical units.
Its period around the sun is 12 years.
If you know one number, you've got the other.
The sidereal period of a planet around the sun is easy to get.
All you need to go out and do is go out and look.
How long does it take Jupiter to go from the constellation Gemini
all the way around to the constellation of the zodiac back to Gemini again?
11.9 years.
Make it an easy 12.
12 squared multiplied by itself.
P squared is 144.
Now you make the lightning quick calculation of the cube root of 144.
Not all that easy to do, but you can do it by trial and error.
5 cubed is what?
5 times 5 times 5 is 125.
Getting close to 144.
6 times 6 times 6 is well above 144.
By trial and error, 5.2, 5.2 cubed is equal to 12 squared
to within the order of accuracy to which we're doing this.
If you want to take the numbers and string them out to a high level of decimalization,
the relationship is exact.
Kepler had figured out his harmonic law, Kepler's third law,
of how the planets actually go about the sun and the relationship
between the periods and the semi-major axis.
From Kepler's three laws of planetary motion,
you can begin to calculate with great precision where the planets are in their orbit around the sun,
which ultimately led to why they go around the sun,
which is something we'll address in the next lecture when we talk about gravity.
This led to Newton's discovery of gravity, at least to a very high degree,
or not discovery of gravity, but how gravity works.
Everybody knew about gravity, but we'll talk about that in the next lecture.
The next person in line was a contemporary of Kepler.
It was Galileo.
We still had no real proof in the sense of the way scientists mean proof
of the sun really being at the center, or at least at the focus of the ellipse,
at the center of the solar system.
The church still wanted us all to believe that it was really the Earth,
that we were at the center of the universe,
but there was no theoretic saying no, it wasn't.
It was the sun that was the center, and this could get you in a lot of trouble for doing this.
People did get in a lot of trouble.
Copernicus didn't get in any trouble because he died about the time his book was published.
But one unfortunate name, Giardano Bruno,
was burned at the stake as a result of promulgating ideas like this.
Galileo made use of the first telescope.
He did not invent the telescope.
He heard about it from apparently a Dutch lens makers were making these things.
The first one to grind the lens for a telescope that was good enough to use on the sky.
There were others who were beginning to do the same thing, but Galileo went beyond that.
He began to catalog the sky, to write down what he saw, to try to explain what he saw.
And he saw marvels.
Anyone with a new technological device is going to skim the cream in any kind of science.
You put the Hubble Space Telescope up, all manner of discoveries drop into your lap.
Things we couldn't possibly have seen before.
Galileo had the Hubble Space Telescope of the time.
And what did he find?
He looked at Jupiter.
He saw four little points of light coming away from Jupiter.
And they orbited Jupiter.
There was something in orbit about a planet,
which by analogy meant that the Sun could do the same thing with the planets.
It made sense now that the planets could go around the Sun.
He didn't know why.
Nevertheless, they did that.
Then he looked at Venus.
And didn't Venus go through its phases?
Now, in an Earth-centered system, Venus will go through some phases, but not through the whole cycle.
If you put the Sun at the center, Venus goes through the whole cycle of phases,
which is the best possible proof you could get that the Sun was at the center of the planetary system.
He looked at the Moon.
He discovered mountains on the Moon.
The Moon was not a perfect surface.
It looked an awful lot like the Earth through his little telescope.
He even looked at the Sun, a dangerous thing to do,
and nobody's quite sure of how he did it or how he filtered it,
but he did, and he found that the Sun was not perfect either.
Something known, by the way, to the Chinese 2,000 years before,
who had recorded naked-eye sunspots.
Don't try to do this at home, okay?
They had either made some kind of smoke-glass filter,
or they saw the Sun at sunrise, but they could see the little spots.
We've known for a long time that the Sun had flaws on its surface.
Galileo found them.
All of this got him in a great deal of trouble.
He was called to Rome for the Inquisition.
He was told not to say any more about this at all, and he'd be okay.
He was put under house arrest for the rest of his life.
Dangerous knowledge of the time.
All of this set the stage for Newton to put it all together
and to develop a theory of how gravity is the glue
that makes Kepler's laws, a planetary motion, actually work.
All of this began in ancient times,
with looking at the motions of the planets around the Sun.
Going up through our own times, beginning with the 1500s,
when Copernicus began to put it together,
and began to show us how the solar system is actually constructed.
Through Tycho, through Kepler, through Galileo,
and at that point, by 1620, it was all beginning to fall into place.
Now, put Newton on the stage in the next lecture, and let's see what happens.
After listening to lecture six, a student posed this question to Professor Kepler.
How many eclipses do we have every year?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
Lunar eclipses seem to be more common of the two, of the solar eclipses,
and they're typically two per year, sort of on the average.
For the solar eclipses, there have to be at least two per year.
They don't seem to be as common because the Moon's shadow covers such a small spot.
For any given location on the Earth, they're relatively rare.
But globally, there have to be at least two solar eclipses per year,
and there can be as many as five.
On rare occasion, there can be as many as seven eclipses,
if you add the lunar eclipses and the solar eclipses together.
Five solar and two lunar.
So solar eclipses are actually quite common over the course of the entire Earth.
This ends lecture six.
