We left off the last lecture with one of the four forces of nature, gravity, the glue that holds everything together in the universe.
This lecture, Reaching Outward, we're going to start looking at another of the forces of nature, the electromagnetic force.
This is going to allow us to look at the natures of the planets, at the stars.
Most of the energy in the universe is transmitted by light.
So we'll look at light, we'll look at the other parts, the electromagnetic spectrum, the radio waves, x-rays, go through the whole spectrum,
look to see how this relates to matter, what matter is composed of, look at atoms, their structure, and finally go into telescopes,
and how we look outward into the universe. What's light? Everybody's familiar with light.
You can't really see light. What you see is the effect of light upon your eyes, but you don't see the light itself.
Light is a moving electromagnetic wave. Over the centuries, people have argued about what light actually is.
Is it a particle? Is it a wave?
It's a little easier first to think of it as a wave, think of it as a water wave in a way.
It's a flow of energy moving through space, not in anything.
There's no material in which the wave is actually moving.
It's an alternation of electric and magnetic fields moving along at the speed of light, 186,000 miles per second,
300,000 miles per second.
There's no material in which the wave is actually moving.
It's an alternation of electric and magnetic fields moving along at the speed of light, 186,000 miles per second,
300,000 kilometers per second, the fastest thing we know of.
There's no mass involved in light, and that's why light can actually move at the speed of light.
Anything that does have a mass cannot move near the speed of light.
Now, Isaac Newton was the first person to decompose light into its component colors.
Red, orange, yellow, green, blue, and violet, the principal six colors.
The color depends upon the wavelength.
Our eyes are sensitive to wavelengths somewhat short of about 1,10000 of a centimeter, very, very short.
These waves carry an enormous amount of energy enough to activate the chemistry of the human eye.
You can also think of light as a small particle.
In fact, it's both at the same time.
The particle of light is called a photon, and it's almost impossible to describe intuitively.
You can think of it in a sense as a little chunk of a wave moving along, although that's not really right,
but it's at least one way in which the human mind can think about it.
The energy carried by an individual particle of light, an individual photon, depends strictly upon its wavelength.
The longer the wavelength, the lower the energy.
Shorter the wavelength, the higher the energy.
It is the higher the frequency, the higher the energy.
It is the more waves that hit your eye per second, the higher the energy is going to be.
Violet light carries about twice as much energy as red light.
The human eye will pick up these photons at different wavelengths and then automatically convert them to different colors.
The pure spectra colors are startlingly beautiful, and of course you can see them very easily in the rainbow,
which is a natural decomposition of light, sort of a natural prism in the sky, very similar to what Isaac Newton used.
The electromagnetic spectrum is the array, the full array of different wavelengths.
The human eye is sensitive only to about a factor of two or so in the wavelength of light.
Once you get to waves a little bit longer than red, you cannot see it anymore.
It's still there, and even the skin is sensitive to it as heat.
Longer than red, we call it infrared.
The infrared spectrum extends out to approximately a millimeter or so.
Once you get beyond that, we call it radio.
It's all exactly the same thing.
Radio waves don't carry very much energy at all because the wavelength is so very long.
You can live the rest all your life underneath a megawatt FM broadcasting tower and never feel a thing.
It's perfectly benign.
The shorter the waves, the higher the energy.
You go through the optical spectrum again, and then you get to violet,
and you go shorter than violet, you reach the ultraviolet.
Shorter than violet and the ultraviolet, the waves get quite energetic.
A little bit of this high energy radiation from the sun sneaks through the Earth's atmosphere,
and this can cause sunburns.
This causes tans.
It's the natural reaction of the human body to the short energy waves.
Shorter than ultraviolet, by the time you get down to waves that are maybe a thousandth or less than a thousandth,
that to which the human eye is sensitive, we call x-ray.
Shorter than that, we call gamma rays.
Nobody is going to stand in front of an x-ray machine for terribly long.
It's an extremely dangerous thing to do.
Gamma rays are produced by atomic bomb explosions.
You want to stay very far away from anything like this.
Fortunately, the Earth's atmosphere is entirely opaque to this kind of radiation,
and we're perfectly safe on the ground.
Although the sun is producing, for a variety of reasons, producing a lot of high energy radiation,
we don't have to worry about it unless you get into space and you get completely exposed to sunlight,
which nobody is going to do.
Astronauts with space suits are, of course, protected as well.
Now, light interacts with matter through the atoms.
Almost everything we know about the universe comes to us by way of electromagnetic radiation.
Astronomy is not an experimental science.
You can't take something into the lab with some very few exceptions and examine it.
You can't bring a star into the lab and examine it.
You can't bring a planet in.
What we know about all these bodies comes to us by means of the electromagnetic radiation that these bodies radiate.
Electromagnetic radiation from the electromagnetic force, one of the four forces of nature,
interacts with matter through the atoms that make the matter up.
To understand the Earth, to understand anything about astronomy, to understand the very large,
we also have to understand the very small.
The Earth is made out of somewhere around 90 to 100, depending upon how you want to count them,
around 90 chemical elements.
The chemical elements are composed of even smaller particles.
We have to understand how they're put together before we can begin to understand the nature of the universe.
So let's take a good look at atoms and atomic structure.
Atoms are decomposed into three really very basic particles, but probably everybody has heard of.
Protons, neutrons, and electrons.
Now, we call these things particles, but like light, they also have a wave associated with them as well.
They have a dual nature, similar to light.
Let's keep calling them particles, in any case. It's simpler to understand them that way.
The proton carries the positive electric charge, the electron carries the negative electric charge,
and the neutron carries no charge at all.
For reasons that are not at least understood, protons and electrons carry exactly the same electric charge,
just opposite directions.
The electromagnetic force is extremely powerful.
It's trillions of trillions of times stronger than gravity.
That comes as a surprise, because everybody is in the gravitational force of the Earth, in the gravitational field,
and you don't really even notice the electromagnetic force.
Gravity cannot be balanced by an anti-gravity. There is no anti-gravity. Gravity goes in one direction.
The electromagnetic force, on the other hand, is neutralized.
There's many electrons in the universe as there are protons in the universe, and generally things are neutral.
So you don't feel the electromagnetic force unless you unbalance it.
Anybody who has, by accident, stuck their finger into an electric light socket,
knows the strength of the electromagnetic force when it becomes unbalanced.
It can kill. It is extremely dangerous. As long as it's neutralized, you're perfectly okay.
Now, the proton and the neutron have approximately the same mass, very, very small.
They're extremely small particles, about a tenth of a trillionth of a centimeter across.
The electron has no known dimension, and its mass is about 1,800 or so that of the proton and the neutron.
An atom is constructed with a nucleus that consists of protons and neutrons in the center,
which is loosely orbited by the electrons.
The electromagnetic force in a broad sense acts kind of like the gravitational force
in keeping a planet attached to the sun. The electromagnetic force keeps the electron attached to the proton.
Now, we can't get carried away with this analogy because it's not like a miniature planetary system.
There are science fiction stories that have little people living on the electron going around the proton.
It does not work that way at all. The electron is actually characterized as a wave as much as it is a particle,
and you almost have to think of the electron as surrounding the proton almost everywhere around the proton.
It's not a hard little ball. Again, it's not an intuitive concept.
So we go back to the idea of thinking of the electron in orbit, but keep in mind at all times that it's not really an orbital problem, not really.
The problem we face in dealing with atoms, again, is one of scale.
It goes back to the old portrait of the sun and the planets that we started this course off with,
with the huge sun and all the huge planets all lined up in a row, completely out of scale.
We have the same problem with the atom.
The nucleus is extremely small compared to the size of the orbits of the electrons.
Let's start with the simplest of all chemical elements, hydrogen.
Hydrogen consists of one proton surrounded by one electron.
It's the simplest possible atom you can get.
What makes it hydrogen is the one proton.
We can even get rid of the electron and we still have a hydrogen atom.
It's called a hydrogen ion at that point because we've now unbalanced the electromagnetic force and we have a positive charge to the atom.
So another name for the proton is simply hydrogen, the simplest possible one we can get.
You neutralize it by having the electron in orbit about the proton, loosely speaking that is.
Now the size of the atom is about 100,000 times the size of the proton.
There's an enormous amount of empty space.
The atom is in fact mostly empty space.
The real analogy is to go to your favorite ballpark, put a rice grain on second base, that's the proton.
The electron is in the outer seats, all the rest of it is empty.
It's about a factor of 100,000.
This allows for an enormous amount of squeezing room in matter and it's what allows us to take stars like the sun when they die
and squeeze them down to bodies the size of the earth and take some stars and squeeze them down to something the size of Manhattan because of the squeezing room.
Now when I look at something solid, realize that it's mostly empty space.
It looks solid certainly and I can't put my hand through any solid body.
The chair you're sitting on for example, you would think that all the atoms should just pass through each other and you should fall right through it.
What you feel as solidity in a body is not really the matter itself.
It's the electromagnetic force that keeps you from passing, keeps your hand for example from passing through a desk or keeps you from just walking through the wall.
You can try it, run into the wall and see if you pass through but I guarantee you're not going to be able to do it because of the electromagnetic forces that are going to stop.
Now all of the other chemical elements depend upon the number of protons in the nucleus.
You go to helium, it has two protons in the nucleus, two neutrons for most normal helium atoms.
Well the proton carries the positive electric charge, the electron carries the negative electric charge.
We know from old grade school teachers that like charges repel each other, opposite charges attract each other.
That's why the electron is attached to the proton because they're unlike charges.
They want to attract each other.
What are two protons doing stuck together?
They are similar charges, they should repel each other.
Aha, enter the strongest of all the forces of nature.
The strong force sometimes is called the nuclear force.
The electromagnetism and gravity are inverse square laws.
As you increase the distance the force drops off but it never goes to zero.
If you double the distance the force drops off by a factor of four.
The strong force on the other hand acts only over an exceedingly small distance,
in fact only over the size of the nucleus itself.
So if you try to put two protons together and you push them closer and closer
they will try to repel each other until you get them within about their own diameter
and then the strong force takes over and makes them stick.
Now in a helium nucleus you have two protons,
but two protons are not really enough to make the nucleus stick together.
You need an additional neutron to force the stickiness so to speak
because the neutron carries the strong force as well.
So you throw a neutron in, it doesn't add anything repulsive in terms of the electromagnetic force,
it adds strong force and you lock that helium atom together.
Most helium atoms consist of two protons and two neutrons.
But there is a kind of helium, that's called helium-4 because there are four particles in the center.
But you can fool around with the number of neutrons, you can take one away.
Now you've got two protons, one neutron, that gives you what's called helium-3, which is a part of nature.
You can do the same thing with hydrogen.
You can take a hydrogen atom and you can stick a neutron to it
and you have what's called deuterium or a form of heavy hydrogen.
Sometimes it's called hydrogen-2 because you have two particles
in the nucleus, it doesn't affect the chemistry of the body of the atom at all.
Now, we can go right up what's called the periodic table,
which of course establishes the chemical natures of the atoms,
just by increasing a number of protons.
Lithium has three protons, beryllium has four, boron has five, carbon has six, nitrogen has seven,
oxygen-8, we don't want to go through the whole thing.
Iron has 26, uranium, which is sort of the heaviest one that naturally occurs on Earth, 92 protons.
And then you increase the number of neutrons along with the number of protons.
By the time you get to uranium, you've got 238 particles in the nucleus, a very heavy atom indeed.
Now, most atoms have a range of neutrons associated with them that allow them to be stable.
Hydrogen-1, hydrogen-2 are perfectly stable.
About 100,000th of the water you drink is hydrogen deuterium oxide rather than hydrogen oxide, H2O.
It's a natural part of the world.
However, if you stick a second neutron into hydrogen and make hydrogen-3 sometimes called tritium,
it becomes radioactive, that is, the nucleus falls apart with the emission of energy.
Radioactive elements, isotopes, as they're called, the variation in neutrons, isotopes.
Radioactive isotopes can be quite dangerous because of the particles they emit.
In the old days of the study of radioactivity, we found three different kinds of radiation coming out of these radioactive atoms.
And we call them alpha rays, beta rays, and gamma rays.
Alpha rays turned out to be helium nuclei.
Beta rays turned out to be electrons, and gamma rays turned out to be real high-energy electromagnetic radiation.
Now, radioactive elements are a natural part of the world.
They occur, uranium is everywhere on the Earth.
In fact, it's the breakdown of uranium deep in the Earth that provides a good portion of the Earth's internal heat.
So we get used to a certain amount of the stuff, and it doesn't really affect us.
But if you get too much of it together, it can damage, it can cause cancer, it can kill.
Some elements have no stable isotopes at all.
A couple of them in the middle, number 43, doesn't have any stable isotopes.
Well, once you get beyond number 83, they're all radioactive.
This includes radium, it includes thorium, and includes uranium.
And then you can get beyond number 92, number 93, neptunium, number 94, plutonium.
Uranium and plutonium are used in atomic reactors to generate heat, to generate electricity.
But not uranium 238.
You have to strip away three neutrons and get uranium 235, which is highly radioactive.
All matter emits or absorbs radiation.
All matter will emit radiation depending upon its temperature.
At a low temperature, the energy inherent in a body is very small.
At room temperature, for example, a body will not emit optical radiation, the kind you can see with the human eye.
At extremely low temperatures, down to your absolute zero, about as cold as you can get,
all a body will emit is radio radiation.
As you increase the temperature to say a thousand degrees above absolute zero,
a thousand degrees Kelvin, it's called, the body can emit infrared radiation.
When you get up into the thousands, the body will emit optical radiation, the kind you can see.
You can see the effect in a toaster.
Put it on in the morning, feel the heat coming out as the elements heat up,
and eventually it hits a temperature at which it radiates light.
At a couple of thousand degrees, it'll radiate only red light.
As you increase the temperature, you begin to move through the electromagnetic spectrum in the optical part of the spectrum.
A warmer body will start to emit yellow light, a hotter body yet will emit blue light,
and then it will emit ultraviolet radiation, and then it will emit x-ray radiation, and then gamma ray radiation.
It's just the opposite of what we tend to read about.
The common phraseology has blue as cold, red hot.
It's just the opposite.
Red light is generated by a cooler star or a cooler body than blue light.
From the quality of the radiation and from the amount of radiation that the body emits, you can determine its temperature remotely.
This would work with glass melt in an oven or it would work with a star or with a planet.
It's from the quality and kind of radiation that a body emits that we learn what it is made of
and what its temperature is, what its density is.
Almost everything we know comes from the analysis of the electromagnetic spectrum.
But we have to be able to gather that electromagnetic spectrum.
We do that with telescopes.
The whole point of an astronomical telescope is to gather as much radiation as possible for a final analysis,
whether it is in a photograph, even whether it's in visual examination through the telescope.
The first telescope used in astronomy was built by Galileo in 1609, 1610.
He turned the telescope on Venus, he turned it on Jupiter, he made an enormous number of discoveries.
First telescopes built are called refractors.
They use lenses to bend light to a focus.
The astronomical telescope is about as simple and scientific instrument as possible.
In its simplest form, it's simply a lens that light goes through, the light is bent down to a focus.
You can put an eyepiece to examine the focus and see the object,
or you can put in more modern times a photographic, piece of photographic film, a photographic plate,
or some kind of electronic detector at the focus and take an image of the object.
It's as simple as that.
Refractors had their heyday during the 19th century.
The largest refractor in the world is 40 inches or approximately one meter across,
approximately the size of an outstretched hand to the face.
You can't make refractors any bigger than that because they're made out of glass and glass will flex to a certain degree.
It's heavy.
So when you point the telescope all around the sky, the lens bends a little bit and that ruins the quality of the image down in the focus.
The way around this problem is to use reflecting telescopes.
The reflecting telescope was invented by none other than Isaac Newton, the person who first decomposed light into its colors.
You use a curved mirror, very similar to a cosmetic mirror.
The curved mirror will reflect the light back again to a focus in exactly the same way that a lens will do.
Now, you do have a problem with a reflecting telescope because the focus is in front of the mirror.
So if you try to look or you try to look at the object, your head gets in the way and you can't see anything unless the telescope is very large.
What Newton did was to put a small flat mirror in the light path.
So the light comes down to the large mirror, comes up to a focus and before its focus is bounced off to the side so the astronomer can look into the side and see the object after this double reflection.
You can do it with other ways as well.
You can put a smaller mirror again that will reflect the light back through a hole in the large primary mirror.
In principle, there's no real limit to the size of a reflecting telescope.
Isaac Newton's was very small, only a couple of inches across.
By the end of the 19th century, we were making them a yard across.
By the early 20th century, the 100-inch telescope at Mount Wilson in California went into operation.
It remained the largest telescope until the late 1940s when Palomar went into operation with a 200-inch or 5-meter mirror.
The telescope still functioning beautifully at Palomar Mountain in California.
That was the largest telescope for a very long period of time outside of a 6-meter that was built in the old Soviet Union.
Part of the reason was we began to develop electronic detecting devices
that effectively increased the size of the telescope by more efficiently monitoring the light that passed through it.
So for a period of close to half a century, we went from photographic plates with a very, very low efficiency of light detection
up to the kinds of charge-coupled devices, all kinds of electronic devices,
the kind of things that you find in high-end video cameras that have almost 100% efficiency.
We didn't need to build big telescopes anymore, at least for a long period of time.
Once we hit the 100% efficiency mark, then we started building bigger ones.
The sizes went up to 10 meters. They're going to go up to 30 meters, 40 meters, perhaps even bigger than that.
We don't know what the next century is going to hold, but the plans are eventually to build something perhaps as large as a 100-meter optical telescope.
The bigger the telescope, the more light it will gather, the brighter your image, or the fainter the stars, the fainter the objects you're able to see,
the easier it is to spread the light out into a spectrum for analysis, the more detailed you can get.
Well, we're really pretty limited in the optical part of the spectrum.
The human eye samples only a factor of 2 in wavelength.
In the 1930s, a radio engineer named Carl Jansky was assigned by Bell Telephone Labs to track down a source of mysterious radio radiation
that was causing some interference with transatlantic communication.
He built a large radio antenna in Holmdel, New Jersey, and every time the Milky Way went through the beam
through the direction in which his radio antenna was pointed, up went the background signal.
He discovered natural radio radiation from the galaxy.
Not much was done with this discovery until the 1950s when a tinkerer, I suppose you would call him, a brilliant man named Grote Reber,
built, home-built, what looked like a huge satellite dish in his backyard, and made the first map of the Milky Way, done by an amateur.
At that point, radio astronomy began to take off.
Now, radio waves are long, and because of the length of the radio wave, you can't get a good, detailed view of an object
unless you build a very large radio telescope.
A radio telescope is the same as a reflecting optical telescope.
You build a big dish with its big radio mirror.
Light comes down, hits the radio mirror, and bounces up to the antenna, which is actually the detector itself.
The largest steerable radio telescope in the world is now about 100 meters across, vastly larger than the biggest optical telescope.
At that point, you can't really keep the curve of the dish together.
You have to have a perfect paraboloidal surface to be able to reflect the radio waves to the focus where you have the antenna.
However, what you can do is to take two radio telescopes, separate them, link them by cables, or synchronize their observations with highly precise atomic clocks,
and look at the same object with two or more radio telescopes.
And you can synthesize the effect of one that is so large that it would span the distance between the two.
The bigger the telescope, the better the resolving power, the greater the detail you're able to see.
We have built such interferometers, they're called, as large as the entire North American continent.
In fact, in some experiments, almost as large as the Earth itself, which allows us to get exceedingly detailed radio views of celestial objects.
We've now expanded these observations through the entire electromagnetic spectrum.
Radio waves you can pick up on the ground, at least in certain bands to which the Earth's atmosphere is transparent.
The same is true of infrared.
But if you really want to span the electromagnetic spectrum, you have to get above the Earth's blocking atmosphere,
where you can get at ultraviolet radiation, you can get at x-ray radiation, even gamma ray radiation.
So we built satellites that orbit the Earth to observe the entire span.
This allows us to see high energy processes that take place in space that produce nothing but x-rays and gamma rays.
Space observatories allow us to see high energy processes from space that we are completely ignorant of if we try to observe from the ground.
The opening of the electromagnetic spectrum is probably one of the great astronomical triumphs of the 20th century.
Space observatories, of course, culminated with the use of the Hubble Space Telescope, which launched in the early 1990s,
which orbits the Earth, not a terribly large telescope.
It's only a couple of meters across.
It's modest by ground-based standards, but it is in the best possible observing location above the Earth's atmosphere.
One of the serious problems we have in astronomy is the effect of the atmosphere.
Don't say twinkle, twinkle, little star to an astronomer, you get in trouble.
It is a nasty thing to look at through a telescope with that star just boiling away, as pretty as it looks from the ground.
It's not a nice sight through the telescope because it destroys our ability to see fine detail on a planetary surface or see fine detail in double stars in any kind of celestial object.
You get above the Earth's atmosphere, all the twinkling goes away, the stars settle down, and we get brilliant views.
The Hubble has taken some of the best images we have ever had.
Now, this doesn't officiate ground-based observatories because the ground-based observatories not only can span the electron, go into the radio part of the spectrum,
but they also can be built larger than space observatories.
So astronomy now uses really a complement of the two.
With space observatories observing what we can't get from the ground, ground-based observatories getting bigger and bigger and bigger,
and you put the two together and we're able to analyze all the light that comes from the sky throughout the entire electromagnetic spectrum.
The telescope itself does little.
We need to have a detector of the light at the focus.
We can take pictures with cameras.
That is, a camera simply holds in the old days a photographic plate.
Now it holds an electronic device which allows us to take pictures of the sky.
We can scan the sky with radio telescopes and take radio pictures.
We can take X-ray pictures with X-ray telescopes in orbit about the Earth.
Or a more common way of analyzing the light is to use a spectrograph,
something that stretches the light out into its component colors that allows us to analyze even the chemical composition of the body being observed.
We don't know where the astronomical detection capability and telescopes are going to end.
We're building them bigger and bigger and bigger.
We're putting them out in space.
Eventually we hope to have some on the moon.
There will be nothing better than an observatory on the far side of the moon which gets us away from all light pollution.
No problem with absorption by the atmosphere.
We can observe the entire electromagnetic spectrum without any human-made interference.
Eventually it'll probably be done.
In the meantime, we'll build bigger and better space observatories.
We have had dozens of them in orbit about the Earth that have allowed us to expand our view through the entire electromagnetic spectrum
and see the universe as nature intended us to see it.
So in this lecture what we've done is we've set the stage for learning the physical natures of the planets and of the other bodies of the solar system,
even of the stars, a subject to which we're now going to turn to see how they're composed,
now that we know how we can observe them.
After listening to lecture 8, a student posed this question to Professor Kaler.
How much of the electromagnetic spectrum can the eye see?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
Atoms and molecules, which are of course composed of combinations of atoms, also have another interesting property.
They are capable under certain conditions of absorbing or emitting light and other forms of electromagnetic radiation
at very specific colors or wavelengths.
You can look at the absorptions that appear in the spectrum.
They look like little lines, little cutouts in the spectrum of the sun or the planets.
And you can use the positions of these little cutouts by comparing them with laboratory spectra.
You can produce a full chemical analysis of the body being observed.
Hydrogen, for example, will selectively absorb a particular band of color in the red, another one in the blue, another in the violet and so on,
at particular wavelengths that are replicated by no other atom.
Each atom and each molecule, each ion, an atom with a stripped electron or more,
will have a particular set of these absorptions or reverse it, emissions.
They can both absorb and radiate at the same specific wavelengths.
And by analysis of these specific absorptions or these specific emissions,
you can do a full chemical analysis of the body being observed.
Tell exactly the chemical composition of it and the number of atoms that the body is composed of.
Another student then posed this question to Professor Kaler.
What other kinds of analyses can we perform on distant, heavenly bodies?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
The human eye is sensitive to light from about four hundred thousandths of a centimeter,
up to around eight hundred thousandths of a centimeter.
It's only a factor of two.
It's one octave out of the electromagnetic spectrum.
We see this little, tiny cutout of the whole spectrum.
With the eye alone, we learn very little about the universe.
Fortunately, nature pumps an enormous amount of energy into that little band.
It's no surprise, I suppose, that the human eye is sensitive to exactly where stars produce most of their energy.
In fact, the peak energy of the sun is in the yellow part of the spectrum,
which is exactly the same place where the human eye is most sensitive
and can make the best use of sunlight.
But beyond the red and beyond the violet, we have no sense of what's going on.
We have to use other detectors to learn about ultraviolet, infrared, radio, x-ray, gamma ray,
and all the rest of the electromagnetic spectrum.
