Astronomy, Earth, Sky and the Planets, Lecture 9, Our Domain, Earth and the Moon.
In this lecture, we'll be using a lot of shorthand for the chemical elements.
In the previous lecture, we talked about elements like nitrogen, oxygen, uranium.
You talked about their isotope numbers, uranium-238, for example, with 238 particles in the nucleus.
It's a lot simpler if we simply use the chemical symbols for them.
Instead of hydrogen, we could say H, instead of helium, HE.
Instead of oxygen, O. Instead of nitrogen, N. Instead of uranium, U.
So instead of uranium-238, it would come out as U-238.
Atoms are also combined into molecules.
So we have chemical symbolism where we would say if we had two oxygen atoms put together,
we're not talking about isotopes anymore, but molecules, we would call this the O2 molecule
because there are two oxygen atoms put together, or the N2 molecule with two nitrogen atoms put together to create the molecule.
In the last lecture, we looked at the tools of astronomy.
What we use to examine the planets, what we use to examine the sun and the stars.
Now let's turn our sights to the planets themselves and begin to look at their physical natures,
now that we know how to examine them.
So in this lecture, we're going to look at the double world, we're going to look at the Earth and its companion, the Moon.
Really two planets, if you don't mind counting the Moon as a planet, and I don't mind doing that at all,
two planets that orbit the sun together in space, one large, the other small, with a terrific contrast between the two.
We'll look at the physical natures of the interiors of the bodies, the exteriors of the bodies,
what makes the Moon different from the Earth, what makes the Moon cold and dead,
what makes the Earth a wonderfully alive, thriving planet, full of life.
I have here a piece of a genuine planet, an actual piece of a planet.
It's a fairly ugly rock that I picked up out of a parking lot.
We pay little attention to these things, it's really quite a remarkable thing.
It's made out of mostly silicon, oxygen, heavy stuff from the periodic table,
very little hydrogen, a little bit of water in it, no helium at all to speak of,
none of the light stuff of the universe.
The sun, the large planets are made of 90% hydrogen, 10% helium, and just the salting of everything else.
This rock is the salting, it's the everything else.
This is what the Earth is made of, things like this, things like iron, things like nickel,
all of the heavy things of nature, as are all of the other terrestrial planets for that matter.
Let's look at the Earth from the point of view of a planet.
This could be the Moon.
In your mind, take a body about a quarter of the size of the Earth.
The Earth is 8,000 miles, 13,000 kilometers across.
Now take a body about a quarter of the size of the Earth, 180th the mass of the Earth,
and put it 30 Earth diameters away.
That's the scale.
We've been all the way from the Earth to the Moon, that is as far as humanity has traveled.
The other planets are vastly farther, much more dangerous trip.
We haven't even been back to the Moon for a very long time for that matter.
We will go someday again, I'm sure.
The Moon is an orbit about the Earth as a result of the gravitational attraction between the two.
Gravity is always mutual.
The Moon has gravity, the Earth has gravity, and it is the combination of the two
that keeps the Moon in orbit about the Earth.
It's actually something of a misnomer to say that the Moon goes around the Earth.
In fact, they go around each other.
As the Moon orbits the Earth, the Earth also orbits the Moon.
However, the Earth is 80 times more massive than the Moon,
so the orbit of the Earth is only 1 80th the size of the orbit of the Moon,
the Moon being 238,380,000 kilometers, 238,000 miles away.
The Earth nevertheless has this little tiny orbit about the Moon,
about the so-called center of mass of the planetary, of the Earth-Moon system.
Now, the Earth and the Moon are extended bodies.
They're not points.
Think of the point underneath the Moon.
The gravitational force directly beneath the Moon is stronger
than the gravitational force on the other side of the Earth,
that is, the force of the Moon on the Earth.
The effect of that is to stretch the Earth out into a slightly oblate shape
on a line toward the Moon.
It's not very much. It's only about a meter or less.
Every time the Moon goes more or less overhead, however,
you raise up a little bit and then go back down a little bit
as a result of the stretching of the Earth.
This stretching is called a tide.
You don't notice it in the solid body of the Earth,
but you sure do notice it in the waters of the Earth
because the waters of the Earth tend to flow toward a point beneath the Moon
and flow in the other direction toward a point opposite the Earth,
opposite the Moon on the Earth.
The Earth rotates beneath this tidal bulge,
so if you're at the coast, the water goes up and the water goes back down again.
This tidal bulge on the Earth slowly dissipates the energy of rotation of the Earth
and actually slows the Earth down.
The day is getting longer by about a ten-thousandth of a second per century.
Not very much, not something you'd notice over a lifetime.
The only effect you notice is on timekeeping and on clocks.
Well, the Earth raises a much more serious tide on the Moon,
the result of which is that the Moon keeps one face pointed toward the Earth at all times.
It's a tidal locking.
We see similar things in the Moons of Jupiter.
We see similar things in the Moons of Pluto and the Moon of Pluto.
Pluto and the Moon keep one face pointed toward the other at all times.
Even stars will do this over a period of time.
The tidal force is extremely strong, an extremely powerful thing.
We'll meet up with it again in our dealings with the other planets.
The Moon and the Earth were formed at the same time four and a half billion years ago.
Nobody was there, so how can we tell?
Let's go back to this piece of our planet again.
Although this is mostly made out of silicon and oxygen, some metal atoms,
most rocks have a tiny amount of natural uranium in them.
All uranium, U-238 with 238 nuclear particles in it,
92 protons, the rest neutrons, all forms of uranium are radioactive.
There's no stable uranium at all.
Now U-238 is not terribly dangerous because it lasts for a very long period of time.
You don't want to be around it for too long, but by itself it's not terribly dangerous.
It's the U-235. It's the really bad stuff.
U-238 slowly decays away over billions of years
into an isotope of lead called lead 206.
It's lead with 206 nuclear particles in it.
Most lead, however, the kind of lead you get in say a fishing sinker is lead 208.
The lead 206 is all coming from the radioactive decay of uranium.
So all we need to do in our rock is to look at the ratio of lead 206 to U-238.
Know the decay rate of U-238.
U-238 will cut itself in half every 4.5 billion years.
That's called the half-life of uranium.
Once we know that from laboratory studies, we can compare the daughter product
with the parent product of a radioactive element and get the age of the rock since solidification.
The oldest earth rocks go older than 3 billion years old.
The oldest rocks of the moon are close to 4.5 billion years old
and the oldest rocks of all, the meteorites, which are small asteroids that land on the earth,
bring in at about 4.5 billion years.
They're the oldest things we know in the solar system.
That must therefore be the age of the solar system, the entire solar system,
not just of the meteorites but of the earth, moon and the entire system.
We know how old it is from radioactive decay and we don't have to just use uranium and lead.
We can use a variety of parent products with daughter products and they all come out the same,
giving us an age for the planetary system of 4.5 billion years.
It's a beautiful body, this earth.
It's covered with water, the oceans, land masses, the continents, covered with clouds,
a pretty good atmosphere consisting of nitrogen and the oxygen that we breathe to keep us alive.
It's unique among the terrestrial planets.
Of course, you can say that about any of the terrestrial planets.
You can say that about any of the planets at all.
They're all their own persons, so to speak.
But the earth is unusual in so many different ways.
It's the biggest of the terrestrial planets and it is marvelously active.
Why active? It's hot inside, as we know.
You go down even into a deep mine, the temperature goes up and up and up.
We have evidence for lava coming out from molten rock below, telling how hot it is in the middle.
This heat causes a great deal of activity on the earth.
The earth is kind of an interesting planet.
It's kind of bimodal.
You have high areas in the continents and then you have low areas that are filled with water, the ocean basin.
So we have sort of high and low.
The moon isn't quite like that.
The moon is more one level.
The mountains on the moon are quite different from the earth, as we will see.
The earth's land masses, some are flat, but along the edges of many of them,
especially along the edge of the United States, South America, you find huge mountain ranges
that span all the way around through Asia, all the way around the Pacific Ocean basin.
Where you find mountain ranges in the centers of some of these continents as well,
you also find great activity.
The earth's shutters with powerful earthquakes that can bring down buildings.
Volcanoes spew hot rock from the interior.
All of these active regions tend to be linked together.
The mountains and the earthquakes and the volcanoes, they're all together.
The earth is an extremely active body.
Contrast with the moon.
Take a look at the moon through a telescope sometime, as Galileo did back in the early part of the 1600s.
And you see a dead surface.
You always can see down to the surface of the moon.
No clouds ever block your view.
The moon has effectively no atmosphere at all.
It picks up a few atoms from the wind that blows from the sun.
A good fraction of the atmosphere of the moon comes from rocket exhaust from the takeoffs of the Apollo landings.
It effectively has none.
There is almost no water in the moon at all.
There's no water in the rocks that were brought back by the astronauts.
This rock taken from the earth, any rock taken from the earth, has water within it.
You can squeeze the water out of it if you squish it hard enough, but not on the moon.
It's an extremely dry body.
The earth, on the other hand, looks pretty wet.
Look at all those oceans.
It fools you.
On the average, the oceans are about two miles deep.
The earth is 8,000 miles across.
The amount of water on the earth is remarkably small.
And the water holds most of the hydrogen that we have on the earth.
The amount of hydrogen is also very small.
The amount of helium we have, which of course is 10% of the sun, is very little as well.
Almost all the helium we have on earth comes from the radioactive decay of uranium, in fact, in the natural rocks of the earth.
Go back to the moon again and just look at this dead, lifeless body.
Fascinating in its beauty, of course, but it's simply a rocky surface that you can see forever.
No lakes, no clouds, no air, almost no water.
There is a tiny bit of ice, apparently, up at the poles where the deep basins are forever hidden from the sun and the water can't evaporate.
But it is an incredibly small amount.
Effectively, the moon is just about as dry a body as you can get.
The earth, on the other hand, has more water than any of the other terrestrial planets, but it's still pretty darn dry.
There's very little water on the earth.
Where you want to find water, as we'll see in later lectures, is out in the cold regions of the solar system, out at Jupiter, out at Saturn, and beyond.
In the regions of the comets, where the bodies are at least, some cases, 50% water ice, but not in the inner part of the planetary system.
The moon is known not for its mountains, not for its mountains like we have on the earth, but for its craters, for its basins.
The moon is entirely covered with impact craters.
Everything from basins that are thousands of miles wide to little pits and rocks, the entire surface of the moon is absolutely crushed with impacts.
You can divide the moon up into two very broad areas, the so-called lunar highlands, which are the non-basins, so to speak.
They're sort of the average terrain of the moon, which are completely covered with craters.
You have craters piled upon craters piled upon craters.
You can see ghost-like craters that have been smashed up by craters piled upon top of them.
From the earth, you can see spots on the moon that make the so-called man in the moon.
They're craters, too. They're huge craters.
They're enormous impact basins that have been filled with lava big enough to see, even with relatively poor eyes.
These, when you look at them close enough, also are littered with craters, although not as many.
The lava rock is dark. That gives the face to the man in the moon.
What makes an impact crater?
Rocks. Any rock is not infinitely hard.
It may feel like one if you get hit by one, but you can compress any rock.
They're not perfectly rigid.
If you put enough pressure on one, you can deform it.
How's a crater produced?
Think of a flat plane, pristine plane.
From the outside comes another rock, an asteroid, most likely.
Moving at orbital speed.
In the case of the earth, the earth goes around the sun at 17 miles per second.
You can go across the United States in just a few minutes at speeds like this.
The rock comes down.
It can be anything from a small one to something many miles or many kilometers across.
The rock comes down and hits the surface of the plane and compresses the surface rock.
Kind of like putting a bowling ball on a bed.
The surface rock compresses downward until the impacting body's energy is used up.
Now, much of that energy is going into heat.
It's not much different than rubbing your hands together and having friction generate the heat between your hands.
In this case, you are stopping a body that is moving at tens of kilometers per second
and that energy gets converted into the compressed rock and into heat as well.
That heat begins to melt the rock and the impact also shatters the compressed rock.
Once the impacting body has stopped, you relieve the compression and won't.
It's like the bedspring.
It pops back and blows everything out of the basin that's been created by the impacting rock
and you wind up with a hole in the ground.
The stuff that gets splashed out goes into what's called an ejecta blanket around the outside
and much of it gets piled up on a crater rim that sort of slumps down
and the slumping helps in a big crater often produce a mountain in the middle.
There was an argument that goes back a century or more
as to whether the craters on the moon are volcanic or whether they are impact.
We now know that they're almost all impact craters.
There's very little in the way of volcanism on the moon because the moon is a cold dead body.
You don't have lava flows coming up from the inside.
The moon chilled off very quickly after its formation.
Now, the exception of that are these large impact basins.
We can get the age of the moon from the rocks brought back by the Apollo astronauts.
The ages of the lunar highlands go back as far as four billion years.
The ages of the large spots that make the man and the moon, however, go back only about three billion years or so.
What apparently happened was that in the early days of the planetary system,
the moon was hit by enormous numbers of impacting bodies.
It's called the late heavy bombardment which slacked off about four billion years ago
and then the moon was whacked by some enormous bodies that created huge basins
hundreds of kilometers, hundreds of miles across.
So big that it cracked the lunar crust and lava flowed up from below to produce lava seas.
These large basins are filled.
The large lava filled basins are called maria, like the woman's name, M-A-R-I-A.
It means sea in Latin.
At one time we probably thought they were ocean beds.
They are not ocean beds.
They are beds that are filled with solidified, now solidified liquid lava that came up from below.
The amount of lava flow is very little.
These things are not very deep.
The moon never had much in the way of internal heating.
It cooled off very quickly and the amount of lava that's flowed across the surface
is much, much less than it's flowed across the earth's surface
because the earth maintains heat in its interior as a result of its large size.
Go back now and look at the earth and contrast the earth again with the moon.
We've got continents on the earth.
We have basins on the earth as well.
These are not impact basins.
Do we have impacts on the earth?
The moon were the craters on the earth.
The earth should have picked up as many craters as on the moon.
They're here, but it's hard to see because on the earth we have an atmosphere,
we have wind, we have water, and the impact basins simply can't stay.
They get eroded away.
Not only that, but the active nature of the earth with the volcanism
and as we'll see, the shifting of the continents simply wipes them out.
Nevertheless, there are about 200 recognized impact craters of fairly recent origin on the earth.
The most famous is near Winslow, Arizona.
Out in the state of Arizona, there's a crater about almost a mile across
that was hit by an impacting body, oh, 50,000 years ago or so.
In recent enough times that the crater is still there.
It's a famous tourist site.
The largest crater that we know of is off the coast of the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico
that's about 200 miles or so across.
And we think it is the crater of a huge asteroid that hit us
that changed the earth's global climate and probably did in the dinosaurs.
So we have them too. They're just not as easy to see.
Now I'll go back to the earth and take a look at perhaps its most distinctive characteristic.
If you look at South America and cut it out, imagine cutting it out of a globe
and rotate it a little bit, you find that it will fit right into this curve in western Africa.
This was noticed maybe a century ago or so.
And it was suggested way back then that South America and Africa were once part of a giant continent
that split in half and the two have drifted apart, continental drift.
The idea was laughed at for a very long period of time.
On the other hand, nobody knew what made mountains. We now know what is going on.
In fact, not only does South America fit geographically into Africa,
but you find similar rock structures when you fit it.
You find similar magnetic field lines frozen into the rocks.
There's all the evidence we need that the two continents were really once a part of a single land mass.
Running down the middle of the Atlantic Ocean is an enormous mountain range
and the crust is being formed.
The earth is hot inside.
Take a look at the size of the earth, 8,000 miles across.
We can derive the volume of the earth in cubic kilometers or cubic centimeters.
We can weigh the earth by dropping a ball, by measuring the acceleration of gravity downward.
That is, we can get the mass of the earth.
You divide one number by the other and you can derive the density of the earth.
The large density of the earth is about five and a half times that of water,
about five and a half grams per cubic centimeter.
Surface rocks, on the other hand, are only two and a half to three grams per cubic centimeter.
They are less dense than the earth at large.
The implication here is that there must be something very dense and very heavy
somewhere inside the earth, most likely down toward the center.
One of the most common heavy material is iron.
And we find that, in fact, by the asteroids that hit the earth, a good fraction of them are, in fact, iron.
So from these data and also from earthquakes which send waves going through pressure waves,
sound waves, shock waves through the earth, we can actually derive a kind of x-ray picture
from the interior of the earth.
And sure enough, down deep inside, about halfway in, is a ball of iron.
About 90% iron, roughly, we think, 10% nickel.
The outer part of that iron core is liquid.
It's the circulation of that iron core that produces the earth's general magnetic field.
Inside that liquid iron core, about halfway into that in radius,
it solidifies as a result of the enormous pressures.
So it's like a solid iron ball floating inside a liquid iron ball,
and the rest of it on the outside is similar in nature to our rock here.
Similar in nature to any rock you might pick up outside,
made mostly of silicates, silicon oxygen, with all kinds of admixtures of metal,
and also carbon, the heavy stuff.
The outer layers are called the mantle.
The mantle is hot, largely as a result of radioactive decay of uranium.
Any time you have a hot substance, it's going to try to rise.
Although the mantle of the earth is made out of rock, it's sort of in a plastic state,
and it can undergo a state of convection.
That is, the hot rock can slowly move upward,
and the cool rock at the top will slowly move downward,
and the mantle will begin to circulate around like this.
Running down the middle of the Atlantic Ocean is an enormous mountain range.
That is where New Crust is being formed.
Rock from the mantle is coming up and creating, lifting this mountain range,
hot molten rock is coming out from it, and creating brand-new crust.
As the New Crust is created in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean,
it pushes the continents apart.
The Atlantic Ocean is getting bigger.
South America is moving away from Africa.
North America is moving away from Europe.
At the same time, the Pacific Ocean is getting smaller.
This is shoving North America to the west.
It's shoving South America to the west,
and the North American continent is being pushed over the Pacific Ocean Basin.
The Pacific Ocean Basin is diving beneath the North American continent,
and this pushes up mountain ranges all along the west coast of the United States,
Canada, and the same all the way down through the Andes and all the way down to Antarctica.
The Earth is divided up into about between one and two dozen crustal plates.
These plates have nowhere to go.
They can shift around, so they're constantly reforming themselves.
One dives down beneath the other, creating mountain ranges that melts rock.
The rock floats up to the top, produces volcanoes.
Where do you find the volcanoes in the United States and Canada?
The Alaska all along the west coast, the so-called Ring of Fire,
that is all the way around the Pacific Ocean Basin.
As the Pacific Ocean Basin and the Pacific plates slide toward Asia,
some of the material gets scraped off, producing island arcs like the Aleutians, Japan,
and many others that you find around the Pacific Ocean Basin.
It's a nice theory, but does it actually work?
One of the beautiful things about radio telescopes,
when you create what is called an interferometer,
where you have two radio telescopes acting as one,
is that you can get the exact distance between the two radio telescopes.
We set a radio telescope up in, say, Europe.
We put another one in North America.
Look at a very distant celestial radio source that radiates as just a little point.
We don't care what it is.
Observe with the two telescopes simultaneously.
Synchronize them with atomic clocks,
and you can measure the distance between the telescopes
to within a couple of inches, within a few centimeters.
Observe over a period of time,
and we watch the two telescopes getting farther apart
at about the rate at which the human fingernails grow.
That is, we can actually see North America moving away from Europe.
We can actually see South America moving away from Africa.
250 million years ago, they were all together.
They split apart as a result of convection in the Earth's mantle,
and now they're being driven apart,
and eventually North America will probably ram into Asia.
Now, the Pacific Ocean Plate is moving northward and rotating around.
The Pacific Ocean Plate joins the North America Plate
at a famous line called the San Andreas Fault.
The Pacific Ocean Plate is moving northward, but it's not smooth.
There's no real lubrication.
So think of putting your hands together and hard as you can,
and then pushing one hand in one direction,
the other one in the other direction,
and suddenly they slip by many meters all at the same time.
Well, your hands by an inch or so, but think of rocks doing this.
They will slip by many meters suddenly, jarringly,
and will send out tremendous shock waves.
The San Andreas Fault comes up, the Gulf of Mexico.
It goes through Southern California
and exits through the Bay Area in San Francisco,
and it brings down buildings, maybe once a century or so,
when it finally rips.
These fault lines are all over the world,
and they're the source of the earthquakes,
and it's the slippage of these crustal plates that do the job.
On occasion, you'll also get a plume coming up,
hot rock from the mantle,
creating things like the Island of Hawaii.
The biggest mountain on Earth is the Big Island of Hawaii.
Kind of surprising.
Most people think of it as Mount Everest.
It's the highest above sea level,
but from base to top, as a single mountain,
Hawaii is the biggest, almost seven miles from the bottom to the top.
It's a result of a mantle plume that's coming up from below.
It's a very special kind of volcano called a shield volcano,
because it looks like an old-fashioned Roman shield
sort of placed upon the ground.
Low slopes, kind of runny lava.
All of the Hawaiian Islands are shield volcanoes.
And the hotspot, the plume, is located at one point in the Pacific Ocean.
The Pacific Ocean Basin is moving to the north
and carrying each island off the hotspot,
at which point it begins to wear down.
The northern Hawaiian Islands are small.
They're worn down by erosion
until they finally just disappear into sub-sea mountains.
The real activity is now taking place
in the southern coast of Hawaii in Kilauea
and a new volcano that's coming, that is now under sea,
where some millions of years from now
we'll have a brand-new resort south of Hawaii.
You can actually see the scar, the track,
left by the shifting crustal plate.
The Earth is the only body that has these crustal plates.
Venus, for some reason, chilled off.
The moon doesn't have any at all.
Mercury doesn't have any.
Looks like Venus and maybe Mars tried to get them,
but they don't have them.
Only the Earth, the largest of the terrestrial planets
with enough heat inside to produce this kind of tectonic plate motion
as it's called, that simply carries the continents around the world.
We can find many other pieces of evidence of this.
India, for example, millions of years ago,
crashed into Asia.
As it did, it buckled up the land
and created the Himalaya Mountains that are still growing.
India is still moving this way,
and the ripple is extending farther and farther into China.
You have to have processes like this to keep mountains
because the mountains would simply wear down under erosion
unless there was something to keep building them up.
And it's the plate motion that does it.
The moon doesn't have it.
It's one single crustal plate.
It's a small body, roughly one eightieth the mass of the Earth,
and it chilled off eons ago.
It's completely dead, no longer any volcanic activity on the moon.
Once in a while, somebody will see a little degassing,
a little outgassing in a crater, but that's about all.
Pathetically small amount of activity.
It's the deadest, really, of all of the inner planets.
Moon has no atmosphere.
The Earth does.
It's terribly thin.
You really can't survive more than about three miles,
five kilometers or so above the surface of the Earth.
Beyond that, the air is simply too thin to breathe.
It's remarkable how fragile and how thin
this terrestrial atmosphere actually is,
consisting of roughly four-fifths nitrogen,
roughly one-fifth oxygen in the molecular form,
not the atomic form, that's poisonous.
Nitrogen and oxygen, about one percent argon,
a tiny fraction of a percent of water vapor,
which is pretty variable, as we all know,
and a tiny fraction of a percent of carbon dioxide
and many other gases, methane, sulfuric acid,
all kinds of little stuff that float around in the Earth's air.
Much of it from the degassing of volcanoes,
the oxygen coming from life processes on the Earth.
The Earth is the only one of the terrestrial planets
that has an oxygenated atmosphere
as a result of all of the life process
that have taken place on our beautiful planet.
You can go to the top of Everest,
but you can't stay there.
The air is simply too thin.
There are two particular molecules
in the Earth's atmosphere of trace molecules
that are of particular importance.
Carbon dioxide, which is at a very low level
and water vapor as well,
are fierce infrared absorbers.
The Sun is at about 6,000 degrees above absolute zero,
about 6,000 degrees Kelvin,
and it produces dominantly yellow light.
Sunlight heats the body of the Earth,
but it only heats the Earth a little bit
above the freezing point of water.
Let's say, round it off to about 300 degrees
above absolute zero.
At 300 degrees, the body can't produce optical light.
That's why it gets dark at night.
The Sun goes down and you don't see the land glow.
It is glowing in the infrared, where you can't see it.
So the Earth re-radiates its heat as infrared energy.
However, water vapor and carbon dioxide
fiercely absorb the infrared energy
and act as a blanket around the Earth
that help keep the Earth warm.
Without that little bit of carbon dioxide,
the oceans would probably freeze.
It's called the greenhouse effect.
And of course, now we get into all kinds of debates
as to what the effect is
when we start dumping carbon dioxide
into the Earth's atmosphere
by burning the carbon in the rocks.
That is by burning oil deposits, coal deposits, and the like,
and nobody is entirely sure what is going to happen.
We are going through a period of global warming.
Is it a result of carbon dioxide in the air
and enhanced greenhouse effect?
Wait till we get to Venus and you can see the effect
if the greenhouse effect really starts running away with itself.
The other molecule of particular interest is ozone.
It's the O3 molecule.
What you are breathing in the air is the O2 molecule.
O3 or ozone is produced in electrical discharges.
If you have a little train set at home, for example,
you can smell it when the engine is running.
It's kind of an acrid odor coming out of the motor.
Ozone is naturally produced
in the upper layers of the Earth's atmosphere
and it fiercely absorbs ultraviolet radiation.
It is what keeps us from frying on the ground
from the ultraviolet radiation that is produced by the Sun.
Again, it's a fragile molecule.
It is broken down by air pollution.
We have done wonders with trying to control this
over the last decade or so
and have probably done it.
Nevertheless, there is a hole in the ozone above South America
that can extend all the way to Australia,
which is causing some of the Australians,
a beach-loving people, a bit of a problem
because as the ultraviolet radiation gets through the Earth's atmosphere,
it causes an increased amount of skin cancer in human beings.
So, as thick as the air appears to be,
it's a rather fragile layer surrounding the Earth.
Much larger is the Earth's magnetic field.
The magnetic field is generated by circulation in the iron core
and the schoolbook picture has it as sort of a nice looping affairs
coming out of the North Magnetic Pole,
which is not at the North Geographic Pole.
If you use a magnetic compass, you will not get to the North Pole.
You will get to an island in Northern Archipelago of Canada, in fact.
So, you have to be a little bit careful on how to use these things.
The magnetic field of the Earth is not really structured that way.
There is wind coming in from the Sun that hits the magnetic field
on the Sunward side of the Earth and hammers it inward, compresses it,
and strings the other side out into a long magnetic tail
that actually stretches farther than the Moon is from the Earth.
The magnetic field of the Earth captures these particles,
these high-speed particles from the Sun, and protects us.
There are two layers away from the Earth,
one about one and a half Earth radii,
and the other about four Earth radii out,
called the radiation belts, the so-called Van Allen radiation belts,
that are filled with these particles bouncing back and forth
like dancers between the North and South magnetic poles
that keep these particles from hitting the Earth.
Every once in a while when a magnetic field collapses on the Sun,
a big bubble of solar wind, particles from the Sun
come screaming down the solar wind, hits the Earth's magnetic field,
overloads it, disturbs it, dumps particles in close to the North magnetic pole,
expands these particles down toward lower latitudes,
and we see a Northern Lights display,
showing that there is an intimate relationship,
not just of radiation between the Earth and the Sun,
but of matter as well.
The Sun literally reaching out to touch the Earth.
Without the magnetic field, we'd be in a lot of trouble
because that solar wind could seriously influence the Earth's atmosphere.
One of the dangers of living on the Moon is, in fact, the solar wind.
You're right out there exposed directly to it.
In a space suit, you're okay for the moment,
but a lunar colony would probably want to dig itself into the rock
to protect oneself from the solar wind.
The Earth protects us from all manner of things out there,
as a result not only of the atmosphere,
but as a result of this marvelous magnetic field
that shrouds the Earth and keeps the solar wind from hitting us.
It's a remarkable body.
What we know about the Earth, which we can examine directly,
tells us a lot about how the other planets are structured.
On the other hand, the other planets are natural experiments.
From the way they are constructed, under different conditions,
different separations from the Sun, different masses, different radii,
we can learn more about the Earth,
which shows one of the great real uses of astronomy.
Learning about the other planets tells us something about our own planet
and how to protect it and how generations of us
can keep living on it safely for hundreds, thousands,
hundreds of thousands, maybe millions of years to come.
After listening to lecture nine,
a student posed this question to Professor Kaler.
Why does the Earth have a magnetic field while the Moon does not?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
The Earth has a magnetic field because of circulation of the iron core.
Iron is an electrically conducting medium.
If you move an electrically conducting medium, you will create a magnetic field.
The iron core of the Earth, the outer part of the iron core of the Earth,
the liquid iron core is in a state of convection.
It's circulating around like this.
It's also the Earth in a state of rotation,
and that sloshes the iron core around,
and that generates the Earth's magnetic field.
The Moon, on the other hand, is so small
that it seems to be solidified throughout.
We're not even entirely sure that the Moon actually has an iron core.
If it does, it's very, very small.
Even if it does, there's no circulation of the iron core,
and the Moon is a magnetically inactive body.
The Moon has no magnetic field.
