Astronomy, Earth, Sky and the Planets, lecture 12, distant outposts, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto.
The last lecture we looked at the giant planets of the solar system, the ones in the middle
of the distribution of the whole thing.
Toward the sun the planets get much smaller, toward the terrestrial planets and the same
thing happens when we go to the outer part of the planetary system and now visit the
smaller planets, the smaller, sometimes called Jovian planets, but not quite Jovian, Uranus,
Neptune and Pluto.
Uranus and Neptune are very similar, Pluto very different.
We'll look at the structures of these bodies, at their moons and what they all have to do
with each other and finally at Pluto as a marvelous transition object that takes us
far out beyond the planetary system into the distant reaches of the solar system, the two
not really being quite the same.
Remember when we looked at Jupiter and Saturn and we remove matter from Jupiter.
As we remove matter from Jupiter, instead of getting smaller, you decrease the gravitational
field and the body puffs up again to almost the size of Jupiter.
If you added mass onto Jupiter, you wouldn't really increase the radius very much.
What you would do is by dumping more mass into it, increasing the gravitational field,
you increase the density.
Jupiter is almost as large as you can possibly make a Jovian type planet, actually.
Well if you now took Saturn and stripped away the mass of Saturn down to the mass of Uranus
and Neptune, which are about 15 times that of the Earth, smaller bodies, only about four
times the radius of the Earth, notably different.
If you strip mass away from Saturn to get down to Uranus and Neptune, if they were made
out of the same stuff, hydrogen and helium, you would again lessen the gravitational field.
The planet would puff back up again and Uranus and Neptune would be approximately the size
of Saturn, a little bit smaller, but not all that much smaller.
Instead, they're much smaller.
Their densities are much higher than you would expect if they were made out of hydrogen and
helium.
Therefore, they must be made out of denser stuff.
They are very different kinds of bodies.
As I said, 15 times or so the mass of the Earth, about four times the radius of the
Earth, Neptune a little bit smaller than Uranus, but its mass a little bit higher, giving
it a slightly higher density.
But rather as you could say about Jupiter and Saturn, what's true about Jupiter is true
about Saturn and vice versa, more or less the same thing is true about Uranus and Neptune.
What you can say about the planet Uranus is somewhat similar that you could say about
Neptune.
The colors are different than they are from Jupiter and Saturn.
Jupiter and Saturn are kind of a yellow-white color.
You can see the creamy nature of the planets with the naked eye.
Uranus is actually visible to the naked eye, but you could never see the color.
But with a telescope, it becomes bright enough to see that these two planets, Uranus and
Neptune, take kind of a greenish to bluish green cast.
Even the colors are different as a result of methane haze in the atmosphere.
We're not looking at ammonia clouds anymore.
We're looking at methane clouds floating in the same hydrogen and helium atmosphere.
But as you plunge inside the planet, the hydrogen and helium probably stops rather
well down and we don't really know what's inside these planets, but it probably turns
into some kind of a mush of methane, ammonia, and finally loosely defined rock, iron, and
the rest.
Much denser stuff.
So in that sense Uranus and Neptune are kind of intermediate between the terrestrial planets
and the Jovian planets, except not in position.
In position, they're much farther out.
It's rather hard to describe the distances when you get to these outer planets.
Jupiter's five astronomical units, the AU remember being the distance between the earth
and the sun.
Jupiter's five astronomical units away from the sun.
Saturn is not quite 10, and then we make a giant jump to 19.
We almost double the distance out to Uranus.
And then we go from Uranus to Neptune to 30 astronomical units.
Neptune is a faint planet.
It shines well under naked eye vision with large binoculars you can pick it up.
With a small telescope, it's not too difficult to see.
If you were standing on the planet Uranus looking at Neptune, it would barely be visible
to the naked eye.
It's not like these two planets are right together.
The distances simply increase in relative proportion the farther away you get.
How Uranus and Neptune turned out to be so similar isn't really known, except that it
seems to be that Neptune may have been formed a little bit closer to Uranus and then gravitationally
moved farther out.
We can address this problem in the last lecture when we look at the creation of the solar
system and of the planetary system.
Uranus has one outstandingly odd characteristic.
Even Neptune has an obliquity of its clip, a tilt to its axis, something like this.
Most of the planets are tipped more or less perpendicular to their orbital planes.
Venus of course entirely upside down.
Nevertheless, the axis is perpendicular, not Uranus.
Very weird.
It's tipped over like this at a 98 degree angle from the perpendicular, technically making
it the second planet of the solar system to rotate backwards.
It has the most extreme weather conditions, climate conditions of any planet in the solar
system because at one point in its orbit, the south pole is practically pointing at
the sun and then 42 years later, half the orbital period, the north pole is pointing
at the sun.
Remember when we talked about the earth and the tropics and the artyx?
The tropic of Capricorn and the tropic of Cancer are latitudes of 23 and a half degrees,
the same as the tilt of the axis of the earth's orbit, rather the axis of the earth's rotation.
The arctic and Antarctic circles are 90 minus 23 and a half.
You get the idea.
Well, at 98 degree tilt, the arctic circle on Uranus would be at 8 degrees latitude
and the tropics would be up at 82 degrees.
They actually cross over so you get the most extreme possible seasons.
The only more extreme you could get is if the tilt were exactly 90 degrees and it's very
close to that.
Nobody knows why this is true.
Nobody knows what happened.
It's not just that the planet alone is tipped over at 98 degrees, but the entire satellite
system is tipped over.
All of this somehow happened as everything was forming at the same time, including the
satellite system.
When we encounter odd things like this, we often invoke collision of some sort.
Nobody can go back that far and figure out really what happened, but we think the moon
formed in a gigantic collision between the earth and probably a Mars-sized body.
A collision may have stripped much of the outer mantle away from Mercury, producing
this iron core in the planet, relatively speaking anyway, and this is substantiated
by some of the huge impact bases we see.
Impact bases that are hundreds of kilometers across, 10 kilometers or more deep.
Sometimes these impacts, with a little imagination, you can almost see it breaking the planet
in half.
A large collision could have somehow produced this tilt.
How that would have happened, we really don't know.
We can't go back that far in the past.
So it'll probably remain a mystery for a long time to come.
Jupiter produces its own internal heat.
Considerable amount of energy comes out from simple gravitational contraction.
Saturn does the same thing.
Saturn actually produces relatively a bit more heat than Jupiter does, in part as a result
of gravitational contraction, but also as a part of the helium inside being converted
from the dissolved gaseous state into a liquid state.
It's sort of raining helium down in the deep core, and that releases energy as well, much
as a thunderstorm releases energy on the Earth.
Neptune, the farthest planet out, actually produces relatively more heat than any of
them.
And here's Uranus looking so similar to Neptune.
Here is yet another of these large planets.
Uranus produces no heat at all of its own.
We have no idea why.
Whether this has something to do with the tilt of the axis, that's another odd thing
about it, is simply unknown.
This remains a mystery.
We've only visited these two planets once by spacecraft each, by the Voyager 2 spacecraft,
which went by Jupiter, which went by Saturn, and then finally visited Uranus, and finally
visited Neptune on its way out of the solar system altogether.
And that's all we know about them close up, although with the Hubble Space Telescope,
and with even some of the telescopes from the ground, we can get reasonably decent ideas
of what's going on the planetary surfaces, especially with the Hubble.
When the Voyager 2 first examined the planet Uranus, it was a, well, I guess the word was
boring.
There were no surface features.
The cloud belts were gone, only with the most extreme enhancement of contrast.
Could you see any cloud belt at all?
And finally, one little wisp of cloud was seen, and one tiny cloud belt.
Now curiously, the Voyager passed by the planet Uranus when the South Pole was practically
pointing at the Sun.
That is, the Sun was practically overhead at the South Pole of the planet.
As the planet has moved around, we have now watched the development of more and more storm
systems and cloud belts that are beginning to pop up, probably as a result of seasonal
effects.
Neptune, on the other hand, has a reasonable tilt to its axis.
It's not so unusual.
It's just 20-some degrees.
Neptune behaves atmospherically a little more like Jupiter and Saturn.
The color of both of these planets is coming from a methane haze.
It absorbs red light very well, so it takes the red light out of the spectrum, allowing
only the bluish component of light and the blue-green component of light to be reflected
back to the Earth.
In addition, Neptune has some other kind of chemical in it that enhances the reflectivity
and turns it into an almost deep blue marble.
It's just a glorious sight, as seen on the Voyager spacecraft pictures.
When the Voyager passed by Neptune, there was a large, dark storm system circulating
around on the planet.
Again, with the imagination of astronomers, it was called not the great red spot.
Remember, the great white spot on Saturn?
This was the great dark spot.
And down below, it was another dark spot.
Dark spot, too.
Really romantic names.
We thought for a while that these dark spots were going to be like Jupiter's great red
spot, but the Hubble showed it just disappeared.
Then others come and go.
They come and go.
A very active atmosphere.
They seem to be methane plumes of some sort that come from below, but nobody is entirely
sure.
We need to send more spacecraft to the outer part of the solar system, and at the moment
there are no plans to do so.
And even if we do develop plans to do so, it is a very, very long trip, taking the order
of a decade or more to get out there to the farthest reaches of the planetary system.
Both Uranus and Neptune have ring systems.
The rings of the planet Uranus were found in a curious fashion.
Occasionally, a planet will pass in front of a distant star, and you can see the star
dimming out through the atmosphere.
It's a nice way of studying planetary atmospherics, in fact, by the effect that the planet has
on the star as the planet passes over the distant body.
As the planet approached the star, the star started to wink in and out, flash in and out.
Disappear, then it'd come back.
Disappear, then it'd come back, and it was obvious at the time that there must be dark
rings around the planet that were periodically passing in front of the star.
And then when the planet cleared the star, the rings on the other side made the star
pop in and out.
All the Jovian planets, all the big ones, Jupiter, Saturn, and then, I guess you should
call them the Uranian planets, since they're so similar and so different from Jupiter and
Saturn, they have their own ring systems as well.
Ring systems seem to be a natural part of planets that have extensive satellite systems.
The ring systems in the outer part of the solar system are almost black.
It's said that if you were in the Voyager spacecraft passing by the satellite, you wouldn't
even be able to see them looking out the window.
They're almost as dark as black velvet.
But with great enhancement of the cameras, there they are.
You can also see their effect looking back and seeing them pass in front of other stars
and get the information this way.
As opposed to the Saturnian ring system, which are broad rings separated by narrow gaps, we
have just the opposite with Uranus.
They are large, skinny, for the most part, dark rings separated by broad gaps.
They are wave stations for smashed-up moons.
The moons don't even have to be smashed up.
You have a satellite in orbit about the planet.
Some rock particle hits it.
The moons aren't very big.
It kicks off dust and debris from the satellite, and this debris is naturally shepherded into
ring systems that are largely controlled by the satellites themselves.
The rings are gradually cleared out by the extensive atmospheres of these planets, but
they are then replaced by more smashed-up particles.
That is at least the way the Jovian, the Jupiter's ring works.
It's the way Uranus's ring works.
It's the way Neptune's rings work.
Neptune has these rings as well, although they're kind of odd.
They're in partial arcs.
You see a section of ring, and then there's a bit of a gap, and there's another section
of a ring over here that are probably controlled as well by the satellites.
Uranus has an extensive natural satellite system, the likes of Jupiter's and Saturn's.
It doesn't have any big ones, however.
It has five or so modest moons, then a whole bunch of really tiny ones.
The moons don't seem to have any coherent pattern to them.
One, the smaller one, Miranda, is however clearly or at least had been geologically
active, something that you don't expect in the dark, dim, cold regions of distant outer
space like this.
The surface has carved into an enormous sections of ridges, almost looked fractured.
For a while it was thought that Miranda had been smashed up and re-stitched back together,
and now we're pretty much sure that it's convective motions, ancient ones probably, in some kind
of icy mantle.
All of these satellites are made largely of ice, or at least half ice.
Saturn's are made out of 70% ice, at least the smaller ones are.
Ice seems to dominate everything out there.
Neptune has an odd family of satellites.
It doesn't have anywhere near the number, at least that we know of, that Uranus, that
Jupiter, and Saturn have.
Instead it has a number of small ones, and one pretty good size one named Triton.
Triton after all, after Neptune, that is, you know, there's a mythological relationship
here in the names again.
Triton is not as big as the Galilean satellites of Jupiter, Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto.
It's about the size of Pluto, which we will see, we will talk about shortly, just roughly
half the size of the Earth's moon.
It goes around Neptune in the wrong direction.
It goes around backwards.
It's the only largest satellite of the solar system that does that, and when you see a
satellite that's going around in the wrong direction, you immediately think, aha, capture.
That is, Neptune is rotating in one way, the satellite is going around in the wrong direction.
It was probably a captured body.
We have close up images of Triton from Voyager 2, and a strange looking body it is.
It's a solid surface, as you'd expect, of an icy moon, and there seems to be a polar
cap on it, and what appear to be almost geologically active regions, plumes were seen coming out
of it, icy volcanoes of some sort, actually volcano made out of hot water coming out of
the interior, and a snow that is probably made of nitrogen, has a very thin atmosphere,
nitrogen, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and perhaps a whole bunch of other stuff.
It's a captured body.
How does one body capture another?
If you have one body here and another one comes in, it will go right back out on a hyperbolic
orbit, as pointed out by Isaac Newton.
One body all by itself cannot capture another body.
You'll have a hyperbolic orbit instead, in and back out again.
Now tidal forces can slow one down, that's possibility, but what may have happened is
that Triton was an independent body in interplanetary space, passed too close to Neptune, wiped
out many of the Neptunian satellites, maybe that's why Neptune doesn't have many satellites,
and got itself caught in the wrong way orbit.
And then we go to the most distant body of the planetary system.
Everybody's favorite.
If you lecture to a bunch of kids, and you ask them, what's your favorite planet?
There are two that really jump out.
One is Venus, because the little kids have often seen Venus as the morning or the evening
star.
Everybody loves Pluto.
Even if it's not their favorite, they all love Pluto.
It's probably due to the Disney dog, but they all love Pluto.
Pluto was discovered accidentally in 1930.
There was a deliberate search on for it, because we thought at the time that there was a distant
planet that was perturbing the orbit of the planet Uranus, turned out to be an accident.
The applied tomb ball was hired at the Lowell Observatory, shortly before 1930, to examine
the sky and the ecliptic, the zodiac, to see if there was a more distant planet.
It took them a couple of years to find this little blip of a body orbiting in a 250-year
period around the sun.
And it turned out that Pluto was just a dot against the sky.
We couldn't even resolve it into a disk until the Hubble Space Telescope was able to see
it.
It has a moon about half its size.
It's more of a double planet than anything else in the planetary system, even more so
than the Earth-Moon system.
The two orbit like this, remember the moon keeps one face pointed toward the Earth at
all times.
In Pluto and Charon's case, the two keep pointing toward each other like this in perfect
synchrony.
That is, a synchronously locked orbit tightly produced through both bodies.
If you were standing on Pluto, you would always see Charon in a particular point in the sky,
going through its dim phases.
The sun only a bright star off in the great distance, standing on Charon, Pluto would
appear the same way, going through its phases.
The odd thing about the planet, the other odd thing about it, is that it too is tipped
over at about 127 or so degree angle.
So technically, Pluto rotates backwards too, and the whole system rotates backwards.
No one knows why, no one knows where Charon came from, we don't know why it was tipped
over.
Again, we invoke, well, if we don't understand it, it must have something to do with the
gigantic collision.
We can't prove it, but who knows?
Pluto has a very thin atmosphere, just millions or less than that of the Earth, nothing that
would be breathable, but one that's detectable.
Lead largely out of nitrogen, but all kinds of other things, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide,
met the usual stuff that you find in the outer part of the planetary system.
But Pluto has a very strange orbit as well.
Most of the orbits are reasonably circular.
Mercury's is a little offset, Mars's orbit is reasonably elliptical, but still, a circle
is at least a decent approximation, not Pluto.
Pluto goes from 30 astronomical units out to 50.
For a period of 20 years, in fact, it is closer to us than Neptune.
It comes inside the orbit of Neptune.
A collision is not possible between the two because of the fact that Neptune and Pluto
are synchronously locked together, that in a minute.
Also Pluto's orbit is tilted at a very steep angle that actually takes it entirely out
of the constellations of the zodiac when it's at its maximum.
So here we have the orbits of the planets, most of the planets like this, and here's
Pluto going way out here and coming way up here like this.
Very strange orbit that is very different from any of the other planets in the solar
system.
This began to lead us to think that is Pluto a planet?
Is it maybe some other kind of odd body?
Not only that, Pluto is very similar to Triton in form, in structure, in size, in density,
and we think that looking at Triton actually gives us a view of looking at Pluto.
We don't know.
It's the only planet we have never visited by spacecraft.
There have been many plans.
They have been scratched maybe someday over the next few decades.
We'll finally visit Pluto, but it's a long, long trip and the plans are not even firm
and they won't be for some time.
The oddest thing, I suppose, about Pluto, however, is that it is again in resonant orbit
with Neptune.
Neptune goes around the Sun three times for every time Pluto goes around twice.
Now, if you take the periods of these planets, the exact orbital periods and divide one by
the other, you see it's not quite a three to two ratio, but if you average them out
over say a million year period, it's exactly so that as Neptune has trapped Pluto.
Pluto is a caught planet if you want to call it a planet at all, which I'm certainly happy
to do.
Neptune, therefore, has grabbed two bodies that are very similar.
It's caught Triton in a backward orbit around itself and it's caused Pluto in a resonant
orbit that actually protects Neptune entirely against collisions.
Because if Pluto is here, Neptune is always someplace else.
The two can't get very close together.
And where there's two, perhaps there are others.
Now, as we'll see in the next lecture, we have a whole set of comets that come in from
a belt surrounding the orbit of Pluto.
This belt came to be known as the Kuiper belt after Gerard Kuiper, who was one of the first
people to postulate it.
Could Pluto be more like a comet than a planet?
We started to look for other bodies that were similar to Pluto and we began to find them
10, 20, 30, 40, 100, 200, 300.
The number just keeps going up and up and up.
Large numbers of icy bodies far beyond the orbit of Pluto intersecting the orbit of Pluto,
and I should really say beyond the orbit of Neptune, Pluto being one of them, about a
third of these bodies are called Plutinos because they, that awful word, call Plutinos
because they share the orbit of Pluto.
They're in a three to two locking orbit.
Neptune's grabbed a whole bunch of these things.
Pluto seems to be simply the largest of them.
In other words, it's a Kuiper belt object and Clyde Tombaugh before his death was said
to have said, and even if he didn't say it, he should have said it, that if I hadn't discovered
the last planet, I discovered the first body of the Kuiper belt, which is a stunning thing
to find when you go back all the way to 1930 and the next ones weren't found until into
the 1990s.
Pluto seems to be a transition object of some sort between these icy comets, not a comet,
don't even think about calling it that, between these icy cometary bodies and the real planets
as if it's some kind of planetary core that started to grow into some kind of Uranus and
Neptune, but simply ran out of raw material and never quite made it.
So now we've looked at them all, Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus,
and Pluto with its wacky orbit, 30 astronomical units all the way up to 50.
Talk about extreme weather.
As Pluto gets farther away from the sun, all of its atmosphere will freeze as snow and
fall on the ground and all the atmosphere will disappear.
And then 100 years, 150 years, hence as Pluto begins to approach the sun, the atmosphere
will warm, the ice will warm, and Pluto will develop an atmosphere.
And imagine in wintertime all the air falling onto the ground as snow, as a nitrogen snow.
Very, very odd place.
The coldest places we know of out there.
The temperature of Triton, the temperature of Pluto hangs around 38 degrees above absolute
zero, a dreadful place to be.
One that's going to be very difficult to visit by robotic spacecraft sometime in the future
just because of the intense cold and getting things to move out there.
So let's go back and look at sort of an overview of this system.
We've got the four inner planets, Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars, rocky planets with
iron cores, Jupiter and Saturn farther out, hydrogen, helium planets with tiny rocky cores.
Even the word rock is a bad term of heavy material on the inside.
Uranus and Neptune, which are probably kind of slushy things with a lot of hydrogen and
helium, but mostly certainly a large quantity of heavy stuff, including water, ice, and
then funny little Pluto out beyond the orbit of Neptune.
And with many other bodies, the largest one of which is about half the size of Pluto.
We've now looked at the whole planetary system.
In the next lecture, we're going to start looking at the little stuff, at the junk,
so to speak, as we will find out the leftovers of the creation process, which will include
the comets, we'll go back to the Kuiper Belt, we'll even revisit Pluto here, the asteroids,
which could be, have been collectively termed an additional terrestrial planet, and then
at the comets that occasionally sweep past the Earth, which will set the stage finally
for looking at the whole creation of the planetary system, how it was all put together.
After listening to lecture 12, the student posed this question to Professor Kaler.
In the final analysis, is Pluto a planet?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
So now we come to the question again, what is it?
Is Pluto a planet?
Is Pluto not a planet?
And then you get into arguments of semantics, in a way, who really cares what you call it?
A planet is what you define to be a planet.
There's no firm definition.
Some people will define a planet as a body that is massive enough to squeeze itself into
a spherical shape.
If you get enough mass together, remember rock is not infinitely strong, gravity will
make it spherical.
If a body is small enough, however, there's not enough gravity to squeeze into a spherical
shape.
Maybe that should be the definition, but if you're going to use that as a definition,
then the largest asteroids also come out as planets, and then you've got a lot more planets
as named planets that you probably want to deal with, rather than minor planets as the
asteroids are called.
So Pluto is so odd that for a while, the International Astronomical Union, the organization
of professional research astronomers, decided to remove Pluto from planethood.
It's gone.
It's a Kuiper Belt object.
Well, the school kids of the country didn't like that, nor did the hometown of Clyde
Tombaugh, who discovered Pluto, and they lobbied the International Astronomical Union,
who finally gave up and said, okay, okay, it's a planet, it's a planet.
It can be both, can it?
That's what makes the body so intensely fascinating.
It's a transition body between one kind and another kind, the reasonably large planets
at least.
Another student then posed this question to Professor Kaler.
How many planets in our solar system have magnetic fields?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
Most planets in the solar system have magnetic fields that are reasonably well understood.
Mercury's got a little one.
It shouldn't because we think the core should be frozen, but apparently it's not.
Venus doesn't have any at all.
The Earth has a modest magnetic field that leads compasses, of course, to point to the
North magnetic pole, which, while it's not at the geographic pole, is not very far away.
All magnetic fields are slightly tilted relative to the rotation, here's the rotation axis,
relative to the rotation axis.
It's a natural part of the circulation of the stuff in the interior that is generating
the magnetic field.
Mars seems to have, well, there's a bit of an argument as to whether it actually has
one.
Jupiter has a powerful magnetic field.
Saturn has a good one.
Uranus and Neptune have magnetic fields as well, but they are as strange as the rest
of the planet.
They're certainly as strange as the Uranian tilt.
Here is the planet, the magnetic field axis.
Here's the rotation axis.
The magnetic field axis is tilted at a wild angle.
Not only that, it doesn't even go through the center of the planet.
It's offset roughly halfway out.
No one has any idea how a planet can generate a wacky magnetic field like this.
The other aspects that separate Uranus and Neptune from Jupiter and Saturn are their
winds.
Winds of Jupiter and Saturn blow in the same direction as the planet's rotation.
Uranus and Neptune have longer rotation periods than Jupiter and Saturn, around 16 or 17
hours, but the winds blow in the opposite direction, making them again quite different
from Jupiter and Saturn.
The winds blow in the direction, the equatorial winds at least, blow in the direction opposite
the planet's rotation.
Nobody knows why.
This ends lecture 12.
