Astronomy, Earth, Sky and the Planets, Lecture 13, Leftovers of Creation, Comets, Asteroids
and Meteors.
The last lectures have focused on the major bodies of the solar system, excluding the
Sun, of course, on the planets.
Now we're going to take a look at, I guess we could only call it the junk, the leftover
stuff, the little stuff.
It's not unimportant, never confused size with significance.
It's the little stuff that taught us how all the planets were put together.
We're going to look at comets, how they work, where they are, why we see them.
We're going to look at rocky asteroids, all the little stuff that hangs out mostly in
the spaces between Mars and Jupiter, and at the things that hit the Earth, the meteors,
the meteorites, the things that land here that we can actually pick up and bring into
the laboratory and examine, which further tells us how all of this was put together
as subject we will address, finally, in the last lecture of this course.
There's very little that is more beautiful, and to the superstitious, more frightening
than a great comet.
Comets are often confused with meteors.
The meteor whooshes across the sky.
It's an atmospheric object.
It's a rock that hits the Earth's atmosphere, whereas a comet is an interplanetary body.
It orbits the Sun, much like a planet, except on a very long, skinny elliptical orbit that
can bring it very close to the Sun and then back out far beyond the planetary system.
Many of the comets in the sky, new ones are discovered every year.
Dozens of new ones are found.
Most of them are far below naked eye vision.
Perhaps once a generation or so, a great comet will make an appearance.
A comet like Halley's comet, one that comes back every 75, every 76 years, way out from
the orbit of Pluto, all the way in toward the inner part of the solar system and back
out again, over and over and over.
It was named after Edmund Halley, who looked at a variety of comets and found that to explain
repetition of orbits, there must be one that kept coming back over and over and over again.
A comet in the sky, they're called comets from the word coma, Latin for hair.
They're called comets because there's a bright central region ahead of the comet, sometimes
with a little nucleus in the center and then a long streaming tail that hangs out in back
of it that can actually go across a good fraction of the celestial sphere.
And then night to night, you see it slowly move against the background of the stars until
maybe a year or two later, it disappears into the blackness to be followed only by a telescope.
We can name Halley's comet that came around in 1910 and again in the 1980s.
We'll come back again in the middle part of our own century.
We can name the Great Comet of 1810, Comet de Chiassechi of 1963.
The list goes on and on and on of these beautiful naked eye comets.
There will be another one in your lifetime.
They come and go every 10 or 20 years, the great ones, the really big ones.
Watch out for the next one, find a dark sky and look at it.
It is one of the true icons of astronomy.
If Saturn is one, surely a comet is another one.
How do they work?
The idea of a comet is that basically of a dirty snowball.
You can go off into say a New York City street sometime in February when the buses have been
rolling by and the slush and the dirt and the sludge is in the gutter and you pick up
a handful of this awful looking ice filled with dirt and tar and all the nasty stuff
that's kind of like the head of a comet, like the nucleus of a comet.
It is an ice ball or a snowball filled with dirt.
That is the dirt in the dust, not dirt like we find on the earth with organics, but little
rocks, dust, fragile stuff all stitched together by ice.
When the comet is way out in the outer part of the planetary system where it generally
hangs out, it's completely frozen and almost impossible to see.
But as the comet's head, the nucleus, comes close to the sun, sunlight begins to melt
away the ices, not into liquid, but turn it from a solid into a gas directly.
This begins to happen as the comet approaches the orbit of Jupiter and then approaches the
orbit of Mars.
The comet's nucleus is not terribly large.
Something the size of Chicago, something the size of Manhattan would be a fairly good
size comet.
They range in size from perhaps a few tens or hundreds of meters up to a few tens of
kilometers.
They're not terribly big bodies.
They're little things.
They are, as we will see, primitive bodies out of which the outer planets were actually
formed.
They're the leftovers of the creation of the solar system and there's still an awful
lot out there.
One approaches the sun.
Here's the sun in this long skinny orbit.
The closer it gets to the sun, the more the ices melt away.
The gas from the comet's nucleus expands away.
Sunlight ionizes the gas.
That is, it strips the electrons away from mostly light molecules, hydrogen atoms, turning
it into an electrified gas.
The solar wind, this flow of matter that is continuously screaming off the sun, then hits
the gas and blows a gas tail away from the comet.
The comet's tail, therefore, always points away from the sun.
The gas tail is going to be illuminated by sunlight.
It's an ionized gas.
It will create its own light, very efficiently.
This gas tail can stream as a skinny blue light far away from the nucleus of the comet.
At the same time the ices are melting away, the embedded rocks and dust are being released.
The comet becomes surrounded then by a cloud of dust and rocks.
The pressure of sunlight alone, light actually has a pressure when it's absorbed by something.
The pressure of sunlight alone then pushes the tiny dust grains away from the comet.
But the dust grains have significant mass to them, so that's a little bit influenced
by the orbit of the comet.
Nevertheless, the dust tail more or less still curves away from the sun.
So the tail can precede the comet in the orbit, rather like this.
It's not like a rock on a string, excuse me, a ribbon on a rock where you tie a ribbon
around a rock and throw it in the air and the ribbon streams it back of the rock.
The tail can precede the comet in orbit.
It always points away from the sun, although the dust tail can do some strange things depending
upon the mass out of which the tail is made.
The closer it gets to the sun, the greater the size of the tail.
And finally, when the comet passes around the sun and goes off into the great distance,
the tail diminishes, and finally the whole thing turns back into a dirty snowball again.
The whole thing to happen all over again some years hence depending upon the orbital period
of the comet.
In Halley's case, every 76 years it comes back in, goes back out again.
Comets are therefore destined to die.
Every time they pass close to the sun, they get a little bit melted away from them.
We think Halley's comet loses approximately 1% of its mass every time it goes around.
We have traced Halley's comet back to times BC from ancient Chinese records.
It's been coming around for at least the past 2,000 years and probably before that, and
it will keep going for many hundreds if not thousands of years into the future.
Eventually, to be broken apart, separated in half, spacecraft images show the actual
nucleus to be kind of a peanut shaped thing, the order of 10 kilometers across, and eventually
a break in half and two comets.
One back to the other will orbit the sun.
There's been a series of great comets orbiting the sun over the last couple of hundred years.
They are called sun grazers because they come very close to the sun before going back out
again, one following the other after the other after the other, which were apparently part
of one enormous comet from long time pass that got broken up into many pieces after
being melted away by the sun, and now the pieces are coming all back like little ducks
in a row, one after the other after the other.
Comets break down into two small, two broad groups.
Short period comets, and not surprisingly, long period comets.
The division is around a couple of hundred years.
It's not very hard and fast.
These comets have different kinds of orbits.
The short period comets tend more or less to stick to the plane of the ecliptic.
But as they tend to be found kind of in the constellations of the zodiac, this means they're
coming from a part of space that is not terribly far away.
Because their short period Kepler's Laws, they can't be more than a few tens of astronomical
units out, 40, 50, 60, somewhere in that general neighborhood, which is why we began to postulate
the existence of this Kuiper Belt, a reservoir of maybe a hundred million cometary bodies,
most of which stay out there forever, but the gravitation of the gravity fields of Neptune
and Uranus, of the outer planets, gradually move them in, and we can see even a few of
them moving in between the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn, gradually they will move into
the inner solar system and be seen as short period comets.
These can't last very long because the periods are so terribly short, they melt down very
quickly.
So for the most part, short period comets, Halley's being an exception, which is probably
a long period comet that somehow got captured into the inner solar system, most of these
short period comets tend to be kind of faint and not very well known to the public.
The long period comets are a different matter altogether.
These things have periods which can be thousands if not hundreds of thousands of years long.
Some of them appear to come in on almost parabolic trajectories, which implies that they are
open-ended.
They're not.
They're really long, long, skinny ellipses that may take the comets out thousands of
astronomical units, if not tens of thousands of astronomical units away from the Earth
and Sun.
It was postulated by an astronomer of the middle 20th century named Jan Ort that if comets
are continuously falling apart, there must be an enormous reservoir of them such that
five and a half, four and a half billion years after the solar system was formed, we still
see them coming in.
The long periods and these comets, or the long period comets, don't stick to the plane
of the solar system.
There can be found all over the place.
I've seen them crossing the sky near the Little Dipper, far from the plane of the ecliptic.
They're sort of randomly oriented.
The implication is there must be an enormous reservoir of maybe 10 trillion comets that
may extend almost half way to the nearest star as part of the Sun's overall gravitational
influence.
Most of them will exist out there effectively forever, but in this Ortt comet cloud where
the inner planetary system is not much bigger than this, here's a comet in a long, almost
circular orbit, never to be seen, but a nearby passing star comes close to it, disturbs the
orbit of the comet, and sends it into the inner solar system where it is seen as the
long period comets.
These are the ones that make the truly great comets.
The ones that the tail can stretch a good fraction of the way across the sky.
Comets are complex bodies.
They have a very complex chemistry.
The ices in them are not just water ice.
There's methane ice.
There's alcohol ices.
There's all manner of complex chemicals that have been frozen, dominantly water.
In 1910, the chemical compound cyanogen was discovered in comet tails.
Cyanogen is a deadly gas.
The earth passed through the tail of Halley's comet in 1910 to the horror of people who
thought they were going to be gas to death.
People laid wet towels underneath their doors to keep the gases out.
It was said that people in New York City had rooftop parties celebrating the end of the
world because they were going to die soon.
Nothing happened at all.
The sky didn't even get minimally brighter.
We passed through that tail and nobody saw a thing because the tails of comets are so
incredibly vacuous.
It's just that they are very efficient converters of sunlight in the energy.
So the tail becomes almost the dominant part of the comet to the human eye, certainly the
most beautiful part, and yet it is a mere tiny fraction of the mass of the comet itself.
The short period comets are coming in from the Kuiper Belt.
We can look out into the Kuiper Belt and we have now found hundreds of these bodies, most
of which will stay out there before being perturbed to come back into the inner solar
system as short period comets.
They range from things that are only probably almost rocks you could hold in your hand to
bodies that we are now discovering that are a few tens of kilometers across up to bodies
like Pluto, which is the largest body of the Kuiper Belt, and a transition between the
real comets and the planets.
Pluto was a body that kind of in its way tried to be a planet but failed.
It became kind of a planetary core and never gathered around it the heavy stuff, the large
stuff, the hydrogen, the helium, and many of the ices that planets like Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus, and Neptune are made of.
This is one of the things that makes Pluto so intensely fascinating because it's a transition
between the planets and the comets, which are some of the original bodies out of which
the planets were ultimately formed, as we'll see in the final lecture of this course.
The other set of junk in the solar system, the awful word for this stuff, isn't it?
Debris perhaps is a better term, are the asteroids.
Science fiction story.
The astronaut bravely plows through the asteroid belt, this belt of rocks that exists between
the orbits of Mars and Jupiter.
Asteroids banging off the spacecraft until blessedly the astronaut is through it.
It doesn't work like that.
There are probably billions of asteroids, but the distances between them are enormous.
They're at three, four astronomical units out, so they're not all that densely past.
We have passed several spacecraft right through the asteroid belt with an area ding.
No problems at all, perfectly safe.
The only problem that we would get to is of course once we're in the planetary environment
out there where it can get dangerous around inner space near Jupiter, passing through
Saturn's rings, but not through the asteroid belt.
There's a curious numerical relationship in the distances of the planets from the sun,
and in the later 1700s, a planet was predicted to be in the space between Mars and Jupiter.
The numerical relationship said there should be one there, but there wasn't.
We went from Mars all the way to five astronomical units out to Jupiter.
But because of the prediction, astronomers began to look for the possibility of a planet
in there, and on the first day of 1801, one was finally found, not even visible to the
naked eye.
Just a little bit below it, you could see it with a modest telescope.
The first minor planet, the first asteroid, which acquired the name Cirrus, number one,
number one Cirrus, before long, roughly 2.7 astronomical units away, pretty much fitting
in the space between Mars and Jupiter.
Before long, another one was found, then another one, and then another one, all acquiring the
names of mythological characters along with numbers.
The discoverer of an asteroid has, or at least had, the capability, the right to name
the asteroid after a mythological character.
Finally, we ran out of mythological characters.
There were some of them were named after cities.
Then you could name it after your sister, your mother, your brother, your dog, anybody
you wanted to name it after at all, until we got to the point that so many of them found,
we simply sort of gave up and gave them numbers.
There are so many occupying the zodiac that it's difficult to take a photograph, a long
term exposure of the zodiac, without finding some darned asteroid in it.
At one point, they were called the vermin of the skies because they were even messing
up some images that we wanted to take of more distant bodies.
We now know of tens of thousands of these asteroids.
Most of the orbits are known.
They cluster around the orbit of Ceres, roughly from two to three astronomical units away,
which is known as the main belt of the asteroid.
Ceres being the largest, about 500 miles, about 800 kilometers, roughly across.
Quite small, significantly smaller than the moon, significantly smaller even than Pluto.
But a nice round body, and if you want, I suppose you could call that a planet too, although
it's simply not visible the naked eye, even though it's closer than Jupiter.
Rather than call these things planets, we have long called the minor planets.
There is even a minor planet center that keeps track of all these critters, because there
are so darned many of them.
Unlike comets, asteroids are more made out of rock and iron.
They're made more out of the stuff that the Earth, Mars, Venus, and Mercury are made of.
Although there are certainly some transitions, there may be some transition bodies to icy
things that are perhaps more like comets, but the two are considered to be pretty distinct.
The comets are dirty ice balls, whereas the asteroids may be somewhat wet rock balls, and
some of them relatively dry.
From their specter, from the quality of their reflected light, we can tell that some of
them are metallic, and that some of them are true rocks.
Some of them cluster in families.
The asteroids are simply grinding themselves down, although it doesn't happen frequently.
The solar system is four and a half billion years old, given all that time.
The asteroids are going to collide with each other, and when they collide, you get a bunch
of smaller asteroids out of a collision, all of which have pretty much the same quality.
So we see families of asteroids orbiting the sun, all of which have the same sort of chemical
character.
The collisions can of course send a few of them scattering around and spread things out
in the asteroid belt.
It's not a thin plane, it's rather thick.
They actually occupy sort of a thick doughnut around the sun.
Within the asteroid belt, we also find a good example of these resonances.
Jupiter does quite a number of them, number on the asteroids.
There are zones in which there are simple fractions of the orbital period of Jupiter,
where Jupiter can either concentrate the asteroids or kick them out altogether, producing gaps.
Jupiter has a powerful influence on the asteroid belt.
As a result, Jupiter can throw a few asteroids close to the Earth, or it can scatter a few
asteroids outside of its orbit.
So the asteroids are not all confined to the orbit, to the main belt.
They spread out gradually until some of them go past the orbit of Mars, a few of them have
orbits past the orbit of the Earth, and a few of them can even approach the orbit of
Mercury.
These are the ones that are considered a little bit on the dangerous side.
They're called near-Earth asteroids sometimes, or potentially hazardous asteroids, because
if one big one hits the Earth, it can produce a major impact crater, change the climate
of the Earth temporarily, put a huge amount of dust and steam in the upper atmosphere,
and kill off species on the Earth.
This certainly happened.
Well, almost everybody agrees that this happened 65 million years ago, when a rock somewhere
around 10 kilometers across hit off the coast of what is now considered the Yucatan Peninsula,
creating a crater a couple of hundred miles wide, raising so much stuff in the air that
it killed off a good fraction of the species alive at the time, including the dinosaurs,
which is why you don't have dinosaurs stomping in the streets out there today.
They lived for a long time, and an asteroid apparently did them in.
How do we know?
Well, we know because we can pick up pieces of asteroids off the ground.
An asteroid, a bigger one, can get through the Earth's atmosphere and land on the surface
of the Earth.
And if it's not too big, it won't even produce a crater.
It'll simply land on the ground for somebody to pick up.
When it hits the ground, as it goes through the Earth's atmosphere, and we'll touch upon
these later, it produces a streak of light in the air called a meteor, and when it hits
the ground, it becomes a meteorite.
They come in two broad forms.
Irons.
It's an iron meteorite.
It's part of the gibbian meteorite found in Africa.
On the outside is a fusion crust.
This is the stuff, the part of the asteroid, that went through the Earth's atmosphere and
got slightly melted away.
It's been cut, sliced, polished, etched with acid.
Inside you can see beautiful, large nickel-iron crystals.
This is about 92% iron, about 8% nickel, and a couple of minor inclusions here of silica.
The crystals are so large as to require about a million-year cooling time from the liquid
state.
This is apparently the iron core of what was once a differentiated asteroid.
That is an asteroid that had a rocky mantle and an iron core, very much like the Earth.
This is very good evidence that the Earth scientists are right that the Earth has an
iron core.
This must have come out from a larger asteroid that smashed itself up.
This pattern cannot be replicated on Earth.
You cannot make iron crystals because we don't have a million-year cooling time to make them
this big.
So you can't fake a meteorite like this.
It's impossible.
Some of these are quite large.
In the Rose Center in New York, there's a meteorite so big they practically had to build
the building around it.
It's huge.
I've seen pictures from the 1930s with kids sitting inside the curves, the carved out
sections of the meteorite.
You don't want to get hit with something that big.
A thousand meteorites a day fall on the Earth.
Most of them are little things.
And of course, the Earth is fairly large, not in terms of, of course, the giant planets,
but there's still a lot of surface area, the vast majority fall in the oceans or in uninhabited
areas.
Nobody has ever been killed by one of these, although there have been people that have been
hit by them.
I've seen a few damaged cars from them, too.
So just sort of watch it out there.
Your chances of getting hit by a rampaging bus running through your home is probably much,
much greater than getting hit by a meteorite.
So you can, you can relax.
You're not in any terrible danger with them.
If an asteroid breaks up, you're going to get the iron core producing the iron meteorite.
You will also get a piece of the rocky mantle.
So the majority of meteorites are actually small rocks.
This is much less attractive in its way than the iron meteorite.
Stony meteorites come in quite a variety of forms.
There are just dozens and hundreds of different kinds of meteorites.
This is a very special kind called a chondrite because it contains chondrules.
Chondrules are little circular inclusions in the rock that have all the evidence of
being flash heated then suddenly frozen again.
Sometime back in the early stages of the solar system, we have no idea why, but it does point
to some very serious violence that took place in the early days of the system.
This is a special kind of chondrite called a carbonaceous chondrite because it has a
very high carbon content.
It's part of what is called the Iende meteorite fall that took place in Iende, Mexico many,
many years ago.
This rock has been dated at four and a half billion years old.
It is the oldest thing known.
We look for the oldest thing known and we say, that must be very close to the age of
the solar system, the age of the planetary system, and the age of the sun because we'll
see there's excellent evidence that all of this system was formed all at the same time.
This beautiful rock looks lovelier as you know what is in it.
It contains amino acids.
It contains complex chemicals that were formed in the dusty gases of interplanetary space
before the rock itself was actually formed.
Hitting the earth that deposits these complex chemicals are people who speculate that these
bodies hitting the earth deposited the seeds of life, not life itself, but the complex
chemicals out of which life perhaps ultimately formed.
We can even go back to the comments and see what happens to these.
These things are hitting the earth all the time too except that they're so fragile that
they can entirely break up.
Comets are filled with water.
We think that in fact the oceans are filled with comet water, comet juice so to speak.
These things have quite an impact upon us.
From them we learn the age of the whole solar system.
As these meteorites pass through the earth's atmosphere they produce a meteor.
Anything that hits the earth's air is going to produce a streak like this.
I hope has seen a meteor at some point.
They're really very common.
If you go out in the early morning hours, when you are on the side of the earth facing
in the direction of the earth's motion in orbit, when the earth is sweeping these little
rock particles up, not just asteroids, but in the majority of cases the dust that has
been flaked off of comets, you'll see typically three or so meteors per hour.
They're not at all uncommon.
In the evening the meteoroids really, the particles in interplanetary space, have to
catch up with the earth and they tend to be long and lazy streaks of light.
When a body hits the earth that fast, it's going at orbital speed.
It produces a tremendous shockwave, kind of a sonic boom.
This is converted to heat that begins to melt the meteoric particle away and can completely
dissipate it long before it hits the ground.
The meteors take place, they occur 50, 60, 70 miles above the surface of the earth.
They are entering in and burning up on their way to the ground.
The big ones, the pieces of asteroid can be strong enough to get through.
Some of them explode before they land, sending showers of stones down onto the ground.
The irons can get all the way through and clunk on the ground and the big ones can produce
impact craters.
The stuff that flakes off comets will for a long time stick to the orbit of the comet.
The earth is always passing the orbits of comets, whether the comet is there or not.
As you get close to the orbit of a comet, you will pick up more and more meteors and
if you go through the orbit of the comet and the debris, you will pick up a vast number
of meteors and get a shower.
The meteoric particles, the meteoroids, which are called before they hit the atmosphere,
are on parallel tracks around the sun.
The earth is plowing through them and much as railroad tracks converge to a point in
the distance as a result of perspective, the meteors in a shower will appear to come
out of a radiant point in the sky.
The meteor showers are therefore named after their constellation of origin.
The most popular of them is the Perseid shower that hits us on the morning, at least it maximizes
on the morning of August 12th.
You can go out and lie on your back, nice summer night, moonless night, out in the country
and simply watch them zip across the sky about one or two meteors per minute.
That's quite a show.
Now they can get better than that.
Probably the best one of all is the Leonid shower that hits us on the morning of November
17th.
The Leonid shower comes from a comet that has a 33 year period, a short period of
comet, well only a 33 year period around the sun.
In back of the comet there are ribbons, intense ribbons of meteoric particles that also have
a 33 year period.
Now on the average, the Leonid shower is pretty poor.
One or two meteors an hour perhaps, not very much.
But every 33 years, if the conditions are right, the earth will plow through the major
part of the stream and we will get a meteor storm, hundreds if not thousands of meteors
per hour.
The great meteor storm of 1833 from the Leonids is said to have produced 100,000 meteors per
hour.
They said it was like a snowfall, it was like the sky coming apart.
It must have been terrifying to the people of the time who didn't know what was happening.
And yet during these meteor showers, there is never an increase in the number of meteorites
hitting the earth.
All of the stuff burns up in the air before it gets down to the ground.
So the meteors can be produced both by asteroids and by comet debris but as only the astroidal
stuff that is strong enough to get to us.
The cometary fluff all dissipates, it's all so fragile, it all dissipates before it reaches
the ground.
Go on out and watch sometime.
They are truly wonderful things to look at.
There are dozens of these showers that take place every year, three or four that are well
worth getting out at three o'clock in the morning just gazing up in the sky and looking
at them.
All of this dust pervades the plane of the solar system.
If you are in a good location where it's really dark, especially on northern hemisphere
spring evenings or northern hemisphere fall mornings, watch after sunset in the evening.
After twilight ends and the sky darkens, you can see a cone of light standing up from the
horizon.
In the best cases that cone of light will actually not diminish, it will go through
all of the constellations, the zodiac, it will be seen rising again in the morning sky.
It's called the zodiacal light, it looks like a faint additional milky way going across
the sky and it's sunlight being scattered off the debris, the finely divided debris
of smashed up asteroids and comet fluff.
In the morning it's sometimes called the false dawn and you can see it any clear morning
if you have a perfectly dark sky or any clear evening depending upon the season when the
ecliptic is more or less standing perpendicular to the horizon.
The best thing to do of course is go on out and see these things for yourselves, not just
the planets that inhabit the sky, but the comets, the zodiacal light and all of the
debris that hits us, the meteors.
We've now brought the whole solar system together, starting with the sun, the nine, ten, eight,
however you wanted to find them, planets of the solar system and finally all of the debris,
all of the little stuff that make the solar system much larger in extent than the planetary
system.
We don't know how far out the Kuiper Belt goes, maybe 50, maybe 60 astronomical units.
We don't know whether it extends farther than that even, it may.
The order cloud on the other hand extends pretty close, half way to the nearest star,
it goes out many tens of thousands of astronomical units.
Everything is now in place.
We can take the planets, look at the conditions of the planets, how they orbit the sun, look
at all the debris and begin to put together a picture of how this marvelous system was
formed four and a half billion years ago.
After listening to lecture 13, a student posed this question to Professor Kaler.
Why do comet ices go directly from a solid to a gas?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
We talked about that in an earlier lecture, but it's probably a good thing to do now.
The comet ices technically sublime, it's like dry ice in a theater set.
You don't get liquid carbon dioxide from the dry ice, it goes directly from a solid to
a gas.
In order to get liquid dry ice, you have to have the gas, not liquid dry ice, in order
to have liquid carbon dioxide, you have to compress the gas into a liquid form.
What has happened is that the boiling point of carbon dioxide is comparable to the freezing
point, so you can't get the liquid stuff.
The same thing happens with water on Mars.
If you lower the air pressure, you lower the boiling point.
You keep dropping it down until it reaches the freezing point, at which point you can't
get liquid water anymore.
So you go directly from the solid state into the gaseous state.
The air pressure or the gas pressure surrounding a comet is so low that you can't get liquid
anything.
It goes directly from the ice into the gas.
Another student then posed this question to Professor Kaler.
Could a major comet hit the earth?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
We think that an asteroid did in the dinosaurs because these meteorites, which are from the
asteroid belt, contain a rather high level of a chemical element called iridium.
Iridium is relatively rare on earth, but it is relatively rich in meteorites.
There is a layer all the way around the earth that's been dated at 65 million years ago
when the dinosaurs roughly disappeared that is rich in iridium.
We think the only way it could have been deposited is by a major asteroid, one several kilometers
across, striking the earth, destroying itself, and then spreading itself out in the form
of dust that finally settled down and worked its way into sediments around the earth.
This is the first evidence that we had of major extinctions on the earth by an asteroid
will impact.
One of the common questions I get is, is this going to happen again?
What are the chances of it happening again?
When you smile and say 100%, it will happen again because there are a lot of asteroids
working their way in.
That's why they're called potentially hazardous asteroids and various offices at NASA and
others are trying to track down all the earth crossing asteroids of a given size at least
as far as we can tell where they are.
Eventually, we may have, before one of them hits, they only hit, big ones only hit every
few millions or every tens of millions of years, so we're relatively safe for a short
period of time.
But if we do see one whose orbit crosses the earth and is potentially dangerous and is
likely to hit the earth, eventually we will probably have the ability to do something
about it and it doesn't take much just to shift the orbit slightly so that 100 years
hence it's going to miss us.
Comets on the other hand are a little bit more dangerous.
The problem right now with the asteroids is that we have, it's usually in a, not here
it comes, it's usually there it goes.
That is, we miss it coming in, we see it going away.
They're not found till they get very close, which is why we've got to track down the critters.
Comets are a different matter.
We might only have a couple of years warning for a major comet coming in to the inner solar
system taking a beat on the earth.
On the other hand, comets come in once they go around back and they go out and the long
period ones don't come back for sometimes hundreds of thousands if not millions of years.
So it's a one time affair unlike an inner asteroid that keeps orbiting the sun until
it finally crosses the earth and smashes into us.
So in that sense, perhaps we're a little, comets are a little bit less dangerous and
on the other hand you have less of a warning for it from them.
This ends lecture 13.
