Astronomy, Earth, Sky, and the Planets, Lecture 14, Creation
We've now looked at everything from the Earth all the way to the outer fringes of the solar system.
We've looked at the planets, we've looked at the asteroids, at the comets, at the debris that hits
the Earth. Now it's time to put it all together and see where it came from. The clues are in the
planets themselves. Look at the solar system and look at the beautiful symmetry of the whole thing.
All the planets orbit the Sun, looking down from the North. All the planets orbit the Sun in the
counterclockwise direction. All in more or less circular orbits, even Pluto, with its relatively
elliptical orbit, is still not that far out of line. Most of the spin axes are more or less
perpendicular as well. And most of the planets, at least the exception of three of them, Venus,
Uranus, and Pluto, spin in the same direction in which they orbit the Sun. This can hardly be
accidental. In addition, the general plane of the solar system lies pretty close to the equatorial
rotation plane of the Sun, and the axis of the Sun is more or less perpendicular as well to the
plane of the solar system, and the Sun rotates in the same counterclockwise direction as the
planets go about it, rather nicely linking the orbits of the planets to the Sun, giving us some
pretty good evidence that this system formed all at the same time and that the planets are, in a very
strong sense, the satellites of the Sun. Many more are the symmetries. Look at the sizes of the
inner planets. They start off small at Mercury, get bigger at Venus, bigger yet at the Earth,
then squeeze down to little Mars, and then if you accumulate all of the asteroids, they're smaller
yet, so you have this beautiful envelope distribution with one massive body, the Sun, on this end,
and another massive body, Jupiter, on this end. This doesn't look accidental either. And then we
start with Jupiter, the big body of the solar system. Go to Saturn, a little bit smaller.
Go out here to Uranus, a little bit smaller yet. We come out to Neptune about the same size, and
then squeeze down to Pluto on the little bodies of the Kuiper Belt, smaller yet. So the sizes
squeeze down as we go to the outer parts of the solar system. Again, more symmetry for us.
Look at the compositions of the planets. The inner ones, including the asteroids, are all
really quite similar to each other. We have iron cores surrounded by rocky mantles, and we can even
include the moon, perhaps, in that if it's got an iron core, which it probably does to a small degree.
And then you go to the outer planets, Jupiter, Hydrogen and Helium, Saturn, Hydrogen and Helium,
then heavier stuff in Uranus and Neptune, and then heavier stuff yet with ice in Pluto.
The inner planets are dry. In spite of the fact that the Earth has a relatively deep ocean for a
human being, the amount of water on the Earth is really relatively small. It only averages a
couple of miles deep over a body that's 8,000 miles wide. The Earth is still, with all of its
water, still fairly dry, as are all of the inner planets. Some of them almost absolutely bone dry.
Once you get out to Jupiter, however, the situation changes. In the inner core of Jupiter,
you probably have a great deal of ice, probably water ice, in a very strange form, of course,
because the temperature is very high near the core. But if you go to the satellites, some of the
satellites of Jupiter are probably 50% water ice, and some of the satellites of Saturn may be as much
as 70% water ice. Water and ice continue all the way out in the outer part of the planetary system,
where, of course, it's cold. The original idea, the basic idea of how the solar system formed,
goes back to some of the philosophers of the 1700s, particularly to Emmanuel Kant and others who
followed him. The idea is that the early sun, and they had no idea how old the planetary system was,
they didn't think it was all that old back then. The age is kind of irrelevant to the idea,
that the early sun was surrounded by a disk of spinning gas, and that the planets condensed
out of the gas over a fairly short time scale, leaving little gas, but leaving planets all
in orbit in the direction in which the original disk was spinning. The basic idea was fundamentally
correct. The details were wrong, not too surprisingly, because there is so much that we have learned
over this several hundred years since the original idea was instituted.
Take a look at how, from start to finish, we are pretty sure that the planets and our own
Earth came to be. Go on out on a clear night, out in the dark countryside, say in a northern
hemisphere August evening, and look at the Milky Way over your head. It's a beautiful site. The
Milky Way, however, is not a smooth band. The Milky Way is broken up by a ridge that runs right
down the middle, and the northern hemisphere is called the Great Rift. The Incas of Peru and Chile
gave other names to it. It's broken up with small blobs of dust clouds. These are clouds of interstellar
gas and dust, and the dark dust particles block the light of the background stars. You can see
these with a naked eye. Now, most of the interstellar gas is heated by starlight to temperatures as
high as 10,000 degrees or so, Kelvin, above absolute zero. Exploding stars can heat the
interstellar gas to even higher temperatures into the hundreds of thousands of degrees.
However, where you get by accident, thick knots of this dusty gas, the dust blocks the light
of the stars. And consequently, it gets chilled. The dust acts as a natural refrigerator to chill
the gas. Now, when you heat a gas, a gas is naturally going to expand. This is how automobiles work.
After all, you explode an air gas mixture and you drive a piston and you drive your car down the road.
If you chill a gas, the gas is going to condense instead. So you will get natural blobs of gas and
dust forming within these dark dust clouds. And if they can become thick enough, if they can become
dense enough, they can begin to contract under the force of their own gravity. And a star is
beginning to be born. Now, anything out there is going to rotate. Why is it going to rotate?
You can't stop things from rotating. These gas clouds bump into each other. They're like bumper
cars. They set themselves spinning. Everything is rotating to one degree or another. Planets,
stars, the sun, the galaxy, everything is spinning to some degree. You're starting off with a blob
that is very large, vastly larger than the planetary system. And as it contracts, it spins faster and
faster and faster as a result of the conservation of angular momentum. The same thing in Kepler's
second law that makes a planet move faster as it gets closer to the sun. The earth is spinning.
As a result, it throws itself out at the equator. As this blob of gas spins faster and faster,
most of it goes into the star in the middle. The stuff that doesn't go into the star gets spun out
into a disk that surrounds the forming star. In fact, we have a problem in theory with these
forming stars that they are spinning so fast by the time they form stars that you can show that
they spin themselves apart and stars can't form at all. We have to have some way of actually
slowing the contracting blob down. And there are ways of doing it. The magnetic field of the whole
galaxy, in fact, acts to help slow these blobs down as they contract and finally release themselves
from the magnetic field of the galaxy. And the star forms in the middle. At the same time,
this disk is forming around the star that is being born in the middle. All of this is happening
at the same time. When the density and temperature of the forming star get high enough at the
core, then thermonuclear reactions are initiated. Hydrogen begins to form to produce four hydrogen
atoms get together to form helium. That releases energy and that stops the contraction. It's sort
of a controlled hydrogen bomb reaction. Entirely controlled. The sun and stars like this in their
forming stages cannot explode at all and the sun can never explode. There's no way it can do it.
Massive stars can, but we're not talking about that. We're talking about the initiation
of thermonuclear reactions that stop the contraction. The energy pushes outward from the center of the
star. Gravity tries to push inward and the star entirely stabilizes itself at a constant radius.
As the star and our early sun stabilized, it was then surrounded by this thin spinning disk,
all the gas and dust rotating in the same direction and we wind up with Kant's disk. However,
what Kant got wrong, not that he could possibly know, is that it wasn't the gas that did it,
it's the dust grains in the disk. Think of an individual dust grain. Maybe several astronomical
units out orbiting the sun all on its own. It hits another dust grain. It sticks by electrical
forces perhaps or maybe melds together. It sticks hard enough. So you grow a bigger dust grain.
That one hits yet another dust grain which grows bigger. It's another one which grows bigger.
These dust grains when they start are very small. You couldn't even see them with a human eye,
but before long they become visible if you were in the cloud. And then the bigger dust grains
gang together and before long they're a millimeter across. They sweep up more. They sweep up all of
the dust. Then they're growing to centimeter size and then meter size. They're getting bigger and
bigger and bigger as a result of continuous accumulation of the dust grains. Finally,
they're growing into kilometer size and we give them a name. We call them planetesimals. The word
means basically infinitesimal planet. It's kind of a bad word, but it does get the idea that these
are the primitive bodies out of which the solar system and the planets began to form. Now in the
inner part of the solar system where we have the sun, it's hot. These growing planetesimals can
accumulate more dust grains and more solids, but they can't accumulate ices. Water is not going
to condense on them because it's too hot in there for water to turn into ice and condense on the
grains. There's a lot that you can't accumulate. So all you can accumulate is the heavy stuff
that boils away at very high temperatures, metals and the like. So you begin to grow bigger and
bigger planetesimals that are dry in the inner part of the planetary system. Once you get beyond
about four, four and a half astronomical units, however, the temperature of this gaseous dusty
disk drops to the point at which the growing planetesimals can accumulate water and they grow
icy rather than dry. The farther out you get, the more ice until finally you're out there where these
things become a good fraction ice, not just water ice, but all manner of volatiles that form ices upon
the dusty, dirty planetesimals. And think of what you're getting in here. These planetesimals are
beginning to, in the inner part of the planetary system, are beginning to replicate the asteroids.
Those in the outer part of the planetary system are beginning to replicate comets.
That is the distinction. The ones that form in here, close, are going to be dry. The ones that
form out here are going to be wet, wet in the sense of ice. Now, when they get big enough, maybe 10,
100 kilometers across, then they have a significant gravitational field and the big ones start to
gobble up the small ones. The big ones grow at the expense of the little ones and gradually they
grow bigger and bigger and bigger, farther and farther apart until, before you know it,
you've got four or five rocky bodies in the inner part of the solar system
that will become Mercury, Venus, the Earth, and Mars. In the outer part of the planetary system,
however, these planetary cores that are growing to the size of the terrestrial planets get big
enough that they can begin to accumulate the hydrogen gas that pervades the planetary system,
because it's cold out there. Hydrogen is a very volatile element, but the growing Jupiter can
accumulate it. It can accumulate helium as well. So the planet around Jupiter, where Jupiter lies,
can grow big and fat. Just keep growing and growing and growing until it's used up all the hydrogen
in its region. Saturn, a little bit farther out, is growing where there is less gas because the
disk is gradually fading away as you get to the outer part of the planetary system. So Saturn
comes out smaller. By the time you get out to Uranus and Neptune, you've got a planetary core,
but the amount of hydrogen is less and less. By the time these planets can grow big, the growing
Sun is beginning to sweep the gas away from the disk of the solar system, removing the raw material,
and Uranus and Neptune are bound to come up fairly small. Get out to Pluto, here's a planetary core
growing from accumulation of comets, but there's no raw material left out of which to grow a big
planet and it gets stuck as a Pluto. And you get out into the Kuiper Belt, there are too few of
them out there to accumulate into a planet at all, and you still have hundreds of millions of
cometary bodies left over that may go out to 50, 60 astronomical units, and we're really not sure
how far this disk actually goes. All explains away very nicely. You wind up now with rocky bodies,
metallic bodies in the inside, wet hydrogen-filled bodies, wet in the sense of ice,
on the outside of the solar system. Now, the last collisions are really big. If you have a primitive
Earth and you deposit in it a hundred kilometer-wide planetesimal, you're going to deposit an awful lot
of heat into the Earth. Every time it gets hit by a big one like that, you begin to melt the Earth.
So the last collisions should produce, if not a liquid planet, certainly a partially molten planet
in which the heavy stuff can sink to the inside. So you have a natural blast furnace in a sense.
The iron and the nickel, the most common metals of all, sink to the middle where they will eventually
produce the planetary core and the lighter rock floats to the outside to produce the planetary
mantle. And across the top, everything solidifies into this crust that we see here today. Now,
there must have been some interesting competition among these growing planets. We think that in
the early days of the planetary system, a body approximately the size of Mars hit the Earth
hard enough to incorporate part of itself into the Earth. The debris then went into orbit around
the Earth, lost much of its iron to the Earth, and the debris solidified into the rocky moon.
It's the only viable theory we have for why the moon has a chemical composition that it does.
It's not without controversy, but it's the only theory that seems to hold up with time and to fit
how the moon was formed. There's good basis for realizing these giant collisions. All you need
to do is look at the maria on the moon. All you need to do is look at the giant impact craters
on Mercury, on Mars, and you can see how much energy must have been deposited into these planets
enough to have melted them down. All of this should have happened in somewhere around 10 million
years. It should be the computer simulations show that this is a very quick process. The sun was born
five and a half billion years ago. How do we know? Well, we simply look at our carbonaceous
chondrite meteorite. We do radioactive dating in the meteorite, and it comes up to 4.56 or so
billion years. The oldest thing we can find is part of the asteroid belt. The asteroid belt was
a growing planet that tried to accumulate. However, it was too close to Jupiter. Jupiter's gravity
kept the asteroid belt stirred up and kept the velocities high, so the asteroids kept crossing
each other, and they reached a point at which they accumulated up to the size of perhaps the
asteroid's cirrus, but then they started smashing into each other and breaking themselves back down
again. Jupiter probably preventing the asteroid belt into completing itself into a planet,
and also throwing many of the rocky planetesimals all the way out of the planetary system,
all together reducing the amount of raw material out of which to form a planet in the first place.
But given that the asteroid belt, with its four and a half billion-year-old meteorite, is clearly
part of the symmetry of the planetary system, we can use it to date the entire planetary system,
the entire solar system, and the sun itself, because all of it should have formed at the same time.
There's a lot of debris left over after this process was done. The moon solidified very quickly.
The Earth took a fairly long time because it's a much larger body, but very quickly,
the moon turned solid. An awful lot of stuff left over in the planetary system,
an awful lot of debris. It's not a hundred percent efficient process. The leftover debris began
smashing into the moon, the moon sweeping it up something like a vacuum cleaner, which produced
a tremendously heavy meteoric bombardment that began to crater the moon and the other solidified
planets and satellites of the planetary system. The early heavy bombardment must have been
completely wiped away by the later stages of the heavy bombardment, which was over with by about
four billion years ago, and that's what we see on the moon. It's the late stages of the heavy
bombardment. Between about roughly three and a half to four billion years ago, the moon was then
smacked by a large number of very large pieces of asteroid debris that left these large basins,
wiped out the earlier meteoric craters, and produced the basins that formed the maria that we see
today. And since then, they've been sort of lightly littered with asteroid impacts, the rate of
infall dropping off dramatically after about three and a half to four billion years, and now we still
get hit by a few of them on occasion. The satellites of the outer planets probably formed in much the
same way. You probably had a spinning disk around the forming Jupiter, around forming Saturn. These
things in some way that is still not very well understood formed the satellite systems of the
planets, much in the way that the planets formed around the Sun. And do the giant planets, the
satellites of the giant planets are in a sense the planets of the planets. The inner satellites,
the inner planets rather, didn't form satellite systems. They just weren't big enough. The outer
satellites, the outer planets on the other hand, were so big that they could form these
satellite systems. Jupiter with enormous number, and of course they crashed into each other and
produced some of the rings we see. A satellite of Saturn probably got broken up. We don't know how
long ago formed this beautiful ring system that we see around Saturn. The rings around Uranus,
the rings around Neptune being debris belts from satellites that are getting smashed up even yet
today. Perhaps some kind of a giant impact was responsible for tipping Neptune over on its side.
We can't go back in the early days and tell, but it seems to be the only choice that we have.
The last collisions also helped set the rotational inclinations of the planets. So the tilt of the
Earth's axis to 23 and a half degrees probably comes to us in the rotation period of the Earth,
the rotation periods of the planets. However they may have been slowed down by tidal effects,
were set by the latest collisions that produced the planets. And we put the whole thing together
into a neat package. Now there's a lot of debris left over. Beyond the orbit of Pluto, we still
have the Kuiper Belt that is much too thin to form a planet. So they're stuck out there.
The gravity of Neptune gradually works a few of them into the inner solar system where they
become the short period comets, a few of them striking the Earth. Many of the early planetesimals,
the icy planetesimals were launched entirely out of the planetary system by the giant planets,
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune to populate the orc comet cloud. They are the primitive
planetesimals that will never make it into a planet, but nearby passing clouds of interstellar gas,
nearby passing stars will change the orbits of a few and drop them into the sun where they become
the long period comets. Now the Earth solidified a little bit late in this scheme because it's
the largest of the terrestrial planets. Nevertheless, eventually, maybe half a billion years or so
after it formed, it solidified and we still have early rocks from that stage. The Earth must have
been terribly dry, yet there were still a large number of impacts from comets occurring. Every
time a comet hits the Earth, it deposits water on the Earth. There is a very strong feeling among
astronomers that all of the water on the Earth that fills the ocean came from early cometary impacts.
Our carbonaceous chondrite that we showed you earlier contains complex molecules. It's possible
at least that these things landing on the Earth gave us the complex chemicals out of which life grew.
Life certainly grew on the Earth, but if that scheme is correct, then why didn't it grow on Mars?
We don't know. We still don't even know whether there are life forms on Mars or not. The Earth is
the only one that we are absolutely sure, of course, that life exists. If this is the case
and if the solar system were all formed this way in this nice neat fashion, one would think there
should be planetary systems around other stars as well. In other words, the formation of planets
is a natural byproduct of the formation of a star and they should be out there. Most stars,
unless these discs are somehow disrupted, should have planets around them. So let's go look. For
one thing, we can identify brand new stars that hover around the dusty clouds of interstellar
space. And what do we find around them? We find dark, dusty discs. Unless they are in thick clusters
where the discs are being disrupted by other hot stars or maybe stellar companions, they have discs
around them. We found enormous numbers of stars with these discs and they're all young. The discs
tend to dissipate within about 10 million years. No, we can't wait 10 million years and watch it
happen, but we are pretty good at telling the ages of stars on the basis of their temperatures
and their luminosities and what we think their masses may be. As a result, we can tell them
within 10 million years or so the discs are gone, which fits in very nicely with the computer
replications of the creation of the planets from the dusty disc in orbit around the early sun.
So we have evidence from outer space as well that this is the way it actually happened. But
can we find the planets? Presumably these discs disappear because most of the material gets
used up in the creation of the planets. So let's go look. How on earth do you find a planet in
orbit about another star? If you go to the nearest star at a distance of four light years, far enough
away so that it takes light at 186,000 miles per second, four years to get from that star back to us,
almost 300,000 astronomical units. And if you put a Jupiter around that star, Alpha Centauri,
never mind the fact that it's a double star with two stars orbiting, pretend it's a single star
with a Jupiter in orbit about it, you couldn't see it from the earth. With all of our sophisticated
telescopes, that Jupiter shining only by reflected light would be too faint to be seen. Never mind
seeing anything approximating the earth. It's not that the planet would be all that faint. It's
that it's tucked up right next to a very bright star that would completely overwhelm it. We have
never seen an actual planet in orbit about another star. It will happen, but we have yet to see it.
We can still tell, however, that these stars, at least a large number of them, have planets
by using the Doppler effect. Remember when we illuminated Venus and Mercury with radar,
we bounced a radio beam off the planet, that shifted the wavelength depending upon the planet's
motion by the time the radio beam got back, we have a different wavelength. By comparing the
outgoing wavelength with the incoming wavelength, you can determine the velocity of the approaching
or the receding body. Now, gravity is always mutual. Kepler's law says that the sun is at the
focus of the orbit of a planet, but that is not really quite correct. The planets are small.
The sun is large, but just as the moon and the earth go around each other on a around a common
center of mass, and the earth has a slight orbit around the moon, one eightieth the size of the
orbit of the moon, because the mass ratio of the earth to the moon is a factor of 80, Jupiter and
the sun, ignore the other planets, just think of Jupiter and the sun, are also in mutual orbit.
And while Jupiter is five astronomical units away, it's one one thousandth the mass of the sun,
that means the sun has an orbit about Jupiter, one one thousandth of five astronomical units.
And then you put Saturn in the act, and that makes the little tiny orbit of the sun a little bit
more complex. So as viewed from outer space, the sun would move back and forth by a very slight
amount, by a speed of only a few meters per second, you could almost run alongside it.
Our technology is now down to the level of measuring Doppler shifts in incoming light
from stars to that kind of accuracy. And sure enough, guess what we're finding? We're finding
Jupiters. We can't see them, but we're seeing the stars move back and forth, and we're finding
bodies that should be roughly the size of Jupiter, maybe half of Jupiter mass to a few
Jupiter masses in orbits about these stars. The first ones we're coming up with are strange.
The Jupiter is closer to the star than Mercury's orbit. But that seems to violate everything I said.
Jupiter should form way out here where it's cold. Well, what if the forming disk doesn't dissipate
very quickly? Jupiter is formed, and then friction makes the planet spiral into the sun before the
disk has dissipated. It could be that the planet spirals all the way in, and the planetary system
is entirely destroyed before anything can begin to develop, any life can begin to develop.
It can get close enough that disk dissipates, and then you have a Jupiter stuck very close
to the newly formed star. What we're finding is that we thought that all planetary systems are
going to be like ours. We're a provincial breed, we people, and we're looking out and we're finding
all manner of other kinds of planetary systems out there. We're finding stars with two planets,
three planets. We have yet to find an earth, but NASA is planning an earth planet finder that
some decades down the line will probably be able to pick up planets like ours. In one case, we've
even seen the Jupiter cross in front of its distant star. Now we can't see the stars as disks,
but we can see the starlight dim a little bit as the planet goes in front of the star,
slightly dimming in light, and from that we can get its diameter. Sure enough, it's about the size
of Jupiter. So we do see the planetary systems around other stars, and the whole thing seems to be
a natural part of normal star formation, and one would think then that the galaxy of stars
should be teeming with planets. Many planetary systems out there. The next step, of course,
is if there are Jupiters, there should be some stars out there that have planetary systems,
something like ours, with earths, and maybe there's another earth out there in a zone in which there's
liquid water. And maybe in one of those planets, somehow life got started out there too. Can we
tell? Well, we can't go examine it. They're too far away. Star travel appears virtually impossible
at this point. But maybe if one of these life-bearing planets develops a civilized form of life and a
technological form of life, perhaps they can broadcast radio waves. So let's go look.
Around 1920, the earth became radio bright with powerful commercial radio signals. Much of those
radio waves, many of them escaped through the atmosphere. 80 years ago, let's say 90 years ago,
whenever powerful radio began to develop, we are now surrounded by a bubble of radio radiation
that many light years across, which incorporates thousands upon thousands of stars. Anybody on one
of those stars looking back at us could see the earth as a radio bright point in orbit about
its star, Doppler shifting back and forth and back and forth. They would know we're here.
So if there's somebody else out there, let's go look. This has nothing to do with UFOs,
flying saucers and all that, which are largely natural phenomena, optical illusions, delusions,
a variety of other things. Venus tops the list of UFOs, among other things. This has to do with
its search for extraterrestrial intelligence. And for a long time now, we've been looking for it.
We set up a radio telescope and look for intelligent signals from space. How do we know it's
intelligent? Well, maybe it's a binary signal. Maybe we're picking up a communications beacon
of some sort. Maybe somebody is trying to contact us directly to see if we're here. We don't know
what we're going to find. As yet, however, as you notice in the papers, there have been no
screaming headlines, life found in orbit around another star. We have yet to find anything for
all of the stars that have been examined. Does this mean there's no life out there? No, not
necessarily. Grass does not broadcast radio signals. Neither do microbes. All we can test for
now is intelligent technological civilizations like ours, but maybe they're not like ours.
Maybe only one planet and a billion can contain life. On the other hand, there's 100 billion stars in
the galaxy. If we don't find any, it doesn't mean that some intelligent life isn't right around the
corner. Either way, again, we come out winners. It's rather like looking at Mars. If Mars has life,
it's going to be a philosophical wonder, among other things, and it will tell us something about
how life forms. If it doesn't, we feel even more special. The same is true with the stars of the
galaxy. Maybe we really are unique, which means we better protect ourselves very carefully,
because maybe we are the true children of the galaxy. Maybe we're the only ones. On the other hand,
maybe the galaxy is teeming with them, or maybe it will. Maybe we're the first ones to come along.
We don't know, and we won't know unless we look. The whole thing finally leads back to us.
People who encounter astronomy in its grandest form sometimes almost get depressed by it.
Think, oh, we're such a significant, insignificant being on such a small, rocky planet around an
anonymous sun, an anonymous galaxy in a universe billions of light-years across,
filled with trillions of galaxies. Who are we? But we can stand on this planet. This planet was formed
from the galaxy. It's a product of the galaxy, and we can stand upon it, and we can look outward,
and we have the minds to understand it. Never confuse size with significance.
All of this, after all, is made up of the tiny particles called atoms, the smallest things.
Without the atoms, we wouldn't have the Earth. We wouldn't have the galaxy.
Perhaps without people standing on this beautiful Earth, there would be nobody
to appreciate the beauty we have around us. Thank you.
Now that you've completed this course, be sure to test your comprehension by taking the final
exam. You'll find the exam on this course's web page at www.modernscholar.com. If you've enjoyed
this program, the Modern Scholar series features many other fascinating courses spanning the
academic curriculum taught by renowned professors. This course, produced by John J. Alexander,
is copyrighted 2003 by Recorded Books LLC. The lecture text is copyrighted 2003 by James B.
The lectures were recorded under the direction of Matthew Kavnar.
