Calculus is hard because it is different. It introduces completely new concepts such
as the limit, the derivative, and the integral. These are novel concepts that appear completely
unintuitive and hard to grasp. When students don't understand the concepts, their applications
are next to impossible. So, to understand calculus, we first must reinforce the concepts
that are fundamental to its foundation. I believe the key to understanding calculus lies
in teaching these concepts. The algebra and complicated math that trips students up can
be learned in time, but a student who never grasps the fundamental ideas of calculus can
never succeed. So, let's take a step back from everything we know about math and try
to learn calculus in a whole new way.
So infinity is really cool because it allows us to talk about things that are either really
big or really small. Infinity has this reputation of being known as the biggest number. Have
you guys heard of that before? Yes. It's not. It's not. Yes, you're correct. If I asked
you guys to count the numbers between 1 and 2, 1.1 is slightly bigger than 1, right? And
it definitely is between 1 and 2. Do you all agree? Yes. So, right now, we have one number
between 1 and 2. 1.11 is also between 1 and 2, right? It's a little bit bigger than 1.1,
right? Yeah. So, now we have two numbers that are definitely between 1 and 2. 1.111. This
is also between 1 and 2. So, if we keep adding 1s, that's what this dot, dot, dot, dot means
over there, that means we can just keep adding 1 on to the end of the summer forever. And
every single time we add 1 on, the number gets a little bit bigger, right? So, it's a
unique number. It's a different number that's between 1 and 2 every single time we do this.
And if we keep counting these numbers as in how many numbers are between 1 and 2, we'll
never end. That is infinity. Infinity is a concept. And this is crucial to understanding
not just infinity but also for calculus. So, now with that, let's talk about 1 over infinity.
If I have 1 over 2, we have this one pizza. We cut it in half. And this red right here
is the amount of my one slice. We all agree? Yes. So, now let's go to 1 over 3. We have
this one pizza and we divide it into three equal slices. This red slice is the amount
of one slice. And now if we divide it into four, what do we notice? It gets even smaller,
right? So, we have 1 over 5. It's a little bit smaller, okay? 1 over 6. 1 over 15. Let's
look at 1 over 80. What would happen if we go to 1 over infinity? The question is, is
it equal to zero? So, remember that infinity is not a number. So, 1 over infinity doesn't
represent anything. Remember, we had to have a number on the bottom of this thing, right?
We have to divide it into a certain number of slices. And if we divide it by infinity
to me, that means nothing. But what does that mean about our pizza slice? Well, we said
it's not equal to zero. But what we can say is that 1 over infinity goes to zero. When
we increase that number on the bottom, our slice gets smaller and smaller and smaller.
And if we keep doing that forever and we keep adding 1 to that bottom number, our slice
is getting closer and closer and closer to being nothing, but it's never equal to nothing.
What this is called, and this is important, this is infinitely small. 1 over infinity
is an infinitely small number, just like infinity is an infinitely large number. Let's move
on to something that I know you're familiar with, area. I want to talk to you guys about
an interesting way to take area. So, let's say we're trying to calculate the area of
a triangle. A way that we might be able to do it is by taking something whose area that
we do know and filling our triangle with it. So, let's say we have our quarters stacked
up like this. And we want to say, what is the area of a triangle that has this shape?
Well, let's count the quarters and say how many quarters fit into this triangle. So,
one way we can do this, we can count it just by going 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, we can do that. But
the way I want to talk about doing it is to count all the columns. If we count all the
quarters, we add 1, plus 2, plus 3, we get 21 quarters are shown right here. And we can
say that our quarters roughly fill this shape, okay? And that there's about 21 quarters in
this triangle. But if we fill this triangle, the first thing I want to show you guys is
that there's a little space in here, right? Where the quarters don't quite touch. And
if we fill the triangle in, we see that there's a lot of this overhang on the quarter. So,
how can we make this a more accurate measurement? Well, let's use nickels now. Now, we have
a lot more columns, right? And what we can do is we can add up these columns again and
say, okay, well, there's 36 nickels here. And now if I ask you, how big is this triangle,
what would you say? About 36. And again, we did this by counting up all the columns. And
now if we look at the inside of the triangle, the space in between the quarters are a little
bit less. There's not as big of a gap between the quarters, between the coins, making it
slightly more accurate. And if we draw it, we say that there's a little less overhang,
right? So, let's go even smaller. Let's use a dime. And if we count up all the columns
the same way that we did before, and there's a lot more columns, so it's a little bit harder,
we get 136 dimes. If we put this triangle over, we notice two things. One, the space
is really small now compared to the quarters. It's still definitely there, but it's definitely
smaller space. And if we fill this triangle up, it almost looks perfect. We know that
there's a little bit of space inside that we have to deal with, but as far as overhang
is concerned, it's pretty much gone, okay? It's still there, right? But there's a lot less.
So now let's compare the three triangles we just talked about. The dimes is definitely
the most accurate out of these three. We all agree? So, we look at the columns that we used.
The width of these columns is only as small as the width of this quarter or the coin. And so,
if we say this nickel has half the width of this quarter and that this dime has a quarter,
one-fourth of the width of this coin, we're taking our column and we're making it smaller and smaller
and smaller. If we keep going on forever and ever and ever and making our coin smaller and
smaller and smaller, making the width of this column smaller and smaller, by using smaller
coins, the accuracy is going to keep getting better and better. And if we make it infinity,
our accuracy should be 100% eventually. So, what would that look like? Well, let's take a look.
This is a decent picture of what that might look like. Now, obviously, one over infinity is so small
that we can't really represent it. We can't make an infinitely small column on a computer or even
draw it because we can always make it smaller. We can always add it onto that infinity, but it
might look something like this. And if we zoom in to this corner over here, we have these columns
that go up. And imagine that these are the width of our infinitely small coins. If we add up all
these columns, we would get the area of our triangle and it would be 100% accurate. This is
one of the big concepts that I want to drive home is that one over infinity can be used
to calculate area, to find the area. And this, this is huge because this is one of the principles
of calculus. This is the second most arguably, first most important idea of calculus,
is that if we use infinitely small columns, we can find the area of anything. Okay. I want to
talk about another concept that's really important to calculus, and that has to do with slope. Let's
start by defining what slope is. So, when I think about slope, what I think of is the incline of a
ramp that you're riding from left to right. So, for example, if we have this guy over here,
he's on a skateboard, he's going up this incline, he's going left to right. We say that this is a
positive slope because he's going up. Now, this guy, same skateboarder, maybe he got to the top of
the hill and he goes, oh, I got to go down now. Now he's going down this from left to right. So,
our slope is negative. It's downhill. We understand the difference between those two? Okay. So,
with this, let's move on to talking about apples. Let's say I have 10 apples,
and I eat, I eat five of them in one minute because I'm like a speed apple eater. And now I have two
data points. I have two numbers, two groups of numbers. We can put this on a graph. This line
tells us that if we go to any point on this, on this graph, we can read how many apples we have
at this minute. So, we have this, this line, and what does this look like?
Looks like a slope, right? And we can put our skateboarder on it. So, this guy is going downhill,
so it's a positive or negative? Negative. But what is the value of this slope?
How can we calculate it? And more importantly, what makes this slope right here, so this line,
different from this slope or this slope? What exactly is the numerical difference? What's the
difference in the actual slope between these two? Between these three? What we can do is say that
the slope is equal to the number of apples that I ate over the time that I ate them. If we have this
line, we start at 10, go to five. How many apples did we eat? Five. Five. And how long did it take?
One minute. One minute. So, our slope is going to be negative five. But what if we had a line that
looks a little more complicated? This isn't a straight line. We have a line that looks something
like this. It's not straight. It's not easy to calculate that slope. And the reason is,
is because the slope changes. Let's look at a skateboarder here. He's probably going to go
really fast. Like, that's a pretty drastic drop, right? It's a really negative slope. Do you agree?
And let's say that slope is right here, okay? Pretty negative. And if we put the same skateboarder
over here, he's like riding a flat ground. He's not really going anywhere, right? He's coasting.
So, that slope is maybe somewhere over here. But what's important is that this same graph,
this same line, has many different slopes. Because this is different than this, which is
different than this. And every single point is slightly different slope. So, we want to be able
to say, well, what is the slope at any given time, right? How fast is our skateboarder going
if we follow this line at any given number? So, if we look at this graph, and we sort of have it,
okay? We take it and we cut it in half. So, if you look on the bottom here, it goes from one to ten.
And it looks like a pretty curvy line. Now, let's say that that's one over one. And let's take a
half of that. So, now we go from zero to five. Look at the numbers on the bottom. We go from zero
to five in our time, okay? So, if we go again, now we go from one to two point five. Now it looks
like an even more straight line. And if we go again, one to one point two five, that almost looks
like an exactly straight line. It's slightly different. It's slightly not straight. It has a
slight curve to it. But it's definitely a lot better. And remember, all we did is we went from
ten to five to two point five to one point two five. We kept having that number,
okay? And it looked more and more straight. So, the question is, what are we doing here?
What I would say is that we started at one over one. Let's say we start at one over one and we
have it. We get the one over two. So, now we're at half of our initial graph centered about one,
because one's always there, right? And we have that. Now we're at one over four, following me.
We keep having the length of our graph centered about one. And we're getting this number on the
right is getting closer and closer and closer to one, right? So, what would happen if we go a
distance of one over infinity? It would be a straight line. Remember, infinity is not a number.
Infinity is a concept. And one over infinity is infinitely small. So, we go from one to one
plus one over infinity. And what we see is we recover a straight line. Doesn't that blow your
mind? Remember, we started out at this. And we said, you can't measure that slope, because it's
different everywhere. It's different every single point on this graph has a different slope.
But if we have it more and more and we focus in on one, we focus in right here. We're focusing
on this time. And we look at only that instant of time. It looks like a line. We said before
that every single point has a slope. And we also said that in order to measure that slope,
we need a straight line. So, if we look at an instant in time that is essentially just one point,
we better get a line, because we need a line to measure the slope there. Do you agree?
Yeah. So, this makes complete sense. If we look at a time from one to something just after one,
infinitely close to one, it better look like a line, because we want to be able to measure
that slope, because we know it exists. And that's important, is that we know this slope has to exist.
So, there must be a line there. And the question is, how we have to just be able to look only at
that point in time to find that line? And this is very important, because we can measure the slope
of this line. Based on this picture, we know that it exists and we know that it's calculable. We
know that we can find it if we have the right tools. I want you to leave with this idea that
one over infinity can be used to find the slope of a curved line. And this is also crucial. This is,
remember I said the area was like the central, one of the two central ideas of calculus? This is
the other one. This is the second half of the complete picture of calculus, is that we can use
calculus to not just find the area of the shape, but to find the slope of a function, of a line,
of a graph, that otherwise we wouldn't be able to find the slope of. All right, so let's just recap
what we learned today. We learned, most importantly, that infinity is not a number. Infinity is a
concept. We also learned that one over infinity is not equal to zero. It leads to zero. It goes to
zero. If we look at one over infinity, it gets smaller and smaller and smaller because infinitely
small and goes to zero. And one over infinity allows us to find the area of shapes using really
small, infinitely small columns, which is crazy. If I give you a weird object, like maybe I give
you something that looks like this, how do you find the area of that thing? That's pretty hard,
right? You want to have a formula for that. We want to be able to use the columns. We also showed
that one over infinity allows us to turn a curvy line, a curvy line like this,
into a straight line at a specific point, at a specific time, which is amazing because it allows
us to find the slope at any given time of a line that we normally wouldn't be able to.
Students just beginning to study calculus always find the concepts of limits, derivatives, and
intervals hard to understand. But when these concepts are broken down and explained in new,
unique ways, such as by using coins to visualize intervals, they become infinitely easier to
understand. In fact, the rather unconventional methods for teaching calculus using this video
allowed the same students who usually hate things that were problems to follow these daunting concepts.
You're actually like really, really good at explaining everything. You gave a lot of detail
expand. I think that was like really, it made sense. Like I can understand it, made it easy
to understand what you were trying to say. So next time you hit a roadblock and want to give up
because you just can't grasp a concept right away, take a step back and try to tackle the concept
in a new way, just like we did with using pizza to explain infinity and skateboarders to explain
slope. Then, once you dive into the awesome fields of mathematics, you will, just like the
fifth years in this video, have a thirst for knowledge. And one day, just like those students,
go on to change the world.
