everyone, and welcome to the Vantage seminar. So this week, we're continuing with our series
on perspectives on Gaowa groups. We're very happy to have Daniel Litt talking to us about
Gaowa theory of local systems. So Daniel, is it all right if we record this talk?
It is all right.
Great. And feel free to ask questions during the talk. So Daniel, please go ahead.
All right. Thank you so much. It's nice to be here. Now, let me just reiterate,
if you have any questions for me, please just interrupt me. It's nice to have a little bit
of a back and forth with these online talks. So everything I'm going to talk about today
is joint work. So some of it is joint with Aaron Lansman, and some other parts of it are joined
with Josh Lamb, and I'll explain which parts are joined with whom. So let me just say that the
goal of the talk is to introduce and give a survey of some pretty concrete questions in Algebra,
which come up when one's studying various questions in arithmetic and number theory.
So some of them are quite closely related to things that Professor Harperator talked about
on the first talk in this series. And so without further ado, let me introduce some of those
questions. So the setup is as follows. So this is sort of a very general question you can ask.
You start with a group, G. It can be a finite group, or maybe an algebraic group, like GLN or
SLN. And you have a bunch of conjugacy classes, C1 through CN in G. So if you'd like, if G is GLN,
just think a bunch of matrices in Jordan normal form. And in the setting, there's a problem which
goes, I think, by two names in the literature. So the Hurwitz problem, if G is a finite group,
and the Dalim Simpson problem, if G is an algebraic group, which is sort of a dyophantine equation in
the group G. So you have these conjugacy classes, C1 through CN. And you want to know, does there
exist G1 and C1, G2 and C2, GN and CN, so that some equation is satisfied. And namely, the equation
is that the product of the GI is the identity. Okay, so let me say that again, you're given a
bunch of conjugacy classes in a group. And you want to know, can you solve the equation, product of
GI is the identity, subject to the constraint that each, the IFELM to be a group GI is in the
conjugacy class, CI. So let me, let me make this question a bit more geometric. So, and I think
in this language, it appeared in Harbator's Chop in the first lesson of the session. So I'm going
to call sigma zero N, the two sphere minus N points. And if you, probably most of you are more
algebra geometrically inclined, then think of that as P1 minus N points. Well, what's the
fundamental group of that space? Well, you can take a loop around each point, which I'm drawing now.
So maybe this is the loop around the first point, let's call it gamma one, the second point would
be gamma two, all the way up to gamma N, which would be the loop around the endpoint. And the
fundamental group of the space, P1 minus N points is generated by the gamma I. And there's one relation,
which is that if you go around all the gamma I in sequence, then you can kind of contract that
composite loop around the back of S2. I don't know if you can see the gesture I'm making in
in the little screen in the top right, but that's supposed to be contracting along the back of the
sphere. And so that gives you the relation that the product of the gamma I is the identity. And
it will be useful to think of this Deline-Simpson problem or Horwitz problem in the following way,
namely, is there a homomorphism from this group, pi one of the two sphere minus N points or P1 minus
N points, into G with the following property, namely that it sends gamma I into the conjugacy class,
Ci for all I. Okay, so this is a rephrasing of this Deline-Simpson or Horwitz problem. Okay,
so why would you be interested in this problem? Well, it has a geometric interpretation in the
case where G is finite, namely, well, maybe if you ask for a surjective map like this, it asks,
is there a G cover of P1 with specified branching? So what you're supposed to think is that,
well, a surjection from the fundamental group onto a finite group is the same as a connected G
cover. And the loops around these punctures control how that G cover branches at each point.
Okay, and this was sort of a precursor to a question that David Harbour better discussed in the first
talk, which was, you know, relevant to constructing these covers in order to try to solve the inverse
gamma problem over certain fields. Okay, what if G is an algebraic group? Well, maybe this is a
little bit more arcane, but I'll try to convince you that it's something you should be interested in.
Well, what does this question become? Maybe if G is SLR or GLR, it's the question,
does there exist a local system on P1 minus some points with some specified local behavior in the
punctures? So, okay, so first of all, why would you be interested in the second question if you're
say interested in the first? Well, I claim the second question is actually really related to the
first one. Why? Because if you have representation as GLN, let's say over over Z or, you know, any
ring, you can reduce it mod P and get a representation into GLNFP or FQ. So in other words,
the second question is a way of addressing the first question in families where you kind of fix
your group and vary the prime. So you can think, for example, if you want to construct covers of P1
with covering group, a simple group of lead type, will those come in families indexed by prime powers?
And this is one way of doing it. Okay, so I don't know that there's any kind of general solution
to this for finite groups. But in the algebraic case, this is kind of a pretty well understood
question. So there's work by Simpson and Kostov and Crawley-Bovey and other people,
which doesn't quite completely answer this question. Like, I don't think there's a
really simple answer given a bunch of conjugacy classes in GLN. Are there matrices in those
conjugacy classes which multiply to the identity? But at least for generic conjugacy classes,
this is totally understood. Okay, so let me come to the next question along these lines.
So that's the question of constructing rigid tuples. And this should be familiar, again,
from the first talk in the series. Well, what we discussed before is an existence question.
So you have some equation, product of GI is the identity, and you want to solve it subject to
some constraint, namely that the GI are in some conjugacy classes, CI. So if you have an existence
question, you should also ask a uniqueness question. And so that's the following question.
So I've written it out here. So which conjugacy classes C1 through CN in G, are there, you know,
main elements G1 through GN in those conjugacy classes whose product is the identity? And well,
when will this be unique? It'll basically never be literally unique, right? Because if you have one
solution, you can just conjugate by an element of G and get another solution. But you can ask,
when is it unique up to simultaneous conjugation? Okay. So we saw in the first talk in the series
that if G is finite, well, a solution is the same as a cover of P1 with some specified branching data.
And if the corresponding tuple of elements of G is rigid, that cover has some good arithmetic
behavior. So for example, it descends to a cyclotomic field. And this is useful for solving
the inverse Gallo problem, the point being that if you now take the preimage under this cover
of some rational points of P1, Hilbert irreducibility tells you that most of the time those will give
you G extensions of this field. Okay. And there's some mild extra conditions you can place on the
conjugacy classes to get the cover to actually descend to Q. I'm not going to discuss this.
Okay. What about the case where G is an algebraic group? Well, you can just ask the same question,
and then it becomes the question of setting rigid local systems. So let me just say
in words what this uniqueness means. It means those are local systems, representations of P1,
which are determined up to conjugacy by their local behavior of the punctures.
Okay. Again, why would you do that? Well, first of all, such local systems also have good arithmetic
behavior, but they're again going to descend to P1 over a cyclotomic field. And again,
the algebraic group case and finite group case are related. So if you're trying to solve the
inverse Gallo problem for families of groups, like families of groups of lead types, I think,
like SLNFP, what you would do is construct one of these local systems and then look at the corresponding
covers you get by reducing one P. And so this gives you ways of producing lots and lots of
extensions for different groups. Can I say a question? Yeah, please. For all these Ns, the same,
you have GLN and you have Q... Oh, those are supposed to be R points. And every time I say a group,
I want to use R for the rank of the group. Sorry, thank you for catching that.
So the number of points is not the same. And how about the Q of mu N? Is that...
That should have been a capital N, I believe. Oh, so all the Ns are different.
All the Ns are different too, yeah. Any two letters that appear in this talk are probably
different. So yeah, thank you for asking. Okay. Okay, so what's known about this question?
So again, I think the finite group case for kind of arbitrary groups is kind of complicated, although
a lot is known for specific groups. In the algebraic case, so the case of representations
into the general linear group, these were classified by cats in his book, Rigid Local Systems in 1996.
And the key property they have is that they're all of geometric origin.
So meaning they show up in the comology of families of algebraic varieties.
I'm going to try to bring that down to earth by the end of the talk. So I want to...
I'm going to give you some idea of what cats' classification looks like.
Maybe let me just remark that if you replace GLR with another
algebraic group, this is actually more or less open, I think, that is not...
Except for a few groups. I think maybe GSP4 or something is understood.
For general group, I don't think we really understand Rigid G-Local Systems.
Okay, so let me tell you the nature of cats' classification because it's really kind of
beautiful and miraculous and it'll show up a little bit later in the talk.
So before I do that, are there any questions?
Okay, so let me kind of tell you what the shape of cats' classification is.
So what are we trying to classify? We're trying to classify tuples of conjugacy classes
in the general linear group. I think this time I wrote correctly GLR and here the ends are the same.
So we're trying to classify tuples of conjugacy classes so that there's a unique
set of matrices, GI and CI, whose product is the identity, up to simultaneous conjugation.
Okay, so what does cats do? He finds this kind of complicated operation called middle convolution,
which I'll discuss at the end of the talk. And what it does is it takes a rigid
tuple of conjugacy classes and it produces a new rigid tuple of conjugacy classes, the same number,
but in a different group. So you start with nr by r matrices and you get, at the end,
nr prime by r prime matrices. And the interesting property is, okay, first of all,
this new tuple is rigid and second of all, r prime is smaller than r, so you've decreased the size of
the matrices. Okay, so what's the idea? Well, then maybe it's clear what to do. You start iterating
this procedure, you eventually get down to r is one. And what is, well, a bunch of one by one
matrices which multiply to the identity is just the same thing as a bunch of numbers which multiply
to the identity. And those are very easy to classify. Okay, so in what sense is this a
classification? Well, a miracle happens. I mean, a miracle with a proof, it's not an inexplicable
miracle. But the miracle is that whatever this middle convolution operation is,
it's invertible. So what that means is the output of Katz's classification is that, well, you classify
all rigid tuples of one by one matrices, that is just n tuples of numbers, multiplying to the
identity, and then all rigid tuples are generated by those by iterating this middle convolution
operation. Okay, this doesn't mean that like any question you have about rigid local systems is
easy to answer. Like there's lots of actually open questions about rigid local systems, despite
the fact that there's a classification, but at least it gives you a place to start looking.
But just to give you an example, like it was open for quite a while after Katz, like could you
classify all rigid local systems with the corresponding representation of like the
fundamental group of s2 minus some points that you get as finite image. So that was like a
open for a while until it was solved by Belkali. And there's lots of other interesting open questions
about rigid local systems. Okay, so that was all background. I want to now start talking about like
the actual subject of this talk, which is a strict generalization of the study of rigid local systems.
And in some sense, it goes goes back a little bit further. So I want to kind of introduce this
question and then talk a bit about the history. And the question is a dynamical one. Okay, so
so let me, well, maybe before I move on to the next question, are there are there any questions
about rigid local systems? Yes, Daniel. So when R is one, there's really no constraint,
any tuple of n numbers that multiply to one is rigid, there's no.
That's right. So in gl one is a billion. So so a conjugacy class is just a single element.
And you know, unique up to simultaneous simultaneous conjugation does not does doesn't do anything. So
any any n numbers count any numbers. There's a little lie in what I wrote here. So so this
geometric origin, it really only holds if the if the conjugacy classes have only root of unity.
Okay, thanks. Any any other questions?
Okay, so so now I want to introduce this kind of dynamical question, which which motivates the
talk. Okay, so suppose I have an n tuple of elements of a group G, which multiply to the identity.
So I claim this a kind of simple way to make a new a new n tuple. And so let me write it down. So
I'm going to write down a bunch of operations on n tuples of elements of a group, which multiply
to the identity. So so what's the idea is I want to switch the I want to swap the if and the if
plus first element of the group. Okay, and you can't actually do that because matrix multiplication or
you know, multiplication of elements in a group is typically not commutative, right? So so matrix
multiplication is famously not commutative. So so what you what do you have to do you have to fix up,
fix up your swapping. And so what do you do? Well, you leave all but the if and if plus first
group element alone. And then you conjugate the if plus first one by the if and put it in the
if position. And then you put the GI in the first position and then leave the rest alone. Okay,
and if you stare at this formula for a little bit, you'll see that that what I've done this sort of
modified swapping, it preserves the property that the product of the group elements is the identity.
Right, so so you go from G one to GI, and you get GI plus one, then you get G one I inverse and
then GI. So here, these two things cancel out and you get just the product of the cheese,
which was the identity to start with. Okay, so this gives an action of some group,
the group generated by the Sigma is on n tuples of elements of G. And that while that of course
descends to an action on n tuples of elements of G, moded out by simultaneous conjugation.
Okay, so this is some dynamical system, it's a group action on a set. I'm going to describe it
in other ways shortly, but you can think of this as a really concrete thing you start with,
for example, G is GLR, you start with n r by r matrices, which multiplied with the identity,
and then I'm going to produce new n tuples of r by r matrices by swapping them around and
conjugating in this way. Okay, and the basic question here is just what are the dynamics of
this action. And this is something that's been studied for a very long time, I think the first
case I know where it was studied is by Markov in the 1860s, so who was studying the kind of dynamics
of some affine cubic surface, which is a special case of this when G is SL2. And then there's lots
of recent work as well, so Borghain, Gamberd and Sarnak have studied this dynamics, there's a
beautiful recent paper by Will Chen on it, Goldman and other people, topologists have studied it,
there's this ongoing work by Eskin, Philippe and Rodriguez Hertz. So this is sort of a dynamical
system that's like one of the best studied dynamical systems in all of mathematics. Okay,
and I want to ask a kind of basic question about it when G is an algebraic group, so I think GLR
or SLR, which is what are the finite orbits of this action? Okay, so maybe that's the
most basic question you can ask about a dynamical system. Okay, so let me just kind of discuss a
little bit about where in arithmetic and topology this dynamical system shows up. So if G is
finite, understanding the orbits of this dynamics are the same as understanding the
components or maybe the topology of hermit spaces. So a tuple like this corresponded to a cover,
a hermit space is a modular space of covers, and the dynamics of this action control like the
components of that modular space. Okay, and when G is an algebraic group, I'm going to spend the
rest of the talk discussing this, so maybe wait a second for some motivation. But maybe a remark
is that this is just a strict generalization of the study of rigid tuples or rigid local systems,
and why is that? Well, let's suppose you have a rigid local system, right? So what does that mean?
It means that like up to conjugation, this tuple of matrices, for example, is just determined by
the conjugacy classes. Well, what does this action do to those conjugacy classes? It just
permutes them, right? So what that means is that if you have a rigid tuple, it has finite orbit
under this action. So studying the finite orbits contains studying rigid tuples or rigid local
systems as a sub question. Okay, so I'm going to now talk about kind of the history of this question
in the case where G is like GLR or SLR, an algebraic group. So stop me now if you want to ask about
the finite group case. Okay, so let me give you some history. So for the rest of the talk,
G will be an algebraic group, and you'll lose very little by just thinking it's the general
linear group. Maybe even SL2 is already going to be very interesting. So let me remind you what
we're studying. So we take G to the n, modulo simultaneous conjugation, and we're studying
the action of this group on it, which is given by these sort of modified swapping operations.
I'll explain where this comes from shortly. It has a really kind of beautiful topological
interpretation. But our question is just, what are the finite orbits? Okay, so let me kind of
tell you where this big group action comes from. I mean, I'll maybe even slightly generalize it a
little bit. So okay, so before we had sigma zero n, which was a two sphere minus n points, and
well, zero, you should never write down a number in a talk, you should always make it a parameter,
right? So zero now is going to be a G, and we're going to study sigma GN, which is a genus G surface
with n punctures. So here's kind of a pictorial definition. I've drawn this with three G handles
here and n punctures. And let me kind of rewrite the set G to the n minus mod simultaneous conjugation.
It's, I'm going to now call this x GN of capital G. And what is it? It's group homomorphisms from
the fundamental group of my space. So remember, this was just free on n minus one generators
before into G up to simultaneous conjugation. So this is the space we're interested in. If G is
zero, this is what we were studying before. Okay, now where does the group action come from?
Well, I think now it should be clear that there's a lot of symmetries of this situation. Anytime
you have a symmetry of the surface sigma GN, you get an automorphism of the set. Well, why if you
have an automorphism of the space, it acts on pi one. And so it'll act on representations of pi one.
Okay, so let me now make that precise. So I'm going to define a group mod GN, which generalizes
this group sigma one through sigma n minus one from before. What is it? Well, the maybe the
topologist way of defining it is you take orientation preserving homeomorphisms
of the space sigma GN. That's a topological group with the compact open topology. And you
take its component. Okay, so that thing has an outer action on the fundamental group of sigma
GN outer because these homeomorphisms don't have to preserve a base point. But nonetheless,
that induces an action of representations of pi one into G up to conjugation or esomorphism.
Okay, if you're an algebraic geometer, maybe another way of describing this group is
pi one of M GN. Okay, I've written a little squiggly equals sign here because actually
these things are only the same up to a finite index subgroup. But we're fine. We're interested
in finite orbits. So the difference won't matter. Okay, if G is zero, this is a very familiar thing.
It's what we saw before this group sigma one through sigma n minus one, which has another name.
It's the spherical braid group on n strands. And if n is zero, there's a really concrete
group theoretic description. It's the outer automorphism. Again, this is up to like an index
two, the outer automorphism group of the fundamental group of pi one of sigma GN,
which is some really explicit group with two G plus n generators in one relation.
Okay, so maybe this last equality or squiggly equals sign should tell you that in fact,
you can make this problem like a question of pure algebra. It's really just a question about
representations of some of pi one of us. Okay. And so just by the definition, so by the fact that
this group, which goes by the name of the mapping class group, has an action on the set,
we have some dynamical systems. So this group acts on sigma GN up to homotopy,
so it acts on pi one, so it acts on the space of representations of pi one.
And what we're interested in is studying the finite orbits of that action.
Okay, so are there any questions about this sort of the setup as a whole?
Okay, so let me tell you, I think the first time people really studied this. Okay, so the first
interest in case is where G is zero and n is four. So we have p one or the two sphere minus
four points. And then while the maybe the smallest interesting group is SL, or algebraic group is
SL two. You could ask, well, why not n is three? And in that case, it's because this group sigma
one through sigma n minus one is actually a finite group. It's actually s three. So finite orbits
are not interesting. Okay, so this is the first interesting case. And its study goes back to
maybe 1905 or something, when the panel of a six equation was discovered not by panel of a, but by
fuchs. So here's the panel of a six equation. I was too lazy to write it down. So I took a
screenshot from Wikipedia. And the amazing property that this has is that, and this is not
supposed to be obvious, is that finite orbits of this action, so mod zero four on x zero four
parentheses SL two are the same as algebraic solutions to the panel of a six equation. So if
you're interested in studying algebraic solutions to the panel of a six equation, and I'll tell you
maybe why people were interested in that shortly, then you want to understand this
dynamical system in this special case, where you have a genius zero surface with four punctures,
and you're looking at SL two local systems. Okay, so so what's the history of this question.
So in 1912 panel. So this is the first case I found the sort of question of period and print.
So so panel of a claimed that when you when you write down a solution to this equation,
maybe with some generosity assumption on the parameters, it's a new transcendental function,
it's a transcendental function, which could not be written in terms of classical functions.
And he gave some kind of argument, which I think by modern standards is not considered to be well
not the statement was not even precise by modern standards, let alone the argument.
But this this was made made precise, but the statement and the proof by umamura
conditional on a classification of finite orbits, or equivalently algebraic solutions.
Okay, so so if you want to make this statement that panel of a was trying to
to claim back in 1912 precise, you need some kind of classification like this.
And yeah, so maybe let me just remark. So I think this this claim of panel of a is it was
kind of to some to tell us a branch differential Galois theory, what the claim that the quintic
was insolvable by radicals was to honest Galois theory. So it was sort of some some basic claim
about transcendence of functions that motivated a huge amount of the development of differential
Galois theory over the 20th century. And it's at least at least sort of related to this classification
of finite orbits or algebraic solutions. Okay, so let me tell you what that classification looks
like. And again, so this is just in the case where you have a genius zero surface with four
punctures and are looking at SL two representations. There was a huge amount of work starting like
from when the panel of a six equation was discovered by fuchs and Picard and other people,
just writing down examples of algebraic solutions. And I think this kind of continued with fits and
starts over the course of the 20th century until I think kitchen really revived the subject by
by rediscovering some of the same algebraic solutions that that fuchs did. And then a lot of
work on this was done by Bolch and Andre of kid I have and Doran and other people. And then I think
the first real attempt at a classification was done by Dubrov and in the early 2000s.
And they gave a classification of finite orbits when when so right so you have you have four
two by two matrices and when when three of them are in the conjugacy class of one one zero one.
And when the fourth is is is diagonalizable. And okay, so this is actually an amazing paper.
So not only do they classify finite orbits, they actually like write down the corresponding
solutions to this algebraic differential equation. And if you like look in their their paper,
they write down like a three page algebraic solution. It's like a it's a really a monumental
work. Okay. And then so finally in 2014, so about about 110 years after this equation was first
written down, the algebraic solutions were completely classified by the Soviet tiki tiki.
So so maybe let me say a little bit about the nature of the classification. It's it's cool.
So first of all, it relied on some arithmetic input. So the sort of main ingredient is some kind
of effective money in Mumford for Tori.
Sorry, I won't say anything more about it than that. It was computer aided. So so the nature
of what they did is they they kind of figured out a way to reduce this to a finite computation.
It's not obviously a finite computation. And what they did is they showed that the list of
algebraic solutions other people had found was actually the complete list. Okay, so so what
does the list look like? So it turns out that there's four continuous families of algebraic
solutions. There's one infinite discrete family. And then there's there's 45 exceptional solutions.
Okay, so so the upshot here is it's kind of complicated. And in fact, I'm really actually
suppressing a lot of the complicatedness. And the reason why is that the Soviet tiki kind of
classify these algebraic solutions or equivalently finite orbits up to kind of
complicated equivalence relation. So really each of these each of these families kind of
represent several other families that are related to each other by some some moves one can make on
on finite orbits or algebraic solutions. Okay, so what's known so that this case of genus zero and
four punctures and SL2 is kind of in some sense understood although there's still some open
questions about it. So what's known beyond that? So the answer is very little. So let me kind of
give a brief overview. So in genus zero when n is bigger than four. So there's some sporadic
examples in the SL2 case, due to calligarous and mitzako and others. The case where where g is
just upper triangular two by two matrices. So the case where you're looking at kind of representations
which are not irreducible. This was classified by Cousin and Musard. And then it's also there's
some work by McMullen that's more or less equivalent. And then when and it's five there's a number of
computations by Tiki but it's kind of not exactly clear to me. I think it's plausible that he's found
all the solutions for SL2 or all the finite orbits for SL2 but it's not clear to me to what extent
there's a rigorous proof of that. And then when g is bigger when g is positive the genus is positive
and you're looking at representations into SL2. There's a classification by Bisouas, Gupta,
Ngin Wang. Okay, so let me tell you. So I think that's what was known maybe three years ago.
So let me tell you what was conjectured at the time. And then I'll tell you about some more
recent work on the subject. So before I start, can I tell you about the conjectures? Are there any
questions? Oh, Daniel, I had a question about the result of SL2. Yeah, yeah. So the continuous
family is like, is it known like what the dimension is for those? Oh, everything is known about them.
Yeah, that's I think is one of dimension three, you know, one of dimension two, maybe,
and three of dimension one, if I remember correctly. And also like, does it also
classify like the sizes of the orbits too? Yeah, really, really, if you look at this
paper of Lysopian tiki, it's great. They have like, Cayley graphs of all the orbits. It's really,
it's a beautiful piece of work. Oh yeah, thanks. And Daniel, I know you said my chance to ask about
the finite group case was earlier, but like, this classification, does it give you uniformly small
orbits for SL2FQ? Or does it not work like that? Like if you have? Yeah, it'll, it'll, it gives you
all the all, I mean, somehow just, yeah, yeah, it'll give you all the, all the uniformly small
orbits. Somehow there's like an ultra product trick you can do if you have a uniformly small
orbit, you can make a finite orbit in characteristics. And you don't really need
ultra products, you can also just use delta break geometry. Yeah, yeah, that's right.
Okay, so let me tell you what was conjectured. And sort of part of what got me thinking about
the subject. So I'm just going to limit myself to the case where G is GLR. So I think there were
kind of two conjectures about this story. So the first one was conjectured more or less independently,
I think, by Kissen and then by Peter Wang. And it's that if G is large compared to the
rank of our group here, so G is large compared to the dimension of their representations,
all finite orbits, well, so a finite orbit, remember, you have a representation of this group
into GLR, and you want to ask if it is finite orbit. And there's an obvious way to get a finite
orbit, which is if this representation has finite image. Okay, and the conjecture is that those
are all. So there's basically no interesting finite orbits when G is big, that that was the
compared to the dimension of the representation. So that that was conjecture. And then there was
another conjecture about this, which is that actually there are a lot of finite orbits. So
that the finite orbits are the risky dense in the space of representations. Okay, so here,
remember, this was the space of representations of this group into GLR, up to isomorphism, up to
controversy. And that has the structure of an algebraic variety. And if you have a set in it,
like the set of all finite orbits, you can ask if it's a risky dense. So you should think maybe
the first conjecture is that there's not a lot of finite orbits and the second is that there are
a lot. Maybe let me remark, I'll say a little bit more about what this conjecture came where this
conjecture came from, but they really conjectured something much stronger. So they conjectured
something like they were there were the set of representations of geometric origin was risky
dense. But that implies what I wrote down. Okay, so the the first remark, and maybe it's not so
surprising from what I've said is that these conjectures can't both be true, they contradict
each other. Okay, so it's maybe not totally obvious from what I what I've written, but
it should be plausible if the first conjecture says there's not a lot of finite orbits and the
second says that there's a lot. It's, it's, it's, there's at least some tension between them. Okay,
and it's, it's not totally trivial to see that the two contradictions can't both the two conjectures
can't both be true, but it's not so bad. Okay, so maybe let me say where some of the motivation
comes from. So I think for, so I think for for kissing the motivation for this question comes
from some ideas around the peak of a trip conjecture, which is kind of how I got interested in it as
well. So this these conjectures, they know Kurtz and Booter Wang. So they're interested in understanding
representations of geometric origin. So, so, so local systems would show up in the cosmology
of algebraic varieties. And there's a prediction that that representations of pi one of a variety
with finite Galois orbit have, have, have that nature that they, they come from, they come from
algebraic geometry. And so I view this, this sort of dynamical system is maybe a function field
analog of that, of that Galois orbit of that, that Galois theory question. And it really is,
I mean, if you think about like local systems on the generic curve, it really is the same question.
So it's studying kind of actions of the Galois group of the function field of MG on on local
systems on a curve. And maybe let me just make a remark, which is I don't know that this expectation
appears in the literature, but I think it's a plausible one, which is that so from this point
of view of like the relative front and major conjecture, so like studying Galois actions on,
on local systems, I think it's natural to expect that these finite orbits, maybe when the genus
of your curve is at least three are all, all of geometric origin.
So at least this is kind of compatible with some standard conjectures about
mapping class groups and rigid local systems. So I can say more about that after the topic,
if you're interested. Okay. So, so I think this was sort of the state of play as a two or
three years ago, there are these two conjectures, which I mean, I think they were thought about
by different communities of people, but they couldn't both be true. Okay, so let me,
well, I'll tell you some theorems now, you can see the next section at the bottom of the page
is called theorems. But before I do that, you should ask me some questions if you have any.
So when you say these contradict each other, is that for a fixed GN and R, and are there also
implications where one is false for certain parameters? Yes. So for fixed GN and R, as long
as R is at least one, they, sorry, at least two, they can't both be true. And for ours one, they
are both true, actually. So, so as long as ours is bigger than, as long as ours is bigger than
one, they can't be both true for the same GN. And what do you have to show? You have to show
that like representations with finite image are not the risky dense. That's not, it's a little
arguing with like Jordan's theorem about finite subgroups of GLR. Any other, any other questions?
Okay. So, so let me tell you, I kind of want to tell you two theorems. So one is about this
general situation where you have curves of arbitrary genus and representations of arbitrary
dimension and so on and so forth. And the other one is about a very special case. It's about
genus zero and two by two matrices. And so, so I'm going to just briefly talk about the general
situation. And then for the rest of the talk, I'll talk about what we were talking about the very
beginning of the talk. So, genus zero curves and two by two matrices. Okay. So, so the first theorem
here is joined with the error linesman. And it says the following, which is suppose G is at least
r squared. So we're interested in representations of a pi one of a genius G surface into GLR with
finite mapping classical orbit. And the theorem is that in this regime, you find it mapping
classical orbit, if and only if your representation has finite image.
Okay. So, so just to remark is you really need some hypothesis along these lines, like the
GSB big, if you don't assume G is big compared to r, there's lots and lots of really interesting
representations with infinite image and finite orbit. So after the talk, if you want, I can tell
you how to make some. Okay. So the corollary here is that the, the, this kind of results that you
conjecture is I mentioned before. So this conjecture of kissing and weighing that if G is big compared
to r, there aren't interesting finite orbits. So they all have finite image is true. And this
conjecture of a no curts and Buddha weighing is false. Maybe let me just say it's false, but
still really interesting, like in the sense that I think there's some, some reason to believe that
some variants of it should be true. And there's this really beautiful work of a no and young,
proving some kind of variant of it. And I think there's lots of other plausible,
sort of interesting and interesting subsets of these spaces XGN of GLR, which should be the
risky dense and have some properties that are related to being of geometric origin or related
to finite orbit. And so I'm not going to say anything about the proof of this theorem except
to say that it takes input from some hard mathematics. So, so, so the proof uses some
non-Abelian Hodge theory and then also input from arithmetic. So, so also input from the
Langlands program through the use of, you know, Groenig's work on read global systems.
So, and this is a, it's sort of a fun example of a result really in pure like surface topology,
which takes input from the language program. Okay, so that's, that's the first, the first
main result I wanted to talk about. Are there any questions about that before I, for the rest
of the talk, I want to talk about two by two matrices, but before I specialize to two by two
matrices. Okay, so, so now I want to go to sort of the original case where people were studying
this question, so the case of, and what, where we started in the beginning of the talk, so the
case of, and matrices where under this kind of swapping action, the, you get, you get finite
orbit. And just the case of two by two matrices, and so the theorem here is joined with Josh Lamb
and Aaron Lenzman, and it's a complete classification of tuples of matrices in gl2 to the n, here
there's of course a condition, namely the product is the identity.
With finite orbit under, under the, this mod zero n, so this group I described earlier,
turned by sigma one through sigma n minus one, so the mapping class group or the spherical
break group. And it's a complete classification under a condition, which is that one of these
matrices is infinite order. Okay, so, so that's not a theorem that's promising you a theorem, and
I'm going to tell, spend the rest of the talk kind of explaining the statement of the theorem.
Okay, so, so let me, let me give a precise statement. Okay, so first of all, I'm going to just
specialize to the case of SL2. This doesn't cost you anything, you can just multiply these matrices
by a constant, by constants to make them have determinant one, and that doesn't change the
fact that they have finite orbit. So, so, so I'm going to make a definition, I'm going to say what
it means for a tuple of matrices in SL2, whose product is the identity to be interesting. Okay,
so the first thing is what we're interested in tuples with finite orbit under this group.
So, so if you, if you start swapping them around, using the sort of funny modified swap
operation, you always get that where you started. I'm going to assume that the subgroup of SL2
that generated is a risky dense. So that's that assumption does cost you something,
but it costs you something that is already covered by other people's work. So the case where, where
the subgroup that generated is not those risky dense, these finite orbits have already been
classified by other people. So, so in the case, well, there's three possibilities, either they
live in a finite subgroup of SL2, and then the classification goes back to shorts who classified
finite subgroups of SL2 in the in the 19th century, or their upper triangular, and then the classification
is by Kuzan and Musar. And then there's only one other maximal proper risk is risky close
subgroup of SL2, which is the infinite dihedral group, and that case is classified by Tiki.
So, so we don't lose anything by making this, by making this assumption that they, they
generate a risky dense subgroup of SL2. And then I'm also going to assume that this
finite orbit doesn't move in a continuous family
of finite orbits.
And it's less obvious that it's easy to classify the continuous family, but, but basically there's
work of Corlett Simpson, which classifies non-rigid two dimensional local systems on
varieties. And DRR used this in 2013 to classify to classify the continuous families of finite
orbits, in this case of SL2 or GL2. And then there's one more assumption I want to make,
which is that none of these matrices are plus or minus the identity. Okay, and this doesn't
cost you anything. Why? Well, if one of the AIs is the identity, you can just throw it away,
it doesn't affect anything. If it's minus the identity, you can multiply it by minus one,
and multiply one of your other matrices by minus one, and then it becomes the identity.
So, and then you can throw it away. So, so in other words, if one of these matrices is a scalar
matrix, it's not interesting, you can reduce the finite orbit to one with fewer, fewer matrices.
Okay, so, so I'm going to make all these assumptions. And I'll say that a tuple of matrices
is interesting if it satisfies these assumptions. Okay, and our goal is to classify
interesting tuples. And I claim if you classify the interesting tuples, you classified all the
tuples. Okay, and here's the precise statement of the theorem, which is, is joined with, with Josh
and Aaron. Okay, so, so what does it say? So suppose we have an interesting tuple of matrices.
And, and moreover, so the real hypothesis here that that means we don't have a complete
classification of all finite orbits, is that we need one of these AIs to have infinite order.
Okay, then, then the classification has the following structure. It says there's some explicit
complex numbers, lambda one through lambda n, such that if you multiply these matrices lambda AI by
lambda I, then they have the following form. They're MC chi, I'll say what that means, of B one through
BN. So they're produced from some other tuple of matrices, B one through BN, where here these B
one through BN are N minus two by N minus two matrices. And the subgroup of GLN minus two they
generate is a finite complex reflection group. Okay, so in order for this theorem to make
sense, I have to explain two things to you. I have to say what is a finite complex reflection
group? And what is this MC chi? Okay, so, so let me do that. So first of all, MC chi we actually
already saw. So this is Katz's middle convolution operation from the beginning of the talk.
So we saw it in the sense that I told you it exists. And at the very end of the talk, I'll try to say
something about what it is. But I want to say it's just some explicit operation you can do on
matrices. I think if you look at Katz, it looks a little bit forbidding, but it's really something
you can plug into a computer and plug in some matrices and you get out some other matrices.
So I'll come back to that. But I want to say first, what is a finite complex reflection group? And
like in what sense is this really a classification of these finite orbits in the case of, of
and two by two matrices? Okay, so, so first of all, I have to tell you what is a pseudo reflection.
So a finite complex reflection group is a finite group generated by pseudo reflections. And what
is a pseudo reflection? It's a, it's a r by r matrix, which is invertible and has the property
that rank of B minus the identity is one. So in other words, it fixes a hyperplane.
It's a pseudo reflection rather than reflection, because it might not have order two might not
the non non unit eigenvalue might not be minus one. Okay, now what's a finite complex reflection
group? Well, it's a subgroup of the general linear group. And it has to satisfy two properties.
So first of all, it has to be finite. And second of all, it has to be generated by these pseudo
reflections. Okay, so in fact, the theorem is much more precise than this. So, so really what
you get is that n minus one of these matrices are actually pseudo reflections. And since these
these matrices multiply to the identity that tells you that the group they generate is, is generated
by pseudo reflections. Okay, so, so in what sense is this really a classification? So I've maybe
I've related classifying these finite orbits to classifying tuples of matrices satisfying some
arcane collection of properties. So, okay, you might reasonably complain, well, now you've made
the problem harder, you know, here, these matrices that we started with two by two matrices, and now
we get n minus two by n minus two matrices, like how, how have we made any progress? And the reason
we made progress is that actually these finite complex reflection groups were classified by
Shepard and Todd in the, in 1956. So, so we actually know essentially everything about finite
complex reflection groups. Let me tell you what they look like. So there's, there's one infinite
family, which usually goes by the name gmpn, and it lives inside of glnc. And here I've written down
a formula for I guess gm1n, but these groups are very simple that you basically just take permutation
matrices. And instead of ones, you put m throats of unity. And so that that's what gm1n is, it's
permutation matrices where instead of ones you m throats of unity, and then gmpn is some index
p subgroup of that. So that's the infinite family. And then there's there's 34 exceptional finite
complex reflection groups. And some of them are probably familiar. So I, the automorphism group
of the icosahedron is one, the vial group of the, of the root system E8 is another one, the
automorphism group of the 600 cell, which is some four dimensional polytope is another one,
and so on and so forth. Some of them are probably less familiar. So there's, there's a group
written called w of k6, which lives in gl6 and has something like 100 million elements,
which I find a little bit more intimidating. Okay, so, so there's a classification is the
upshot here. So, so maybe just to give you the sense that this kind of classification of finite
orbits is actually useful, you can use it to get really kind of concrete info. So here's I think
the, the, the most basic statement I know. So, so suppose we have a, a collection of these two
by two matrices with finite orbit satisfying the other list of hypotheses I mentioned above,
and also one of them has infinite order. So, so the sort of non non trivial that the sort of
interesting hypothesis. So then the statement is that is actually at most six of the matrices.
Okay, so there's not, it says that there actually wasn't that much left to find. And this is, this
is sure. So there are examples with six matrices. Maybe let me just say a word about how one deduces
this corollary from the classification. So, so I don't know a direct proof of this corollary,
like the way we prove this corollary is we first show that these finite orbits that we were studying
are related by middle convolution to finite complex reflection groups. And then we use the
classification of finite complex reflection groups to say that there are, there's sort of
no examples when, when, when you have more than six matrices. So it's a really indirect argument.
Okay, so I, in the next five minutes, I want to give you an idea of what, what middle convolution
is. So, so what is this operation MC chi that appears in the statement. So, so before I do that,
are there any questions? Okay. So what's middle convolution. Okay, so, so we're trying to understand
some local systems on S two minus some points, which I'm going to view as P one minus D. And
I'm going to make the harmless assumption just for notation that infinity is a point of D. So,
infinity is one of our punctures, you can always do that just by, by relabeling,
reparameterizing P one. Okay, so here's some complicated diagram, which is supposed to explain
what middle convolution is. So I'm going to give you a sort of formal definition and then I'll say
what it really means. Okay, so, so what are the objects in this diagram. So you take x cross x
minus the diagonal. So that's some open inside of P one cross P one, it maps to x. It includes
into P one cross x. And then you can also take the other projection to x. And then there's one
more player in this diagram, which is that, well, given an element of x cross a point of x cross x,
so you can think of that as given by two numbers. Those numbers aren't equal because I've deleted
the diagonal, and neither of them are infinity, because I've deleted infinity. Then I can send
them to a one minus the origin just by sending x comma y to x minus y. And that's well defined
because I deleted the diagonal and I deleted the divisors P one cross infinity and infinity cross
P one. Okay, so what is middle convolution. So there was a parameter chi, which is going to be a
rank one local system on a one minus the origin. That's just a representation of pi one of a one
minus the origin, which is Z. So it's just a number and a local system on X. Okay, so what is
MC chi of this local system on X. It's a new local system on X, which has the following form.
It's R one pi two lower star of J lower star of pi one upper star V, tensored with alpha
upper star chi. Okay, so that's kind of complicated. Let me say what it actually means in the case we
care about. So the case we care about is the special case where V has finite
monodermy group G. And you're supposed to think it's a finite complex reflection. So here we're
applying it to the local system with monodermy matrices B one through BN. And I told you it's
a finite complex reflection group. And I want to tell you what is the output of that procedure.
And it's the following thing. So V has some finite monodermy group G think the finite
complex reflection group. And chi is some local system, which on a one minus the origin with
the property that it's eight powers trivial. So in other words, the if you take the loop around
a one minus the around zero and a one minus the origin, the monodermy is given by an eighth root
of unity. So then the middle convolution has the following property. There exists some family of
curves y over X, whose fiber over a point little x and x. So here, let me pick a little x and x and
tell you what the fiber y sub X is. It's a cover of P one with Galois group.
G times Z mod AZ where G is our finite complex reflection group and A is the order
of our rank one local system. And it's branched over D our deleted points and also this moving
point X. So what is middle convolution? It's, it's, it's a specific specific piece of the
comology of this family of curves. Okay, so what we've done is produced out of a finite group
and a number a some family of curves, or that's what middle convolution does. And then you pick
out an appropriate piece of the comology of the family of curves. And that's the middle convolution
of V. Okay, so, so let me just finish by telling you what I view is the upshot of this. So, so
here we have some kind of classification of finite orbits, when we have n two by two matrices.
And the upshot is that all those finite orbits have kind of a good geometric explanation. So they
have a good geometric explanation. So not only as in cats are they have geometric origin, but
they're there of geometric origin in a way that I find to be like particularly clean and beautiful.
So they come from covers of P one, whose Galois group is a finite complex reflection.
And I think that's all I wanted to say.
Thanks, Daniel. Does anyone have any questions?
Why is this middle convolution? Why is it middle? And I think it's so
right. So when cats describes this operation, I mean, I kind of give even this definition is
like not exactly what cats wrote, it's equivalent. But cats describes it in terms of some perverse
sheaves. So there's a this J lower star is a middle extension. I think that's, that's, that's
where it comes from, I think. Did you also say it changes rank? Yeah, yeah, there's a really fun
thing. So, sorry, can you slow down and explain how the rank changed? Yeah, so it's kind of fun,
right. So in cats is in cats is construction when he's studying rigid local systems, it decreases
the rank, right. So you start with rank, whatever, and then you keep going until you hit one. So in
our situation, it's actually quite different. And I think this is maybe one of the most fun
things about the classification. So I appreciate the question. So here we started with some,
some rank two local system. And then the output was a rank n minus two local system. So it increased
the rank, but it made it simpler in another way. So you start with infinite or even risky dense
monotromy, and you end up with something with finite monotromy. And so, you know, very special
kind of finite monotromy where you can totally understand. So yeah, so, so, so it's kind of fun.
So when you four two by two matrices, so the Penelope six case, then n minus two is two.
And so you go from two by two matrices to two by two matrices. And in that case, it was sort of a
very famous symmetry of the Penelope six equation called the Okamoto transform. But when you add
more points, it actually makes the local systems bigger. So I think maybe why people miss this.
And but it still makes them simpler, kind of interesting and understandable way.
But sorry, so now I just want to say that explicit description, you said r pi to lowest r
pi whole back tensor, I just want to see how it changes rank. Can you just add some numbers for
me? It's kind of complicated. I would have complicated. Yeah, I mean, we can do it. It's
just like the, the, you know, computation of the oil. But yeah, I say, go from rank what to rank
what, if you just tell me the numbers, I'll try to figure out. So we say has rank n. And this total
thing has ranked n minus two, where n is the n is the number of points of d d. Okay. All right.
Yeah. So I mean, it's not actually hard to figure out that the only slightly complicated
thing is this j lower star, which means the number of like the multiplicity of the eigenvalue one
in the local monitor me shows up. Okay, awesome. Thank you. Yeah, no problem.
Maybe I'll just mention that there was also a spin off of middle convolution some years ago,
in the case of finite groups where people started with rigid triples, because those are not too
hard to find. And then they were able to use that variant construction to get rigid tuples
with that are more than triples. And so that let people get realized groups as Galois groups using
rigidity in ways they couldn't before, because it was too hard to find examples where it wasn't
just a triple. And so this was big around 20 years ago, seems to have petered out though.
Do you know what, what is this? What is the reference here? Yeah, well, let me throw out the
name Michael Detweiler. He and others were doing things like that around that. And I actually
haven't been hearing about it since then. So I don't know if there's been any more recent work
since the flurry of activity around that. Yeah, so I learned a lot about this middle convolution
stuff from these papers of death, violence, writer. So so yeah, that if you want a place to look,
I mean, Katz's book is amazing. But but, you know, death, violence, writer have some right,
right, those two, yes, especially, and they work with some other people to both line and others.
But yes. Great, let's thank Daniel again.
And our next talk is December 12th with Andrew Obis.
