Hello, good morning, everybody. It is my great pleasure to present a speaker on site.
One of you. Unfortunately, we have more of you here on site.
Mihael Eckstein is off. Thank you. Yes, of course. Thank you so much. Yes.
So, so hello again, and it is my great pleasure to introduce Mihael Eckstein. He's one of our local speakers we are very happy to have him around.
He got his PhD in 2014 from Tagelonian University, where he is now an associate professor in the physics department but your PhD was in mathematics right.
But then he had an extended romance with his National Quantum Information Center at the University of Gdańsk.
So he will be very well acquainted with the talk of art record I suppose in a few tomorrow actually.
And he received a number of interesting awards from the Ministry of Education and Science.
These are very hard to get awards. So, for these achievements.
He also wrote a book with Bruno Jochum spectral action in non-competitive geometry is quite impressive for a person with a PhD in 2014.
I haven't read this book I admit but it's something you should look at.
And one thing which is very outstanding in Mihael's life is his efforts in popularization of science. I'm really impressed that in particular among many other efforts like writing articles and so on.
He has lots of popular lectures on YouTube, and the number of views is spectacular it's over half a million.
Okay, of views of his public popular lectures on YouTube. So today I have a chance to double this number, which we wish you very much.
Mihael Eckstein and it will be about going from physics to non-competitive geometry in the back so it's like the title of one of these Hobbit movies, right?
Then back again, right? Yes.
Okay, so I will start sharing the screen.
And voila, here we go.
Okay.
Well, thank you very much. Thank you for this very nice introduction.
I'd like to thank the organizers for inviting me here. It's a great honor to give a lecture here.
So I was asked to tell you about non-competitive geometry and physics and to do it in 60 minutes.
So I'll do my best, but let me just make two disclaimers.
So non-competitive geometry is an advanced domain of mathematics, so you really need to know well the differential geometry and functional analysis.
Okay, so what I can give you in 60 minutes is just some kind of general idea what it's all about, why it's interesting.
And then second thing you need to know is about physics that the methodology of physics is quite different than the one from mathematics.
And physics is much more pragmatic. So if you meet an average physicist say at CERN, the only thing he or she would care are the numbers, the numbers they can measure in an experiment.
They don't care about structures, they don't care about matrices or whatever, they just need a number that you need to measure.
And that said, the history of science shows you a spectacular interplay between physics and mathematics and the inspirations that go both ways.
Quantum mechanics inspired the development of operator algebra's functional analysis and many auxiliary fields.
And on the other hand, if it had not been for Riemann and his brilliant idea of a curved geometry, then Einstein could not have written his equations.
So, that's my idea of this talk, just to give you an example the example of non commutative geometry of how this interplay between physics and mathematics works in practice.
All right, so let's get started.
Okay.
Yeah, let me start with a slogan that physics is geometry.
And that's not even my claim that's actually plateau, and plateau claim is actually even stronger. He says that the knowledge of which geometry aims is the knowledge of the eternal.
And that's not even physics is metaphysics, but people took it quite seriously and is an excerpt from Johannes Kepler's book, showing the platonic solids in connection to physics.
Right.
Now we're in 21st century and people still take it seriously and here's the proof.
The books which treat about geometry and physics, particularly recommend the book of Roger Penrose.
If you're interested in mathematics you should read this book if you're more interested in physics than you should read this book if you're interested in neither you should read this book anyway.
Because it's it's really brilliant and it shows you a spectacular picture of this interplay between physics and mathematics.
Okay, and otherwise you have you have obviously general relativity you have, you have quantum information you have quantum theory you have many body physics.
A lot of different, different subjects.
Okay, but then you should ask, Well, okay, so physics is geometry but what is geometry then.
So, for me at for this lecture, geometry means remanian geometry.
Roughly you can say that you have three levels of structures. First is a topological level, which tells you if your objects has any hole in it or not.
Then you can put a smooth structure on it. And then you will see there are any cracks on the picture or not.
And then eventually you have a metric structure which allows you to determine the shapes and measure distances.
And then physicists only care about the metric structure, because this is something they can measure in an experiment. Okay.
Okay, so now, one slide course of remanian geometry.
So please forgive me if you don't know remanian geometry and just try to sell you the main idea. The main idea is that a manifold is an object which is locally looks like an euclidean space, but globally it need not be so.
Typically, you would need many patches charts to map it.
Okay, so you cover your manifold with coordinate charts, and then you need some transition functions between these, these two charts.
And while depending on what you want, you can just consider them to be continuous functions, or you want them to be smooth functions as you're doing in smooth geometry.
Okay, so this gives you the, so these patches together they form an atlas and there's a maximum atlas, and if there's a maximum smooth atlas you have a smooth manifold.
Okay, the second important feature is a tangent space so if you have a manifold then at any point of this manifold, you can have a tangent space, which is just a homomorphic to Rn.
These are just vectors in this point and then, then you can equip your manifold with the with many different structures with tensors in particular, and particularly interesting tensor is a metric tensor, which is some billionaire symmetric non degenerate form,
which, as you see is depend, it's defined on a tangent space, and it depends on your point x so, typically it would vary from one point to another.
Okay, and if you have a metric tensor, you can measure distances that's what is assist want and that's what this is do.
So if you have two points, you look for curves which link these two points.
Okay, with a sufficiently smooth or at least differentiable.
And then you compute its tangent vector every point, compute this, this integral.
That's the length of the curve and then you take the infimum overall possible curves, and this gives you the distance that's the geodesic distance.
Okay.
Now back to physics.
Why manifolds are nice because our universe is actually a manifold.
Okay, so Einstein equations are equations for the metric tensor.
Okay, so the assumption the big assumption is that, well, our entire universe is is a manifold it's a smooth remanian manifold.
Yeah, with a certain metric tensor and our only goal is to determine this metric tensor from empirical data from from measuring of cosmic microwave background and stuff like that.
Okay, and that's how the expanding universe arises.
One important thing here is that the universe is not really a remanian manifold it's a pseudo remanian manifold because it's not a space, it's a space time, which means that this metric is not really a metric because it's not positive definite.
But it has a signature with one minus and three plus or one plus three minus that's equivalent.
And this leads to a causal structure. So, well you have a speed of light so the limiting speed which which tells you that, well, there is a limiting speed in the universe and this changes a lot.
But otherwise that's that's the same structure I mean you can, you can do pseudo remanian geometry, almost as if you did with the with the usual remanian geometry.
So, so that's the big word mic micro scale.
Now what happens at microscopic scales. Well, it is quite different there.
Firstly, because quantum particles, well, they do not have definite trajectories well at least not always. And that's a, that's a famous double slit experiment so if you put just one button to a slit, it will go both to both of these holes in a sense
to neither of these holes in another sense, if you wish, but it's not like goes to one way or another.
And you will only know when you measure it at the end on the screen so a single photon will just give you one dot here.
But if you put many of them, then they will interfere and you will get this famous interference ranges.
This is a non classical effect. Okay, so this is the first problem you don't have trajectories so well, you cannot really think in terms of curves on a universe manifold.
And the second problem is the existence of complementary variables.
In terms of the sense, the position and momentum of the particle, they are complementary variables in terms of mathematics they do not commute, which in terms of physics means that they don't have a common probability distribution.
And that's exactly the statement of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, saying that, well you can measure position as accurately as you want, and the same goes for momentum.
But if you want to measure both simultaneously, then there is a bound and this bond is given by the, by the plan constant.
Okay.
And, yeah.
Well,
as you see if you don't have trajectories. Well, we don't have the usual observable so what do we have. Well, first of all, we have vectors in a Hilbert space where you have a quantum system, which is, let's say in a pure state.
It's described by a vector in a Hilbert space so Adam told you about Hilbert spaces.
So, so then if you want to measure something you need to look for an operator on this Hilbert space of quantum states, a self adjoint operator because self adjoint operators have real spectra.
And while in an experiment you always measure real numbers at the end.
You can debate whether they are real or maybe distraction or so but it's not a complex number anyway.
So you need to deal with self adjoint operators.
Okay, so as you see it's this, it is very different from, let's say from the classical word from Riemannian geometry trajectories, clouds of dust stuff like that.
Okay, so the natural language for quantum mechanics is that of algebras.
Well, I believe that Francesca will tell you more about operator algebras on Friday. So I will just quickly flesh through.
So an algebra is just a complex vector space so I will consider algebras over complex numbers you can consider it over any field, but yeah complex numbers are are nice and if you don't believe me then go to Roger spend those book.
So you have a vector space then you have a equip it with a multiplication.
You equip it with an evolution. Okay, which needs to be compatible with the duplication by scholars and this multiplication in the algebra.
And then you have a complete norm on it. Okay.
And that's a little bit banach algebra.
And for sister algebras we have an additional property, which is this one. Okay.
So we will mostly focus on so called unit all sister algebras so just algebras would have a you, you can do something more general without a unit.
There's always an old approximate unit but you tell algebras are nice. So let's stick to them.
Okay, so this is quite abstract, but then comes girlfriend and I mark tells us that actually every sister algebra.
So this is a method to calyster isomorphic to some close about your brow bounded operators on some Hilbert space.
Okay, so if you know bounded operators on Hilbert space well you know sister algebras.
And what's very nice is that this proof is constructive.
So we have an explicit construction that's called the belt on my mark signal construction, which tells you, well how to do it. Okay, have an abstract sister algebra.
So this is essentially about the theory of representation of sister algebras you represent them on a Hilbert space. Okay.
Example, simple example the matrix algebra.
You just take matrices of your favorite dimension with a standard matrix multiplication.
And you define the evolution to be the conjugate and transpose of a matrix.
And then you put a, put a supremum normal on this. So that's the, you see that's just the operator norm.
On the algebra of matrices, the one that Adam showed you days ago, and you can re express it in terms of a square root of the maximal singular value of x.
Okay, and this is a nice finite dimensional sister algebra.
And in fact you can show that's the better bird theorem that any finite dimensional sister algebra arises from direct product of matrix algebras.
Sorry, there are some, sorry, there are some, yeah.
Okay, and well matrices are nice for instance for quantum information that's that's the field I have working right now.
So if you just take the simplest example of two by two matrices, well they define for you the spin algebra.
And the spin of a single particle is a, it's a qubit so that's the, that's like a quantum version of the bit through the element, the elementary quantum information.
So every qubit is a normalized vector in situ.
And this you can represent it as a point on a sphere. So that's sometimes called the block sphere.
Okay, and then, so as you see you have many more options for a qubit than a bit for a bit you just have zero and one for a qubit you have the whole sphere.
Okay, and then you can take any observable so any, any Hermitian matrix two by two matrix, then you can make a measurement and then you get some expectation values etc etc.
So really I have a question. So this notion of measurement is just kind of black box. Yes, it's not defined mathematically. Yes.
What is the precise value of this measurement. Yes.
Well, the value of the measurement.
You have an observable you have a state that and then what what you are given is only the probability distribution not the precise outcome of this measurement.
Exactly. So that's, that's the phrase I was going to read so that, okay, you just consider that an effect so an operator which is in zero and one so that has only zero and one as as simple eigenvalues.
So you will get one with probability with this probability. So that's just the expectation value of this observable this affecting in this state.
And of course it has zero with a with one minus p.
Okay, so, so in other words, it's impossible to define the measurement as a map from observables times states as to two real numbers as an actual map you only know the probability that some outcome would.
Yes, yes.
More precisely you can say that any observable it has some spectrum. And these are the possible outcomes of your measurement. So the numbers that you would register at the measurement at the apparatus.
And then any state defines a probability measure on the spectrum of this observable.
Okay, thank you.
So, sometimes I mean here depends if you choose a an axis which is aligned with your state, like, exactly aligned with your state then you will get the same results with certain.
But it's very specific in typical you will get some, some random numbers and that's that's quantum randomness.
So, another example which is, well, hopefully a motivating example, saying that well you need to go to sister algebras and then maybe you can get back to spaces and, and maybe geometry.
So, if you have any compact house door space, you can define functions on it, say complex valued with a point wise multiplication and evolution by complex conjugation and the supremum norm, then this is a commutative sister algebra.
Okay, and in fact, yes.
You have to use a microphone to ask a question.
Okay, let me repeat. Why do we assume that the space and is compact. Does it have to do with the supremum norm.
Obviously the supremum would work but it's just the question of the existence of unity if you have a, you have a compact space then, then there is a unity in your sister algebra I this space is only locally compact and there is no unit but still you can,
it's, it's, it's actually here in the gulf on duality because gulf on duality tells you that this is again a two way street so.
So that every commutative sister algebra arises in this way from some.
So maybe this compact is due to the fact that this supremum is finite yes if you don't assume your function to vanish at infinity then you don't have, you cannot guarantee that this supremum would be finite.
But for compact it is for granted.
Yeah, but for locally compacts you can, you can take functions which vanish at infinity.
Okay, so they, they are arbitrary small outside of compact sets and then you can, you can do as usual with the supremum, and it's still a nice sister algebra.
It just doesn't have a unit but otherwise it's, it works just fine. This got fun duality is a really really powerful tool it's well you can you can even define it in terms of equivalence of categories stuff like that.
I also have the question if I may ask.
Go ahead.
And regarding this point of compactness of the of the house of space.
Isn't this related to the case that you are working actually with the spectrum and the spectrum becomes a compact space.
Yes, actually this is the, I mean the spectrum of the algebra I mean, yes, yes, yes, actually this the space that am that arises here in golf and duality that's precisely the spectrum of the algebra.
And that's a compact set.
Yeah. Yeah. So so when you're working with this and then then it has to become. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay, okay. Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay, maybe we have if you allow me just a very quick comment.
Locally compact and compact house of space is not so extremely different in the sense that you have a topological procedure of say one point compactification.
So if you want one of the definitions locally compact house of space is how it behaves with respect to one point compactification, and on the algebraic side, you have minimal unitization so these are completely analogous procedures.
And, in fact, going from the Gelfand Neymar with duality theorem for compact house of space is to, to, to locally compact that's not the big deal.
Although of course doing analysis on non compact spaces is much harder than on compact spaces everybody knows this, but conceptual speaking these locally compact versus compact house of spaces are not so drastically different they have the same kind of animal.
And, and I would be more willing to say that we have an anti equivalence and equivalence between compact house of space is an unit of commutative sister algebras because the function is contra variant.
Okay.
Well, well for for physics we actually would prefer to be with the locally compact spaces because our universe as far as we can tell is not compact units.
It's, it's, it's only locally compact.
And that's a theorem actually by girl thing that if you have a compact space time, it always contains a closed causal curve.
So,
So, right now we're just at the topological level so the first step, okay, we want to do geometry eventually.
So first thing that we need is some kind of smooth structure.
Now the smooth functions on the manifold.
They do not form a sister algebra because this is not complete so the sequence of smooth functions can converge to a continuous function only.
But these guys are dancing in the sister algebra continuous function so that's, that's good enough.
There's, there's more structure here there's some locally convex topology and that's the structure of pre sister algebra but it's sufficient to know that they are, they are dense.
All right. So, now we are ready to finally go to non primitive geometry.
And so let me present you the notion of a spectral triple developed by this gentleman along con, who got his fields metal, but not for non competitive geometry he got it for classification of on Neumann Alderbrust.
I even though it's a fields metal the guy on this metal is Archimedes not fields. Yes, yes, that's right. That's right.
Yeah, and con is this guy on the left.
Just to make sure.
Okay, so, as you can easily guess a spectral triple consists of three elements.
Typically, so we have a unit or star algebra, you can take it to be a pre sister algebra, typically you do but, well, as long as you have a place for representation on the Hilbert space on a separable Hilbert space.
Then it's, it's good enough.
And once you have a pre sister algebra which is dancing a sister algebra.
This representation is always guaranteed because you have the DNS construction so such a space always exist and you can represent these breakers.
Now the pivotal element is the is this operator D which is typically an unbounded self a joint operator on the Hilbert space.
There's two crucial features. The first one is that if you take a commutator with a representation of any element of the algebra.
Then this operator was here this should extend to a bounded operator. Okay, this guy is unbounded it has some domain. So if you just send with you to with the with the elements of the algebra.
That's usually just just an unbounded operator but the assumption is that these guys always extend to bounded operators.
Okay, so an intuitive level, you can think if, if your elements of the algebra, their functions, this guy acts as a differential.
The commutator is just the differential of your element. Okay, so we want the differential to be the finite so this is like a smooth element of this algebra.
Differentiable.
The second condition is the compactness of the resolvent. So this means that if you take an inverse this guy might have a kernel or not but if it does you need to take not an inverse but the, but the resolvent means that this guy is a compact operator.
My ask is very naive, simple, I think a question of this compactness of the resolvent assumption for a Hilbert space which is infinite dimensional. Does it entail that D must be unbounded.
Does it entail that D must be unbounded.
Yes, I think so because it's, yeah, because I mean compact operator.
It has a discrete spectrum with the only accumulation point at zero. So if you take the inverse of it, you have the accumulation point at infinity.
Yes, unless you are a finite dimensional that must be unbounded. Yes, that's because you don't think that's possible unbounded it was hinting that oh well it's typically bounded sometimes might be unbounded no it's the other way around it's typically.
Yes, it's typically unbounded if your Hilbert space is between dimensional it's typically unbounded but if it's finite dimensional well then you don't really have a choice it's just a matrix again.
Okay, so that's, that's the core that's the basis on which you, which you build your, your theory and then you have some more technical assumptions because this is only differentiability you then meet some more commutators which tell you that your elements are really smooth elements.
I think that you can argue also that if they do would be bounded the D minus lambda identity also would be bounded and then if you multiply by this operator which is compact you will get a compact operator since compact operators for an ideal, and therefore you get that identity is compact which is not possible.
Unless you're a Hilbert space is finite dimensional.
Yeah.
That's yet another way to say that that's right.
There is some notion of dimension so you have spaces which are finite dimensional you can go to infinite dimension. Also, if you want, and you can put more structure here so called reality structure, projective models, etc, etc.
Okay, but so let's let me now make an internet so saying something more about where what is this the operator where does it come from.
Well, again, it comes from physics.
So, there's a fundamental dynamical equation of quantum mechanics which is for the Schrodinger equation. So that's the equation for a for a free massive particle with mass m.
Okay, and the problem with this equation is that it is non relativistic.
And I think that people realized quite quickly that, well, okay. Well, if you make a Lawrence transformation that's not going to be invariant so that's bad for the tier.
So they tried to write down an equation which would be Lawrence invariance, the first guess with the blind Gordon equation, which is a second order question with this dull umbered operator here.
It's a wave equation with the mass here modified wave equation, which is nice but it has some problems with the probabilistic interpretation because if you define the density of probability it's not always positive or it is not always Lawrence invariance so that was not quite satisfactory.
So apparently Dirac was the first to write down this equation but immediately he was not satisfied with it so he went and constructed his own equation.
So what Dirac did was just to take a square root of this operator.
And then he realized that well okay if I want to take a square root of this operator the operator that I'm going to get cannot be a scholar, but I need to enlarge my space, and this is how spinners arise.
Okay so in four space time dimensions, you need four gamma matrices for Dirac matrices which are four by four matrices, and which satisfy this nice anti commutation relation with the Minkowski metric here.
And well the Dirac equation is well that was absolutely a genius idea that explained the spectrum of the hydrogen atom.
And while it was gave birth to quantum theory and it was really a major breakthrough in physics.
And at the same time, it led to a major breakthrough in mathematics.
So this Dirac equation you can write it, well this was for Minkowski space time, as you can write it on any spin manifold which well a spin manifold is, well, almost all orientable manifolds are spin sometimes there are some topological obstructions.
There's something called the speed structure.
And as long as you have it you can write down your Dirac equation and the operator that sits here that's called the Dirac operator. Okay, and that's, that's the inspiration for, or that was the inspiration for this the operator inspector.
Okay, and in fact, if you just take a smooth compact spin remanian manifold, you take smooth functions on it.
And you have your spinners over this manifold, you take square integrable sections of spinners which form a nice Hilbert space, and you take this Dirac operator so the Dirac operator from this generalized Dirac equation, then you are going to get a commutative
and then that's a, that's a fundamental result by Kohn which, well it took him some 12 years to get the final version. As far as I know the series that the first version was, well there were some controversies around it so Kohn worked really hard.
And after 12 years he published the final version with a proof which is something like 70 pages long or so.
Well, historically speaking I remember that it was Jova really who worked on this theorem for a very long time, and they almost got it but there was a gap, there was one step missing, and allow him to finish it but it's, he says himself that it's one of the hardest theorem that he ever worked on.
Yeah, let's, let's certainly correct.
I think that you need some extra assumption, yes, so if you are saying that your spectra triple is commutative it does not only mean that A is commutative but the whole bunch of assumptions, dimensions with modules.
Yes, yes, yes, yes, that's right there are a lot of technical assumptions which I don't think here there's this smoothness condition the finite dimensionality piece of mobility it's stuff like that so it's, yeah.
There are a lot of assumptions here.
But, yeah, as long as you do it you can prove that it's, it's a two way street.
And if I remember correctly the toughest part was to distinguish between orbit fault and manifolds.
Because of course you have got the numbers you know but it's compact house of space, but is the manifold and and and how to axiomatize it using functional analysis that it's manifold not an orbital, not a pillow with four corners for instance.
Right, that's right.
Okay, so let me just give you three glimpses of this, how this works in practice.
So first thing is that this guy this direct operators as a nice self a joint operator it has a discrete spectrum which is unbounded so it grows to infinity.
And then we have the eigenvalues and the number of eigenvalues which are smaller than a given lambda, then there's a nice theorem by by which tells you that this grows as lambda the power and where and is the dimension of the underlying money.
And then recover the dimension of the underlying manifold just by looking at the spectrum of, of your direct operator. Okay, and then what is more you get the volume, which comes here, and that's why you need compact spaces and some coefficients.
Well, you can also say that this dirac operator acts as a kind of the derivative to compute the commutator you get something like this. Well, that's the summation over this index view.
And the norm of it is just the supremum rate, the supremum rate.
And what is more, you can actually recover the geodesic distance. That's the cons distance formula.
If you want to take a supremum overall functions, which would have this gradient bounded. Then this gives you precisely the geodesic distance.
So, to me, it's a very powerful result because it shows you that really you can, you can do geometry on this dual level on the algebra of functions.
What else. Well, you have finite spectral triples where, well, you just take your favorite matrix algebra, you represent it on a, on a Hilbert space on a finite dimensional give birth space and then you take any permission matrix,
which is a good dirac operator, and of course it's bounded because it's finite dimension.
Well, you can combine the two things and go almost commutative. And these guys are very important for physics, which we shall see in a moment.
So don't care about this. Don't worry about this gamma pipe that's the priority operator just think of it in terms of a product geometry.
And it's almost commutative because the commutative part is infinite dimensional and non-commitative part is finite dimensional.
So this one is much bigger. That's why it's called almost.
And there is much more to that.
You can have spectral triples on graphs, on practicals, some non-houselor spaces, you have isospectral deformation on commutative torii, you have quantum spheres, which relate to quantum groups, et cetera, et cetera.
So there's, there's a lot of that.
But, okay, let's switch back to physics again.
In the 1980s century, and, well, we have a famous Pierre-Louis Mopertouille, claimed that nature is thrifty in all its actions, or otherwise that nature is lazy.
And it always, the physics works in a way so that the system uses the least, well, it minimizes some quantity, okay, not necessarily energy, but some quantity.
It's an action.
They actually apparently Euler had the same idea in the very same year and apparently Leibniz wrote the idea 30 years before.
But, well, it was just in the letter so the credit goes to Mopertouille anyway.
The basic idea is that, well, if you have just a classical particles, a bunch of particles and they follow some trajectories.
Then you have a, you can write the Lagrange function, which depends on this trajectory and its derivative and it can depend explicitly on time.
Then you can write down the action functional, which is this integral from some initial time to final time.
And then you say, okay, I want my action to be stationary.
So it's slightly more general than the original idea, it need not be the least action, it can be the maximum action or the stationary action action.
And from this you derive the Euler Lagrange equations by variational calculus. Okay, so this gives you the equation of motion.
This is really probably one of the most powerful laws of physics, if you wish, and it caused the sort of shift of paradigm in doing physics because before that you need to need to write down the equation for system, like in classical mechanics.
And now you can just deal with action as long as you have the action, you can, you can write down the equations and it's actually much easier to write down an action because, well, you have symmetries and they are much better visible at the level of the action that at the level of the equation.
Okay.
So that was really a breakthrough and the primary interest was in classical mechanics but then it expanded to almost all domains of physics and use it in statistical physics, quantum mechanics, quantum theory that's at the basis of the famous path integral
formalism by Feynman and cosmology etc.
And in particular, it's of use in particular physics.
Now,
that is the Lagrangian of the standard model of particle physics.
It's beautiful, isn't it.
That's a typical exam question, write it down.
Yes, yes, yes, that's, yeah, yeah.
So it's beautiful, isn't it.
Now, of course, it's not it's.
It's a nightmare, right.
So, there are two problems. First problem is that, well, you would like to modify it somehow or understand it better but it's heavily protected by symmetries.
So, although it is very sound, it is.
It's not too very appealing, but still it's protected by gauge symmetries Lawrence invariance and and quantum theory renormalization stuff, which means that there's some anomaly which needs to cancel etc etc.
It's really constrained and it's not easy to modify it in a way to not to spoil the theory to modify it consistent.
For me there's a second problem I mean which are we missing something here because if you look at this formula you see well, there should be some structure behind it maybe or
what is this sound.
Anyway,
is there any structure behind the standard model as it is behind this nicely formula.
Question.
All right, and then came Ali Chamsen and Aloncon in 1987 and they said that well, the physical action should only depend upon the spectrum of your operator D.
Which, well, that's that's a quite a limiting as principle it says that whenever you have a spectra triple, you have an action.
Now how do you implement it well, you take your DRAC operator.
You need to divide it by some energy scale for physical reasons because this operator has the physical scale of energy.
They mentioned this. Well, this guy is unbounded. So you need to cut it off with some smooth function.
And then it becomes trace class and then you can take a trace of it.
So roughly the idea is that as in the by law you need to count the number of eigenvalues which are smaller than your given energy scale.
So basically, well, if you want to have all your physical fields, then it's not sufficient to just take the bear DRAC operator but you need to take the fluctuations of it, which on the mathematical side they correspond to geometries which are,
they correspond to your initial spectra triple. It's actually the Morita equivalent spectra triples, but there is some notion of equivalent geometries and you need to, you need to move within this class.
Okay, so you need to consider the fluctuated DRAC operator.
And then, well, you very rarely know the spectrum explicitly so you need to need to do some, you need some method to compute it and the standard method is to use an asymptotic expansion.
So to look at what happens when lambda is large. Okay, of course it's going to divert with lambda.
So the first term of this expansion you know that that would be the by law in the commutative case, but then you might be interested in some sub leading terms. Okay.
That's the idea.
Yes, I asked a question regarding the spectral action principle.
Is it just a purely theoretical result or is it based on some text from physics.
Actually, it is based in a sense that it's, it's, it does relate to particle physics if you apply to almost commutative geometry and that's actually on the next slide so yeah.
So then the idea is that you now assume that we go almost commutative so we have our base time manifold, and we take a product of it with some, with some internal geometry, which is, which comes from this matrix algebra so it's, it's a zero
geometry in this sense it's it's different than for a string theory because we're not adding additional dimensions here we're still in dimension four, but we have some internal geometry which is what can be highly non trivial.
Okay, now, if you choose smartly or finite algebra and
con choice is this one with the sea water unions and three by three matrices, which, of course, if you know the standard model it's not hard to guess why is it so because the standard model has the gauge group you one as you two as you three.
So that's, that's a natural choice.
You need a Hilbert space which again you take from particle physics you look what are the fundamental fermions and how many of them they are you take a suitable representation.
So you have the freedom in this fine idea a cooperator so then you can encode masses and couple constants, and then the magic happens.
If you compute the spectral action and use a simplistic expansion, what you get is you exactly get this bosonic part of the of the standard model.
Okay, and why this happens well.
This is because of the so called Gilkay theory, which is related to heat operators and and also index theorems.
And these guys are the so called silly David equation so it's a really powerful theorem of index which relates an index of an operator.
So just purely the operatorial property with some geometric invariance.
And it turns out that these geometric invariance. Well, the brilliant idea was to that these geometric invariance they are just the elements of the action.
So, this should be physics. Okay, and that's a picture that I found and, as far as I understand it's, it was drawn by come himself.
I mean, it's, it's on a blog under a under a note which is, which is signed AC.
And so, yeah, they wrote an article with with time sitting in in 2007 address for some time model the beggar, then the editor of physical review letters, ask them to change the title, maybe, but still it's, it gives you the idea.
And so, the main idea is that this might be the answer to one of the questions saying what's the structure what's the, what's behind the standard model okay why is it so why is this action so complicated, or why is it so and not a different action.
And that's that that would be cons answered that need to take almost commutative geometry with a suitable algebra and, and then off you go.
But as I told you, is assist. Well, they maybe don't care so much about the dress but they do care about numbers.
And here unfortunately, they got the wrong number.
The original model predicted, he's massive, roughly 117, you got a ton of holes which turned out not to be the truth, because the, the, the value they measured that LHC was 125.
And actually this value was excluded earlier by, by debat from accelerator in us.
So it's still quite spectacular that you can, you can predict something from this model something that was unknown and you still get it, you know, you need to understand that the masses of elementary particles well they range.
The giga electron volts is like 10 to the nine electron of okay and the mass of an electron is, is what is like 0.5 mega electron.
So that's a, there's a huge mass care here in particular physics so if you just pick something and random you will get, get it wrong by orders of magnitude and here you get the same order of magnitude.
So for me it's really spectacular and given the number of assumptions and structure behind it.
But still it's not the right number so physicists won't care.
So then Conan Chamseddin they, they realized that they overlooked some, some additional field that was there but they didn't take it into account and they, they wrote a second paper in 2020 is 2012 saying that it's a, yeah, there is some missing
parts.
And it's not so spectacular anymore because then, if you introduce an additional field you lose the predictive power, and while you can tune it to 1000 to 125 GB of Higgs mass but it's no longer prediction it's a positive diction.
It's not going to be anymore but still it's, it's a vivid domain and that's the main application of non commutative geometry alakon in, in physics right now so that's a, there's a whole book of non commutative geometry and particle physics by Walter von Suleitem which I highly recommend.
And that's the idea that well saying that well we look some for some unified models so maybe there is, as we know that the Higgs boson exist maybe there is another boson, the Sigma particle which provides another unification.
So, this is something people explore.
I can also say that the spectral action predict some modification of general relativity at the level of the action. So, the Einstein equations come from Einstein Hilbert action.
And if you write down the spectral action for gravity which you can do.
It's a very different action so you get the Einstein Hilbert plus some corrections and these corrections well people look into it and see if it's, well what it says about about the universe and, and we measure it in cosmic microwave background or gravitational wave data.
So, yeah.
That's something people look into.
Okay.
Let's be conclude with the, with the same my, my personal take on non commutative geometry and physics.
Because well this, this play around with the with almost commutative geometries and, and standard model that's, that's all very nice, but the really holy grade of physics is how to complete gravity with one this guy that pictures Alan con right.
Yeah, well, of course.
Of course and he's holding the great.
So that's, that's really the big question okay and nobody knows how to do it. Well, most people maybe would say that we should quantize gravity but then comes Roger Reynolds and he says no no no it's quite the opposite you need to modify quantum mechanics, because of gravity so you never know.
And I think that non commutative geometry might play a pivotal role here.
If not providing the final model then at least that's inspiring some ideas.
The first thing that comes to your mind is that okay, we have the almost commutative geometry which governs the standard model of particle physics but if it's almost commutative then maybe it's just an approximation to something which is truly non commutative.
Now, what is it.
And if there's such a thing then what it means for quantum mechanics for quantum theory quantum space time stuff like that.
And for me I think that the main challenge here to understand it's good is to go to so do remanian and commutative geometry.
Well, I can tell you it's, it's very hard and it's, it's very different.
I think it's much harder than in the usual, in the usual classical case where you are going to the remanian is not a big deal you just have a metric with, which have a signature with some minus sign.
Here it's much different because, for instance, your DRAC operator on on Minkowski space time.
Well, it has infinite degeneracy so every Eigen space is infinite dimension, which is good for physics because it essentially means that the DRAC equation has solutions and has a lot of it.
But, but for mathematics it's a nightmare because then it's, well, we cannot, we cannot make any reasonable spectral theory with these operators so this is a big challenge but I think this is really essentially if you really want to read for the Holy Grail.
Okay, I think that would be right the time to put here. Let me leave you with some references.
Thank you very much for a very beautiful lecture.
All right, any questions from the room.
I have a couple of questions. So, if we could go back to the side with the spectral action.
As far as I remembered, the powers of lambda which appeared in this. Okay, cool.
Yeah, are bounded by DS so these are the higher the highest part but you also allowed negative powers. Yes. Yes.
Okay.
So that, if you're, if you're on an almost commutative spectra triple then these the, well these the dimension of the underlying manifolds who typically wanted to be four.
Okay, if it's a variance, rather than the second term is, then it goes by even powers so there is no power three, and then there is power two, and then there's a power zero and actually the Einstein Hilbert action is.
This coefficient which sits here proportional to lambda square.
Lambda four is, well, you can say the volume of the universal that's the constant.
And at the constant term lambda to zero you have all these actions of peaks and gauge bosons and stuff like that.
So this actually, right now I'm looking with a with a friend of mine with our book and we're looking into this lower or dimensional terms, seeing if there's anything interesting there, because well I mean to select David coefficients they, they are known so you can just write them down
they.
They are very complex to go lower but you can do.
The idea that this expansion again is something more general it's not limited to almost commutative stuff and this is a large part of my book is devoted to that with Bruno.
You can do P summable spectro triple then the post P and you can still do the expansion, but then you might get some weird things like logarithm of this lambda or, or even complex powers of it so you have some oscillations and that would be interesting to understand
what what it what it means for physics.
I have a couple more questions.
If I could ask about, okay what is if we assume the existence of the Sigma particle. What is the perspective for for experiments for discovering new physics in large other and collider and so on.
Well, I don't why I don't remember the exact numbers. What I know is that it's it's not immediate in the sense that it's not they they are not going to exclude it as fast as they did with the with the Higgs boson.
I guess then you need to compute all the spin man diagrams etc do the renormalization.
I think but, but I know that that Walter is is looking into that and there are some people from the certain theory division that also did the computation and try to look in the data.
If there's something going on or not.
So, yeah, well,
yeah, also there are there are a lot of different models like this super symmetry, which some of them got falsified some of them, not yet, but since well the basic idea of super symmetry is getting less and less popular than it might be that
that people get more interested in these models.
And let me just say that also Walter did some different models this is called party salam unification so some some unified theory which has some even additional fields and new predictions so anyway, so the punchline is that you can make a prediction
and then go to the lab and see if it's wrong or right.
A different story is how easy is to test this prediction.
Well, typically it's not easy at all but I know.
Okay, thank you. I'm also curious about this modification to general relativity which you mentioned. So this would be on the large scale.
This is because if you have the Einstein hebert action, it's very simple is just the integral of the scholar curvature, right and if you vary that with respect to G, you get the Einstein equations.
You can think of the interaction you can think of in relatively, but then you can, you can consider theories with f of our.
Okay, so any function of our would do. And, and then well people looked into that and so I, from what I know there are two main directions one is in cosmology so people try to relate it to inflation.
There is a hypothesis, let's say, some people say it's, it's knowledge but I follow Roger Penrose and say it's still a hypothesis that there was a period at the very beginning of the universe inflationary expansion exponential driven by some unknown field, which made our
universe homogeneous and isotropic. That's what we observe.
Nobody knows what is this inflaton field and how to see it. So one direction is that's to look into this corrections that come from NCG and see, well if it relates any how to inflation.
But these are the works of Matilda Marcoli and Marissa Calariado and the students, they did some research there and the second thing is about gravitational waves.
If you have some modified gravity theory.
Well, you can see the difference at least in principle in the propagation of gravitational waves.
That's how people look at it.
Okay, thank you and maybe last quick question so should we view this spectrum action as an a functional which is defined on the space of all derogatory or rather something like we take a give we have a spectra triple and then we consider all the fluctuation and this is a function,
functional on this space of fluctuated operators, but for a given spectrum.
Yeah, yeah, that's, that's a very good question and you know what's the right answer should be, because I mean that there is no such thing as an abstract space of dirac operators.
I mean, you don't have a spectral triple and you don't even know what that should be.
I think you really need to start with a spectral triple.
But then comes the question okay about these fluctuations so what what is your equivalence class of geometries, because these are since the usual fluctuations and actually
the recent work by by Ali and Walter and so they come.
They consider a more general form of fluctuations, which do not come from this more attack with us but it's something more general but still they claim it gives you some equivalent geometry, and then you get something more general.
And then you have more dirac operators so you can have more physical fields and different models and stuff like that so.
Yeah, it's for me at least it's not completely settled what is the space of the operators on which you should.
You should bury this, but I guess you should at least fix your algebra and your Hilbert space and see all possible dirac operators for such two variables or how to complete you know, two out of three right principle.
And I guess the same is classic clearly you fix your manifold and then you look for your metric answer right. Yes, yes, exactly.
Thank you very much. Thank you for a beautiful talk.
Anybody else.
Okay, so now are there any questions from zoom perhaps.
Any further questions.
Okay, I don't see any raised hands.
So in this case, let us thank me how again for is really really very beautiful. Thank you so much.
For recording I encourage you to go on to our YouTube channel, and we already have five lectures uploaded and this lecture will be uploaded shortly, and we resume at $1,100. Thank you.
