Good morning, good afternoon, good evening everyone, wherever you might be.
Well, this is the last lecture of the school, and we will end it with not theory.
Why not? Again, it is my honor and pleasure to introduce the speaker, my friend and colleague from New York, Buffalo State University of New York,
Alan Shkora. He did his PhD in the year 2000 at the University of Maryland College Park, and I cannot resist to tell you a funny story that he had with his PhD.
Well, you know, when you get a PhD, Doctor of Philosophy, and once for some formalities, he was accused that he's not qualified to go and teach mathematics because he's Doctor of Philosophy, not Mathematics.
So you have to be very careful when you get a PhD, why don't you get a PhD in Mathematics.
Anyway, a joke aside, Adam's main interest is in interactions between topology, algebra and number theory, modular spaces of representations and very quantization.
So, welcome to not theory, without any further ado, Adam, the floor is yours, I stop sharing, you start sharing, and we rock and roll.
Thank you.
Thank you, Piotr, for inviting me and for this wonderful introduction.
Let me do the sharing here.
This is...
We can do it, alright?
Alright.
Sorry guys, I'm just adjusting here the frame.
Alright, I hope you guys can see the first slide.
Yeah, so thank you again for the introduction. Thank you, Piotr, for inviting me to this workshop.
This could be in person with all of you, but given the reality of COVID and the fact that I live on different continents, I guess, will settle on a virtual talk.
In case you wonder where is Buffalo, well, it is 20 miles from Niagara Falls, which you can see here on the picture.
And one second, technical difficulty trying to figure out how to do...
How to advance the slide.
No.
Somehow, I think Zoom is blocking my...
Well, I think we'll just do this.
Alright, so what's a knot? A knot is an embedding of a circle into three-dimensional space.
We'll talk about knots and about links. Those are embeddings of collections of circles into three-dimensional space.
And they will be considered up to isotope.
That is continuous deformations, which do not allow for a link or part of it to pass through itself, so you cannot pass one piece of string through another.
And equivalently, instead of R3, one can consider three-dimensional sphere.
So the sphere is the same because they only differ by one point at infinity.
So, well, here you see on the side some knots. This is called the anode. This is called trefoil.
And this is called a figure eight knot because it has this eight here in it. And this is a link.
And this is a link of two components called, in fact, the simplest non-trefoil link called the hopf link.
And so, by the way, a knot can be thought as a link of one component.
And knot theory intrigued people and inspired art, at least since Brown's age.
And, of course, it was of great importance in practical applications like sailing.
And here is an example of ancient Roman mosaic. And you can see the hopf link here.
And this is a decorative element on a Chinese spot from the Ming era, about 400 years AD, the common era.
And knots inspired scientists throughout the ages. Here you see a page from Gauss's famous mathematician's Gauss notebook from the end of 18th century.
And then the modern roots of knot theorist and perhaps start with Lord Calvin. This is the guy who, after whom we have a temperature scale named and in mid 19th century, scientists were wondering about the speculating about the nature of different chemical elements.
And so, he proposed a theory in which atoms, different atoms correspond to, are noted, tubes of ether called vertices, and they correspond to different knots.
And in this theory, chemical elements, chemical molecules correspond to links, built of different knots, different atoms.
And, well, the theory was of course, Monkers, but it led to attempts to classify all knots and links.
And to do that, it's continued to represent them by two dimensional diagrams.
So, here you see such diagrams. Again, this is the knot.
This, you have three diagrams here with number six, that means that they are three different knots with diagrams with six crossings, and they are just named 616263.
And, and, well, so, of course, every knot has, and every link has different diagrammatic representations.
And there is a theorem due to German mathematician at the Meister, which says that the two such diagrams, the grammatical presentations of a link are related by the following moves.
This is called the first of the Meister move, so we just undo this little loop here, or create it.
And any two pieces of string, of course, can be pulled apart like here and, and all created, you can create two crossings like that, or like that.
And then you have the third of the Meister move.
Now, before I continue, perhaps a disclaimer that this is an informal introductory talk, so some statements will not be completely precise or accurate.
And also, I'm going to mention in this talk a large number of topics in higher mathematics.
And so I had to make difficult choices. What background I, which is necessary, I can assume that you guys have and, and, and, and, and I will skip that, which may be hard on some of you, but then I will be introducing some other background to which may be obvious to some other
and perhaps boring, especially for professional mathematicians in the audience. So I just hope for your patience, and I apologize to everyone in advance.
So with that, let's continue.
So, and you have two diagrams proving that they are present the same link.
Usually involves showing a sequence of other Meister moves relating them. And, and that's not always obvious. Those moves are not always obvious.
So for example, let's just without looking down without cheating. Let's just look at this specific diagram.
Well, can you guess if it can be simplified? Well, it doesn't, doesn't look like it can be simplified, but it can.
And in fact, the first move towards simplification is pulling this arc underneath.
And like that. So you have to create two extra crossings before we can simplify it because then the idea is that we are going to, I don't know if this is visible.
Yeah, I can make it larger.
And then the idea is that we're going to pull this string underneath.
I like that.
And they were done with the further simplification moves.
And so by starting by adding those two extra crossings and doing those simplification moves actually were able to untie this knot completely.
So this is not obvious, at least to me, but this diagram represents the knot.
But proving. So, classically, the main problem not theory is this term meaning with the two diagrams represent the same not or whether basically two presentations of the same not or link can isotopic to each other.
And so proving that they are usually is done by showing a sequence of them.
So further master moves relating their diagrams.
Now, proving that two diagrams are not equivalent is harder.
And because one would have to establish a that there's no sequence of further master moves relating them. That's pretty hard.
So it's usually done by a defining and considering certain invariance of links.
And these are functions and link diagrams into usually some algebraic objects, which are preserved by the master moves.
The simplest such example, of course, would be the number of components of L. So the hop flink cannot be isotopic to travel, because the number of components of a link is some invariant.
And then with advent of algebraic topology at the beginning of 20th century.
People started using tools of algebraic topology to construct such invariance.
And then, of course, the simplest topological invariant of a link is its complement in our free cause. So this is a certain topological space considered up to have more morphism.
And there is a famous theorem of Gordon and lookie, which says that this complement of a link where the complement of a not in this case distinguishes not up to its mirror image.
So a mirror image is when you take a diagram, and you just flip all the crossings to the opposite crossings.
You get a mirror image.
It's not true for links.
Many events. So this leads to a problem of distinguishing non homomorphic topological spaces, at least for knots, and the basic tool for that in algebraic topology is the fundamental group.
You know, they like that by one of why of topological space, why, which for connected space is just the space of the set of all close loops in why up to homotopy.
And those loops are supposed to all have certain base point in why and the homotopy preserves the base point.
So for example, you have here two loops A and B in the stores in the surface of a donut.
And those loops such loops form a group.
Well, they must be those loops must be oriented so there's no orientation on A and B but but a but a when they are oriented and you can consider composition of those two loops and a B.
So that means you first go around a and then around B, and you get a look like this.
So it's easy to prove that this is a this is a group.
So fundamental group, the fundamental group of.
Let me extend the screen here, if I can.
Alright, a fundamental group.
In fact, we can prove that distinguishes all nodes, again, up to mirror image.
And in fact, for anthropological space, it's easy to describe its fundamental group by generators and relations.
Unfortunately, the isomorphism problem in group theory is unsolvable in general, which means that given two groups by the generators and the relations.
There is no general algorithm to decide to decide whether they are isomorphic or not.
Yes.
So, is it possible to classify all possible groups which appear in this way as a fundamental group of a complement of a not.
Is it known.
I think all relies on them on the precise definition of the word classify so there is no, there is no simple definition you can you cannot do it like using few adjectives about groups.
And,
but maybe there's some cumbersome way to do it. I would have to think about that.
Okay.
So, for, for example, every finally presented.
Finally presented group is a fundamental group of four manifold.
That's correct.
Yes, so I'm wondering how the situation looks like in this case, where we consider a complement of a.
So, there is no such nice theorem or need theorem for, for not groups of this these are called not groups.
I mean what we know is that a stabilization of this group which is first homology of a, of the complement of not or a link is Z a to power number of components of L.
There is no, at least coming to my mind, and I don't believe there is one like a nice clean characterization of all the groups can you get.
Okay, thank you. But if I understood correctly, after taking a quotient with the commutator subgroup you get always a free a billion. Yes.
Correct. Yes.
Okay, thank you. Thank you. So this is nice.
Yeah, so this is a very good question because this already clears.
You know, covers already the question of homology groups which are also another type of basic topological algebraic topology invariance of spaces.
There are very weak invariance of, of links they just determined number of components. And this is a principle strong invariance if you know how to distinguish different finite represented groups.
Nonetheless, algebraic topology provides other useful invariance like the Alexander polynomial family.
Which, well, which is nice, but not entirely this factory for the purpose of classifying notes or links.
All right, so let me, before I continue, let me address a certain potential elephant in the room.
And that's a question. Why should we really care about notes.
In general, I guess it's a controversial question in mathematics.
The purists will say that not some links exists. That's a good reason enough reason to study them.
But pragmatists, for lack of better words, may say that an importance of a theory in math is based on on certain criteria.
What are the applications of that theory to other sciences, or practical applications or how is it, what, how is it connected with other areas of mathematics.
And so it turns out that not theory does surprisingly well by this criteria.
And it has connections significant connections with practically all areas of math and strong connections to advance physics.
Not to mention, of course, sailing or other or or mountain climbing.
Adam, Adam, can you hear me.
Yep.
Can I ask you a stupid question. I'm looking at this sentence after a theorem of Gordon and Luke.
And what do you mean by problem of distinguishing non homomorphic topological space if they are non homomorphic bed is different so they are distinguished.
Well, you know, I can draw, I can draw you to topological spaces and I can ask you are they homomorphic.
Okay, so you want to decide whether or not they are homomorphic. Okay.
Correct. Yes. Okay. Okay. Thanks.
And for a not compliment that's enough to determine whether two knots are isotonic by that.
All right, so I, I was talking about that, the applications, even though may look like some exotic kind of mathematics piece of mathematics, actually has many applications so let's let's talk about them.
So first of all,
the first application is to topology.
The main problems in topology is classification of manifolds.
And so what is the manifold it's an dimensional and dimensional manifold is a topological spaces and which locally looks like RM.
Yes, so connected one manifolds are our infinite line and the circle.
The dimensional manifolds are just surfaces. And so we have a sphere that classified by, at least the compact ones, the closed ones are classified in this the following manner you have a sphere you have a torus surface of a donut you can have a donut with two holes with three holes and so on.
And then there is an infinite family of non orientable surfaces.
And then it was to classify a non closed surfaces. Well, you can just remove open holes from those surfaces and then you have surfaces with boundary.
By to you.
Adam by P2 you mean real projective space you're a real project.
Yes, yes, and this is the, this is a picture of.
So this is a, this is a well understood topic. And then, of course, people try to understand classification of three dimensional manifolds and that's way more challenging.
And an interesting, of course, classification of three dimensional four dimensional manifolds.
And we live in, in, you can think that we live in three dimensional space. So, the cost mix the cost, the cost most the, the universe is three dimensional space but of course with time is four dimensional space so it's, it's probably it's some sort of manifold, possibly with, I guess, with singularity is being black holes but ignoring that it's a it's a manifold.
Anyway, so a crucial. So, there was a lot of effort put in, in recent decades in a understanding classifying three dimensional spaces with major contributions from famous mathematicians like Bill Thurston's and Gregorio Perleman, who saw the famous punk architecture.
So, by now we have pretty good understanding of three dimensional manifolds. I don't, I don't think we have a classification person.
And I can tell you the crucial tool in analyzing three dimensional manifolds is a surgery.
So, what's the surgery well on the surface, surgery consists of cutting a surface around the loop.
And like, I tried to depict in this picture here, the red loop and gluing glue a and filling it with a with a with a disk.
And it results in a new surface.
A, in the context of three dimensional manifold consists of taking a link in that manifold. So now we're talking about embedding of schools into M and taking a solid neighborhood of a knot or a link and removing it.
And by removing it, you obtain manifold with boundary torus.
And when you obtain a solid torus, and then there's a lot of ways, different ways to glue it back, because you, you do it by gluing back the boundary of a solid torus which is a torus with the torus boundary of the manifold.
And there is many different homomorphisms of torus to itself, or from one torus to another, different homomorphisms will produce different topological spaces.
This is called surgery or not can be done on a link. It's a very useful tool because, for example, with this technique, this method, you can, well, you can surger any manifold into any other manifold if they're connected.
And even they have the same boundary. Well, we're here, I guess you assume there's no boundary.
So that's the first application to, to study the three dimensional manifolds.
Then the relations to physics, which will take more time so I will discuss them in a moment.
So the first one is the number theory. Those relations were discovered initially by Mumford in the 1960s and then pursued by very major, and by others and currently by Mauritia.
And so it's a theory which postulates that a three dimensional manifold is like a number field, which means it's an extension of rational numbers to a final degree.
Q a joint square root of two.
And according to this theory, links in the manifold are like ideas in the rings of algebraic integers.
So for, for this number field, the ring of algebraic integers is Z a joint square root of two.
And well, not according to this analogy correspond to prime ideals.
And so, in particular, as free three dimensional sphere the simplest three dimensional manifold corresponds to rational numbers, links will correspond to ideals in Z.
And, you know, all ideas in Z are cyclic. And so they correspond to natural numbers.
Or to zero, I guess. And notes correspond to prime numbers, but prime ideals, according to this, from this point of view correspond to prime numbers.
All right, so notes are like primes.
So I know this, this may look bunkers.
But our makes look silly or very simplistic, but I can assure you it's not it's a very serious theory.
And, and basically, it has this whole dictionary relating topological terms, not theory to on three dimensional topology in general, two notions in number theory.
And the origin of this analogies is not understood, but they go quite deep. And basically what it means is that there are certain statements in topology, where using this dictionary, and you can translate them into true statements in number theory.
In fact, I, I wrote the paper on the subject as well, exploring some, some of such analogies between between equivariant homology work with foreign group actions and manifolds and equivariant homologies related to those group actions, and some
in the last field theory on the other side, one number theory site.
Excuse me, Adam, can I have a question?
Sure.
Is it easy or even maybe you could intuitively say why Q corresponds to S3, because it's why, why this field or not someone else.
Okay, so accepting, accepting this analogy in general why S3 to Q. Well, you know,
the basic, the basic state fact is that this is the simplest three dimensional manifold of sorts. And this is the basic number field.
But I'm going to maybe actually respond to it with the next line. So in particular in this analogy, homology group of M corresponds to the class group of K.
What is a class group? Well, class group is a finite group which measures to what extent this ring of algebraic integers fails to be unique factorization domain.
Or principle ideal domain, which happens to be the same.
For example, for S3, this is trivial and of course Z is some principle ideal domain.
So, so that's one reason why we have this analogy. Well, maybe it's not a strong reason.
And, and then, according to this theory, branch coverings corresponds to extension of extensions of number fields.
And the way links in M are lifting to links in M tilde correspond to extensions of ideals.
Okay, so, you know, in particular, every three dimensional manifold is a branch cover over Q.
And this seems like a good model or good analogy to saying that of course every number field is an extension.
Let's say every branch cover is a, every manifold is a branch cover of S3.
And this is analogous to the fact that every number field is an extension of Q.
Of course, there's lots of issues with this analogy, you can, it's easy to poke holes in this. And like, you know, obviously, such extension from Q to K is unique and branch covers are not necessarily unique.
So it's easy to stoop to find reasons why, why this is not a perfect analogy, and it's not, but, but it's still amazing, amazing how, how deep it goes.
And to give you more sophisticated reason why we have this analogy is that in number fields, there's a cohomology theory for number fields called atalcohomology groups.
And there is a certain shift with certain shift coefficients atalcohomology groups make look rings of algebraic integers as three dimensional objects.
In fact, objects which satisfy a certain version of Poincare duality, quote, quote, Artin Verdi duality.
And there is even a paper by a Capranoff, which claims that this analogy can be extended and that quantum field theory on topological site.
It's like like Lagland's program in number, in number theory.
Well, of course, you can ask what's quantum field theory doing here with with knots and links, while this goes to this to those connections of into physics which we're going to discuss in a moment.
And
May I have a question?
Yeah, sure.
So about this last correspondence I thought that the Laglands program itself is some kind of big picture correspondence between two different branch of mathematics between on the one side there is a representation theory and on the other side.
There are some deep connection with number theory.
Yeah.
So, so this correspondence shows that, in fact, all these two should be somehow related to quantum field theory. Yes.
Well, so that was the correspondence and quantum field theory can be also considered as correspondence and
like say let's take topological quantum field theory, you know, it's correspondence between surfaces and certain algebraic objects and three dimensional manifolds and certain algebraic objects.
So yes, it's a correspondence between correspondences.
Okay, thank you.
And so maybe now on the lighter side.
The DNA strand can form a knotted loop here is a picture, a beautiful picture of some of some not like that.
And I even heard a claim.
Don't quote me on this but I heard a claim that if a cell has too much the DNA strands DNA has too much nothing in a cell then it shortens the life of a cell.
So try not to not feel DNA too much if you can.
So, not appear in nature in this way, but there's the connection with not fear here is in fact deeper because to study the notings of DNA I guess one takes a solution with DNA strands, and then add some enzyme, and that
enzyme will lead to recombination of DNA, which may change the nothing of it.
And so then we see the, the recombine DNA, and this leads to a problem which can be considered not theory problem, trying to understand knowing that the action of the enzyme, the properties of the enzyme and seeing the final result of the
recombination try to figure out the original nothing of the, of the DNA strand. So there are some topologists like, like they would summers and others and his collaborators who wrote papers about that.
All right, so moving on.
Before we continue with physics and other topics.
Let me weekly introduce braids. So a braid on end strength is family of and of and
arcs going in some direction say going down like here. You see and strength for strands going down and and twisting around each other.
And braids form a group with the identity being the trigger brands so just and just going down without any crossings and then the group operation of course is composition.
And it's not difficult to think if you if you think about it for a little bit.
It would be difficult to see that every element indeed has its inverse. Like, here I have this crossing of two strands. And I could now composite with opposite crossing.
And that would undo this crossing. Yes, I can then compose with opposite to this crossing and this crossing and then I can, so I can add a special an additional right here on the bottom, which will undo all the crossings you see.
And there's a natural homomorphisms from the break group to the permutation group where you forget about the middle part, the braiding, you just trace where the first string strength goes it goes to the second point and point.
And the second beginning point goes to the first endpoint, and the third one goes to the third and four goes to fourth so you get the permutation of four points.
And now, when you have a break. So the break here for example between those dashed lines.
Then you can always close the break and you get a link.
And one can prove it's a old theorem of
Markov. Well, I think of Markov, which says that every link can be obtained in this way. And in fact you can study not theory, so I can study links through, through the through breaks to those presentations.
So now let me tell you about some applications of, of rates in particular.
Now, going back to analogies between topology and number theory.
There is this mysterious complicated to define group called Grotten Dick Taishmore group introduced by the infield.
And so as I said it's complicated I'm not going to
explain it, but the definition, at least one definition involves breaks it's related to breaks.
And what their infield proved is that this group contains the absolute absolute Galois group of Q.
And, in fact, for what we know it may be an isomorphism.
It may be quite amazing if it was because arguably this absolute Galois group is the most important object in number theory understanding this group.
Yes, so in particular we have say, famous inverse Galois problem which asks, is it true that every finite group is an image homomorphic image of this group.
Moving on, the second application of breaks or a connection of breaks to other areas of mathematics.
And break group is the general group GLN group over the ring of polynomials over the field of one element.
So this may sound crazy if you never heard of that, but you know, there are many objects algebraic objects you can consider over finite fields.
So this is my notation for a finite field of P2N elements, vector spaces matrix groups and so on.
And mathematicians, I think initially Japanese mathematicians I forgot the names specific names.
But they realized that there is certain combinatorial objects which correspond to such vector spaces matrix groups and so on, which are not really associated with any field.
And, or more precisely they started hypothesizing about this mysterious field F1 and they, they develop this, this theory of properties of F1.
And that's, of course, there's no, you know, on the nose.
If you look, if you open the definition of what a field is of course there is no field of one element.
But, but there's at least one paper I saw which tried to make the notion of one F1 precise.
In any event, it's postulated that the general linear group over F1 is just a permutation group.
Generally, the general linear group over polynomials in X over F1 is the Braille group, and of course evaluation of X at zero.
Well, we'll lead, we'll define a map from, from this general group to this general group, general linear group.
And this corresponds to the homomorphism we discussed from the Braille group to the symmetric group as M.
Next, next application or relation of Braille is in set theory.
So, set theoretist these days, they study things like set in large cardinals properties of large cardinal numbers, and they're independence of axioms of, of, of non-Sermelo Frankel axioms.
And I will not go into the details but those things are related to, to Braille groups.
And then finally, a braid groups are used in cryptography.
And in part that relies on the fact that given two n-brates, beta and beta prime, it's deciding whether they're conjugated, conjugate, and finding a conjugate or alpha, so such that this identity holds is hard.
However, verifying that this is true, even alpha, it's fast and easy.
It's like factorization into prime numbers, right?
Yeah, something like that, exactly.
Okay.
So, well, so now, in order to relate not theory to physics.
I'm going to talk about John's polynomial, but I'm checking my time here. And I think it's good time to stop for now.
Okay, so let's have a coffee break. However, before we do it, will you elaborate a little bit between the link, I'm saying it as an English word and the mathematical term, between a link that we have between braids and quantum groups.
Well, so, yes, it's okay, so I was planning to talk about quantum groups later on.
But yes, there is such a thing as a quantum group indeed, and people study representations and every representation of a quantum group that fights representation of the braid group.
And this is done through what this is related to Young-Pakster equation, if you heard of it. I don't know if that's what you're asking specifically.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
Okay.
Yes. Okay. So, yeah, thank you so much. So let's have a 15 minute break and we'll resume at 4pm sharp.
All right, I will pause recording.
Your talk is in progress. Your head on it.
Thank you.
So, going back to this question, which I was asked about, about not groups, so fundamental groups of not compliments.
Now I remember there's a theorem of stallings, which says that there is no algorithm to determine whether given finitely presented group is a not group is of this form.
So that's one, one clarification for the previous discussion.
Now, moving on.
I wanted to relate not theory to physics.
When you talk about the Jones polynomial.
So, as I mentioned already earlier, algebraic topology gave us some invariance of links most notably the Alexander polynomial, which was already invented or discovered in 1920s and there was some progress in not theory since then.
After that, but the next true revolution, not theory came with the Jones polynomial in 1984.
And so he proved that you can associate to every oriented link polynomial around polynomial in this variable, such that this this polynomial called Jones polynomial is one for the unknown, and it satisfies the following scan relation.
What it means is that if you have three different diagrams, which are actually identical link diagrams which are identical everywhere, except at one spot.
And the first link in that spot has this crossing is a positive crossing.
The second link has negative crossing and the third one has no crossing at all has those two arcs like that.
So, those three diagrams, the Jones polynomials of those three diagrams are related by this equation.
And then, and then the Johnson's construction was quite a complicated quest for the advanced. In fact, the motivation for for his construction came from the study of fundamental algebras.
So I could have mentioned also that in in relations to not theory.
This is the reason for this one half in an exponent.
Why just not consider it is just a traditional. It's just a traditional notation, so we could replace.
Yes, some kind of convention. Okay, that's right. Yeah. Okay, thank you.
And so, and then, soon afterwards, Luke Kaufman invented an equivalent invariant. However, his invariant is for frame links in our free which are unoriented.
The same link is just embedding not just of circles but of Anoulai into our free.
So you can think of them as bands, while forming Anoulai, and you embed it into our free.
And so, in order to draw those things on we use the blackboard framing usually.
We use much blackboards these days in mathematics but I'm glad you guys have blackboards there in bend level.
Anyway, so what is blackboard framing well it's a it's a framing which is always parallel to the page or to this computer screen.
So in particular, this king here, a cannot be untied cannot be a simplified because then it will have a twist double twist when you try to do it.
All right, so the theorem of Kaufman says that there exists a unit bracket function on all frame links under the frame links into Laurent polynomials name.
Such that whenever you have three diagrams were again identical everywhere except at one place when there is a crossing this moving and this moving, then we have the following scan relation.
And the second property it has is that you have a link with unlinked trivial component, then you can remove it and replace it by this constant.
This constant looks unintuitive, but in fact this is the only possible constant consistent with with this gain relation.
So, and the proof that such construction, such function is unique.
If it exists, it's obvious because if you take any frame link like this travel here, then you can, then you can resolve all the crossings by this relation.
And at the end if you resolve all the crossings then you just have collections of of trivial loops.
Yes, like this is there are two loops here, and this is a single loop here, and you can compute their value by, by this relation.
So, for that, and then checking that invariance after them under the master moves actually is quite simple and yeah, it's, it's actually a very elementary.
Once you realize that such a thing exists proving that that it does what it does is very simple.
So, for example, for the travel we get this value, which tells us immediately that travel cannot be unnoticed, because the value of the unnoticed minus a square minus a to minus second power.
Sorry, I'm slightly confused by the use of war brackets so this already means something that we post some axioms for one.
And one variable yes not some some sort of the algebra bracket is no no yeah it's a it's a name of this function and we draw it by one we draw it by drawing a bracket so a bracket.
But in this in the statement of the theorem.
Yeah, first part there is unique bracket means.
Yes, I see. Okay, yes very good so this is there is a unique function. This is a mental.
Okay, this unique function which is called a bracket.
Okay.
Thank you.
And it's related to transfer nominal by renormalization so if you have oriented a link, then you can consider it with arbitrary framing, you take the bracket.
Okay, when I say that sorry you take oriented link diagram on the in a plane or on blackboard, and then you take its bracket, and then you multiply it by this factor where w is so called right of the diagram which is just some of
crossings of L signs of crossings of L.
So this is positive crossing this is a negative crossing. And after this renormalization and change your variables, you will get the Jones polynomial.
All right. So, and so one can find the trans polynomial is not an ideal invariant of links or not.
One can find pairs of different links with the same trans polynomial.
However, a, we don't know such examples where one of them is the unknown.
And in fact, Jones formulated this conjecture, the Jones conjecture which says that a it is impossible if Jones polynomial of K is one.
And then K must be the unknown.
And, in fact, there was an attempt by the AMS American Mathematical Society to compose a list of problems for 21st century in the spirit of of Hilbert problems for the 20th century.
And so this is one of the problems with Jones proposed for for 21st century for us to solve.
And I think that my student and I will, well, we verify this conjecture computationally, and at least a up to 24 crossing diagrams.
And that involved testing.
So as you can see, more than 10 to the 13th of not diagrams, I don't even know the word for that kind of a numeral and on the supercomputer here at Sunni Buffalo.
That requires a lot of optimizations to actually reduce it.
This problem to only to only considering this many not diagrams, and then there is a, it's a challenging problem to to compute the Jones polynomials or the Kauffman brackets, because as you can see this the simplest way is exponential number of crossings.
So we have 30,000 lines of code for that various optimizations.
And I should mention that this is a version of this conjecture for links is not true. So, this is wise and Kauffman found examples of links, which are not trivial, which have the same Jones as the trivial link.
And, well, let me mention this, let me end the slide by mentioning that there are many other open questions about Jones polynomial because it's a quite a mysterious reading quantity.
And for example, we don't know what polynomials appear as values of the Jones polynomial.
Let's talk about connections to physics. So a few years after the Jones polynomials invented or discovered with them.
Perhaps the most famous contemporary physicist, famous for his important contributions to string theory, and in particular, a published a paper with which he gave a physical interpretation of the Jones polynomial.
So this will be fairly advanced.
But I'm not going to explain all the details here, but the good thing is that this is not absolutely necessary for the continuation of the talk.
Nonetheless, I think it's, it's, it's useful to discuss this a little bit.
So what we can discovered is that our claim is that for any group G. So a group is a matric. Well, for us will be just a matrix groups, matrix group, which also happens to be a manifold, like GLN or SUM.
And for any such group, and for any positive integer K, and for any link L in the three dimensional manifold M.
Witten claims the same variant. So I guess I should say there is a variant such that for any link L and manifold M.
And this invariant associates to it, a complex number given by a certain path integral.
And the, the path integral will be over a certain connections a on M, and they, I'm not going to define them here. This is just too advanced but for people who know a little bit about gauge theory.
So what happens here when fixes a principal G bound over M and considers connections on this on this bundle.
And given a connection, which happens to be one form, you can consider this free free form, or turn Simons form and then integrate it and one can associate with it and a number, a real number defined up to two pie Z.
So one puts it here in the exponent and integrates this over all connections, and then there's certain terms here called Wilson loops, and which one puts here for all the components of L.
Okay, so let's ask something. So what is mathematical status of this integral, this is well defined mathematically.
Is it like integrating over infinite dimensional. Yes, exactly it is. I was about to say that. So, and that's why this fear and it's really quotation marks, because for us mathematicians this is not really precisely defined because in fact, all connections like this.
So this is an infinite dimensional affine space, and in order to do an integration would need to have some measure. There is no natural measure to consider here.
So nonetheless, you know, path integrals are extremely important in physics.
So what you can consider this construction would call go into something called Chen Simons field theory and physicists use them other field theories.
They're very important in the standard model of particle physics.
And physicists, they, even though it's ill defined physicists know have certain experience with dealing with those objects know what kind of operations they can do.
And without getting into trouble.
And so, but the link is hidden where in this definition of CI CS.
That's right. Yes. Yep.
In the W of CI. That's right. And basically it's a trace of certain whole or not me of given by the connection along the, the component C.
Okay, thank you.
And so, you know, this is quite fascinating because, by the way, because we are used to the fact that math is applied in physics. But here we see an example where physics implies to math.
And we will obtain a very interesting physical intuition. Well, the physical intuition provides some insights into mathematics and, you know, the various, the certain conjectures inspired by this claim rigorous conjectures inspired by this claim.
And actually to talk about them. So, I need to talk about the shooting to rife. But first of all, let me mention that, you know, several people I mentioned here in the stock gave got fields models for their work.
I mentioned the link field, he got fields model for his work, then Jones.
And then we can for his contributions to, to, to mathematics, perhaps as the only physicist ever.
And in an event so
we recently retaliated. There is a mathematician with a Nobel Prize. So now that's right. That's right. Yes.
Oh, that's a good point. And I should, I should have related this to not fear, but I forgot about that.
All right. So, a, a, soon afterwards, a machine to machine to mathematicians to drive and indeed a try to define rigorously.
And the object of this sort as we can postulate that or defined physically.
And that led them to the invention of topological quantum field theory, called simply take uft, which associates to, it's a theory which associates to each surface a vector space.
Okay, so for that as input, we need two things, we need a group G.
And we need an imposter again, then a non negative integer natural number K.
And so we get a vector space finite dimensional vector space for each surface. And if you have a link in a manifold M that that they're defined a vector in the vector space associated with the bundle of M.
And well associated with also this link and M.
And in particular, if one can define this, this vector space for the empty surface. So it's allowed to use empty set here. And this is then complex just complex numbers one dimensional vector space.
So you get a scalar.
So in particular for close manifolds with a link in it, you get, you get a complex number.
So you get a scalar for interrupting so often worries.
So M is fixed. Yes, M is fixed and we think of M as as the D manifold in which we live. Yes.
No, I don't like no M is not.
Well, it depends what you mean by fix it's it's for this very corresponding to M.
Well, I would prefer to say, well, I guess you can say that I would prefer to say that you fix G and K, and then forever M and forever L you have this invariant.
Okay, G's group and we should thought the thing about it as some gouge gouge group. Yes. Yes.
Something like as you do, for example, correct. Yes.
Yes.
Yes, just natural number back here.
Okay.
Okay, thank you.
Yeah. And then, well the construction of this theory.
This, you know, goes back to your question to about Kaplanoff. Yes. So Kaplanoff you see you have some sort of, you can say duality or functor between surfaces and three dimensional manifolds and links to some algebraic objects.
And so kind of was comparing that to long glance program, which are also some correspondences in any event so the construction of that is it's at the time consuming and non elementary and it relies on this concept of a quantum group,
and I'm not going to define the bat.
Maybe I'll just mention that yes for, for each semi simply group, at least, you can define those two quantum groups, the, the, the formation of the, of the universal enveloping algebra, obviously algebra, and the, the formation of the algebra functions on the group.
And they are dual to each other.
So they will, they will make an appearance later on.
And in particular for as you to the sim, which is the simplest non trivial group, you may say, and for any K distance out to be a version of the Jones polynomial at root of unity.
Q being root of unit.
Okay.
So, the construction of the machine to write the QFT is, it's quite complicated.
Oh, so I guess I should have finished that so why do we consider those quantum groups, I will I wrote here because then, then you can study the representations.
You can ask me very good question. And such a presentation leads to, to a representation of the braid group and through braids, for example, you can try to define a, you can try to define invariance of links.
And so this is one way to, to try to at least partially define this theory.
So I want to now go a different way, approach, use a different approach to define invariance of links in three manifolds, which is much simpler, and at least conceptually so fix a community thing are,
because there's no reason to be specific, and just assume and fix an invertible element in our. So for example just lower on polynomials in this variable a.
So for any three dimensional manifold, the scale model of M is going to be the space of formal in our combinations of links in M.
And so this is an infinite dimensional space, even if you consider links up to isotope.
And you question it by, by the skin relations you saw for the Kaufman bracket.
So you say that this link is equal to this link plus a inverse times this link.
The meaning of it is as before three links, which are identical except at one spot.
And then L union and not is equal this much.
And it's kind of rough hard to wrap your mind around it because it's quotient of infinite dimensional our module by an infinite dimensional sub module.
But it's sort of right away by by abstract nonsense gives us invariant of links in M because for any link you can consider a class of link L after all is an element here in the scale model.
We have an invariant.
And then you can prove it's not difficult to prove that the scale model of our free is cyclic generated by the empty link.
So for this theory is useful to assume that empty not empty set is a is a link of zero components, just a formal added there.
All right, so.
And so the bracket the Kauffman bracket will. Okay, so this means of course that every link correspond to some scalar R.
And this correspondence is really the Kauffman bracket, you know, is for this ranking, especially for this ring at least.
So this is really reformulation of your M of Kauffman.
And we're proving it's cyclic is not difficult because for any league in our free of course you can resolve all its crossings so let me treat and eliminate trivial loops and you will end up with a scholar might multiple of the empty set.
So, I'm going to study those game models, and frankly, a.
I am not going to do it because the invariant defined invariance of links, but because they lead to a very rich theory with various connections to some other advanced topics in mathematics and which I will try to explain in the remaining time.
So at here, by the way, that's a scale models, these game models were first introduced by Przetski and by use of Przetski and by Vladimir to arrive.
All right, so, yeah, so let's talk about their properties.
So first of all, let's take a to be plus minus one in some in some ring.
Okay, so then I can rewrite this scan relation in this way. This will be plus or minus depending on a, but notice that you know if I rotate up those pictures, 90 degrees then I get the same scan again the same element.
So in other words, it means that this crossing is this crossing, assuming a equal plus minus one. What does that mean, well, it means that it's really its utility as a invariant perhaps diminishes here because you can just really change
crossings between between.
You can change crossings in links, but there's a positive for that. And that is that now we can define a product of two links as their union.
And in general, the problem is, there is no canonical way to put two links in M together.
And the, if you're not in our free if you're in our free you can sort of say well one is on one side and others on the other side, but if you are saying as one cross in three dimensional torus as one crosses one crosses one.
There is no such fingers left side or right side, or there's not even notion of above and below.
If you can change crossings that it doesn't matter you just take any disjoint union of them and they're all equivalent for this move.
So what it means is that you get through this multiplication.
This becomes the scale model becomes R algebra commutative R algebra.
And so we can ask what kind of commutative R algebra do we get for every three dimensional manifold.
Right, so this leads us to the notion of a character varieties, but let's start from the beginning.
I mentioned to you guys that there is no general algorithm for distinguishing two groups by given by generators in the relations.
So it that means that in practice, we often try to distinguish two groups like that by studying the representations into another group, usually matrix group.
And so for example, you know, you try to prove that two groups are different by saying well this group has homomorphism into maybe SL to SL to see and this one doesn't have any treat non trivial homomorphism to SL to see that would show that they're
and in general this leads to consideration, consideration, considering of all representations of gamma into SL to see.
Right, and a, it's a, it's a very large set, often, and the SL to see acts on the set by conjugation.
And so we mathematics we often identified conjugate representations.
So let's consider the quotient of the space by this action.
And this is called the SL to see character variety of gamma.
And of course, of course, everything I did here can be done for any nice matrix group.
And so this is just as a to see here is just for simplicity.
And now I claim that this is naturally an algebraic set, which means what does that mean what it means it's a subset of some affine space.
Can be of large dimension, which is a solution of certain polynomial equations.
Okay, and so that's not an easy claim, intuitively to justify it so let's just look at an example.
Let's say gamma is a free group on two elements.
Then I claim the following that such representations are to conjugacy are determined by by three complex numbers by trace of raw of a trace of raw of B and trace of raw of AB.
And so I wouldn't order them by tows tow a tow B tow AB.
And in fact, I guess the non trivial part is, I claim that not only is determined but also that can be arbitrary.
And I am slightly, I'm slightly simplifying the truth here. But as I said, this is an overview talk so, so moral speaking, that is correct.
Well, this means that really you can identify a character variety of a free group on two generators with with triples of complex numbers. So this is a very simple type of an algebraic set.
Well, and of course, by the way, notice, at least, you know, this is not sure if I claim but at least notice that these quantities are invariant up to conjugacy are changed are invariant under conjugacy.
Because we are taking traces of matrices.
In any event, so now let's consider the free a billion group on AB.
A similar statement is true.
Again, each such representation is determined by this triple.
However, those numbers is not too difficult to prove that those numbers have to satisfy this identity or normal identity.
So, the character variety of Z two is the zero set where I claim this is the only identity, which they satisfy. So, this character variety is the zero set of this polynomial in C in C free.
Again, it's an algebraic set.
So we are in the realm of algebraic geometry, and in algebraic geometry, every algebraic set has an algebra of a number of functions on it, called its coordinate ring, denoted in this way.
This is a very important notion because you have an algebraic geometry have a duality between algebraic sets and certain nice.
What does the nice, what nice means here? Well, it means finally generated and no new potents coming at the fringes.
And in fact, every such ring with the coordinate ring of some algebraic set that termines it uniquely up to isomorphism.
So, in this case, the character variety, the coordinate ring of corrective variety is the quotient of this polynomial ring by by this identity.
And because this polynomial function is I start logically zero on on this set.
All right, so why I'm talking about character varieties out of sudden.
Well, because there's an old theorem of mine with use of Przetski and independently with Doug of Doug Bullock, which says that if you take R to be complex numbers a to be plus minus one and M to be any three dimensional manifold.
Then, as you remember, I told you before a moment ago that this is some commutative algebra, where you just take product of two knots or links to be just any disjoint union of them.
And we ask, what kind of algebra is that? Well, it turns out to be the coordinate ring of the character variety of the fundamental group of M.
And I don't remember now if I mentioned this to you about those tiles, which you saw on the previous slide.
These are called trace functions.
You can in fact define trace function for any element of the group, not just for those three.
And so those trace functions correspond to notes.
Okay, so what does morale is picking this means? Well, it means that scale model over say this ring is some sort of quantization or Q deformation of the coordinate ring of this character variety.
All right, this shouldn't be too surprising.
Because actually, character varieties play an important role in quantum field theories in different quantum field theories, including Sharon Simons field theory.
And so,
Wow, what I mentioned, or I hope to mention before, and maybe I forgot to mention that.
Let's just go quickly here.
So, this is integral over all connections by turns out the most important contribution comes from flat connections, whatever they mean.
And so now I claim that this character variety is really the space of all flat connections in a witness work for the group SL to see.
And then, since we are on the subject of character varieties, they also play a role important role in number theory.
And so, number theory, if you study number theory, maybe you heard of this topic of the formation spaces of Galois representations where people study representations of Galois groups into SL SL to with some coefficients up to conjugation so they also study
the character varieties. This is, for example, important in the proof of in, in, in the wildest proof of the last for mafia.
Yes, I think I'm lost in this theorems or in this theorem or your theorem together with Przetski.
Yeah, and turns out to be something. It is commutative. Yes, so why do we call it quantization.
Well, no, it's commutative specifically when a is equal to plus minus one.
Because, in fact, when when a is not plus minus one, we cannot even define in general multiplication.
So, okay, when I say this, of course, I mean here, you know, a is that q.
I should maybe just put a, I should put here. Well, yeah, whatever I can put a equal q.
Okay, okay, okay. Yeah, just one more question you said that in this huge path integral and not path integral integrating overall connections.
In fact, the main contribution comes from a flat connections.
Yeah.
So this phase of flat connections is really smaller. It's finite dimensional.
Correct. Yes.
And now I cannot find it.
So this is how physicists deal with this problem. Yes, they don't care. They, they only considered this finite dimensional.
Well, well, no, they need to care, but you can try to, you can try to take a limit when k goes to infinity.
You take this and then it turns out that in the limit, the non non flat connections indeed become insignificant.
If you take a limit of k going to infinity, so the skew will go to one, then indeed,
the infinite limit.
Yes, it's enough to look at the flat connections, but in, but unfortunately this doesn't help us with any of those particular integrals.
It tells us something what we can expect in the limit of k going to infinity.
Okay, thank you.
And yes, so this leads to this leads to asymptotic conjecture about this invariance, which are still open.
Okay, at least partially.
Okay. Yeah, so going back to that so.
Okay, so this is a very good question, of course, thank you because it's related to what I'm going to say so now.
If you took as you to support g equal as you to the tech uft of Russian into rf.
Well, remember it's supposed to associate spaces to surfaces.
And those those spaces are very closely related to the skin modules of of what free manifolds well of thick and surfaces.
So if your works for roots of unity, so you need to take a root of one.
So this is all related to that.
And now, going back to scale models in general.
You know the definition is quite short, but abstract so in fact they are very difficult to compute, as I said, you really did by definition you're dealing with a portion of something which is infinite dimensional by infinite
dimensional sub module.
So it's not easy to present them by generators and relations.
However, there's a surprising conjecture by within which was recently proved.
And the conjecture says that for any close manifold scale model is in fact, a finite dimensional.
Those guys use a high tech machinery to prove that.
And, and in this game models have relations to some advanced topics in in geometry.
In particular, they can be studied and they are related to to certain derived objects in algebraic geometry derived stacks to be precise.
And the conjecture that a gram of with an invariance as well.
Sorry, can I have a question what is the ring here, CA.
Well, this is the rational functions with complex coefficients and variable a.
Yeah, and some something about earlier. So you said that SM is an algebra, only when a is plus minus one correct yes.
Okay.
Yes.
I'm running out of time but let me hope at least to say to to cover perhaps this slide.
So, and so now let's consider an oriented surface Sigma and the free manifold being a thickening of Sigma.
And then this theory becomes richer because then actually for any queue, we have a product.
Okay, and the product is just given by stacking L one on top of L two. So for a thick and surface we know how to canonically put two links together one on top of the other.
And this is this scale model into non cumulative in general algebra called scale algebra of Sigma.
And which is noted by s Sigma.
All right, so for this ring.
This is some quantum deformation that this time is an algebra quantum deformation of the coordinate ring of character variety.
I will not be able to talk to cover a connect all those connections of, of this algebra with other objects.
But let me just say that these are examples of quantum cluster algebras. So now cluster algebras and quantum cluster algebras are popular and hot topic in in in algebra.
And they're also closely related to something called quantum fashion spaces of check off and talk is sorry of check off and cashier.
In fact, maybe I can even go bolder and say that, in fact, skin algebras are the best thing notion of what quantum space should be.
All right, and
well,
maybe, let me try to summarize it just in few words. And so, so kind of a few years ago extended scan algebras to state that scan algebras, which allow a, not just loops in in thickens in this manifold, but also arcs
with their ends at the bundle of Sigma.
And then the second bundle is gained relations which are needed to be added.
And this leads to a new rich theory of scan algebras of status gain algebras, they're called status because that must have assigned plus or minus.
And
let me quickly summarize what I wanted to say here.
It turns out that status gain algebras a bygone is in a natural way.
Isomorphic to the quantum group OQ SL to
and a well the product.
The product is given by stacking one one tango or one link on top of another. There is a co product here.
And by splitting a bygone into bygones.
Antipode is can be described geometrically as a rotation, how that they did rotation. So this gives a new approach to geometric approach to quantum group.
Okay, say it again how do you describe the antipode rotation by 180 degrees. Yes, right. Yep.
So, so this gives a completely geometric approach to quantum groups and in fact, allows to interpret certain, I would say mysterious abstract notions in the fear of quantum groups dramatically.
And what I will, well, let me just say very quickly that I'm just finishing a preprint work with Tangler, which frankly we work on it for the last two years.
It's quite, quite substantial amount of work.
And in which we generalize this theory to SLM.
And everything what I said about SL to can be done in SLM.
It's slightly more complicated involves and unveiling graphs.
But all everything what I stated so far, works for in that case.
And you really mean the standard to deformation of SLM groups right. Yes.
Maybe you could give a talk about an uncommitted jump to seminar about this.
Sure, I could do it. Yes, I could do it.
So, and so I am out of time.
And so I guess I will.
It's time for me to stop. Again, thank you for for listening and for inviting me.
Thank you very much. Let's thank Adam for his wonderful talk.
We were some questions during the talk, but it's never enough.
If you still want to torch Adam torment him with questions fired well.
Adam, why don't you go and Adam.
Okay, I see some question on the charts.
Okay, I'd like to add some comment and a question.
Well, at the beginning, you said that the value of some branch of mathematics can be somehow measured by by the way it connects with other branches of mathematics and science.
And we were talking about the connection of not not theory with physics with topology, but to me the most surprising was, was the connection with the theory of large Cardinals, which, well, which I have thought to be somehow isolated branch of
mathematics, maybe because I don't know much about this theory and I wouldn't like to offend anybody who is interested in it.
But, well, excellent question.
So, I don't have time to elaborate on this. And this is whole topic, but you know what, and I would say there's no matter what you intend to study, whether you study analysis or, or algebra, you just have to check that out.
So, the term to look is lever tables.
And it's just amazing. The story is quite amazing.
Could you please repeat.
Well, I'm saying.
Well, you see here on the screen I wrote the lever tables. And I hope, I hope I'm not miss miss miss pronouncing it.
Maybe I am.
Okay.
And the audience who knows what I'm talking about because I tried to, I'm trying to figure out my spelling. My spelling is not perfect.
But there is a suggestion.
The lever tables. Okay.
I saw what I was saying is, you know, even if no matter what area of mathematics you are interested in read about that because this is just mind blowing. Okay.
But, but in general, you know, it's connected to questions about large cardinals what are large cardinals like.
Well, I don't know, you can ask.
You can ask what you can ask about Cardinals larger than that that I left zero.
Yeah, I cannot. I will have to think harder to tell you a reasonable question about large cardinals and some of them, some of them are a possibly independent of sort of Franklin.
Some of them are not.
You can ask whether such a large cardinal exists or not. Anyways, this is related to that and that is related to braiding and it's very, very weird story.
Okay, I will.
I will take a look. Thank you. Yeah, you're welcome.
Can I ask again? Oh, sure.
So, for a simple minded person, when it comes to quantum field theory, what is what is the connection with this quantum field theory, understanding the terms of weakman axioms.
I don't know one.
Okay, so let me stop logical quantum field theory relates to the axioms of quantum field theory, the weakman axioms.
Oh, well, now.
So now you stamped me because I don't know, you know, I'm frankly not an expert in quantum field theory, I don't know a Whitman axioms, but shouldn't they be similar to to this.
Oh, no, this is, this is a construction of distributions operator value distributions so this is somehow for me at least a different flavor but
I'm definitely not an expert on this. Yes, I unfortunately I cannot comment about that. This, this quite to field theory is topological because many quantum field theories depend on the metric on the space M and this one does not.
But a, you know, I don't know about Whitney Whitman axioms unfortunately.
Okay.
All right, anybody else.
Anybody else from the audience on site.
I didn't see any raised hands.
How about folks from the zoom
raised hands so in this case let us thank Adam again for his fascinating talk and exposition of not theory.
Thank you.
Oh, now we are slowly coming to an end. So it's time to conclude our meeting.
The last talk of our school as they say all as well that ends well.
And I think we can say that ever and I brought it to a happy end.
And I'd like to take this opportunity to thank the been level team for the hospitality we at the beginning of a conference we think basically almost everybody.
The Banach Center first and foremost but if you want to bend level is part of the Banach Center, a disconnected component if you want.
And I must say that the way we're taking care of was quite amazing many things went wrong many things were problematic but the point is that the problems were immediately resolved.
I think that they went beyond the call of duty in meeting our needs needs.
And in particular, my big fat thank you goes to the IT person and you know, I forgot his surname.
And of course to the director of and level who is a small one with my leg and they really helped us a lot but I think I can say about the whole staff and level that they really took very good care of us and we appreciate it.
And as a punishment for very good deeds ever and I plan to organize the same type of a meeting in about a year, but for a time being, I think, the meeting is concluded.
Yes, but let me thank again the students. I mean there were six.
There was a committee of six students who put a great deal of work and let me recall their names once again.
Jakub Krzyszto, Kacper Mazur, David Miigacz, Daria Perkowska, Patrick Prevendowski and Karolina Stefanczyk without their work, nothing would be done.
And I just remembered it was Micha Doroch.
Okay.
Okay.
So now we named everybody.
Okay, so thank you guys.
The meeting has ended. I stopped the recording.
