You're listening to The Great Simplification with Nate Hagins, that's me.
On this show, we try to explore and simplify what's happening with energy, the economy,
the environment and our society.
Together with scientists, experts and leaders, this show is about understanding the bird's
eye view of how everything fits together, where we go from here and what we can do about
it as a society and as individuals.
Today's episode, we will be talking with Chuck Watson.
I've known Chuck for about 15 years when we used his damage infrastructure
maps on the oil drum dot com.
Every time there was a hurricane that was threatening the oil and gas
infrastructure in the Gulf of Mexico.
But over the years, I've come to know Chuck and realize that he is one of the
smartest humans I've ever met.
And he pairs his intelligence with wisdom, which is a trait that I really value.
Chuck has worked on risk in many fields related to civilization.
And he's worked for governments, for government agencies and in the private sector.
And to be honest, I don't even know the particulars of Chuck's professional
background, because it's complicated and confidential.
And I'm probably not supposed to know.
Suffice to say that Chuck has become a friend, a colleague, and is on a team of
humans trying to educate and wake people up on the risks that we collectively face.
This episode surprised me because we ended up talking about a risk that most
people don't talk about, which is geopolitics and the increasing chance
of a nuclear exchange.
I hope you learned some things as I did about this increasingly important
underlying risk to our future.
Here's a conversation with Chuck Watson.
So, Chuck, you and I have known each other going on 15 years.
We met when you were doing risk analysis for the hurricane impact on Gulf
of Mexico oil infrastructure when I was running the oil drum.
And we've become friends and collaborators and often compare notes about
the world situation.
But you are a risk expert.
You've spent your whole life analyzing risk.
And my job right now is telling stories about the human predicament to leaders,
government officials, students, the general public.
And risk is kind of a central theme to my work, the human predicament, because
we face so many risks at different timescales, at different levels of consequence.
But how do we even deal with risk?
How do we understand risk?
I don't think our modern world is one that our ancestors ever had to deal with.
So could you just start us off by explaining what risk is and how our society
thinks about it and how we should think about it and we'll go from there?
Yeah, it's interesting because you really can't untangle risk from uncertainty
from the decision-making process.
And in fact, a lot of what I end up doing ends up only indirectly being what
you would call risk in the sense of what are the odds something bad is going to
happen or not happen.
A lot of it boils down to looking at data, looking at the uncertainty in that data,
looking at how do you convert that data into information?
In other words, so let's say you've got this climate model or you've got this model
of the probability of a nuclear war happening or some obscure thing like that.
Well, OK, that model has information, has data going into it.
You're then crunching that data, creating more data, derived data, technically.
Then you're going to look at that and try to convert that into something actionable.
Some information is what I tend to call actionable data.
It's boiled down.
It's something that you think you understand.
You think it's I hate to use the word truth and facts.
And we can talk about that a little bit later because as you're saying,
a lot of the work you do and a lot of your emphasis has been on how us fire apes
try to navigate a modern world.
And I think that's so critical because we don't deal with a lot of high
consequence, low probability situations.
And so if you think of something like a hurricane and a hurricane coming
and making landfall someplace, well, a bad hurricane may be a one in 50 year event.
It may be a one in 100 year kind of thing.
So that's usually at or outside our lifetime experience.
So, you know, maybe we heard about it from our parents or a grandparent or a story
we read about, but it's not really real to us till it happens to us.
So that tends to create a problem that we call risk homeostasis,
which is one of those fancy words and other piece of this that's kind of interesting.
But, you know, nothing happens for a long time.
We make decisions, we do things, we run red lights, we speed a little bit.
Nothing bad happens.
Then that one day when we're speeding or that one day we run the red light
and somebody else comes barreling through the intersection.
Uh oh, well, we didn't get away with it that time.
So then that creates an opposite problem that when something bad happens to us
within our short frame time experience, we overreact to it.
So we tend to sweep the pendulum swings based on our short term experiences.
And so that has a huge problem propagating through the whole process.
We tend to overreact to risks we've experienced recently and
underreact to risks that we haven't experienced recently.
Well, actually we underreact to events that we haven't experienced,
but the risk was still there.
If there was a 10% or a 20% risk of some of nuclear war or something,
but there was no nuclear war, our brains emotionally think that odds
were 0%, even though it was 10% and we navigated it.
So I can think of several examples of where that's relevant and why it makes
yours and my work more difficult, specifically the financial problems with debt.
We've never really had a deflationary Minsky moment in the financial markets.
Every time we've run into problems, the central banks or other institutions
have come to the rescue.
So it seems like we can continue to borrow indefinitely without a problem.
Another is in your field, nuclear war or nuclear exchange.
We've never really had an event like that in the last 50 years,
but the risks have been non negligible.
So what you're saying on risk homeostasis is that psychologically,
our brains over and underreact to our perception of risks.
And in this case with financial and nuclear risk is we've made it through a lot
of metaphorical landmines and therefore our behaviors naturally take on more risk
because we were never faced with the consequences.
Is that correct?
Yeah, exactly.
And you can look at that in lots of fields.
And one of the areas where a lot of research and a lot of really interesting
papers were done on this is trying to study NASA after the Challenger accident.
You had an initial engineering study, which basically said, don't launch below 40 degrees.
Well, they came in and one time did a launch at 38 degrees and everything was fine.
Then you do another launch.
Well, we got away with it at that time.
What we can shave another degree off.
And so you keep resetting your window until it doesn't work.
And then what happened after Challenger, the opposite.
They bumped the criteria up to where they weren't launching.
Oh, there's a rain shower out of the Bahamas.
We better not go today because it's it's potentially risky and we don't understand it.
And so the pendulum swings and we tend to underreact or overreact to and you're
correct in the terminology to the hazard, you underreact or overreact to that hazard
based on your short term experience, even though the probabilities haven't changed.
So you've told me before that low risk often means high consequences.
Can you explain what that means and why that's relevant today?
Sure. So you look at something like, again,
Hurricane is probably the one that people are familiar with that the low
probability events, the one in a hundred year events, if you look at, say,
the U.S. economic system, that's a hundred to one hundred and fifty billion
dollar event, if you look at long term.
Now, that's where you get into a problem because what was again,
using the hurricane example, we are with because of growth,
because of development in the coastal zone, population growth.
What used to be a fifty billion dollar event is now a one hundred billion dollar event.
So I've seen, for instance, Noah just published a new set of billion
dollar disasters. And if you look at it, it looks all front loaded.
It's or back loaded. It's all happened in the last 10 years.
That's just because the coastal zone has two or three times as much
exposure on it. So there's more stuff there to break.
Well, that gets into the whole decision making process as well.
And you can call it the law of unintended consequences or how trying
to fix one thing breaks something else, FEMA flood zone regulations.
So we go in and go, well, you know, we've got this stuff in the coastal zone.
Let's increase the building codes and make it so that you have to build
something that's not as vulnerable. Well, OK,
let's say you reduce your vulnerability by half, but it costs you five times
as much to build that thing. Well, guess what?
Your lost costs, your lost probabilities are actually bigger
after you made this supposedly smart fix than it was before.
So that's where you've got to be really careful in making sure
risk, probability, uncertainty, hazards.
It's a dynamic landscape, the floods we just had in the Midwest.
Again, that's a hazard where if you look at it,
it was maybe a 50 year rainfall event.
But the problem is we had built, there was a Walmart Supercenter
and Distribution Center that was built paved surfaces.
All that water that used to absorb into the ground was now running off
into those creeks and ended up flowing right through that town.
So just because you have an event and you understand what that risk is today.
Now, next year, you may design a 25 year plan based on that risk.
And in three or four years, it may be invalid because something else changed.
So here's a dumb question.
How does the risk homeostasis kind of morph into the risk singularity
in our culture? For instance, we have endocrine disrupting chemicals.
We have climate change. We have biodiversity loss.
We have resource limits. We have financial limits.
We have geopolitical risk.
We have all the things that you're working on and many other things.
If we did the appropriate thing to avert all those risks,
that would be like the entire focus of our economy.
How do we invest a little to protect against these?
And you talk about one in 100 years, nuclear war or climate change
of the of the risks that are being discussed are kind of one in a species
sort of timeline. Yeah.
So how do we even think about all these risks?
And maybe you could explain the concept of how risks are additive or not,
because if you have seven risks and they're all 10 percent chance of happening,
what is the math of that?
Maybe just explain how we think about all this, because to me,
it seems like we're living in a world of unbelievably numerous risks
and they're not all independent.
There's some overlap and some of them trigger others.
How can we think about all that?
Yeah. And that's a problem that goes back to the problem
with how humans perceive their world.
So you hit on a really good one, because a lot of people would look at it
and go, well, climate, you do climate and you do nuclear war.
How do those two mesh?
And of course, they mesh quite a bit and the probabilities are all
interwoven in an extremely complex way.
So what happens if there's even a small scale exchange of nuclear weapons?
And let's, you know, I can think of multiple scenarios,
but one that's on people's mind right now is Ukraine.
And you think of what might happen there where the U.S.
gets involved and starts to lose a conventional conflict.
Well, we've changed the rules of engagement and we've changed the U.S.
has how it thinks about tactical nuclear weapons and has expanded the arsenal
and expanded the situations in which we think it would be appropriate.
It used to be, you think of the 60s and the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Everybody just assumed once you start slinging tactical nuclear weapons around,
it's going to end up going strategic with the big missile exchanges.
Let me pause you right there.
The U.S. has a as a unique position on this, right?
We're the only country that is allowed to use nukes.
Can you explain the situation there?
Yeah, that's the U.S.
has all of the other countries.
Israel is a little bit ambiguous on it, but all of the other countries
basically have a no first use policy.
They've declared that they will not be the first to use a nuclear weapon.
And it is some nuances to it.
For instance, Russia has been very clear in stating that they will not be
the first to use a nuclear weapon unless it's an existential and they've gone on.
And there's documentation what they consider to be an existential event,
like armies crossing the border and pushing deep end and Moscow is besieged
those kind of circumstances.
So essentially what they're saying is we're not going to use nukes unless
we're about to collapse.
The U.S. has said, well, you know, we'll use them for a lot of other things.
So, for instance, the U.S.
has said that it will it is willing to use tactical nuclear weapons
in response to cyber attacks.
Imagine that that is actually US doctrine.
I can send you the documentation that that shows that.
How can we get away with that is because we're top dog on the military
and that's the way we can the only way that other countries won't
band together and reject our policy.
I don't understand.
I don't really understand it either.
And it's partly why I don't think Americans fully appreciate
the extent of to which America is not respected in the world.
We're feared, but when it comes to being a moral, ethical leader,
countries deal with the U.S.
and do what we tell them to not because they like us, not because we're
the shining city on the hill anymore, but because they're afraid of us.
And because we're like the slightly crazy guy that you want to move
carefully and not make sudden moves around and understand that kills me to say that.
Because, you know, I my first experience is working for the U.S.
governor, I served in the Air Force in the 1980s.
I've been as a consultant to a wide variety of agencies, you know,
literally shed blood for this country.
It just kills me to have to say that.
But I go into international meetings and it's that level of respect
for the moral authority of the U.S., the moral position of it just
has completely evaporated since, I would say, the mid 1990s.
So to conclude that or to draw that thought to a close,
that the U.S. is not only what we say
because when you're looking from an intelligence standpoint,
you its capability, its intent and its capacity.
It's what you know what you're saying you're going to do.
And then are you building the tools you need to do that?
So the U.S. has just started production on the B61-2 nuclear weapons,
which is going to mean almost nothing to most of your audience.
But that's essentially a new class of selectable yield weapons
that can be carried on fighter aircraft.
Here's another dumb question.
Sorry to interrupt.
Why do we need more nuclear weapons?
We have enough in the world to destroy the world hundreds of times over.
What's the logic of we need a few more?
Oh, you're now into the wonderful world of acronyms.
And this is an important point.
If you look at the 60s, 70s, 80s, the Cold War with Russia,
other two prevailing schools of thought developed
around nuclear weapons, the one that most people are familiar with
is mutual assured destruction or MAD.
And that's the one that says you start using nukes.
Their their value is deterrent
because basically once you cross that threshold,
it's going to get out of hand and kill everybody.
And so that basically says the only reason you have a nuclear weapon
is to keep the other guy from using it on you
and you build a survivable deterrent.
So you don't have a first strike capacity.
So every nobody dies.
In other words, nobody uses the weapons for everybody dies.
Mutual assured destruction, the second school of thought,
which actually was one that I got my initial training in is called nuts.
And first off, only humans can come up with acronyms
like MAD and nuts to talk about nuclear bombs.
Nuts is nuclear utilization targeting strategy.
It's a school of thought that says you can use nuclear weapons.
They're just another weapon system.
It's another part of your mix.
And so you can plan to use them
and that there are breakpoints between
tactical use, operational use and strategic use.
In other words, you can get away with using small nukes
to get selected military targets without significant risk
of escalating to a general exchange.
So if you look at that, so let's look at Russian weapons systems,
US weapons systems, the Russian weapons tend to be large,
yield and dirty, which says if you use them,
there's a lot of bad consequences.
And that's the trend that they have tended towards over time
and stuck with China, essentially the same thing.
They're not building a lot of these small,
yield, selectable, yield kind of weapons.
It's the big ones. It's the deterrent weapons.
The US over the last 20 years has been going towards building smaller,
more easily delivered, the W88-2,
which is able to be launched on submarine-launched ballistic missiles.
That's an extremely dangerous weapon,
because you don't know if you see a submarine
launching one of these at you.
Is it one of those small weapons that's going for a small target
or is it part of, is it the beginning of a general exchange?
So it's very destabilizing.
So if you look at leaving politics
and just leaving aside and putting the intelligence hat on,
if you look at the kinds of weapons that the US is building,
it's saying we're building weapons that we intend to use
for tactical use, not just for deterrence and assured destruction.
And it's not just the US.
There's other countries that are going from mad to nuts, right?
Not so much.
If you look at, say, what Russia is doing is very interesting.
Their weapons systems of unguarded,
cleansed all these different systems,
they actually are gearing more towards precise, targeted,
hypersonic weapons carrying conventional weapons.
So they're trying to avoid that nuclear threshold
by building advanced conventional weapons
that can inflict tremendous damage on military targets
and are virtually unstoppable in the sense
that it's very hard to target and counteract
an incoming hypersonic weapon.
So I assume based on your recent comments
and conversations in the past that you think nuts is nuts.
Yeah, I don't think it's a smart strategy,
especially if the other side Russia is saying,
look, you use a nook, you've crossed the threshold,
we're going to have to act as though you have crossed that threshold
and are going to be using strategic weapons.
China has essentially said the same thing.
And so, you know, do you balance what people say
they're going to do, what their weapons mixes look like,
what they're going to do?
Russia, at least, is building a capacity to at least shoot down
small scale tactical nuclear weapons.
That scares the US, quite frankly,
because you look at a lot of our weapons are the cruise missiles
are reaching a point of obsolescence
against the advanced Russian air defense systems.
If you launch a salvo, very few of those are going to get through,
which means you're going to want to increase the yields on those salvos.
It's in a very complex calculations on that.
But it's a messy situation and it's dangerous.
We're going to get back to that
because I have some some deep questions to ask you about that.
But getting back to how this started, how do we think about risk?
And you were explaining how climate and nukes are interrelated
and you were talking about Russia.
But I mean, all this stuff just compounds on each other, the different risks.
It does. And that's a great point, Nate.
And what I was trying to get back to was, OK, I do a lot of climate modeling.
I've been a peer review scientist on my PCC.
You would think at least the public side of a lot of my work
is with weather, geophysical hazards, that kind of thing.
So if someone asks me, what's the greatest risk humanity is facing?
Because right now, most people are saying, oh, it's climate.
And to me, you have to when you're looking at hazards and risk,
you got to know what timeframe you're thinking about.
And you ask, how should you think about risk?
Well, this is that process is, OK, if you look at the 100 year timeframe,
yeah, climate is probably the biggie.
We're radically changing our climate systems
and it's going to change agriculture.
It's going to change whether you can live within 100 miles of the coast.
There's Florida going to be underwater,
which may or may not be a bad thing, depending on what you think of Florida.
So if you look at those kinds of things,
100 year climate environmental issues, if you look at a 50 year timeframe,
there's some people that would still say client.
But I know me and you would be saying, no, it's financial risk.
It's resource depletion.
It's those kinds of things that start to really look at
that we're on a growth curve that is just not sustainable.
And so we would probably think in those terms.
But what's the biggest risk in the next 12 to 24 months?
Surprisingly, it's nuclear war.
And in my estimation, what's worse in one sense,
and one of my favorite catchphrases, as you know, is it's worse than that,
is, of course, if you have a small scale nuclear exchange, guess what?
You've just triggered all those other risks.
You've just melted down the financial system and
imagine what would happen to the markets, to global commerce.
If a war broke out where people start slinging nuclear weapons around,
even if and even a small scale exchange, as some of the recent studies
publicly available now are showing that,
especially exchanges with the modern nuclear weapons mixes,
like the US is looking at using where you're ejecting a lot of soot.
There it's not the airburst you think of as the 1960s strategic.
You're going after hard and buried targets,
which throws a lot of stuff into the atmosphere.
That stuff comes down generally in the oceans.
What happens if you shut down
phytoplankton production in the Atlantic for a year,
which is what even a dozen or so tactical nuclear weapons could do?
So you just caused a cascading environmental catastrophe,
even with the small scale nuclear exchange.
So in the in the 1970s, everyone was worried about nuclear war
and no one was very few people were worried about climate change.
And now 50 years on, everyone is talking about climate change.
And virtually no one is talking about nuclear war.
It's kind of a flip of that conversation,
despite them being linked, like you say.
Yeah, exactly.
And again, it's if you look at the risks now, I would argue.
And again, my I've entered government service
and my career began in the early 1980s.
So I lived, I had to study the Cuban Missile Crisis.
I didn't I wasn't alive or just a baby at the time.
But you look at I did live through the Abel Archer incident.
I live through reforge the reforger incidents.
I don't know what those are.
Yeah. And see, that's it.
You don't know what those are.
And you probably you've heard of the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Yes. You probably did not hear about Abel Archer.
I'm sure you don't know what the Christina Airport incident in 1999.
That was when the so-called peacekeeping forces in Yugoslavia,
when it was disintegrating, just a quick summary of it.
You had Russian forces that occupied an airport as part of the Serbia force.
And then you had the NATO forces had come in.
Russia had occupied an airport that NATO was expecting to occupy.
And General Wesley Clark actually ordered a British airborne unit
to go and take that airfield away from the Russians
and order them to open fire on them.
And one of the reasons I don't care for General Clark,
he ordered them to open fire on it.
It was really a misunderstanding and miscoordination.
Yet here we had the NATO commander ordering.
We ordered Lieutenant General Jackson to as a British commander
to go in and by force, we take that field.
Well, my Jackson told Clark, look, I'm not going to start World War Three for you.
That's his exact words.
So, you know, that's just here in the last little over 20 years.
There have been other incidents where we've actually come close to these kind of exchanges.
So I read two reasons why, one, we don't have access to that sort of information.
But perhaps more importantly, even if we did have access,
that's such a thing that shuts down human agency so much that it's like,
I don't want to hear about that because there's nothing I can do about it.
Or at least there's a perception there's nothing I can do about it.
So what you're saying then in the field of nuclear exchange,
peer on peer globally, that we have in experienced risk homeostasis.
In other words, in the last 50 years, the odds of global nuclear war
have been much greater than zero, even though emotionally,
we feel like there was virtually no risk.
Wasn't there a paper written or something that the last 50 years
there was like a 60 percent chance of nuclear war or something like that?
I don't remember.
Yeah, that was a PNAS paper that was done a couple of years ago.
And there have been other papers and other journals that have come up with 40 to 60 percent.
Some will go as low as 30 percent.
But most of the thinking is that it was if you want to say a coin flip,
whether or not we wipe ourselves out, that's probably pretty reasonable.
And it's important.
I think it was actually higher than that.
Higher than 60 percent.
Yeah, I don't know how we did not end up blowing ourselves up.
And right now, how we've managed to avoid it.
And, you know, again, if you look at these incidents,
there's someone familiar with that you can't really discuss too much.
But you look at, again, the Pristina incident,
you look at the B, the submarine incident during the Cuban Missile Crisis.
All of these incidents.
And I sometimes joke with people.
And the sad thing is, it's not really a joke.
Is I said, well, you know, I personally stop global nuclear war
on three separate occasions.
Once it wasn't even my fault for almost starting it.
And, you know, what it boils down to is how many times we came so close
and it was one person, the fire breaks didn't seem to work right.
The normal processes, you know, it was down to the individual.
It was the actions of one individual and had it been a different person there.
Had it been slightly different circumstances, the probabilities,
you can't calculate that.
And the plus side, and this gets back to why I'm afraid of the current situation.
On the plus side, you said, human agency, individual human beings, you know,
need to you look into the abyss, the abyss looks back and maybe you turn away
from the abyss and I think that's what happened in a lot of cases.
But what happens when you're no longer afraid of a nuclear conflict?
And that's what concerns me about the current generation of American leaders.
You're just here in the last week, we've had two separate congressmen say,
well, you know, in the situation in Ukraine, we need to kill some Russians.
Imagine someone saying that in 1970 or 80 or 60.
Yeah, we need to make a point.
We need to kill some Russians.
You're talking about whether you agree or disagree, whatever you think of the
the Russian government or our situation in the relative geopolitics.
You're talking about shooting at military forces of a
global nuclear power.
I mean, my God, is that where we are?
I know one of the reasons that you agreed to do this conversation with me
is because you deeply care about this and hope that something can be done about it.
Would more public awareness of these risks help?
What can we do to make a nuclear exchange globally
less inevitable than than you're kind of painting it?
Well, and that gets to all of these other problems.
All of these have a common thread, whether it's
nuclear risk or environmental risk, which, you know, the climate system
or financial system, it all comes down to governance.
Oh, governance.
OK, I was going to say we have a brain mismatch with our ancestral environment.
So you're taking it a step further and it's governance.
Governance is how we overcome this.
And that's another thing, too.
I think we sometimes forget is and I really love your expression,
fiery, because that to me really captures kind of where we are.
And the other expression that said derogatory way sometimes is
you'll say, you know, here people say that a situation is like
monkeys in a nuclear power plant.
Yeah, you know, that's actually what we are monkeys running,
trying to run a nuclear power plant.
And of course, we're smart enough to build these things.
And are we really smart enough to manage them properly?
And the problem is when you start to how you run these systems,
a lot of our instincts like tribalism and our lack of under our lack
of ability to perceive more than the short term gain.
And that gets into as you're talking about brain chemistry
and all those other factors, all this boiled down to how do we
create systems of governance that take into account the complexity
of the modern world, the extreme dangers, but also the extreme
opportunities of a lot of these technologies.
We've talked recently, and of course, all in the news about
artificial intelligence and the networking and all of these things,
CRISPR gene editing and all of these amazing technologies
that have come into play.
And yes, even nuclear for nuclear power and being able to do these
kinds of things to make the world a better place, make it safer for us
and make it safer for the dolphins, make it safer and better for the environment.
This technologies can go either way.
But unfortunately, what tends to happen is our instincts,
our tribalism, the need for getting that rush of power and success
and accumulating stuff even well beyond the point where it makes
any difference to us.
So we've got to build systems of governance that are capable of dealing
with the fact we are basically just toolmaking animals.
You know, we still have all those drives.
We need to make sure that there are mechanisms in place to manage that aspect
and make the take advantage of the opportunities of all the amazing
technologies that we've developed while minimizing their risks.
And so that's not a good place to be in a lot of ways,
because our current systems of governance are utterly incapable.
And they're, in fact, aggravating and making those technologies more dangerous.
I'm going to come back to that because that's the heart of it.
But you said something else that made me question something.
You brought up dolphins and I'm just wondering the example you gave earlier
that some 10 or 12 nukes exchange would shut down because of the soot
in the atmosphere would shut down the food webs in the Atlantic Ocean.
Yeah. What about the Pacific Ocean?
Would the dolphins there be okay and the food webs just be slightly less affected?
Or is this a global thing or a regional thing?
No, no, that was probably hemisphere.
If you're talking a small scale exchange and I just use the Atlantic as a
example because I'm sitting here just a couple of miles from the Atlantic.
So again, that's narrow human interest.
It's like, I care about the Atlantic, what goes on in the Pacific.
That water is cold and I can't swim in it anymore.
So but yeah, you're right.
It's we're talking about a hemispheric kind of thing for a small scale exchange.
Of course, a global exchange, you're screwing everything up.
Why aren't people in the climate community talking about this at all?
Largely because the majority of the information and the parameters
you need to do these simulations are largely classified.
So that's a major issue.
You can winkle out some of this from public documents.
And that's what the public studies have been done in the last few years.
You go back to even the landmark studies that Carl Sagan and the crew did
with nuclear winter scenarios in the 70s.
So it's possible to do it.
But it's also if you look at who's going to fund that kind of a study,
well, it's probably going to be Defense Department or one of the defense related
think tanks, what are they going to do?
They're going to classify it.
So it's never going to reach the public view.
And especially if you're talking about
doing something that's limiting a weapon system that you feel like
you need to build, then maybe you're not even going to look at it that closely.
So this brings up another question, just thinking out loud.
I'm just starting this podcast.
You're one of my few guests.
But for better or worse, I'm a systems synthesis and I'm trying to put together
energy, money, the environment, the brain as individual and aggregate levels,
governance, politics, geopolitics.
And it strikes me that I want to help society navigate what's coming.
And there's a universe of things that are true and relevant and interesting.
But a big chunk of that are things that create information hazard that actually
won't be helpful if people hear them.
A big chunk of that is things are depressing to people.
And a big chunk of that is things that will get me canceled in culture
because people won't want to hear them.
And what's left is then less relevant to our real situation.
I just had that thought as you were speaking.
Do you have any thoughts on that or?
Welcome to my world, because if you look at virtually any of the areas I work in,
it's pretty depressing.
And if you go in and try to do an earthquake plan for a community and you're
going to tell them, well, you're basically, you're one in 500 chance,
you're going to get wiped out.
The instinct is to say, well, why do anything about it?
Because it's either not going to happen in my lifetime or be my kids or
grandkids, so who cares?
And the other thing that tends to happen, again, it's a human nature thing.
And particularly in the U.S., when you're talking about doing community
planning is, well, the federal government will help us out if it gets bad enough
because it won't affect the whole country.
The kind of risks that we're talking about affect the whole country at once.
There won't be any help coming.
So it's complicated.
And what I try to do is figure out, well, what are the things that help in the
short term against the hazards people see every day or are more likely to see?
And then how do you blend that so that it's also dealing and taking the edge
off some of the longer term hazards?
So if you look at, say, like a hurricane coming in, you can look at something
like, well, beach renourishment, adding more sand on the beach, protecting
your sand dunes, well, that's helping the environment.
It's helping tourism because now you've got a nice place for people to go
and it's protecting against the hurricanes.
So it's hard, but you have to find things that will help with those big risks
that help on the small end.
And I think that's where we keep coming back to governance because, OK,
good governance means the trash gets picked up on time.
It means you've got a system where you've got a good solid health care system.
It means you've got a stable economic system.
It's all those kinds of things that blends together.
And it also means you're less likely to suffer from these catastrophic big risks.
So let's go down that rabbit hole a little bit.
There was such a thing that we might agree was good governance 50 years ago,
80 years ago, 150 years ago.
But what's happening now is this phase shift towards first social limits to growth.
In other words, the economy globally and nationally is still growing,
but it's being shared now by fewer people.
So a lot of people have not experienced growth in the last 30 years,
which leads to polarization that and and social media and AI
and some of the other things we could talk about.
But governance today seems like it's placed on a game board
that makes good governance the way Walter Cronkite might have described it less possible.
So we are undergoing in real time a phase shift in governance in a negative way.
Given all the risks that you and I talk about,
what sort of governance structure could we look to in the future to help?
And how do we get that started?
I have no idea.
Yeah, that's a real tough one.
I can see a system that would work,
but I don't know how we get there because it would make a lot of people mad.
If you look at one, and actually that raises a really interesting point
because we started the discussion, you can start and design something
that may be perfectly fine for the conditions that you face now.
But then over time, the conditions change
and then you start tweaking it in ways that doesn't work.
And I would say the US government is a prime example,
something small that looks on the surface like a good idea.
Senate making the Senate popularly elected.
The Senate used to represent the states and the state governments,
but that change of now they represent people.
They're popularly elected on the surface. Oh, that's great.
That's more democracy. That's better.
But it also really screws things up because the original system
was designed around these sovereign states.
So now we've got the split system where the states still have tremendous power.
You know, the president and the authority really
don't order you to wear a mask during a pandemic, for instance,
but the state governors do.
Well, that's a real problem because now you've got individual states
with individual leaders who have very different worldviews
who may or may not want to go along with it, either for religious beliefs
or science beliefs or just a sheer political order in this.
So you just how do you.
So the system that was fine for 18th century
with sovereign states, limited communications,
you tweak it in a way that you think, oh, we've got better communications.
Now we can make it more democratic by making it more democratic.
You broke it.
So don't you think that trend is going to accelerate the battle
between state governors and the federal bureaucracy,
president, executive branch as as events unfold in the next decade?
I think so. And I think you're seeing that to an extent now.
The problem is, as you know, there's been a lot talking about risks
and systemic risk within, say, the US political system.
It's a real problem.
People talk about civil war or talk about breaking up.
Well, it's not that simple because you look at a state like Georgia,
which ordinarily you would consider, even though we ended up with two
Democrat senators this time, the reason for that is
there's a very deep urban rural divide.
And so if you do go down that road, and I don't think we will for a number of reasons,
but if you went down a road to a to a serious
conflict, civil war type situation, there's no boundaries.
There's no it's not like North and South, where you get two completely
different economic systems and two different social systems.
It's within a state, even within a city.
I mean, here in Chatham County, you've got the county, the suburbs
are largely Republican, you've got the urban areas that are Democrat.
How are you going to split that up and even have a it's just going to disintegrate
the chaos? It's not going to disintegrate into any kind of an organized conflict.
So here's a conundrum that I'm emotionally processing in real time,
talking with you. I can make the case for the type of things that you're saying
should only be said to elites who can change them.
At the same time, the elites are a product of our population
and our virtue and our values and our engagement with the issues of the world.
So how can your message and your knowledge about the risks that we all face,
including the granddaddy of all, which is some peer to peer nuclear conflict,
how can that be helped by more general public awareness?
And I'll I'll I'll just put it bluntly.
There's a reason you don't do a lot of podcasts and and we're willing to do this
because you are very worried about this.
And clearly, you think there is a path forward to both change our governance
and somehow defuse the growing nuclear risks in our world.
What do you think?
Yeah, and that hits to a vital problem that we have.
And that's information and how information flows
and how we've got this rupture now of people classifying things as misinformation.
In my experience, there's less misinformation.
It's more isolated, correct data points that are then being misinterpreted.
And so you look at what you mentioned about elites about governance.
Say, I believe that you've had Dick Epphart as a guest on your podcast
and talking about the Iraq War 2003, how that information you would think
had a leader of this nation end up with that kind of bad information about WMD.
Right. And it was pretty much unanimous at that point.
Colin Powell believed it.
I mean, everyone believed it.
Well, you say everyone believed it.
Analysts didn't believe it.
People at my level absolutely didn't believe it.
And again, I was involved in some of that.
And I can tell you nobody really believed it.
The problem is when you get higher in the organization,
you start to get selection bias.
It starts to be if you're given information, something that's maybe,
for instance, chemical weapon precursors.
Well, that was the big deal during the Iraq thing.
And it's like, oh, well, Iraq has chemical weapon precursors.
Well, today you get a bifurcation.
People say, oh, well, you know, Bush lied.
They didn't lie.
They were actually correct.
There were precursors there.
But guess what, Nate?
Every Home Depot is a supermarket of mass destruction, from my perspective.
I mean, you've got chemical weapons precursors in Home Depot, in Walmart,
and all these other places.
So if you're doing an intelligence analyst and analysis, you then come back to,
well, OK, is it militarily significant?
And maybe if you've decided on a course of action
and you're trying to justify that course of action,
you don't talk about whether it's militarily significant or not.
You just basically throw out, well, we're worried
because someday they may have that capacity.
So that's what we're going to push.
So you start to select and go, you focus on, oh, wow, precursors.
Not reading or not caring about the wider picture.
It's like, well, we can't ever let it get beyond precursors.
So that's where the problem is what makes good leadership,
what makes good decision making, certainly what makes someone
giving some of the ability to be elected.
Those are different talent sets.
And again, how do you blend all that to get into a good governance?
Underpinning all that is the fact that humans prefer simplicity and certainty.
We don't like uncertainty.
So we prefer messages that are simple and confident about a path.
And our world is incredibly complex and nuanced and fraught with risk.
So there's the individual human behavior aspect.
And then there's what manifests in governance and leadership.
And this reminds me why I never call you on a Monday
because you usually get my week off to a bad start.
And after this podcast, I'm going to go decompress with my dogs.
But we're alive at this time, my friend.
And we have to play a role in in diffusing these risks.
So getting back to the nuclear risk, maybe maybe just expand a little bit
if you would be willing.
I've read the news like most people have.
There's Saber rattling with Ukraine and Russia and the U.N.
and the U.S. role in the U.N.
And it seems to be being diffused a little.
But you seem to think that there are significant odds in the next 12 to 24
months that that gets out of hand.
If that's true, are you aware that two days ago, like it's three days ago now,
Russia basically delivered the U.S.
and NATO and ultimatum?
No, I was busy chopping wood and making a colorful video about energy.
I've been watching the news here in the U.S.
and in Europe, and it amazes me how little our current
government seems to I'm not on the inside anymore.
But just from what I'm seeing on the surface, on the outside,
what happened to all the old Russia hands, the old Soviet people
that understood what was going on and understood communications?
It basically Russia set delivered draft treaty outlines,
which a lot of people here in the West, and they mentioned it briefly
on CNN and on Foxes, oh, well, it's just paper, it doesn't matter.
They were very specifically laying out what they consider to be red lines,
what they consider to be here's things that we're worried about.
You need to take seriously.
And I wonder how seriously they're taking on the inside.
And just it's a little bit dated because it's from the 2009.
But I was horrified to see if you recall when Hillary Clinton,
the Secretary of State, gave Sergei Lavrov, the Russian Foreign Minister,
this red reset button.
Well, the word reset was actually the wrong Russian word.
How is it possible for the U.S.
Secretary of State to give something to the foreign minister
of the Russian Federation, something that is the wrong word?
So so that was the the geopolitical equivalent of my autocorrect and my phone.
Exactly. And how is it possible?
One of our email exchanges recently, I said, you know, World War Three
is probably going to start from Google Translate or autocorrect or both.
And that's a perfect example.
That's a joke, right?
And that's not serious.
Well, think about what a misunderstanding that was Lavrov laughed it off.
But what it did was let the Russian team know these guys aren't serious.
They're doing this gimmick and they're not even able to pull this gimmick off.
How can we trust what's going on with them?
If you look at things like translations, and this gets to what you're seeing
about information, the current geopolitical situation.
A good example is Putin was recently quoted and he has said in different
contexts in slightly different ways that the collapse of the Soviet Union
was the greatest geopolitical disaster of the 20th century.
OK, that's kind of a literal translation.
And so a lot of people have leaped on that.
And you hear all over the West, aha, he wants to recreate the Soviet Union.
But if you look at it in context and you look at what he actually said,
he wasn't saying the collapse of the Soviet Union as in the loss of the Soviet Union
is the problem. It was the collapse itself that was the.
So you get into linguistics.
Another Putin quote is that he said that no one with a heart
does not miss the Soviet Union.
No one with a brain wants it back.
And so when you put those in context, you understand what he's saying is that
the way the Soviet Union broke apart, what happened with NATO expanding to the East,
even though there were multiple solemn assurances that it would not,
has created a high geopolitical risk.
And so just taking that as a
is one situation because I'm having to be pretty familiar with it
because that was my area and what I worked in.
So you can take that to look at Taiwan, China.
You look at various other geopolitical conflicts.
You can extrapolate that to energy and resources in a lot of ways
and that it takes a very deep understanding of a lot of these issues.
And how does that deep understanding at an analytical level
get converted into information that then gets to a political leader
who is making decisions?
And that's really the focus of a lot of what I'm looking at.
And the problem is just that you you've asked
in directly a couple of ways, how do we fix this?
And this is something that I'll throw out.
I'm not sure what our time is like at this point, but I'll throw a bomb
and literally figuratively hear democracy.
Does democracy work? Is democracy a good idea?
How much democracy is too much touched on that with the Senate?
At what point does having someone who has the skills to be
elected as a political leader in a democracy?
Are those skills really such a good set of skills to be making these kinds of decisions?
So that's a tough thing to look at and a really tough problem to handle,
because we're so conditioned to think more democracy is better.
Is that really true in a very complex technical environment?
Well, it also is.
I mean, a democracy only works if the citizenry are engaged and educated about the issues.
And I mean, I don't know how that's possible.
I'm not even educated as much as I know about the systemic predicament.
I know very little about the things that you're saying, which brings up a tangential question.
I mean, you look, I can just imagine President Biden's day and daily briefings.
And right now there's a lot on Omicron and COVID and lockdowns and masks
and changing the flight rules and things like that.
But then you've got all the other things going on.
The Build Back Better Plan was just not a pass because of Manchin
and all the progressive versus middle of the road.
Democrats are in fighting.
But then you throw this stuff on what you're talking about.
Ukraine and Russia, at some point, it almost becomes unmanageable.
All the different risks that we have, whether it's democratic or not.
And that actually raises a good point.
And it raises a concern that I've seen happen in our government
and that the political influence has been seeping lower and lower into the various organizations.
And I'll toss out one example is the Defense Department.
And you look at, did you know that the Joint Chiefs of Staff are no longer in the chain of command
and have not been for like 25 years now, 30 years?
I did not know that.
Yeah, the Joint Chiefs are no longer in the chain of command.
The president can directly issue orders to what they call the combatant commanders in the field.
So what's the role of the Joint Chiefs then?
They're advisors.
They are they're in an advisory capacity.
They no longer have direct command authority.
Now, the original thinking and the reforms from the that were put in place in the early 90s
the rationale for that was the Joint Chiefs were too powerful.
They could be too obstructionist.
The thinking was that by making them advisory, it took them out of the chain of command,
gave the political leaders a direct link to the combatant commands,
which made them more accountable to the political leadership.
OK, maybe nice in theory, but what about the flip side of that?
It makes the politicians too powerful.
You know, let's say you have a nuclear use scenario or a bombing scenario
that were even conventional war, you're going to to start.
Well, OK, a two or three star combatant commander
doesn't have the connections to Congress that a member of the JCS does.
He doesn't have that high visibility profile.
Can you name the head of Norcom?
I mean, I doubt most congressmen could could name who the head of the North American command.
But you know who the Joint Chiefs is because he's test fine before Congress and all that.
So what you've done in that concrete situation is you've taken out
somebody with the stature, you know, that chair of the JCS.
He's not going anywhere except maybe to Lockheed Martin when he retires.
He's so you're what you're really describing is in this unbelievably
unique period of economic growth and largesse on the backs of
technology coupled with with fossil surplus.
Our political system is self selected for politicians
as opposed to capable technocrats on the issues of the day.
And that is a self selecting thing that has been a positive feedback,
which means that not only is maybe the structure
not conducive to the risks that we face in the coming decades,
but the personnel might not be as well.
And you look at the exactly and you look at the number of political appointees.
You look at how deep into the organizations
political influences and partly that's a societal social thing.
You know, the concept of I like to think of myself.
I I'm pretty well apolitical in the sense that
I like to think of myself that way as well.
Yeah. And that's where I don't, you know,
I've served and acted as a consultant to all kinds of governments,
both here in the U.S. and internationally.
And it doesn't what I care about is solving problems
and making things work better and making people's lives better.
And as I've said in what in on my blog and some of my posts is,
you know, you want to fix climate change.
I can give you a plan that Adam Smith would the ghost would write
and you will chapter wealth of nations or, you know,
Lenin would rise from the tomb and cry out Leechton in Red Square.
I mean, it doesn't matter to me.
You can take a Marxist approach.
In fact, I think just over my shoulder here.
Actually, it's the other shoulder.
We have one my little we have, you know, Marx
and then the opposite extreme.
We have Bender, who is the ultimate who's the ultimate libertarian.
So I don't care.
We can go from Marxism to libertarianism.
I think in certain circumstances,
either of those philosophies can solve problems
and can make a better society.
So it's my job is whichever direction society is going to take
is to say, well, here's how you can do that within that framework.
The problem is you've got to be willing to listen to expert opinion.
And that hits on and that expert opinion has to be.
A political, neutral, unbiased so that when I tell you,
look, this isn't going to work.
I'm not telling you it's not going to work
because I want to create a socialist utopia.
I'm telling you it's not going to work because it's not going to work.
And you need to trust that because as you just said,
you're never going to understand you're a smart guy.
But you haven't spent 40 years studying computational fluid dynamics.
So if I tell you our best climate models are saying X is going to happen.
Well, you've got to almost accept that.
I can explain it.
I can try to tell you the uncertainty,
but you as a decision maker have to trust that I'm telling you that in an unbiased way.
That system in this country has broken down.
And that's I blame scientists.
I blame people like me.
I blame scientists for part of that and I get it.
You know, you look at the 70s and 80s, you have a lot of the leading
researchers in climate where we're looking at the models and going,
holy crap, we got a problem here.
So they went to Congress.
They said, look, you've got to do something about this.
Congresspeople say, well, what do we do?
Well, at that point, I think you have to, as a scientist, step back and say,
look, there's several different, there's multiple options used.
There's free market options, there's centralized government options.
But I will work with you within that framework, but I can't tell you
which philosophy to use behind it because I don't want to get pinned
with the policies because once you do that, then I'm taking sides.
And the other side is going to say, well, is there a real problem?
Or are you just using that problem to force some kind of social change?
Which is exactly what happened with climate.
Well, in my experience in DC, the last two years, universally,
my meetings had three things in common.
One is the people were political.
How does this risk you're talking about land on the D versus R?
The second is I got plenty of other problems.
This is in the future.
I care about the right now.
And the third is, OK, I understand.
But what can we do about it?
I need to have a response.
And it's very difficult to get rid of those three things
and actually work on problems.
I will publicly acknowledge right now for those viewers that watch my
Earth Day talk, one of my grand interventions, my 20 interventions
that I suggested was this idea of a council of contrarians.
And you, Chuck, are the one that gave me that idea, a council that would act
as maybe a fourth branch of government where there would be bipartisan,
nonpartisan experts that would have negative authority, not positive
authority to enact any legislation or a policy, but the ability to veto bad ideas.
Well, and that kind of actually goes back to what we were talking about
with the nuclear conflict problem that actually you just hit on where my thinking
on that started to develop, probably, is that it's most of the times
when something bad is avoided, it's because somebody said no to a bad idea.
And the astronaut, I believe it was John Young, was very famous for saying,
there's very few situations you can't make worse by doing something.
And, of course, from a political standpoint, the pressure is have a program,
do something, but sometimes the right and patent again, a quote factory here.
But the patent was also famous for saying a failure to decide is a failure,
but a decision not to decide is a decision.
So giving politicians and we as voters, and we need to let politicians say,
I don't know, you need to let them say we need to we need to give them
the flexibility to compromise.
And that's something that's also missing from our current political dynamic.
So since you have the mic here,
maybe do you want to expand a little bit on this idea of a council of
contrarians or save that for another day?
Yeah, just to toss it out, if you gave me a clean sheet and said,
you're emperor for 20 years, restructure our society and government.
The first thing that I would do, there's way too many politicians.
There's too many elected offices here in Chatham County.
We vote for coroner.
Really? I understand the politics of it, because back in the Old English
Commonwealth, and this, by the way, gets to another point that, to me, is so
critical. You notice a lot of times I talk about history and periodization.
How do you divide history up into chunks so that you can, well, when does history
start? Because if you look at the Arab-Israeli conflict, well,
do you start it in the year 500 when the Israelis got kicked or were able
to leave Babylon and go to the Promised Land?
Do you start in the turn of the last century with the beginning of the Zionist
movement? Do you start in 1949? Do you start with last week?
And where do you do that? That's where your answer ends up, largely.
So that history and taking a view and making sure you understand the
circumstances, I think, is critical. I lost my train of thought.
But with the blank page on the Council of Contrarians.
So my blank page, system design, would be reduce the political offices,
make being a leader a profession, a decision-maker.
You know, we tend to think politicians are leaders, but they're not.
They're politicians. They are experts at getting elected.
And we just sort of hope and pray that they're also good leaders and good
decision-makers. Well, you look at somebody like a Trump who, you know,
was great politician. I mean, he was able to get elected.
He had a lot of help from the media.
And we, you know, you can argue over all that, not really a great leader in
the sense of the only people that followed him for the people that were
predisposed to follow him.
So he was able to pull the political's feet off of getting elected.
Wasn't really good at bringing people around his point of view and
perspective as leadership as a decision-maker.
Yeah, I would say it was a train wreck.
I could make similar arguments about Biden and that the system that got him
elected performed quite well.
You look at here in Georgia with the way that the campaign was run.
It had nothing. It was all about strategy and tactics.
It had nothing to do with really either, it was politics.
It had nothing to do with either leadership and absolutely nothing to do
with the ability to make decisions once you get into office.
So I would create a structure where you're not eligible to run for a higher
office until you have demonstrated an ability to perform
and make good decisions at lower level offices.
And so how do you do that?
Well, in Roman times, the Roman Republic had sensors.
And the sensors had a lot of different functions.
They conducted the census, of course.
But one of their other functions was, again, that negative contrarian role
where they could throw someone out and say, you're no longer eligible
for political office because, you know, you were corrupt.
And so sensors themselves were no longer eligible.
They were it was composed of generally former senators.
And eventually there became like a lot of processes.
You've got to have checks and balances to make sure that that system
doesn't become corrupt.
But having people whose role isn't to lead,
it isn't really to make decisions, but it's to review other people's decisions
and look at it and say, yeah, you know, go back and rethink this.
This is not technically astute.
That's particularly vital because, as you say, we've got stovepipes of technology.
We've got, you know, being an expert in AI does not make you an expert in geopolitics.
And being an expert in military affairs doesn't make you an expert in the environment.
And so getting multidisciplinary, getting people who are experts together,
but also having generalists, you know, we tend to focus on somebody and,
oh, you get your doctorate in economics or in atmospheric science or something.
Well, OK, that's nice.
But how do you cross those fields?
We get the terminology is specialized.
You get all of these things that you get over specialized.
And then you have a poor political guy who's got an elect that he wants to do a good job.
And so now he's got, as you were talking about with Biden, OK,
you've got a parade of virologists coming in to talk to you one day.
You've got, you know, maybe a military guy coming in the next day
and then you've got an economist coming in.
That's where you've got to have this very reliable framework
of experts who can provide that level of guidance and expertise.
And then the check and balance.
We currently are checking balances or our three branches.
But yeah, having a branch out there that their sole purpose is to look at things
and say, that's a bad idea.
I think it makes a lot of sense.
That does make sense.
And your last few sentences there, even though we're running out of runway,
are tooting my horn, so to speak, because long ago I decided
that society does need more generalist, more systems, thinkers
to be able to fly up high enough and look down at our situation.
So education matters.
Education of young people now so we can have critical thinking,
wide boundary thinkers as our citizens and our leaders is very important
because our education system has so far.
And yes, we have an attempt to do liberal education.
But really, we're stamping out reductionist expertise in a lot of these universities.
Yeah, absolutely.
That I agree.
I do want to very briefly say that I agree 100 percent with.
I was lucky or unlucky, depending on your perspective in that
I was put my undergraduate degree in electrical engineering
and then got graduate training in geophysics and then ultimately economics.
So I ended up being a generalist almost by default
because there was nobody really doing the kinds of analysis that I was doing.
And so I was able to just got pushed into that.
But it's frustrating sometimes because I do deal with specialists.
So, you know, I'm dealing with somebody with a PhD in atmospheric science
who looks and goes, you know, you should be talking about the economics.
Why are you dealing with computational fluid dynamics?
Even though, in some ways, I've had more CFD courses than they have.
Same with economics.
It's like, well, you know, you're a science guy.
What are you doing talking about gross domestic product?
And, you know, relative, I was just had a very I was trying to figure out
purchasing power parity in industrial sectors versus commercial versus domestic
product sectors the other day.
And so that's where I think you are on a really good track
and something that you're doing that I think is so important
is getting these students at the undergraduate level
to start thinking in terms of go take a course.
And if you're studying economics, fine.
But make sure you take some courses in biology.
Make sure you take a course in a hard science.
Try to at least take intro to engineering or something
so that you know what's going on.
And the universities need to be structuring it to make it easier
for undergraduates to get a good broad and learn some poetry.
You know, go learn some history, but all those kinds of things.
That's where, again, I was quite fortunate that I was able to to study
history and languages and linguistics and understand those different pieces.
That's vital for our future.
If they're running out of room in their schedule,
they could just bypass taking economics all together.
In my opinion, that's the dismal science.
So let me just ask you one more question here.
And I think I should have you back
because we haven't scratched the surface of some of the relevant parts here.
I am a systems thinker, but and most of my listeners
are already worried about oil depletion and financial overshoot,
ecological overshoot, climate change.
But now you're throwing in nuclear risk and governance into the mix,
which are two things I don't know a lot about.
There's a reason you agreed to do this with me, Chuck.
It's because you deeply are worried about what's coming on those two areas.
But how does sharing this information about those two risks
to individual people on this podcast
will not be listened to by the general public?
It's going to be those curious minds who are trying to make sense of this
and make better decisions in their own lives, in their communities
and maybe at a larger scale.
What recommendations would you have for them to take these things on board
that maybe they've never thought about that sound pretty fricking scary?
What do you think?
I think the biggest thing is we've got to reduce the level of geopolitical tensions.
How? That's exactly what that was.
My next sentence was the way that we do that first off is
don't buy into the propaganda.
Don't buy into this adversarial relationship
that we seem to have with different countries.
There are you look at Russia, you look at China and you look at our news today
and the you've got politicians who are basically saying there's a big threat out there.
Is there really? And I know it's it's hard because you don't have access to information.
But it read Deutsche Well or read which may not be the best
because they're kind of it can be propaganda, too.
But seek out and try to understand a little more about the world
and try to understand that
and try to seek out alternative information sources.
Don't get in your stovepipe.
I would guess Fox News or CNN
recognize that in the case of Ukraine, for instance,
it's actually if you watch those two networks, you're hearing essentially the same things
that geopolitical tensions are high, even though the perspectives are slightly different.
I'll I'll interrupt you and then continue your thought.
Two things.
Number one, I think I saw a stat recently that 60 percent of Americans
left or right have one news source.
That's where they get their news from, whatever it is, CNN or Fox.
It's a single source.
So maybe in the show notes, you can give me a list of eight or 10
broader sites where you can get information.
Yeah. And so you'll hear stuff and it drives me crazy.
You'll hear people say, well, RT, for instance, or Al Jazeera.
At least scan the headlines to see what they say is important.
And you'll be surprised because in the US, it's all the political horse race.
But you go look even at something like Deutsche Well.
And I'm happy to say I have a list, actually, of sites.
Some of them you can freely visit.
Some of them you want to use Incognito because they're considered
propaganda sources by some of the like RT is considered this foreign agent.
Or you look at some of the Chinese sources.
Al Jazeera, for instance, Al Jazeera has great
historically has had great coverage of Africa.
And we forget about Africa.
We forget about South America.
We forget about these different areas where there's a lot going on.
And suddenly, even if you don't even if just scan, you're scanning the headline,
suddenly you realize, wow, there's more going on than what Joe Manchin did
with the Build Back Better Plan.
And that opening up that world puts those kinds of squabbles in perspective.
So what you're kind of saying is that we need to, well, the risk right now
is what happened with the Iraq situation in 2003 with the weapons of mass destruction
feels like it's bubbling up as well with respect to the Russians
interfered with our election and Russians are the bad guys, etc.
That that's it's deja vu, but at a larger stakes.
Oh, absolutely.
And again, that gets back to if I tell you the Russians did not interfere in our election.
OK, immediately you'll get a course from one side saying,
of course, they did and they'll point to Cozy Bear or point to the trolls.
Well, the thing is, this was trying to say about information and misinformation.
In fact, Russia did have troll farms that amplified and echoed certain
American voices that were saying those kinds of things.
And of course, the reason why and you may ask, well, why did Russia do that?
Is it because Putin wants to take over the world?
It's like, no, because the US has pumped billions of dollars into trying to
build up and try to overthrow the Russian government or influence the Russian government.
You look at Navalny.
Navalny is astrotourged.
Nobody in Russia takes him seriously.
You read the US media, you would think, oh, my God, Navalny is this
well-respected leader who's being oppressed by Putin.
Navalny couldn't pull more than 10 percent.
You know, Putin actually is legitimate.
Well, he's pretty popular.
People are tired of him, but they don't see a big alternative.
And in fact, the constant demonization does him more good at home than it does.
So getting back to US domestic issues, ask your political leaders those hard questions.
And I will say this, especially when it comes to geopolitical issues, be very careful
about anything coming out of our intelligence agencies, because they're basically
telling you the information that has already been compiled and processed into work
product that is designed to support a policy.
And to our political leaders, and I believe that
Representative Gephardt would be now cheering this, is that it's vital
that you question what's coming out of these and try to find alternative sources.
So your basic message to our listeners is keep an open mind.
Make sure that you are skeptical of common news outlets, try to learn more
from alternative news outlets and maybe shift your internal pattern recognition
risk calculus to include risks of war and governance, because those things
are happening in the background simultaneously with the more popular risks.
And I would add one final point that to me is absolutely vital.
When you're looking at people that you think disagrees with you, and particularly
you look at the Republican-Democrat divide here, what concerns me when I talk
to people on either side of that divide, they think that people on the other
side are being subjected to propaganda and misinformation.
And they think that people on the other side don't have valid concerns
because their information is bad.
I know that's simplifying.
Classic in-group, out-group dynamics.
In-group, out-group, exactly.
Yep. Guess what?
Same thing about your subject, those same constraints and the same problem.
Generally, I find you can pick any subject, abortion, voting rights, immigration.
And what you find if you dig away the propaganda, you may find people
are concerned about different things, but there's also a lot of common ground.
And I would say empathy and compassion.
And so you look at what's the underlying concern?
People who say to pick one of the real hot button ones that because of
Supreme Court now is abortion.
Well, OK, you've got those who are concerned with what they, and I think
for large extent legitimately, you're looking at an evolving human life
and the dignity of that evolving human life.
But the flip side of that is you've also got the dignity of the woman
who's carrying that potential human being.
Well, what did both of those points have in common?
Ultimately, you're looking at how do you preserve the dignity of the human life
and the dignity of a human being?
And to me, most of our issues boil down to that.
And then you've got this third component that's really orthogonal.
And that's what is the role of government.
And it's important to realize when you say there should be a law.
Essentially, what you're saying, I authorize government to use violence
on my behalf to make that happen.
I know that sounds a little bit libertarian, but it could.
And I'm not taking it to that extreme because there are circumstances
where government needs to say, yeah, don't do this.
You know, you have force backing it up.
But if you think of these topics compassionately and recognize.
There's very few circumstances where that person you're
disagreeing with is really just evil or really just has some crazy.
Their concerns are probably legitimate.
They're just looking at the problem differently than you are.
So what you're what you're suggesting and advocating and hoping
is that we can again, maybe put country before party and have
somewhat of shared values again, but the misinformation, the misinterpretation
of information, the distraction and the non-equalates education
combined to making us talking past each other and get hijacked by
the the polarization instead of recognizing the wider boundary picture
of, oh, my God, we're all facing these risks together and we better roll up
our sleeves and have authentic conversations about the path ahead.
And I would elevate it.
I don't like to phrase country above self because the interests
of these national entities we call nation states aren't necessarily
the interests of the people that live in them.
What I would boil it all down to is understand whoever you're
dealing with that you disagree with.
It may be that they too are compassionate, that they too have concerns.
It's just their focus may be different.
So what you need to do and what they need to do is recognize the validity
of each other's concerns and then figure out where the common ground is.
Because nine times out of ten, there is a common ground and it does.
Yeah, it's going to take some compromise.
But if you if you believe the other person is sincere, then and in most cases,
they are and they have real concerns.
And if you address those concerns, you can come to an understanding.
And that may be very meta and, you know, kumbaya, but hopefully it's real.
This whole podcast is meta and kumbaya.
But I do think we need that civil discourse again somehow because without
that, we're not going to solve any of these problems.
And we need to extend it internationally.
Russia has valid concerns.
They're not pointier tables.
OK, how do we do that?
Last question, and I'm going to have you back because there's a lot of
stuff we didn't get to.
But how do we extend the civic discourse from domestic to international?
Just a few bullet points or suggestions.
Number one bullet point is we need to insist that our leaders take into
account, not just the domestic political concerns.
So why are we pushing Europe, for instance, the way we are?
Why do we care where they get their natural gas from if it's stabilizing that society?
Well, we want to sell them more LNG.
That's selling them our LNG.
That's a domestic political economic concern.
Yeah, that's nice, but that's potentially destabilizing if we're
creating an adversary out of Russia.
Because let's face it, it's more convenience, more environmentally
sound for them to use a pipeline to send them gas.
So, OK, let's figure some other market for our goods.
Let's figure some other way of doing it.
So I would say that when talking to our politicians, we need to
press them from a global standpoint, not just we do it on the environment.
We're constantly after our politicians on the environment and say,
think internationally.
But not to go down another rabbit hole as we close.
But this gets to the super organism issue is that we're outsourcing
our governance and our planning to the market.
Yes.
Thank you so much, Chuck, this is very informative.
I learned a lot and thank you for your continued work on de-risking
our world and to be continued, my friend.
Absolutely.
I enjoy talking to you, Nate.
Again, what you do is pull together these different things in a way
and try to get it out there for people to think about.
And as being a systems guy, and I feel that I'm a systems guy as well
on a lot of detailed technical issues, what you do is essential.
So thanks for this podcast.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the Great Simplification,
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit
thegreatsimplification.com for more information on future releases.
