Dagen H or H-Day was the day on the 3rd of September 1967 in which the traffic in Sweden
switched from driving on the left hand side of the road to the right. Dagen means day
and the H stands for Hurger traffic, the Swedish word for right traffic. It was by far the
largest logistical event in Sweden's history. The first attempt to order traffic to the right
was in 1718 but by 1734 ordinances had stipulated Sweden should drive on the left. This of course
didn't matter too much until motor traffic became common and with Sweden's neighbours Norway and
Finland driving on the right border crossings were a very awkward dance. Sweden was starting to think
more globally and driving on the right would put it in line with many other members of the new
common market. The Swedish government had been making noises to change over to the right since
1927 and that had encouraged car manufacturers such as Saab and Volvo to design their cars for right
hand drive roads but this led to many head-on collisions when passing on narrow two-lane
highways. Despite this the change was unpopular. In a 1955 referendum 83% voted to keep driving on
the left. In a move that wouldn't be the first or the last to ignore popular opinion after it had
given them the answer they didn't want in 1963 the Swedish parliament approved the prime minister's
proposal of right hand drive traffic beginning in 1967 as the number of cars on the road tripled
from 500,000 to one and a half million and the problem was only expected to get worse with more
people driving. A commission was established to oversee the change and began to implement a four
year education program. The campaign included displaying the DAG and H logo on various commemorative
items including milk cartons and underwear. Swedish television held a contest for songs
promoting the change and the winning entry that became a popular hit was a song called
Keep to the Right Svensson. Surprisingly there was actually a bit of road in Sweden
where people already drove on the right. The road between Kvälje and Tundtje in Norway
had been drawn incorrectly and a bit of it went over the border into Sweden. Although this was
now a Swedish road to avoid having to swap the sides of the road twice for this short section
of road it was agreed to keep drivers on the right hand side. As DAG and H neared every intersection
was equipped with an extra set of poles and traffic signals wrapped in black plastic.
Workers roamed the streets early in the morning removing the plastic. Existing road lines were
yellow so before the change over white lines were painted then covered with black tape.
Approximately 350,000 signs had to be removed or replaced, 20,000 of them in Stockholm alone.
Some signs were mirrored such as the roadwork sign and the sign warning of moose crossings
as it was felt that the moose were more likely to come from the right hand side of the road.
Black hexagonal signs with a letter H were placed on roads to remind drivers to drive on the right
and while they were altering signs the government took the opportunity to impose
speed restrictions on certain roads. One way streets presented unique problems,
bus stops had to be constructed on the other side of the street and intersections had to
be reshaped to allow traffic to merge. It's still possible to spot motorway sections built before
the change over as the on ramps are shorter than usual and off ramps longer. New cars from 1966
had headlights that were designed for driving on the right but special stickers were applied
with strict instructions that they shouldn't be removed until the switch over. On the day itself
all non-essential traffic was banned from the roads from 1am to 6am. Any vehicles on the roads
during that time had to follow special rules. All vehicles had to come to a complete stop at 450am
then carefully change to the right hand side of the road and stop again to give others time
to switch sides of the road and avoid a head on collision before being allowed to proceed at 5am.
In the large cities of Stockholm and Malmo the ban was longer from 10am on saturday
until 3pm on sunday to allow work crews to reconfigure intersections and other towns
also saw extended bans. Despite the transition being in the middle of the night it was covered with
probably not that scintillating live tv coverage. Over 10 000 police and military personnel monitored
the process along with over 100 000 people helping out at pedestrian crossings. The relatively smooth
change over saw a temporary reduction in the number of accidents. Experts suggested that
changing to driving on the right reduced accidents while overtaking as people already drove left
hand drive vehicles thereby having a better view of the road ahead. People were also lightly more
cautious and alert driving on the other side of the road which reduced accidents. Fatal car to car
and car to pedestrian accidents dropped sharply as a result. The number of motor insurance claims
went down by 40%. Of course these initial improvements didn't last. The number of motor
insurance claims returned to normal over the next six weeks and by 1969 the accident rates were back
to the level seen before the change although more cars were on the road by then. Trams in many
cities were withdrawn and replaced with buses. In the run up to the change local authorities had
been buying buses designed to be driven on the right but some seven and a half thousand existing
buses were converted putting doors on the other side starting 18 months before the switch over.
The cities of Gothenburg and Malmo sent their existing buses to Pakistan and Kenya
who drove on the left. The modification of buses was the largest cost of the change.
Although all Swedish road traffic switched to drive on the right metro and railways didn't
change and continued to drive on the left. Fellow Nordic country Iceland changed to driving on the
right the following year on a day known as H-Daguin. A big thank you to all my patrons for supporting
me. To get early advert free access to new videos or to appear in the credits please consider
supporting me using the Patreon link below from just one dollar or 80p a month and hit that
subscribe button to get notified of new videos. Thanks for watching and see you in the next video.
