I'm sure we all know that there are different kinds of numbers. The integers, evenly spaced
on the number line, the fractions, which seem to go everywhere, then the real numbers, which
fill up all the gaps unaccountably still left between the fractions, and which are represented
by infinitely long strings of digits, considering off to the right. Which is actually kind of
nuts if you think about it. Well, what if I told you there's a totally different kind
of number you can make? One that gets represented instead is a string of digits continuing infinitely
far off to the left. These are what we call the periodic numbers, and that P stands for
a prime number. To construct them, you first need to pick your favorite prime number. I'm
going to pick three, and then use that prime as a base to write your integers in. That
is, instead of the digits in your number being zero through nine and representing powers
of ten, they'll be zero through two and represent powers of three. For example, the number seventeen
is made up of one nine, two threes, and two ones, so in base three, seventeen is written
one, two, two. The key step is to come up with a new way to say how far apart these numbers
are instead of the usual distance. What we'll do is to say that if the first n digits of
two numbers are the same, then the distance between them is one over three to the n, so
that numbers are closer together if many of their first digits are the same, just like
real numbers only in the other direction. Now, remember how I said the real numbers fill
in all the gaps left in the number line? Now that we have a new way of measuring distance,
the gaps show up in different places, and we get something different when we try to
fill them all in. What we get are the free attic numbers, since we chose to go with
three as our prime. This process of filling in all the gaps is called completion, by the
way, if you want to look it up. Now that we have the free attic numbers, we are free
to do addition, multiplication, even find square roots. So, we know how to get these
free attic numbers and how to write them, but what do they actually look like all together,
and where do they fit on the number line? The answer is, they don't. We'll need to do
something completely different. There are different things you could do, but what I've
come up with is something I'll call a paedic well. Build it, we take a line segment, this
is what we'll turn into our number line, and then raise two walls of height one so that
we have three wells, and all the wells and walls have the same width. Three wells, since
we chose three as our prime number. Then, in each of the wells, raise a couple of walls
so that you end up with three smaller wells. I guess you can see where I'm going with
this. You keep on doing this until you have infinitely many infinitely small wells. And
what's left at the bottom of the wells? That's our number line. You might think there can't
be anything left at the bottom since we put in all those infinitely many walls, but trust
me, there is. But how do we get from a paedic number to its position on this weird number
line? You number the wells zero to two, and put the number into the well corresponding
to its first digit. For the smaller wells, again number them zero to two, and put the
number into the well corresponding to the next digit, keeping it up for all the digits
of the number. In this case, we'll end up somewhere right around here. And the reason
we made sure to put in all of those walls is that they let us measure the distance between
the numbers and the number line. The way it works is that the distance between any two
numbers is exactly the height of the tallest tower between them. One thing that can be
helpful in finding out what something really looks like is to look at the open sets. The
handy kind of open set to use is a ball. To make a ball, you pick some point to be your
center and pick some radius. The ball is then made up of all the points whose distance from
the center is less than the radius. On the regular number line, these just look like
open intervals with the center in the middle. In the paedic well, balls look like this.
Use some point to be your center and mark your radius on the vertical axis. Then imagine
pouring water into the well from the center you chose and letting it rise up to the level
of the radius, but don't let it overflow if the radius is right at the top of one of the
walls. Then the ball is made up of all the points on the number line that are now under
water. Now that we have a way of drawing these things, we can say a few things about them.
For example, when constructing this ball here, what would we have gotten if we had decided
to use one of these points down here as the center instead? The exact same ball, right?
So that's a pretty weird result right there. In the paedic numbers, every point in a ball
is its center. Another thing that should be easy to see is that it's quite possible for
two different balls to contain exactly the same points, but have different radii. If
the radius of this ball here, for example, has been a little lower, you wouldn't have
changed what points it contained. Speaking of different balls, we might wonder what
it looks like in the paedic numbers if two balls intersect. It shouldn't be too hard
to see that in that case, one of the balls, the one with the smallest radius, must lie
completely within the other one. Overlapping just a little bit is simply not allowed. This
sort of geometry may seem very strange, but paedic numbers are a very powerful tool in
number theory and have even been used to try to describe physical phenomena such as quantum
gravity or cosmological inflation. So perhaps it's not so much the numbers that are wonderfully
weird, but this world we live in.
