I would like to introduce you to the viewers as a professor of neural
science at the University College of London. And you've made substantial theoretical contributions
to neurobiology, including the free energy principle. And you're a fellow of the Academy of
Medical Science, past president of the International Organization of Human Brain Mapping, fellow of
the Royal Society of Biology, Weldon Memorial Prize and Medal for contributions to mathematical
biology. Honor a doctorate, including one from the University of Zurich. I have to say that's
quite impressive CV that you have there. So I think I'd like to start with a few preliminary
questions. And it really is how, in your view, as a preeminent neuroscientist, view the early
and late childhood reading as creating models or frameworks of images of concepts of ideas,
is that something that you have worked into your theory?
In a general way, absolutely. If you cast our job as neonates, as infants, as building models
of the lived world, and our lived world comprises other creatures like us, and in particular when
we're very young, mum and dad and siblings and the like, then it becomes imperative to understand
a world that is encultured. And by that, I mean things that come along, constructs that
shape that world and make it sensible in the sense of making sense of the world. And language is
probably the post child of that thing that has to be learned, has to be instilled in your model
of the world. And in particular, making sense of dadic interactions right from birth. First
law is sorting out whether your mum is me, or I am somehow different from mother, am I in control
of mother, developing a sense of self. So the act of inferring that mother is somehow separate
from me, another creature like me, but not me, depends upon all sorts of communication, initially
a fit of touch. But within months, we now have the machinery of language. And that machinery
really does fast track that model learning, that sort of building apt constructs and models
that you can predict what's going to happen next. And indeed, of course, predict what you're going
to do next, what you're saying next, inferring your intentions, your propositional stances and
the like. So language then, you know, you just look at a school curriculum from the start,
plays a really central role in scaffolding that model learning, that structural learning,
that model building. You know, language is a fascinating terrain. And of course,
it goes from writing to printing to the current internet way of which language and images combined
on screens. And so I think there's been quite a different approach and understanding of language
and accessibility to language. And has that had any impact in terms of just the way our brains
now generate models of reality? Is that substantially different than before the invention of the
printing press? Go back to the ancient Greeks, where it was all oral storytelling.
That's a really interesting question. So I'm just thinking my mind. So from my point of view,
your language is the vehicle that provides a structure to the narratives that we bring to
the table to understand what's happening on the outside of our brains, beyond our skulls.
And what you're effectively asking is, is the written word, is that point of reference,
that consolidation, that crystallization of the cues and the structure instrumental in
disseminating and improving the learnability of these narratives? I think so, absolutely, yes.
Yes, I hadn't really thought about that, but it'd be fascinating to model that,
you know, because language prior to the written word only lives in my head and your head,
but once it gets out to the public's third world, there's a reference and a continuity there
that I would imagine would be best seen as something that is sort of self-selecting in
terms of hierarchical co-evolution that enhances the learnability of language. The learnability
of language in and of itself enhances the learnability of your generative models and your
inference and your making sense, making sense of the world. So yeah, so in a sense of talking about
communication as a heart of the language, we really have to, I guess, look at the medium
in which the communication has occurred, because the, to use Marshall McLuhan, the medium may be
the message that the way we construct our models will depend very much on the boundaries of that
medium, the amplification of that medium, and the way that we can use it for our purposes
and purposes of the community. Yeah, I mean, that speaks this notion or a notion of a shared
narrative. If I'm using my model of the world to understand you and make sense of you,
effectively, if I assume that you've got the same kind of model that I'm using,
then our narrative is literally a shared narrative. It's not mine nor yours. It is something that
we're sort of committed to together. So that shared narrative is something that we have to
aspire to and learn together. So it is defined cooperatively, again, in an encultured way.
And the modalities and the shared commitments to the way that we use language, whether it's in
print or indeed, what could even argue that mathematics is a kind of language that only
works because there's a shared commitment to using this modality, these shapes, these kinds of sensory
cues to enable me to infer what you are thinking and what you're going to say next.
The other preliminary thing I wanted to raise is I've been fascinated because I've seen a number
of your interviews, particularly about the Markov blanket, which is probably would take a whole
show just to go through that. And I'll let you introduce what that concept is, but whether
the kind of generative models that we get as a child from our reading experience,
could it be said that those form a kind of Markov blanket? In a sense, it explains to me
cognitive biases. A cognitive bias are the defenses against basically contrary or hostile
images or thoughts or ideals or principles. And so we have a cognitive bias. We have,
for example, confirmation bias. We look for those articles, those books, those peoples that
confirm our beliefs and values. Yeah, no, I think that's an excellent point. Yeah. I mean,
cognitive biases, you could actually read as sort of Bayes' optional biases. So if you subscribe
to the free energy principle that rests upon Markov blankets, you are in the game,
all of us, anything that exists is in the game of securing evidence for our own existence, which
just means evidence for our models of the world. So you're going to seek out confirmation. And
if you're successful in seeking out confirmation evidence that you exist, and you've got a good
model of the world, you exist for longer. So it's an almost tautological truism that what you just
said is absolutely right. One of the things that I heard you say in another interview, and I love
this in the context, particularly of fiction and novels, if you are constantly surprised,
you've had a bad model of the world. So in a way, you can judge the cognitive equipment that a person
has, how it's been shaped by how surprised they are. So I guess the wider your reading is as a child
in many different genres and styles and periods, the less surprised you're going to be when you see
something, because the range of activity that would have to surprise you would be vastly greater.
Yes, no, absolutely. In fact, we actually use measures of surprise as measured by
electrical brain responses from people with autism or schizophrenia. Just to get a physiological
handle on this, you're absolutely right. People do actually use surprise or oddball responses
to sort of phenotype various conditions where people may have difficulty inferring what's going
on around them. But you also bring to the table the breadth of reading the
the different kinds of outcomes and exchanges with your environment, cultured or not,
will certainly shape and be essential in determining the shape of the model that you take forward
into later life. And if you have a model that generalizes to different situations that you can
predict, synthesize in a way that renders it unsurprising when sufficient information has been
secured, then you're certainly going to have a better model that is more context sensitive
and will underwrite a longevity in a changing world or a very context sensitive world.
I'm just wondering where, again, getting back to reading books and fiction in particular,
where imagination and creativity fit into your view of modeling and generating models,
because although you may be surprised, surprise, for example, if you're an improv musician,
is actually a good thing. You can riff off of that so that you, in a sense, you invite the
surprise. And when you're writing fiction, in some ways, you're looking for the surprise,
because that's what the reader wants. The reader is looking to be surprised,
because if it's all predictable, they say the book is boring.
Yeah, another excellent point and a key issue in the philosophy of the free energy principle,
which we rest upon something called the dark room problem, if we just want to minimize surprise,
why don't we go and seclude ourselves in a dark room and stay there forever,
then we'll never be surprised. But that sort of misses the point. If we are curious creatures
that are always compelled to resolve uncertainty, then the resolution of surprise or expected
surprise as a consequence of our actions is going to be one of the primary drives
for surprise minimization. So we have to look for the opportunity to minimize surprise.
So we listen to stories, we watch TV series, we read books, because we know at the end there
will be a denouement, there will be a resolution of uncertainty. And if you read uncertainties,
expected surprise, you know there's going to be a wonderful opportunity for that aha moment
when your mathematical kind of surprise is actually resolved. And I think it's a great
explanation for music, that you set up an uncertainty in terms of the way that this
riff could go or what's going to happen in the next few bars. And then you're compelled to continue
listening, actively listening in order to resolve that uncertainty. But it's a resolution of uncertainty
that drives novelty seeking and curious behavior. And I repeat, if uncertainty is expected surprise,
the resolution of uncertainty is a minimization of this mathematical kind of surprise.
Right. So one of your papers I would certainly recommend that viewers have a look at is neural
science and bio behavioral reviews November 2020 issue. It's a brilliant paper that looks very
closely at the whole notion of generating models and the commitment of the brain as this
constructive organ that we are constructing models and testing them against reality at every stage.
And when somehow the model isn't quite working well, as I understand from the paper,
this then we go into a question and answer. What are we missing in the context of this thing?
Why is it a little bit off? Or is our model off? Do we have to adapt it in order that we see more
clearly the reality that's there? In other words, it's not anything other than we have low
information. And what we're seeking is to increase the level of information so that we have a better
understanding and explanation of what happens next or what may happen next.
Yeah. That is a beautiful summary of the essence of active inference.
Absolutely. And I think it touches on the last exchange in relation to why we are
compelled to be curious. Why are we curious creatures? And it all boils down to this
minimization of a resolution of uncertainty entailed by our current models and states of affairs
in the world. So how do you resolve that? You resolve that uncertainty by gaining information.
How do you do that in the optimal way? Well, you basically respond to epistemic affordances.
You know where to find the right kind of information that's going to resolve your
uncertainty. So you listen to that news channel, you read that author, you go to that Wikipedia
service. So you know what you don't know. And asking questions querying the world
is the optimal way to minimize your uncertainty. So you can actually write this down in terms of
an expected free energy or an expected surprise. And again, I ask you to read
expected surprise of uncertainty minimizing this expected free energy. Following an action,
following a move on the world, inevitably compels you to gain the most information that
resolves your uncertainty about the world. And interestingly, of course, the degree of epistemic
attractiveness or affordance of a particular move, a particular question, a particular query,
the choice of things that you might read depends upon your current belief state. It depends upon
what you know, what you don't know. So of course, you could get bored when you've been foraging
epistemically and there's no more uncertainty. So then you'd move on to move on to something else.
Our work suggests that that sort of epistemic motivation in neuro robotics, for example,
is known as intrinsic motivation. Just what would happen if I did that? Resolving uncertainty
about the way that the world works. That's probably much, much more important than simple
sort of utilitarian pragmatic pairs, like you're being rich, or if you're a monkey,
getting fruit, fruit drops in an experiment. So I think that resolution of uncertainty,
that information gain is underwrites most sentient behavior in systems like, like us.
And, you know, not every system needs this, you know, viruses and thermostats,
wouldn't have this epistemic. But I think at a certain level, when your generative model is
sufficiently deep and prospective, and it has to be in order to cope with living in a world
that is constituted by other things like you that are also very deep and prospective,
you know, then you become equipped with a model that entertains the consequences
of your action. And of course, if you measure the consequences in terms of what matters,
then the only thing that matters is getting down that expected surprise, that expected free energy,
which just is being curious. I'm glad you mentioned the word curious,
because it seems to me that curiosity is not equally distributed. Some people seem to be
far more curious than others, maybe to their Darwinian disadvantage, but there is a range
of curiosity. And I'm wondering if that correlates with creativity and imagination.
Yeah, I'm sure it does. So technically, what I think we are talking about here
is in the cognitive neuroscience is something called structure learning. So we're talking about
the structure of our models. If you're in machine learning, and you're doing deep learning, for
example, how many layers would you have in a hierarchical model? If you're a neurodevelopmental
psychologist, and you want to know what point to different levels in the auditory hierarchy,
or the language system, come online. What we're talking about is building models,
literally by wiring in different components. So you have to know the structure. And of course,
you can't know the structure. All you can do is explore different structures, see whether they're
fit for purpose, see whether they explain the data at hand. But therefore, you have to explore
different models. And I think this is where creativity and imagination comes in. It's the
ability to think about counterfactual structures in the world. What would happen if the world was
like this or like that? You've got these counterfactuals implanted, these differential hypotheses.
You can then use your sensory exchanges with the world or with others or with books to actually
evaluate one model in relation to another, literally using the model evidence, the evidence
of that model inherent in the sensory data. So that's how statisticians and people in machine
learning actually optimise the structure of their models. And I think that's exactly what we do
during neurodevelopment and subsequent experience dependent learning. And what would that look like?
It would look like a creature, a system, an agent who entertains in a very creative way
different compositions, different structures, different constructs that could possibly explain
their world and then testing out the evidence for these different constructs. And if you're an artist,
the way that you might do that is by looking at the reactions of other people or indeed your own
reactions to something that's now out there. It's been realised physically in terms of a story
or in terms of a picture. So imagination would be, if you like, sort of online structure learning
and creativity that allows you just to, on the fly, moment to moment, just consider different
hypotheses about what's going on now, but exactly the same sort of mathematical imperative, I think
underlies the building of the structures themselves during neurodevelopment and during our ongoing
reorganisation of our brains and the concepts that are entailed by that structural learning.
Yeah, counterfactuals are interesting. And I'm wondering if that's something that is taught
along with early childhood reading as well. In a way, you could say Shakespeare may have had a
right is that, you know, all life is a stage and we're all actors on it. And that childhood reading
is a series of scripts in which you see the human drama unfolding in front of you. And by
understanding that, you understanding what's expected of you socially, you understand what are
the boundaries of behaviour, what you can expect from others. So in some ways, it prepares you
to enter society because you don't have to have experience directly, you can experience
indirectly thousands of relationships going back hundreds of years and have a whole
generative model of the human condition from that early reading. So part of it is,
can you teach things like counterfactuals? For example, can you teach your child,
take Hamlet, put him in Waiting for God, take God, put him in Hamlet. How does it change the story?
Yeah, I think that's absolutely right. And he started off that thesis with the notion of scripts.
I think scripts is, you know, a very nice way of thinking about the different kinds of models
that are going to be plausible, going to be allowable when self-modelling. Because the most
important thing is basically a model of the world, a model of the lived world is essentially a model
of me in a particular world. So most of the pressure on early learning is just finding out,
first of all, am I separate from my mother? If I am, what bits of the world can I move?
Sure. So distinguishing between my body and non-body. And clearly, as one gets more sophisticated,
more skilled, then one develops quite a sophisticated and deep, literally with
hierarchical depth, generative model of me. But of course, that entails the kinds of things that I do
and the kinds of things in this world, in this culture, things like me do.
So I think that's one way of looking at scripts. And that has to be learned.
And as I think you're sort of highlighting, using culture, using and culturalism
that brings with these deontic cues, these counterfactuals that say, well, you can be
that kind of person or that kind of person, or possibly more relevant, in this setting,
you'll be that kind of person in that setting, you'll be this kind of person.
Just to give us, to scaffold and to provide priors, empirical priors, we call them
mathematically priors, that are informed by experience and the structure learning and evidence
accumulation, that shape the structures that you will entertain. And of course, if we are
99% of our time is basically spent modelling the embodied me in some transaction or interaction
with the embodied you, then a lot of these scripts are going to pertain to the kinds of things,
the behaviours, the social norms that would apply in that context. I do emphasise the context,
you know, I think we can be different people in different contexts, we can contextualise
our models in the same way that if I was bilingual, I would contextualise my narrative
or the spoken narrative, given what I thought you would understand and I would understand
from you. And having that context sensitivity that underwrites the generalisation of one model
for multiple contexts is this context sensitivity. So the greater the latitude or scripts you have
in front of you, I think the more apt you will be to cope with any new context in later life.
I think stories, you know, even down to the level of reading fairy tales at bedtime,
some of the sort of most caricatured but enduring Shakespearean
memes or structures or scripts are all there, you know, I'm a fairy princess,
so I'm some sort of hero. All the green fairy tales, for example, they have that sort of
life structure in them that I would imagine most people would be able to identify with one
character from a fairy story that, you know, five years later will be one character in their
favourite Enid Blyton book or, you know, whatever children read nowadays through to, you know,
the political and other dramas that we read in adolescence. So I think that's absolutely right.
And probably, you know, there must be a vast literature in terms of Evo Devo, the sort of
combination of developmental psychology and evolution, so this notion that, you know,
evolution is just not the selective pressure acting upon a person, but the person builds
is in a particular environmental eco-niche that is, you know, a game massively and deeply encultured.
And because we, if you like, shape that culture and that eco-niche, that encultured eco-niche,
then the eco-niche itself now becomes such a subject of selective pressure at another level.
So there's a sort of nice dance between the environment learning about the denizens and
the phenotypes in that environment and learning about, you know, learning the culture of this
environment. And they both have to be optimal hand in hand as we go forward.
One of the things, continuing on with the idea of scripts, is that is reading losing its grip,
losing its grip and culture and society as one of the main forces to learn the scripts that are
the models that are generated in order to understand a theory of mind of others, to understand yourself
and understand the world. I mean, what in your view, because a lot of people now are reading less,
they're getting their information from TV programs. I mean, that's been going on for 50 years, but
with the internet, there's a lot more distractions so that the kind of scripts that may be
taught these days are short scripts, as opposed to book length scripts that go into some
degree of complexity. I just wondered if you could react to that.
Yeah, I can, but I gotta react as a pure layman. I have no professional insights here. I do know
people, you know, who make this their life work. I think it's a fascinating area, but you know,
I'm just going to say that's an incredibly engaging point, especially with the advent of
social media and the increasing potency of adverts, mini films within 10 seconds now,
designed to provide extremely information, rich uncertainty, resolving material,
precisely tuned for brains that can only attend for 10 seconds or 30 seconds, even to, you know,
synchronizing the cuts in the editing with the natural temper of our eye movements,
the way that we visually palpate the world. So, will that have any material effect on
the temporal depth of the narratives and the scripts that we sort of start to inscribe
in our generative models of the self of me or different kinds of me that I could possibly be?
Again, as a layman, I would be surprised if there's any real damage being done, to be quite
honest, you know. There's long stories with the long-term denouements are still intensely
attractive from an epistemic point of view and in terms of identifying with characters and the
like. So, there is ample evidence that people still want the long stories. Unfortunately, it may
not be, and you'll have to ask me why I say unfortunate, but unfortunately it might not be
the textual story, but certainly if you look at things like Game of Thrones or your face police
dramas or season one of the next HBO mega drama series, these are structured long narratives
which people are still find unavoidable and will commit to. So, in terms of there being a sort of
sea change in short, sharp, fast, trivial, not trivial, but fast narratives with early closure,
scripts with early closure. I'm sure that there are lots of opportunities to indulge in that,
but on the other hand, there's plenty of evidence, I think, that what people actually commit to
when they settle down, especially during the coronavirus pandemic, to go through their box
sets. The box sets are, I think, an epitomization of the long stories. Of course, the best box sets
are those that translate in an easily didesimal form, the best books. So, you know, I would be
more optimistic than one might think from a lay perspective.
Well, I think I appreciate you sharing that. I'm just curious as to whether it might have
implications for your own mapping program and your own notion of generative models, because
the way we generate models depends on an input. And if the input is a book, you're going to generate
one class of models. If you're playing, say, computer games, which I don't have anything against,
I think it's actually, they're fun, but you're generating a different kind of model making
about the world. And those do make a difference, because if you say communication is a shared
activity, and they're in a reading culture, you share the activity, although you read alone,
you share those books intellectually with those around you in your culture. If that culture
starts to shift, then you're sharing them with a smaller group of people who model according to
books, as opposed to, say, playing computer games. Yeah, I think that's an excellent point.
One aspect of that point brings us to an important sort of paradigm shift at the end of the 20th
century, which was towards sort of an embodied perspective, an inactive perspective, a situated
perspective on sentient behavior, which tries not to deny the key role of the physical way in which
we sample our information, get information from the world. And indeed, on some radical accounts,
the very physical, embodied act of soliciting sensory information from the world could be
read as perception. So I think one attractive example of that is the finger fluency that
teenagers now, in fact, millennials now have in terms of being able to type on an iPhone.
No, I don't have an iPhone. So I just don't have this fluency. But they will have a substantial
part of their motor and premotor and supplementary motor area devoted to this fluency, which would
parallel parts of my broker's area, problems area 44, that I devote to using more my favorite words
when writing them down. So there will be physical differences in our motor compensate,
our communicative acts that will be written into and entailed by different brain structures and
different fluences. So I think that's absolutely right. So the new authors may not now be people
who are writing books, they may be people who are engineering games. And so there's more money
in that than there is writing books. I can attest to that.
If you just want the money, that may not be a good thing.
It begs the question, is that a good thing or a bad thing from an evolutionary perspective?
I made no judgments, but it certainly is a reality that you could reverse engineer if you
gave me a young person's brain from 2015, relative to a young person's brain in 1915.
There will be structural differences. And if I understood the nature of their
genetic models entailed by their brains, I will be able to say that this is the kind of
youngster who reads books. And I will be surprised to see
the gross differences between all of their friends in their conspiracies or their in-group,
whereas the millennial subject would have a different kind of brain who would have
different kinds of fluences. And you'll be able to see, well, this is the kind of new reader
who probably does engage in narratives by watching Netflix or playing games online with their
friends and siblings. So as a neuroscience, you could see
same territory, but different maps. You can see the mapping has been of a different kind and
different quality. But the territory is recognizable, but the map of the various trails and where
you're going is take some use to getting used to because you don't have that part of your brain
which has looked at that kind of map before. Yeah, you don't have that sort of physical language.
You can't articulate. And if you can't articulate, if you can't do, then you can't see. You can't
understand. So the essence of understanding others is the notion of this shared narrative,
which means that if I see you doing something, then I can use my models of the kinds of things that I
do to infer what you intend. So if I can't do something, then I can't understand. I can't
make sense of you if you did the thing that I cannot do. So that's not a sort of mystical
statement. It really does bite hard, say in neurology, where people with Parkinson's disease
may have difficulties adopting certain facial expressions or responding swiftly in terms of
initiating certain kinds of movements, which means that they can't do it. But crucially,
they can't recognize those kinds of actions, those communicative acts in other people.
So you just lose the language. So I could never, in any true way, understand what a finger thumb-flipping
youngster on the tube is trying to do, because I just don't have that as part of my geratin model.
So I can't model them. They are another species for me. I mean, not in any malignant way, but they
are now a different generation. And I'm not part of that generation. There will always be a communicative
barrier, which is not a bad thing, but there will always be that barrier simply because they have
a different way of expressing. And I think it comes to the notion which you brought to the table
around about the modalities. The modality does entail the physical ways in which we communicate
and which we share narratives. And if I don't speak that language, or I am not able to play a
particular computer game, or I'm not a subscriber to Netflix, then there is going to be a fundamental
disaggregation or disaggregation of different cultural groups, being generational or clinical.
Literally no longer speaking the same language, which is often the way a generational divide is
put. A breakdown of communication, because the medium at which communication is used, is just
different enough. It's just like, if you hear a dialect, even in your own native tongue,
you still have to strain a bit. You may pick out some words, but there will be other words which
are not familiar to you. If you go to Edinburgh, you're going to find maybe in a pub there that
there's someone, you're missing some words, which are common to everyone there, but are not common
for you. Yes, no, absolutely. The dialect is very interesting because that introduces a degree of
uncertainty. If you just think about what things are we attracted to and the valence of things,
and if the key imperative is indeed this imperative to resolve uncertainty, then the uncertainty induced
by what did she say? It starts to become slightly aversive, and it is that kind of
noisiness, that sort of uncertainty, which irreducible uncertainty, which you will ignore,
and you'll go to another more reducible kind of uncertainty. Yes, this is my kind of book,
this is my kind of story, this is a TV series for my age group, because I understand what's
going on, and at the end I will get that to Newmont, I will resolve that uncertainty. But if you infer
you're never, for example, new kinds of popular music that just do not, you don't have a geratin
model for you, you can't predict what's going to happen next, you will actually find them quite
aversive because they do not afford the opportunity to resolve uncertainty, to improve your model of
the world in any meaningful way, and you'll stick to, as you get older, you will certainly stick to
the kinds of information that do have that epistemic performance. So, I mean, there is kind
of an emotional homostasis that I think that people naturally drift to. So, if there's something that
is incoherent, not particularly understandable or pleasant, they either avert their eyes or pretend
that they didn't see it. This is part of human nature, of what you choose to see, and what you
choose not to see, in respect to John Berger's ways of seeing. And again, I think that comes from
reading, which I think is a segue, and let's go take a time machine back to York. You're now about
10 years old, none of the metals, none of the accolades or the fellowships are there. You're a
boy reading a book. Tell me a little bit about that environment in which you are reading a book.
It's an environment that is shaped very much by my family, particularly my parents, really. So,
I think to understand that environment and the books that I would pick up and read,
you had to understand why those books were there. So, my mother was a nurse,
and when she got married, it was in the age where it was, you know, the script's word that you've
sort of invested in your children as a mother, and the father went out to work. My father was a
civil engineer, which meant we had to move around the country very much like an army child to wear
the new stunch as he was actually a motorway bridge engineer. So, we had to move around the
country, and he spent a lot of time on site. So, I had this curious mixture of an extremely bright
man with a passion for physics and engineering, and an extremely bright mother whose only focus at
that time was how to bring up children properly. So, she got this very lucky.
Very lucky.
Loads of books on psychology, popular psychology, for her edification and enrichment,
that was a nice compliment to my father's books, which were largely all engineering,
and his favourite book was Spacetime and Gravitation, by Sir Arthur Eddington.
And I only found out about four years ago how favourite that book was, because apparently when
trying to court my mother when they're in their teenage years, he'd made her read it as well.
That had to be true love.
It's the only book on your list. You have seven books. I have never heard of this book,
so I did a little bit of research. The most recent review I could find was in the Bolshevik American
and Mathematical Society, January 1921. And the only place I could find to buy a copy was
Walmart Canada's website for $89.40. It also said, the other two pieces of information,
it had no reviews, and two, it was almost sold out.
So, please tell me what age you read this book. Your mother read it as a teenager. How old were
you when you read this book? I must have been about 10 or 11 years of age. I read it several times.
But it was at a time where we were actually having maths lessons at school, so the narrative,
the language of maths was starting to emerge. I'm surprised there were no reviews of it,
because I think, latterly, it's seen as a classic in the sense that it was the only accessible
way that an informed early 20th century layman could get a good handle on general relativity
in Einstein's notion. Sir Arthur Eddington, the author, was famed really for being able to translate
Einstein's ideas into a way that enabled people like you to grasp the essence of it.
And it's still, I think, a very readable book, if you want to understand not only what is
general relativity, but also how you might take those baby steps conceptually, and possibly how
Einstein and people at that time were thinking out of the box and logically
arguing themselves to the way that this world must be. So we're coming back to some generative
models of a very grand sort here, certainly in the context of physics. So that was probably
my favourite book, because it really did have that epistemic affordance that we were talking about.
It really did not only engender a whole space of counterfactuals about the way that the physical
universe could work, but also provided a denouement in terms of resolution and certainty. So the big
thing about the story that that book tells, which is basically a story of conceptual exploration in
terms of the way that the physical universe might be structured, but it was written by somebody who
was actively involved in securing the evidence for it. It's a 1919 expedition off the coast of Brazil
for the eclipse. It's a great, in terms of science history, it must be such an exciting time
for scientists who also were explored as an adventurer.
It was an adventure story as well as an exploration of science. Is that what really
kind of hooked you on science at 10 years old? Was this both?
Yeah, I think so. I mean, I think as with most people who subsequently became natural philosophers
or natural scientists in the Victorian sense, those opportunities to find out how things worked
again had this epistemic affordance that was irresistible, and that particular book just took
you to the edge. If you ever have the chance to read it, you will see that it actually starts off
with exactly something that we've already focused on as a fundamental way of engaging
with the world, which is questions and answers. If the purpose, if we are here
in virtue of being curious creatures, then what does that mean? It means that we basically
seek answers, and how do we do that in an informed and efficient way? We have to ask the right kinds
of questions. Questions and answers are central to model building and then living in the world.
Interestingly, space, time, and gravitation starts off with a conversation that is just
a series of questions and answers from and between three protagonists with slightly
different perspectives on the way the world works, the mathematician and the physicist and so on.
So it actually starts with just a conversation. That's what I meant by, it was a fascinating
insight into the way that people were asking their questions and offering answers, some correct,
some incorrect, at that time. But it really pulls you in as well, because you would be wanting to
ask that question, and you want to hear what the answer was. It was a very compelling reading,
just the first chapter, and it's a device that I subsequently used when writing with friends in
philosophy proper, as a best way to get to the heart of the matter, to get into the narrative
through a series of questions and answers. But then the adventure, as you said, the practical
adventure of going off and doing these experiments and the history of experiments that underwrite
this particular view of the world, which was very different. I mean, that's something very
refreshing about the way that Arthur Reddington paints a picture of the universe, where they
have different shapes. Well beyond, does the universe have an edge? What shape is it? Is it
hyperbolic? There's a notion of it at the edge of the universe even exist. Does it close back on
its own big circle? What about hyperbolic? Also, hang on, I never thought of that. Yes, of course,
it could be like that. And it was just so fascinating, just again, a little bit like the
other counterfactuals that we were talking about before, the different ways that it could be,
which you never imagined, but now you had. And once you'd had that experience of imagining
another way of looking at things, then that made it easier just to entertain other kinds
of counterfactuals. And of course, that's the mark of a good scientist. A counterfactual is
just a hypothesis. The mark of a good scientist, a natural philosopher, is asking the right questions
by bringing counterfactuals or alternative hypotheses to the table. And that takes imagination.
From imagination, you're going to have creativity coming out of that, because the more you can
imagine, the more you can create and construct and different models. So you're learning this at
10 years old, a book which was read by both of your parents, that actually was a condition for
the father's decision to want to marry the mother, and she went along with this.
So did this become something you talked about in the family? Did it become kind of a family
touchstone, space and time and gravitation? I mean, it has everything, all the questioning and answers,
the process of inquiring the world. I mean, did these things come up at home?
Not at all. No, I had to. My mother was completely non-mathematic.
I would have told my father off if he introduced that in family conversation.
So no, no, this is all under the cover. It was all implicit.
My father was a great educator, but in the best way possible, in terms of just providing
learning opportunities. So he gave me a slide rule and said, how does that work?
Never spoke about it again, but I spent months working out how a slide rule worked at that age.
So before I ever met the concept of a logarithm in mathematics, I already had a fundamental
understanding of the arithmetic and geometric transformations and the role of logarithms,
simply trying to appease my father because he'd asked me a question, which I'd never told him
the answer. And I think that space time gravitation was one of those devices. He said, read that.
It's like a slide ruler. But I did notice it was interesting he managed to trace down a copy.
Although we never discussed it, we do discuss things now, he's retired, but not in those days.
But it's interesting that after I had read it several times over the years, before I left home,
he made sure he got the book back. And he's going down in his favourite bookcase.
And he won't let me have it until he passes. For him, it was a very important book as well,
but it was all done silently. Now, my mother would not have found those kinds of counter-factuals
at all entertaining. I repeat, she was much more into psychology and ways that people thought and
think. So she was much more verbal in her analysis. So there was discussion of general
relativity around the table. I've heard you say as well that underlying everything, the foundation
is a mathematical. That mathematics is the place that you start and then you go up from there to
explain the world. And I'm wondering again, if this book space and time and gravitation
was one of the early influences for that view of reality of model making, starting with a
mathematical equation. Yeah, I think that's absolutely true. I mean, it's both true that I
have said and believe that mathematics, I think, is the most efficacious language,
the best shared narrative that we have, that transcends most other spoken languages or written
languages. And its unreasonable efficacy boils down to its simplicity and its delicate but
beautiful structure. So I think, as a vehicle, as a way of talking about ideas, and ultimately has
to be reduced to the formalism of mathematics before I think anybody else will understand it
ultimately. And not about now, but in five or ten hundred years time, all the great advances I think
have or can be articulated mathematically. I'm just catching myself there because of course,
you might argue that natural selection was a great biological idea that wasn't necessarily
mathematically couched. But I think in terms of making natural selection work, then you would
you would certainly then formalize it in terms of genetic algorithms and fish price,
fundamental equations of evolution and the like, which actually are very close to the
same equations that underwrite the free energy principle in terms of us as curious creatures
making inferences about the world. Right. We are inferences making creatures, for sure.
Let's turn to the first of the fiction choices, one of my favorite and I think favorite of many
people, 1984 by George Horwell. What age were you when you first read 1984?
I can't remember with any veracity. I must have been, I'm just imagining where it was. It was on
the bookcase at the bottom of the stairs where my mother kept her favorite books.
And in virtue of being in that house at that time, I must have been about 12 to 13.
Okay. So you pull it off your mother's book shelf. Was this a book that you just devoured over a day
or two or you lingered over for a longer period of time? I think I probably devoured it. I've
quite a slow reader. So now, in fact, I have to confess, since going to university and since
committing to a rather hectic, work-orientated career, I don't read for pleasure anymore because
I have to review scientific papers and the occasional book nearly every day. So I just have no
space for pleasure reading. But in those days, you have the time and the space to do it for
pleasure. And I probably was quite voracious in going through it. So my mother had a collection
of penguin classics. So I just went from right to left. I remember that. I do remember 1984 as
being particularly compelling. There were other things that Aldous Huxley in the Doors of Perception,
but 1984 was quite enchanted and frightening. So I do remember that one quite acutely. So I had
it gone through it quite quickly, late into the night under the covers, which at all kind of
stuff. What did you find at 12 years old that was the most compelling part of 1984?
If it's a long time ago, I'm remembering this like you might remember a dream and not very well.
We're talking over half a century since I actually read it.
But the kind of the feeling that you had, can you remember that feeling, that experience?
Yes, it was just the horror of realizing that my comfort little world shouldn't be taken for granted.
When the veil was slowly lifted on the kind of world that the protagonist in 1984 had to contend
with, it was an eye opener that such societies, such cultures could actually exist and may actually
exist in other parts of the world. I didn't know at that age. So it was just a revelation that there
were other universes, universes of a cultural sort of an attitudinal sort, going back to these
the norms that, how should I behave in this context, in this society? So that was an eye
opener and curiously attractive because it was just so frightening. And once you developed this
hunger for another kind of culture, another kind of society and what you couldn't do in that society
all sorts of things which must resonate with everybody. All the little phrases like room 101,
double fiction, all of those classic things which, whether or not you like the word meme,
I think the meme applies to these things that once you've seen them, they stay with you for life.
Every few pages was an eye opener. And of course, there's always this, I can't remember if this
is true or false or a made memory now, but there's always this sort of notion that he could get out
of the city and go off to these green fields and escape with his girlfriend at some point.
So I love that as well. And I think that's possibly because the way I was brought up in Yorkshire,
there were two bits of my life. There was sort of hard work, sometimes actually getting used to
being in a new school because we're moving around a lot, settling into a new environment. And then
holidays off in the Yorkshire moors. So I've always had this polish of this sort of always light reading
about things like so far from the madding crowd, getting out there back to a quieter pace of life.
And I just remember there was this escape for the protagonist in 1984, if he could get there,
if he could realize it, but it was clearly never going to happen in any meaningful way.
That was again quite attractive. Yeah, it was not the hobbits in that case. This was a pretty
dark world that's portrayed in 1984. And what's interesting is it's a book that has endured
for 60, 70 years, and I think it's about 70 years and it's now out of copyright in 1984.
But let me just give you a couple of phrases here from the book. The party told you to reject the
evidence of your eyes and ears. It was their final, most essential command. In other words,
your ability to do what you're talking about in your paper of asking questions, asking better
questions, resolving the uncertainty, you no longer have the autonomy to do that. That has been script
from you. Question and answers are over. This is the script, the only script. There are no
questions and we may change the script tomorrow. We may be at war against East Asia tomorrow,
we may not. We'll let you know. That's the world of 1984 and part of the horror of that is
another of the quotes. Not merely the validity of experience, but the very essence of external
reality was tacitly denied by their partnership. There's no generative models that are done
independently in 1984. It is a chilling book and it's a book that fits into some of your other
early fiction as well. It's a statement about power and those who seize power never voluntarily
relinquish their power. Those were great excerpts. I've forgotten them. It's all coming back now.
Yes. I was wondering whether you were going to talk about the ghosts of that withdrawal of our
life affirming, and I would say mathematically necessary
quest for evidence for our own existence, whether that was being recapitulated in the
modern era by things like fake news. In a sense, you could imagine fake news,
this is basically saying the truth does not matter, Obama, truth decay. There is no
evidence of any worth out there anymore. I think that's equally frightening,
but painted in black and white by all. Well, I think that's, you know,
in that imaginative book. Well, again, let me give you a couple more quotes to refresh your
recollection. He's talking about the ideals set up by the party was something huge, terrible,
glittering. A nation of warriors and fanatics marching forward in perfect unity, all thinking
the same thoughts and shouting the same slogans, perpetually working, fighting,
persecuting 300 million people all with the same face.
And then power is carrying the human mind to pieces and putting them together again
in new shapes of your choosing. Again, I could perhaps see a 12 year old are all reading this,
and some of this, it seems to me now is reflected in your own research and your own modeling,
is it is a way to showcase what the human brain mapping should be. It should be have the freedom,
the basic freedom to generate models of the world without manipulation and without interference.
That there should be some choice in this. And there's George Winston with his girlfriend Julia
trying to find some small way to model a traditional relationship and being unable to do that, being
bounded in in such a way that the only thing they could do was to submit.
They could no longer question, they could no longer answer, but they love big brother.
So, I think with 1984, we find a book where, again, curiosity comes up in Orwell's world,
there is no curiosity that's allowed, there's no creativity, there's no imagination.
And so creativity and imagination go across just language, you go across music and goes
across the mathematics that you use to describe the universe, because it may disable and disable
institutions that have a vested view and what the model of the universe is. Copernicus,
this is you had your Copernicus moment when you were talking earlier about suddenly, I understood,
growing up in New York, that York was not the center of the universe, there were things going on.
In other places that were quite terrifying, the way to interrogate the world was not universal,
it was local. Yes, absolutely. And perhaps that was, I mean, looking back, clearly,
you can see that kind of utopia is just not sustainable, it's everything. Sure. So, one way
that philosophers describe this sort of the ability to pursue life as a curious creature
is self-evidencing, the existence is just acquiring evidence, asking questions and acquiring the
evidence for your own existence. So, mulling over what the excerpts that you've just shared with us,
what that is describing is completely unsustainable and is frightening because it cannot exist,
or it does exist, it wouldn't exist for very long. It is the exact opposite of self-evidencing,
that latitude, that creativity, that opportunity to ask questions, to reaffirm and then change my
mind about my place in this world. So, perhaps that's why it was curiously frightening. As you
say, very dark. Yeah, it's a system, a lot of what Orwell wrote about in the 40s, we can see playing
out in various countries today, where there are more totalitarian measures, authoritarian measures
to limit free expression, which again, whenever I hear limiting free expression, it's limiting the
right to question. Question is the challenge. The challenge is the model may not be right,
it needs improvement. We need better and more detailed answers, and that requires being able
to say the current model is flawed. And so, you have millions and hundreds of millions of people
who don't want the questioning, who are quite happy to have the party decide what the truth is,
and that everything else is false. Are they happy? Good question. Good question. Whether that brings
some kind of emotional resolution, maybe it is at just an emotional level that happiness for them
is having the security that there is a community of people who have faith in a particular stagnant
modeling of the world, that the model of the world, of course, probably never existed, because
these are fantasy models, but they believe them to be real. It's not a simile or a metaphor,
it was like Napoleon saying I am Caesar, not like I am like Caesar, I am Caesar.
So there is that kind of internalization that can go on and seems to be going on.
Yes. You're tempting us to be into a political discussion of contemporary.
No, I don't want to go there. But we may go there a little bit in terms of the next book,
which is quite political, Homeage to Catalonia, which is another George Orwell,
this is nonfiction as opposed to fiction, but it is absolutely memorable. I can remember reading
this very young as well, so I'd be very interested how old you were when you read this and what kind
of influence it had on you at the time and now. So clearly my mother put all her George Orwell
penguin classics in order. Next to 1984.
And that one was in a similar spirit to just realizing the world could be in a different
way or there were realizable universes out there, so you should never take your own world for granted.
What I took from the Homeage to Catalonia was the autobiographical aspect. I didn't,
until you reminded me, remember it as an autobiography. I thought it was just a story
about a young man's adventures watching a war in originally things that started in
Barcelona. But the thing for me was I could see me in 10 years time and that there were
different possibilities about the way you used your life. Because I had assumed that I was going
to be a good boy, probably thought at that time that I was going to be a psychologist
because of my father's passion for mathematics. I probably already had committed to a life as a
mathematical psychologist, like some kind of scientist involved in the brain. But I was
impressed by Orwell's sort of moral and political convictions. You didn't have to do that. You could
just say, no, I'm leaving this country and I'm going to go. So just a different way of scripting
your life was a real thing. And it actually happened. And here was this eloquent young man
talking about how he chose to spend and risk his life. At a time when I was at school I had to
make choices about exams and the kind of education and the career path that you were likely to pursue.
And clearly those sorts of questions really did not bother George Orwell. He was out there
doing the right thing, having adventures. He left Eton and went to Spain to join the
partisans there. One of the things I love about Orwell, and it comes out in homage,
is his humility. Beware of my partisanship, my mistakes of fact and the distortions inevitably
caused by having seen only one corner of events. There's a beautiful
sense of humbleness in that statement. Because anyone who's been in a situation like that knows
that what you're seeing is not the whole context. Things that are going on or orthogonal to you
are multiple. You have no knowledge of them. And so what you're reporting on is what you've
experienced and what you've seen. And there are very few people, Orwell was one of them,
who was able to acknowledge, I can only tell you what I experienced, what I saw.
And I can also tell you, beware of the propaganda from abroad written by people who have never been
here, who have never been in battle, who have never seen the things that go on. Because they have an
agenda. One of the things that is interesting about homage as well is his humor arises. I love
this quote. For some reason, all the best matadors are fascist. I think I've been thinking about
that. Maybe it's the public display of the power to slaughter the bull in front of a stadium filled
with people. That would be attractive. There is a certain level of fascism in the matadors role
and performance. A wonderful play of language. And the thing with Orwell is he's able to layer
his observations with these kinds of deep insights by just the right metaphor at the right time.
Orwell also, in addition to his reporting on the war, had things to say about the
ruling class in England. I'm just wondering, as a young boy growing up, if that had any impact at
all. Here's a quote on class, whether the British ruling class are wicked or merely stupid is one of
the most difficult questions of our time. And at certain moments, a very important question.
I think it did influence me. I mean, it's difficult to say whether those books influenced me or whether
I have chosen those books because I have subsequently adopted a particular political
and worldview. But I suspect the former. Interestingly, your point about, beware
the being partisan on the basis of the secluded amount of evidence that you gather from
your exposure to the world. In contrast, I probably inherited a lot of my political views,
not obviously from my parents, but also by just assuming that Orwell was right.
So I subsequently grew up to be effectively a socialist of an understated sort. But if I had
to commit to one side of the political divide or another, I'd certainly be in Orwell's direction.
Simply because I took him at face value because of the honesty and the integrity of his writing,
both the fictional writing, but also the what struck me a bit, him writing about his own
experiences as a young man. You're absolutely right. I mean, that autobiography is
an excellent example of honesty, brutal honesty. And, you know, he talks about when he was shot.
He says two things went through his mind. First, his poor wife, what was she going to do? Her husband's
killed now in Spain. He says, my second thought was, this is just crazy. This is stupid. This is
some random shot of I'm standing in a trench. I'm not being heroic or anything. I'm just shot
talking to someone. It is absolutely beyond my comprehension that I'm going to die in this stupid
pointless, senseless way. And all the nurses and all the doctors said the same thing.
Anyone shot through the throat, they always die. You didn't die. You are the luckiest man alive.
So there's Orwell saying, you know what, amongst the absurd, there's also random luck.
I had both that day. The absurdity of being shot in the place I was shot at the time,
along with the fact that I survived when I shouldn't have survived.
I forgot about that, but now you've reminded me. Yes, that was a very important part of, yes.
Thank you. Again, I think going back to generating models is, and again, it's generating models
and uncertain to go together in this way, is that there is a degree of randomness and chaos
and luck that's involved. And you find that in reading as well, that basically a character
can have some either good luck or some bad luck. Things that are happening outside of his or her
control. And whether a homeage to Catalonia is one of those books, and I think there's something to
be said, that there is a certain degree of random spin the wheel of you end up in Spain as opposed
to Portugal or Thailand or wherever. And things happen there that would not otherwise have happened
to you if you'd gone another way. It's the counterfactual again. So what we're learning then
from your reading list is there are a lot of counterfactuals that the characters and the
authors are talking about. Yes. From Eddington to Orwell. So maybe there's a lesson here that
delicious diversity. Yes, the diversity and the counterfactuals continue to proliferate if you
allow them inside of a creative imagination found in the right series of books.
She leads us to Lateral Thinking, which is a nonfiction book by Edward de Bono. What
was your age approximately across this one? About 30. So this was one of my mother's books.
A whole series of popular psychology books, but I remember that one in particular.
Simply because it drilled down possibly in a sort of popular psychology fashion
on how we thought. And in fact, it actually addresses exactly the model building, the
creativity. So the lateral thinking could be read as just thinking outside the box,
gaining access in your head to that diversity. Those counterfactuals that enable you to render
your understanding, your narratives, your model of the world generalizable and context sensitive.
So I can't remember very much about it, but I do remember being intrigued by the importance of
letting go of preconceptions and celebrating the brain as literally a fantastic organ, a
generator of fantasies and hypotheses and counterfactuals to enjoy itself in thinking about
different ways of solving problems or explaining this and that. And it's certainly something which
became a scientific question in later life, thinking about how on earth do you get a computer
to do this? If you wanted to simulate Ahar moments and insight in silico,
how would you engineer that? What are the principles that underwrite that kind of
that particular sort of creativity and imagination and resolution? So sometimes
the creativity is almost paradoxically in finding simple solutions.
Passing various explanations. Oh, it's just like that, deflationary explanations. So
I got a sense of that from what I remember of Edward DeBona's natural thinking.
For me, I read it quite young as well, is that some ways it was kind of a simulation program
of surprises, of how to surprise yourself. And in some ways, it's like a test crash in the car
to see what gets bent, see what works, what does it, how you can make it a little bit
stronger and better and so forth. And that lateral thinking was that way of testing
the model that you have. And you test it in hard ways that surprise it because you know,
no model has all the answers. That at some point, there's going to be a model failure.
And what you're looking for is how best, most efficiently, to get to that failure of a juncture
and to learn from that. And by improving the model, go back through the process. And it's in
basically an indefinite process because the model never gets totally perfected.
Yes. That's one of the things I think I took away from that book.
That's it. I'd forgotten that aspect, but you're absolutely right. And of course, that is exactly
the structure learning we were talking about before. Testing against the evidence at hand,
breaking the model, reassembling it, adding little bits in or taking stuff away. That is exactly the
thing that underwrites how we learn to live in this world. So technically, that would also be
known as Bayesian model selection where those hard tests of your hypothesis, your explanation,
are essentially seeking out data that would disambiguate between the hypothesis is the
right model or this is the wrong model. So good informative data is often the data,
the evidence that destroys your hypothesis, breaks your model, that road tests your car
in a destructive way. But then you know that was wrong. And then you move on to something which is
I haven't seen, got that perspective. I haven't remembered that perspective, but it does feel
absolutely right from a first principle account of sentient behavior.
Because in some ways, I mean, De Bono's book on lateral thinking kind of underlies
the process of scientific thinking which sets it apart. And maybe it's that kind of process
that's difficult to communicate to a non-scientific audience. Because to think that there are people
who are trying to break their models in a world where most people are trying to protect their
models at all costs, you see that they're talking cross purposes.
Yes, that's a good point. So if I was lecturing students in psychology or physics, I mean,
the whole point of a good experiment is it provides definitive evidence for or against
your hypothesis. So good data is data that will actually enable you to move on from a particular
hypothesis. So there's always a counterfactual in science is the null hypothesis and the
alternate hypothesis. And what you want are those data that allows you to disambiguate.
If you get some data and you're left 50-50, that's a bad scientist. Again, it's just another way of
saying asking the right questions. So what is a question? It's just a move on the world
to solicit some data which resolves your uncertainty. I think that's a lovely description
of the scientific process. Begs the question, what instances are people trying to protect
their model or their ideology? Is that part of this sort of confirmation bias and
base optimal maintenance of a particular gerative model? If you can find the right
environment and the environment or the culture permissively provides the right evidence,
perhaps that's a viable solution as well. But of course, then you take away this context
sensitivity, this counterfactual richness that we were talking about before you can't generalize.
That 1984 utopia will work provided everybody commits to that and there are no external
perturbations. There's nothing else in the universe that's going to come along and undermine it.
Re-contextualize it. Again, your Markov blanket is a useful metaphor in this case where
if you have one that is so thick it's impenetrable, it can't be changed. It's not subject to question
and answer. It is the Titanic, it will never sink. As opposed to I think the scientific process,
Markov blankets are like the universe. It can be in multiple shapes and configurations.
Some we learn from better explanations are better shapes than others,
but no one has the right to say one is the preferred, the only shape.
Yes, absolutely. I was just thinking about a very thick Markov blanket. I've never heard
that before, but it's a lovely idea which of course would render you completely insular.
Isolated, you're very thick and immutable, unchangeable and provided that thick blanket
protected you from the rest of the universe that would be fine, but of course the universe is going
to be rolled out blanket at some point. Then you get this dynamic. It's a very good point from
the point of view of physics because the whole point of the Markov blanket is that we're not
islands. We have to exchange with the world outside our heads, the world outside our communities.
If you're a cell, the world outside your cell boundaries, we are open systems and that does
require exactly this transformation and mutation and dynamics and reshaping of the Markov blankets
separate me from not me or you from not you. It did occur to me in your earlier
conversation with me that there might be a range of these Markov blankets and that
there may be an element of the population where that blanket is so overwhelming. It can't be
changed. On the other hand, it's so fragmentary that it's easily destroyed. Either of those
are not going to be productive of a happy life, of a life that's rich with texture and able to
accommodate surprise and uncertainty. That's absolutely right. You can see examples of this
all around you. The Markov blankets that are so friable, so labile, so capricious that they only
exist fleetingly is a very different definition of things that dissipate, die and decay.
All of those D words which have negative connotations are just descriptions of the dissipation of the
Markov blanket, a thing losing its thinness as the Markov blanket disappears. Stuff that doesn't
exist or decays or dies or dissipates very quickly, that's at one end. Stuff at the other end can
exist but it exists like a stone or a diamond for as long as it is allowed to exist and does
absolutely nothing. That Goldilocks regime in the middle where we live, which is not a stone
but neither is a forest fire. Let's go to Lord of the Rings. It's interesting you mentioned
growing up in the countryside in York. As you probably know, J.R.R. Tolkien grew up in
countryside in Worcestershire outside of Birmingham. In some ways, the Lord of the Rings is
his perception of that childhood, of that place, of those people, of those times,
the culture, the myths, and he brought in all of the myths with the Slavic, Finnish,
Celtic, Greek, Norwegian. He was a great linguist at Oxford University. We have the chair there.
These books, I think, had a profound influence on multiple generations. I'm not
certain if they're read today, they would have been in the past, but I'm very pleased to see them
on your list because, again, we're back to 1984 in a way. We're looking at
symbols of power, sources of power, the most powerful people setting the communication
moral agenda of what people can do, what they can think, and that the power in this case
is one ring by someone who is power hungry, Sardon, living in his castle in Moldor.
We have a small group from the forest, the Hobbits, Frodo and Sam, who venture out on a
reverse quest, which is a counterfactual, if you like. This is not Odessus. This is the office.
They are at home, unlike Ulysses, who was trying to get home. So, being at home, they needed a
reason to leave, and the reason to leave was to take the ring that Bilbo had given Frodo,
his cousin, to go back. It was only one place where it could be destroyed, which was the center
of this power. And the whole story is the journey back to Mordor, in order to destroy
the ring that threatens to destroy Middle Earth, which is where the Hobbits lived.
So, how old were you? Was this on your mother's bookshelf as well? It wouldn't have been
amongst the psychology books, but where was it? This is my book.
And in a different way from 1984, I think this is my first exposure to the fantasy literature,
another world. This was much more escapism. It wasn't about having your eyes open. I recognize
everything Tolkheim was writing about, whether it was the countryside and idealized countryside
that against his homestead, or the mountains that I was familiar with, with the Pennines,
and indeed with the occasional trips to the Welsh mountains or the Scottish mountains.
And also, I can't remember why, but I also loved sort of old English folklore and the tales of
Sir Arthur and Merlin. If I could have been one person at that age, I would have liked to be Merlin.
But all of these notions and narratives and the atmosphere and the compass of this new world
that Tolkheim had created was very, very comfortably with all the things that I loved,
but it was somewhere you could escape to. That had all the right ingredients. The one ring,
the simplicity, the David and Goliath kind of situation, the overwhelming odds,
the heroic venture with a small fellowship that within this fellowship, they could find the
resources, creative resources in order to overcome what seemed to be impossible odds.
Yes. The hallmark of a great story. Will they do it?
Will they succeed? Rather than the George Winston ending in 1984 where he says,
I love Big Brother. Here, Big Brother is in for a fall.
One of the things I think that's interesting about the Lord of the Rings is the symbolism of going
back in England to really preanglesaxon England, certainly before 1066,
with the Normandy invasion, that there was a sense of people living with nature as part of nature,
that really the big changes came with the agricultural and industrial revolution,
and that that changed everything. It took communities away from the forest, destroyed the
forest, and that was in a sense something I think the token regretted very much. The sense of if
you want to just, that was the power, the new power was these new technologies that were coming in
and basically changing everything and everyone. There must have been changes that were going on
when you were growing up in York as well in the rural area. You could probably see even in your
childhood that things were not going to stay the same. Yes, absolutely. My father was instrumental
in that in terms of building a lot of the infrastructure. Certainly in England at that time,
that's when a lot of the technology and infrastructure which we currently enjoy was being
assembled, so things were changing. Of course, mixed with the slight sadness that my father
had to leave the home to do that. I didn't necessarily see this infrastructure building,
the mechanisation of England as necessarily the best thing because it entailed the absence of my
father. Certainly it's a younger man, but you're absolutely right. Another author I used to love
was Thomas Hardy because it just took you before this time. It was just a much safer time. It always
struck me that the past is a much more comfortable, pleasant place to be because there really is no
uncertainty about the future because you know what happened. Certainly in a so pre-technological
setting, I've always been drawn to dramas in an escapism sense, stories and literature
that is in a quieter, gentler, more contemplative time, usually with lots of fields and grass and
vegetation. The thing about the past is that it's basically drained of most of the surprise
because we know what happened and what didn't happen and there can be revelations that come
up here and there that change our idea of what happened and we may be a little bit surprised
by it, but being surprised about a new piece of information from the past is quite different
than being surprised about what's happening today or what may happen tomorrow to prepare for.
I mean just to perhaps put this in context, at that time there was CND and the Cold War
and I remember having government information films at school about what to do in the case of a
nuclear explosion. So there was a genuine fear that the world was going to, certainly amongst my
age group, probably naively, there was a genuine fear that the world was going to explode.
Watching pictures of nuclear bombs go off induced the kind of deep existential
fear and angst that you have during a nightmare. So there was certainly in the era of Thomas Hardy
in Wessex or in Middle Earth, you knew there couldn't be a nuclear bomb, but there were still
great challenges ahead. There were still dramas and betrayals, so there was still
a really important narrative, but it certainly did not entail the kind of devastation that
industrialization and technology and nuclear technology would entail if it all went wrong.
Right.
At that point in sort of English history.
Yeah, it's interesting as well because I know you've written a lot about communication and the
importance of that, is that it's been said of Tolkien's trilogy that he's really writing about
the loss of communication between man and nature, that there were lines of communication and that it
part of what he was trying to do was to write about that breakdown and the relationship between
man and nature. With climate change these days, we can see that actually that breakdown has had
quite significant consequences. If we could move on to Lord of the Flies from Lord of the Rings to
Lord of the Flies, I'm not certain if there's any perfect segue for those two titles, but
we're going to try our best. Were you living with your parents in York at the time you read this?
Yes, about the same time, probably a little bit older because I also remember
doing that at school or at least having having discussions at school. So obviously I got to
the stage of doing my studies for English literature, but I had read it previously,
and this was at the tail end of my mother's collection, but I think spoke very beautifully
to psychology and the way that we relate to each other when circumstances change. So this was
portended a growing fascination with psychology and psychiatry, and eventually I became a
psychiatrist en route to becoming a theoretical neurobiologist. So this was an eye-opener,
not in terms of the way that the world works, but in terms of the way that we work, for me.
Again, a very compelling read. I mean, you read this as an adolescent, and really it's a book
about adolescents without adult supervision of, in a sense, dividing into factions, and the factions
might be called, one would be maybe Ralph, who was more of the, for civilization and democracy and
consent and rule of law, and then of course there was Jack, who was just the opposite, who was
into hunting tactics, power games, domination, Piggy, who was the intellect and the rationalist,
and Simon, who was the incarnation of good and holiness. So we had all of the adolescent
characteristics there put together, and from your observations as a psychiatrist in the past,
was it a reasonably valid look at how adolescents divide into factions and the kind of values that
emerge from that? Yes, I think it is. Beautifully painted, there's different dimensions and aspects,
and also very apt descriptions of all my classmates, the different classmates that you could be
and I have to say, almost, you had a choice, you could become any one of those people in
different contexts. So again, different scripts for different ways of coping, and coping here
in a very changeable, unconstrained context where you were in charge. I mean, it certainly
it certainly was a detailed picture of adolescence, but in many senses one could imagine
grown-ups disintegrating in exactly the same way, without the societal infrastructures and cultural
constraints in play to keep us all together, all reading from the same old sheet or hymn sheet.
But certainly, as an adolescent, he was a good library or repertoire of different ways of
behaving. I can remember wanting to have mixtures of the key characters, and I was growing up at
that time, having moved because my father was now building motorways in North Wales in England,
so moved to a different school where there were a lot of people where the nearest city was Liverpool,
and some of them were beautiful characters, very sort of compassionate, some very religious,
some hard people. So I felt sometimes obliged not to be piggy, which was a natural tendency
given my intellectual leanings. I deliberately tried to be un-piggy and learned. It took me
about six months to smoke a cigarette without being sick, but I had to do it to get that age,
like Jack might have appreciated. So it was great to see all these characters
on different ways of behaving, play out, but also how all those traits become very much
accentuated and caricatured in their expression when the breaks are off, when the context and
the constraints are not there, all the paranoias come in and the outlandish, surprising ways of
responding when you can't predict what is going to happen can sometimes lead to quite catastrophic
outcomes. That's a very interesting observation. I hadn't thought about that, but you're right.
It's they arrived with one script, but where they're in an environment where there were
multiple scripts that could be used, and there were surprise. It's how they dealt with surprise
on different scripts that led to the conflict, which is kind of interesting as well with
Token, who's in a sense created the Middle Kingdom that it's filled full of piggies and
Ralph's, but the other characters aren't there. Jack is not there in tokens, idealized communication
of man and nature. So there is that interesting juxtaposition of Lord of the Flies and Lord of
the Rings. And one which I think certainly had more influence in terms of a scholarly
and studied approach to personal interactions, which I should not have been surprised,
rolled forward 10 years, and I was studying psychology, university, and then subsequently
psychiatry as a practicing condition. So there was a richness there that was
possibly underwritten to a certain extent by reading those books. Another book, I remember,
was Animal Farm around that time, which seemed to have the same sense to it. This is the
disintegration of the psyche at an interpersonal level that could be afforded, if all those
constraints or that harmony that Tolkien was restoring in his long story was not attained.
Yeah, it's, again, looking at those books that we've discussed, it really is a question of
harmony's juxtaposition with power. And does power ultimately capture harmony for its own purposes
and defines it in such a way, an Orwellian way, that it has the best of both worlds and everyone
else has a script, which is the worst of all worlds, but it's their script and they believe in it.
So there is, I'm glad we're working on this metaphor of scripting, because in a sense,
what we've been discussing in this conversation are the various scripts that appear in the
literature here, the diversity of them, how in some ways it's the same script, but in different
contexts. You know, suddenly in Lord of the Flies, you have adolescent boys without supervision
in a state of nature. What kind of disintegration happens and what scripts arise out of that?
Catcher in the Rye by J. D. Salinger, an American novel, a classic, which is on your list.
Again, about an adolescent going through a particularly difficult psychological time being
kicked out of his exclusive school in Pennsylvania and making his mission to save all the innocent
children of the world from going off the cliff through ignorance or their own innocence.
So what drew you to this particular book?
That was the last book I read, so I've been in my late teens, if not early 20s then,
and I can't remember how I came across it, but I do remember reading it while traveling.
I don't remember where I was traveling, but becoming absolutely engrossed. So that was one
of those books you just couldn't put down. I don't know why I was so engrossing. It had the same
kind of completeness that Lord of the Rings brings to the table in terms of defining
a complete universe where all the rules are known. Nothing is resolved, but all the contingencies are
in play, and indeed there was a little map in my version of Lord of the Rings. You could actually
see where you were that was bounded, and in the same subtle way, but in a different way,
I think Catch and the Rye had that. This was a little universe which was, I can't remember now,
because it's, as I say, more than half a century since many decades I read it, but it had that.
This was a little island, a little bounded island of a few days in a young man's life
where they just got into that little island, that little sort of epoch. It was completely
self-contained, an episode, and you didn't have to worry about the past or the future.
You just were in this particular bounded critique, description, adventure within this epoch,
and that was very comforting, but also very frightening because, again, there's this sense
of disintegration. I probably misread it. What I remember from this was, and it probably is again,
a made memory due to my psychiatric training later in life, but I remember it as basically what we'd
now describe as an early psychotic break, a young man experiencing the first psychotic break and
disintegration again of the psyche, a disconnection of the connectivity that ties our world models
together inside our head, and all the delusional mood and the misperception of what matters and
what's going on in just daily life and daily transactions with relatives and friends and
teachers, and indeed, I think it was the one point that ends up in a psychiatric asylum.
So I remember it acutely because, of course, within a few years I was actually dealing with these
people, students at Oxford University who were experiencing the early symptoms of schizophrenia
going through very similar episodes and weekends. It was just a very poignant, very personal.
I thought it was almost autobiographical, but obviously it wasn't. It read as if it was.
Again, it had an honesty in its disintegration and its chaoticness, which as a student of
the way things could go wrong. It was very engaging. So it was obviously influential as well
in terms of career path and in terms of your own modelling of the world, particularly adolescence
in the world, would have been, in a way, modeled by Holden Caulfield and his inability to kind of
accept a larger reality. There's one quote I'd like to share with you from the book,
which shows the quality of the writing and I think the essence of the story.
She wasn't doing a thing, I could see, except standing there, leaning on a balcony railing,
holding the universe together. That, to me, is the epitome of great art, putting the mundane
with the sublime, the local with the universal, the ordinary with the meta in one simple sentence,
leaning against the balcony, holding the universe together.
Somehow making that kind of a cosmic connection between two very disparate,
again, your counterfactuals, put together in one sentence in order to make a profound point
of the interconnection that goes on between counterfactuals.
Perhaps it was that style of writing and that beautiful juxtaposition of things which just
could not normally go together within our unnormative appreciation of the world,
which made me think it was autobiographical, to have that ability, not dissimilar to the
sort of lateral thinking, and certainly almost formally identical to something called
night's move thinking or derailment and schizophrenia, where things jump about and there
are collisions and juxtapositions and associations that are completely implausible in one's normal
internal narrative or indeed spoken narrative. The kind of thing that exactly is the required
to build a new model, to be creative. I imagine it's the kind of thing that Van Gogh had in a
visual context. The other thing about that particular example about the balcony and holding
the universe together is that it has this grandiosity, which again is a hallmark of
certain kinds of psychosis or manic depressive psychosis, that the true or false impression
that your existence matters in terms of, in a manic sense or nipotent sense,
matters in terms of the existence of the universe, but also notice within that holding the universe
together, that your influence transcends or encompasses the entire universe, a complete
loss of boundary. There is no boundary between you and then you get into notions, froggy notions,
of ego dissolution, but of course, given our previous conversation, the dissolution of the
Markov blanket. Now you're not responsible for holding the universe together.
Yes, exactly. The blanket dissolved, but therefore a fraction of a nanosecond exists and you see
something you haven't quite seen before. It's interesting that line between imagination and
schizophrenia, where imagination at some point along a continuum is no longer a healthy vehicle
to resolve uncertainty. It is a vehicle that's basically the steering wheels coming off and
the brakes don't work. Yes, I think that's a very nice way of putting it. Just on logical
arguments, that has to be right in the sense that we still have people with this kind of psychosis
in our population. So from an evolutionary point of view, that speaks to the fact there is something
very adaptive about having a type of tendency. There's something that promotes your ability
to survive and to live in this culture, in this world on an evolutionary timescale,
if you've got this propensity for exploring counterfactuals. But as you say, you can go too
far. So there has to be something slightly schizophrenic about all of us if we're going
to make a difference or indeed survive in this world. But when it goes too far, which then gets
into the clinical domain, which I think if I read that now and applied psychiatric criteria,
I think you get the diagnosis there. But it is all about coming back to the reduction of uncertainty
and inference. It's all about inference. In a sense, what are delusions and hallucinations,
if not simply falsely inferring something is there when it's not? Or what is an agnosia or a
neglect syndrome where you say, this is not my arm or I can't recognize that person's face.
So that's basically inferring something is not there when it is. But in both instances, it's
a sort of a disorder of inference. It's making the wrong sense of the sensory impressions.
Clearly, we have to suspend our commitment to the sensory evidence in order to imagine
perhaps the most beautiful example of this is dreaming. So this is something very close to
the heart of one of my most senior and close colleagues in consciousness and sleep research,
Alan Hobson. So if you want simple evidence, the brain constructs its own realities and its own
expirations for the world, then you need to look no further than dreaming. And this is at the heart
of consciousness and sentience. But that sentience is an active construction that the brain has
generated, where you use the sensory information during waitfulness, at least, to constrain and
shape and do the structural early. A very delicate game. And if it goes wrong, you can easily see
how you can fall into a state of psychosis. And indeed, you can possibly understand certain
sleep disorders along those lines. Yeah, that's interesting. I didn't thought about that. But
it makes sense because in a dream state, the input from the world is cut off. So what is being
filtered in is not from experience. It's from the data banks of models in your head
that then create their own counterfactuals without any kind of countervailing
reality check with the evidence at hand. Yes. So you can imagine that that's a nice example.
Every night you put on a very, very thick Markov blanket. That's the way sleep is,
is a thick Markov blanket. One that you can't throw off to cool down until you wake up. It's there.
Dreams are the hallucination from inside a thick Markov blanket.
Alan Hopson would love that. I'll tell him that.
Okay, so we're coming then to the human condition and Halden Caulfield and Catcher and the Rye,
where let me give you a couple of quotes to remind you some of the nice parts of this book,
the nature of truth. It's partly true, but it isn't all true. People always think something's
all true. Again, one of those leaning on the balcony kind of statements,
the human condition. Among other things, you find that you're not the first one
who was ever confused and frightened or even sickened by human behavior.
And that goes back to some of the earlier books on the list as well,
is that realization of the diversity of behavior and that there are things that are going on
outside of York in places like Catalonia that I was never aware of.
Far from the Maddening Crown, Thomas Hardy. That's a book I'm familiar with. I went through
a stage of loving Thomas Hardy, read everything. Again, I think a contemporary of D.H. Lawrence
and writing about relationships between the classes and particularly and far from the Maddening
Crown, you have the wonderful Bathsheba and her estate, a very accomplished, self-reliant woman
who suddenly decides that she will risk everything for a rogue named Troy who really
just cast his luck to the fates and doesn't really take care of her, but she's willing
to risk everything for this, even though there are people around him, men around her who wish to
court her, but she will have nothing to do with them. So we're seeing, in a way, a kind of self-destructive
streak set in a class setting. What was the book, Far From the Maddening Crown, for you growing up?
It was in part escapism of the sort that one enjoys with Tolkine and the other
great fantasy like stories. The inherits from the fact that it was in past times, so you
knew, coming back, that you knew there were going to be no nuclear explosions or walls,
the parameters were set, but within those parameters there was intense tragedy. I think
you're picking up on the self-destruction. That was the tragedy and certainly in the context of
all the men who could have made it all right, self-evident naughtiness of Troy. Within the
parameters of this little world, in the southwest corner of rural England, we sort of took on a
magnitude which was quite horrifying. You just couldn't believe it was getting worse and worse,
how awful Troy was, particularly from, I do remember feeling very sorry for Gabriel. I do
remember the opening thing where he loses his sheep, and that was horrible as well, because I
used to love animals. I wanted it to be a better point. So this sort of getting back to the Yorkshire
Moors aspiration was underneath a lot of this. But it was, for me, again the perversity of
a failure to properly develop a theory of mind or infer the intentions and the nature of another,
by ascribing them inappropriately the attributes that you would have of Sheba would have had to
Troy. She failed to infer what kind of person he was, and unfortunately have to witness the
evidence towards the end of the story that he wasn't the kind of person that she was. So
it's a failure of a shared narrative in a romantic and interpersonal sort, which is irresistible.
As a story, as long as it doesn't happen to me. In a way, far from the maddening
crowd, the central heroine there, you can see that the deficiency is she didn't have appropriate
scripts to model the world of men and what the capabilities were and what the dangers were.
Her model was inadequate and she was unable to ask the right questions in order to update that model.
And so she just got deeper and deeper in holding on to the model that she knew,
even when it was clear that it was failing her, she was unable to let it go.
Yes, I mean, naivety of the sort that inherits from not having access to those counterfactuals.
So had she read Thomas Hardy, she'd been fine.
He judged the obscure, I would recommend.
So the book kind of ends with the world is largely made up of compromise.
And the compromise, I take that to mean in a larger sense, maybe a little bit like leaning
on the balcony kind of metaphor, is that the compromise is with your ability to control
the scripts of others and your perhaps inattentiveness in updating your own scripts
in order to have a more meaningful, effective way of communicating others, what you intend,
what your motives are, what you wish to see happen.
That was wonderfully put in, in particular that notion of updating your own scripts as part of
that, I would say, existentially necessary way of updating your world models.
So actually that word updating plays a really central role in formal mathematical descriptions
of model optimization and structural, and it's called Bayesian belief updating.
It is literally updating your belief states on the basis of evidence.
So if compromise is basically being able to accumulate and assimilate evidence in the service
of updating your beliefs, basically updating in order to improve or optimize your model
of the world, then compromise is, if you like, an entirely and complete description of the way
that we live. Yes, and another one that's perhaps a little darker is that the compromise
of the updating of your scripts is also dependent on the power of whatever
mondo you're living under, that somehow the updating isn't equal across the board.
And I think it's important to understand that culturally that updating process
is viewed in very different ways and has been done historically.
Now, the power is the environment.
Yeah, it is. Absolutely.
It's terribly, what I would hope is not, so you won't find an Orwellian Utopia in Wessex,
though. This is why it's so nice to read Thomas Hardy.
This has been a delightful conversation, Carl. I very much appreciate you coming on the show
and sharing with us your in-depth knowledge of science, of neurology,
of mapping of the human brain. We could go on for a very long time. You've added a lot.
The books you've chosen are classic, and I hope that the viewers will appreciate the
insights that you've brought to those books and to the general conversation on how we use books
to model our world and how that model influences who we are, what we are, what we see, and what we want.
That was a lovely closure. I greatly enjoyed talking to you.
We talked about all my favorite things. Thank you.
Thank you, sir. You have a great day, and I will let you know when the show is up.
Thanks a lot, Ben.
Thank you. Cheers.
