They called themselves neoregonites, but were willing to answer to neoconservatives or hawks.
Paul Wolfowitz was generally considered the brains of the outfit.
Paul Wolfowitz believed then that it was a mistake to end the war as we did under the
circumstances that we did.
They underestimated the way in which Saddam was able to cling to power and the means he
would use to remain in power.
That was the mistake.
One of the most controversial assertions made in the Israel lobby and foreign policy by
John Mersheimer and Stephen Walt is that members of the lobby played a principal and necessary
role in the plan to invade Iraq in 2003.
For them, they argue, the invasion would not have happened.
As Stephen Walt wrote years after the book was published in Foreign Affairs, even some
readers who were generally sympathetic to our overall position found that claim hard
to accept, and some left-wing critics accused us of letting Bush and Cheney off the hook
or of ignoring the importance of other interests, especially oil.
Rather than oil, the pair contend, it was a powerful group within the Israel lobby,
the driving force of America's hawkish interventionism and proponents of spreading democracy by the
barrel of the gun.
Or here's a less graceful description from prominent neo-conservative Michael Ladine
of the American Enterprise Institute.
Every ten years or so, the United States needs to pick up a small, crappy little country
and throw it against the wall, just to show we mean business.
Ladine was at one time a consultant to the U.S. National Security Council.
Norman Finkelstein, a key critic of Israel today, as they carry out a genocide in the
Gaza Strip, was at the time of the book's publishing openly at odds with Mersheimer
and Walt over this very issue.
The argument that Steve Walt and I make in our book is that the Israel lobby, again,
mainly the neo-conservatives, were the principal driving force in the United States behind
the war in Iraq.
Now, we argue that the lobby by itself, or the neo-conservatives by themselves, couldn't
make the war happen.
They definitely needed President Bush and Vice President Cheney to be on board.
And that happened after September 11th.
I do not think the evidence supports that claim.
The chief architects of the war were Mr. Rumsfeld and Mr. Cheney.
And I doubt anyone would claim that Mr. Cheney or Mr. Rumsfeld have any allegiances other
than to the U.S. government.
Not satisfied with merely debating, Mersheimer, Finkelstein devoted a chapter in his knowing
too much to the Iraq question, where he gives a brief but helpful history of the neo-conservatives
The founding fathers of neo-conservatism, such as Irving Kristol,
He has been called the godfather of neo-conservatives,
wrote the Marxist wave in the 1930s.
Irving Kristol, Norman Potthoritz, Midge Dector, the magazines around which they coalesced,
were basically partisan review and commentary.
When this wave crested after World War II, they joined in the liberal anti-communist witch-hunt
of the 1950s.
The neo-conservatives then rode the new left wave in the early 1960s.
When it crested in the mid-1960s, they again joined in the establishment backlash to it.
As the spectrum of respectable opinion in the U.S. shifted steadily rightward, the Jewish
neo-conservatives galloped yet more swiftly, eventually crossing the Rubicon from the Democratic
Party to the Republican Party.
As Finkelstein writes, the collapse of the Soviet Union shifted the focus of the neo-conservatives,
and indeed U.S. defense policy makers generally, on the Middle East.
However, he staunchly disagreed on a key argument put forth in the Israel lobby.
The most sensational item on Mersheimer and Waltz' charge sheet alleges that the disastrous
decision of the Bush administration to invade Iraq in 2003 was orchestrated by the Israel
lobby.
Finkelstein argues that if the principal architects of the war, namely George Bush, Dick Cheney,
and Donald Rumsfeld, were motivated by Israel, why in the first and second-hand accounts
of the pre-war behind-the-scenes debates of the Bush administration, Israel barely gets
a passing mention.
Finkelstein looks to their memoirs.
In her memoir No Higher Honor, Condoleezza Rice, who was national security advisor in
the Bush administration, does not list or even allude to Israeli security as the or
even a motive behind the attack.
In his memoir Known and Unknown, Donald Rumsfeld, who was secretary of defense in the Bush
administration, also does not list or even allude to Israeli security as the or even
a motive behind the attack.
In his memoir In My Time, Dick Cheney, who was vice president in the Bush administration,
also does not list or even allude to Israeli security as the or even a motive behind the
attack.
If the Israel lobby played such a critical role in the decision to attack Iraq, how
was it able to so effectively cover its tracks?
One could understand why Cheney et al might want to conceal that oil was the impetus behind
the attack, but it is unclear what motive they would have to conceal the Israel lobby's
role.
It's a good question.
If Israel played an important role in the decision to invade Iraq, one would think that
this would be mentioned in the various memoirs of the perpetrators.
In Mersheimer and Waltz book, they quote, knowledgeable and well-respected individuals
who had said openly that the war was linked with Israel's security.
Beginning with a Philip Zellico In September of 2002, Zellico was a member
of the president's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, known to insiders as PIFIAB.
He would also serve as executive director of the 9-11 Commission and as counselor to
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice.
They've also written at least two books together.
His words before an audience at the University of Virginia on September 10, 2002, were first
reported by Imad McKay of the Interpress Service in 2004.
While speaking on a panel of foreign policy experts, Zellico said the following statements.
The unstated threat.
And here I criticized the Bush administration a little because the argument that they make
over and over again is that this is about a threat to the United States.
And then everybody says, show me an imminent threat from Iraq to America.
Show me, why would Iraq attack America or use nuclear weapons against us?
So I'll tell you what I think the real threat is.
It actually has been since 1990.
It's the threat against Israel.
And this is the threat that dare not speak its name because the Europeans don't care
deeply about that threat, I will tell you frankly.
And the American government doesn't want to lean too hard on it rhetorically because
it's not a popular cell.
Zellico names a familiar foe.
If the danger is a biological weapon handed to Hamas, then what's the American alternative
then?
Play out those scenarios.
Don't look at the ties between Iraq and al-Qaeda.
But then ask yourself the question, G is Iraq tied to Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic
jihad and the people who carry out suicide bombings in Israel?
Easy question to answer and the evidence is abundant.
Zellico was right.
In an October 2002 Human Rights Watch report on Palestinian suicide bombings during the
Second Antifada, they note that Saddam Hussein's government provides funds to families of martyrs
and others and has established a differential in which families of suicide bombing operatives
are said to receive a considerably larger sum of $25,000 while other families that have
suffered a death receive $10,000.
Iraq provides these monies through the local Bath Party-affiliated Arab Liberation Front
or ALF.
The ALF is a constituent member of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
They cite an informative article from the Sydney Morning Herald.
Its author, Paul McHugh, interviewed the Arab Liberation Front's Secretary General,
Raqqat Saleh, who confirmed that since late 2000, more than 800 families have received
martyr payments of $10,000.
It's transferred by the banks, he said, from the Iraqi banks to the banks in Palestine.
Philip Zellico was not happy with Mersheimer and Walt publishing his quote in the original
article which later became the book.
In the end notes of the subsequent book, Mersheimer and Walt write,
We used these quotations in our original article in the London Review of Books and Zellico
challenged our interpretation of them.
We based our discussion on a full and unimpeachable record of his remarks and his challenge has
no basis in fact.
Ironically, Zellico appears to have been proving the point made in his original speech.
As we saw earlier, Finkelstein's skepticism of Mersheimer-Walt's argument includes the
fact that there is no mention of Israel as a motivation for invading Iraq in the memoirs
of Condoleezza Rice, Dick Cheney, Donald Rumsfeld and others.
But should that not itself elicit pause and skepticism?
In his decision points, George W. Bush recalls a meeting with British Premier Tony Blair
in April of 2002.
In April 2002, Tony and Sherry visited Lor and me in Crawford.
Tony and I talked about coercive diplomacy as a way to address the threat from Iraq.
Tony suggested that we seek a UN Security Council resolution that presented Saddam with
a clear ultimatum.
Allow weapons inspectors back into Iraq or face serious consequences.
As I recall that discussion, it was less to do with specifics about what we were going
to do on Iraq or indeed the Middle East because the Israel issue was a big, big issue at
the time.
In fact, I think I remember actually there may have been conversations that we had even
with Israelis, the two of us, whilst we were there.
So that was a major part of all this.
But the principal part of my conversation, we've got to deal with the various different
dimensions of this whole issue.
As we can clearly see, Blair provides details peculiarly absent from Bush's telling.
Bush also railed against his critics in his memoir, saying some alleged that America's
real intent was to control Iraq's oil or satisfy Israel.
Those theories were false.
I was sending our troops into combat to protect the American people.
Saddam refused to cooperate with weapons inspectors, even with the threat of an invasion on his
doorstep.
The only logical conclusion was that he was hiding WMD.
Despite an October 2003 Congressional Research Service report, which noted that from late
November 2002 to March 2003, UN inspectors combed Iraq looking for weapons of mass destruction,
conducting over 750 inspections at 550 sites.
There's also the findings of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence's report on Iraq
WMD published in 2004.
One of the committee's members, the late Dianne Feinstein, stated in no uncertain terms
the state of Iraq's so-called nuclear program in the lead up to the invasion.
I think it is clear that there was not an ongoing nuclear program.
In August of 2002, prior to the vote in the Senate on the authorization to go to war,
I spent a day in Vienna at the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The IAEA is the agency that runs nuclear inspections.
They saw no signs of a nuclear program in Iraq.
The IAEA convinced me that there was no ongoing nuclear program in Iraq.
The intelligence reporting on a possible Iraqi nuclear program did not have an impact on
me because I did not believe it was correct.
Though she still voted for the war oddly enough.
The reason for the Bush administration's quietness about the role of Israel in the planning
is evidenced by a revealing article in the Jewish Forward newspaper.
The article is absent from both its English language and Yiddish language archives.
It took some serious digging to find, actually, oddly enough, though Internet archive finally
came through with the right maneuvering.
It's called Iraqi Move Puts Israel in Lonely U.S. Corner.
And it was written by Mark Perlman for the week of September 20, 2002 edition.
In contrast to Bush's memoir alleging Saddam refused to cooperate with weapons inspectors
with the only logical conclusion being Saddam possessed WMD, Saddam Hussein's surprise
acceptance of unconditional United Nations weapons inspections put Israel in the hot seat
this week, forcing it into the open as the only nation actively supporting the Bush administration's
goal of Iraqi regime change.
Israel's diffident stance appeared untenable this week after most capitals welcomed the
Iraqi announcement Monday that it would accept the return of weapons inspectors without conditions.
Further, Perlman writes, Israel and its supporters have insisted for weeks that while they sympathize
with the administration's hardline stance toward Baghdad, they were reluctant to advocate
any position openly.
The reluctance was fueled by fears that critics would claim the United States was going to
war on Israel's behalf, or even, as some have suggested, at Israel's behest.
These concerns came a month after Prime Minister Ariel Sharon told the Knesset Foreign Affairs
and Defense Committee that Iraq is the greatest danger facing Israel.
Though he clarified, we aren't intervening in U.S. decisions, but he said that strategic
coordination between Israel and the U.S. has reached unprecedented dimensions.
Days later, Aluf Ben reported for Haaretz, Israel is pressing the United States not to
defer action aimed at toppling Saddam Hussein's regime in Iraq.
Quoting Foreign Minister Shimon Peres, the problem today is not if, but when.
Adding that while attacking now would be quite dangerous, postponing it would be more dangerous.
Aluf Ben continues, but like Sharon, Peres also added a disclaimer, saying he did not
want to be seen as urging the United States to act and that America should act according
to its own judgment.
Israel, he said, will be a good soldier in the camp led by President George W. Bush.
The appetite for war among Israeli officials was on open display.
Foreign Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Benjamin Netanyahu wrote op-eds urging invasion.
Barak wrote for The New York Times, an article titled Taking Apart Iraq's Nuclear Threat.
Those who prefer to wait and hope for the best should contemplate the following.
No one really knows how close Saddam Hussein is to building a crude nuclear device, and
it was a crude device that destroyed Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
You will doubt Mr. Hussein's readiness to use a nuclear weapon against American assets
or against Israel, if only under extreme circumstances.
Once Iraq becomes a nuclear power, the very decision to go to war against it would become
a totally different ball game.
Notably, Barak felt comfortable enough to reveal his battle plan, which involved deploying
some 300,000 American soldiers.
For a successful invasion of Iraq, two operational options are basically valid.
A surgical operation to hit the core of the regime, and a full-scale operation to include
major airborne and ground forces, perhaps 300,000 soldiers.
Saddam Hussein has set an example of defiance, especially against the first President Bush,
that other Arab leaders cannot and should not emulate.
Netanyahu wrote for The Wall Street Journal.
Most Americans understand that, had Al Qaeda possessed an atomic device last September,
the city of New York would not exist today.
They realized that last week we could have grieved not for thousands of dead, but for
millions.
This is a dictator who is rapidly expanding his arsenal of biological and chemical weapons,
who has used these weapons of mass destruction against his subjects and his neighbors, and
who is feverishly trying to acquire nuclear weapons.
We now know that had the democracies taken preemptive action to bring down Hitler's regime
in the 1930s, the worst horrors in history could have been avoided.
Today, nothing less than dismantling his regime will do.
I write this as a citizen of the country that is most endangered by a preemptive strike.
For in the last gasps of his dying regime, Saddam may well attempt to launch his remaining
missiles with their biological and chemical warheads at the Jewish state.
We support this American action even though we stand on the front lines, while others
criticize it as they sit comfortably on the side lines.
This hawkish rhetoric reportedly gave rise to concern among Israeli officials, writes
Dan Eisenberg for the Jerusalem Post.
In an article absent from its online archive, which I had to access via ProQuest, since
it has not been archived in the Wayback Machine, the date was March 10, 2003.
The US attack on Iraq will begin next week, but Channel 1 reported that the foreign ministries
receiving reports from the US that the plethora of war predictions emanating from Israeli
leaders is being sharply criticized by the US media, which accused them of trying to
go the administration into war.
Until now, however, Israeli officials have continuously ignored warnings from US and
Israeli leaders, including Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, to be cautious and stop predicting
when the war will begin.
Sharon himself appeared to heed the warning, and the man who previously claimed Saddam
was the greatest threat to Israel, praised President Bush today for his pursuit of a
possible war in Iraq while seeking to disavow any Israeli involvement, writes James Bennett
for The New York Times.
The finely calibrated statement reflected concerns at the top of the government that
many of the worst critics in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere were identifying Israel
as an instigator.
Mr. Sharon sought to split Israel's support for a war from any responsibility for it.
I wish to emphasize we are not involved in this war, Mr. Sharon said in a meeting of
his party, Likud.
Looking past an Iraq war, the Defense Minister, Shah Mufaz, has urged the United States to
prepare to put diplomatic and economic pressures on Iran.
More on that later.
Indeed, not just Israeli officials were concerned, but also pro-Israel lobbyists in the United
States.
Dana Milbank, writing for The Washington Post, reported in November 2002 that a group of
U.S. political consultants has sent pro-Israel leaders a memo urging them to keep quiet while
the Bush administration pursues a possible war with Iraq.
The six-page memo was sent by the Israel Project, a group funded by American Jewish
organizations and individual donors.
Let American politicians fight it out on the floor of Congress and in the media,
the memo said.
If your goal is regime change, you must be more careful with your language because of
the potential backlash.
You do not want Americans to believe that the war on Iraq is being waged to protect
Israel rather than to protect America.
And it was this pro-Israel lobby in the United States that sought to tone down language implicating
itself in the war which it had persuaded the Bush administration to pursue.
At least that's how Mersheimer and Walt would put it.
The driving force behind the Iraq war was a small band of neo-conservatives who had long
favored the energetic use of American power to reshape critical areas of the world.
They had advocated toppling Saddam since the mid-1990s and believed this step would benefit
the United States and Israel alike.
It was the pro-Israel Thomas Friedman who told Haaretz's Ari Shavit in April 2003,
I could give you the names of 25 people, all of whom are at this moment within a
five-block radius of this office, they were in Washington DC at the time, who if you had
exiled them to a desert island a year and a half ago, the Iraq war would not have happened.
They were all affiliated with more than one think tank, comprising a network of like-minded
fellows and scholars who would come to hold prominent positions in the Bush administration
and have an influential role in American foreign policy.
John Bolton, who would serve as the ambassador to the United Nations, could boast being a scholar
for the Project for the New American Century, the American Enterprise Institute, and the
Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs, whose advisory board also included former CIA
director James Woolsey and even Dick Cheney.
What the late William R. Polk once described as an affinity bordering on patriotism to Israel
among the neoconservatives is by no stretch of the imagination limited to Jews.
In fact, Bolton is so pro-Israel that in May 2006, Israeli ambassador to the United Nations,
Dan Gilerman, joked Bolton was a secret member of Israel's own team at the United Nations.
The secret is out, we really are not just five diplomats, we are at least six, including John
Bolton. After Bolton was to be reappointed in late 2006, which caused controversy among
Democrats and Republicans alike, one of his defenders included Malcolm Holnelein,
vice president of the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations.
We talked about them in my last video. The Conference of Presidents comprises the 50
largest organizations in the American-Israel lobby. The Jewish community remained supportive
and would want to see Bolton stay, Holnelein said. Mark Perlman, writing for the Forward,
explains, Bolton is viewed as a strong supporter of Israel and exercised the American veto last
week on a UN Security Council resolution condemning the killing of Palestinian civilians in Gaza.
Bolton had cultivated especially close personal bonds over the years with all major Jewish groups.
Just how much power did the neo-conservatives have in the Bush administration?
Mersheimer and Walt explain, prominent officials in the Bush administration included Paul
Wolfowitz and Douglas Spieth, the number two and three civilians in the Pentagon,
Richard Perl, Kenneth Adelman and James Woolsey, members of the Influential Defense Policy Board,
Scooter Libby, the Vice President's Chief of Staff and National Security Advisor,
John Bolton, Under Secretary of State for Arms Control and International Security,
and his special assistant, David Wormser, and Elliot Abrams, who is in charge of Middle East
Policy at the National Security Council. Mr. Wolfowitz, considered a leader of the neo-conservatives,
has an informative history prior to his being appointed as Deputy Secretary of Defense.
Joseph Cerencioni wrote for the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace just
one day before the US would invade Iraq on 19 March 2003.
Long before September 11, before the first inspections in Iraq had started,
a small group of influential officials and experts in Washington were calling for regime change in
Iraq. Some never wanted to end the 1991 war. Many are now administration officials. Their
organization, dedication, and brilliance offer much to admire, even for those who disagree with
the policies they advocate. Cerencioni's history begins as early as 1992. Paul Wolfowitz, then
Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, supervised the drafting of the Defense Policy Guidance
document. A partially redacted version of the document is available in the National Security
Archive. A section titled Middle East and Southwest Asia reads, As demonstrated by Iraq's invasion
of Kuwait, it remains fundamentally important to prevent a hegemon or alignment of powers from
dominating the region. We must endeavor to curb proliferation of nuclear, chemical, and biological
weapons, as well as ballistic and cruise missiles. The infusion of new and improved conventional
arms and the proliferation of ballistic missiles and weapons of mass destruction during the past
decade have dramatically increased offensive capabilities and the risk of future wars throughout
the region. Excerpts from the document were subsequently leaked to the New York Times,
which caused something of a scandal. Embarrassed, the first Bush administration retracted it.
Its drafting had been supervised by Paul D. Wolfowitz, the Pentagon's Under Secretary for
Policy, wrote Patrick Tyler, who goes on to explain the strong emphasis elsewhere in the
document and in other Pentagon planning on using military force if necessary to prevent
the proliferation of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in such countries as
North Korea, Iraq, some of the successor republics to the Soviet Union, and in Europe.
Though it was retracted, its supervisor of course became Deputy Secretary of Defense,
and thus the Defense Policy Guidance document was rehashed as the National Security Strategy of 2002.
Nations that depend on international stability must help prevent the spread of weapons of mass
destruction. We are menaced less by fleets and armies than by catastrophic technologies in the
hands of the embittered few. We must defeat these threats to our nation, allies, and friends.
The U.S. National Security Strategy will be based on a distinctly American internationalism
that reflects the union of our values and our national interests. Our comprehensive strategy
to combat WMD includes proactive counter-proliferation efforts. We must deter and defend against the
threat before it is unleashed. There's also the year 1996, when Richard Perle, Douglas Feith,
and David Wormser, all future Bush administration officials, wrote a report which they sent to
the new Likud government in Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu's first term as prime minister.
The report called for a so-called clean break, and called removing Saddam Hussein from power in
Iraq an important Israeli strategic objective in its own right. Jumping two years ahead in 1998,
18 neoconservatives wrote a letter to President Clinton urging him to aim above all at the removal
of Saddam Hussein's regime from power. That now needs to become the aim of American foreign policy.
Again, many, most in this case, of the signatories became officials in the Bush
administration, including Elliot Abrams, Richard Armataj, John Bolton, Paula Dobriansky, Richard
Perle, Donald Rumsfeld, and Paul Wolfowitz. In January of 2001, as George W. Bush was to be
sworn in as the 43rd president, the Jerusalem Post's Washington correspondent, Janine Zakaria,
reported on the emerging group of officials who will steer U.S.-Israel relations during the next
four years. She declared Iraqi President Saddam Hussein is quietly developing weapons of mass
destruction. Regarding Paul Wolfowitz's appointment as number two at the Pentagon,
pro-Israel communities are jumping for joy. Wolfowitz is considered a strong supporter of Israel.
He has been one of the loudest proponents of a tough policy toward Iraq,
focused on finding a way to bring down Saddam Hussein's regime. Jumping for joy indeed,
in fact, for his role in the Iraq invasion, the Jerusalem Post would name Wolfowitz Man of the
Year. No question, this was Paul Wolfowitz's year. On September 15, 2001, at a meeting in Camp
David, he advised President George W. Bush to skip Kabul and train American guns on Baghdad.
In the process, Wolfowitz became the most influential U.S. Deputy Defense Secretary ever.
Can you so much as name anyone else who held the post? The war in Iraq had many authors,
Donald Rumsfeld, Dick Cheney, Tony Blair, George Bush. What's not in dispute is that
Wolfowitz is the principal author of the Doctrine of Preemption, which framed the war in Iraq,
and which, when it comes to it, will underpin U.S. action against other rogue states.
Following September 11, many people grasped intuitively that it was useless to contain
or deter foes for whom suicide was an acceptable option. The difference with Wolfowitz is that
he's been talking about this since at least 1992. When President Bush says America will not permit
the world's most dangerous regimes to threaten us with the world's most destructive weapons,
that's Wolfowitz talking. The neoconservatives had infiltrated the White House. In April of 2002,
a number of them would sign yet another letter, urging invasion,
signed most prominently by now Defense Policy Advisory Committee Chairman Richard Pearl.
Only the United States has the power and influence to provide meaningful assistance
to our besieged ally. Mr. President, we urge you to accelerate plans for removing Saddam Hussein
from power in Iraq. As you have said, every day that Saddam Hussein remains in power brings closer
the day when terrorists will not just have airplanes with which to attack us, but chemical,
biological, or nuclear weapons as well. It is now common knowledge that Saddam, along with Iran,
is a funder and supporter of terrorism against Israel. Iraq has harbored terrorists such as Abu
Nadal in the past, and it maintains links to the al-Qaeda network. If we do not move against
Saddam Hussein and his regime, the damage our Israeli friends and we have suffered until now
may someday appear but a prelude to much greater horrors.
Now, I want to go back to Janine Zakaria's article for the Jerusalem Post,
when she reported on the new appointees in the incoming Bush administration.
There's one part that will surely stick out to some of you. It's about Bush's
powerful Vice President Dick Cheney. Cheney is considered such a key player on foreign policy
that people in Washington have started to refer to his staff as a shadow National Security Council.
And while because of his business background, he is routinely referred to as an oil man by
people in the pro-Israel community, a moniker which translate roughly as not sympathetic to Israel.
I think you could make a case that on September 10th, 2001, it's not clear that George W. Bush was
in any fundamental way going in our direction of foreign policy.
That's Bill Kristol, co-founder of the Project for the New American Century,
and son of Irving Kristol, mentioned earlier by Finkelstein as a founding father of neoconservatism.
In fact, fellow neoconservative Jonah Goldberg described Kristol as the godfather of neoconservatism.
Bill Kristol also signed the 1998 letter to President Clinton urging Saddam Hussein's removal
and years later the 2002 letter urging Saddam Hussein's removal.
Sorry, just so we're clear, he is one of the most prominent neoconservatives.
I will work hard to find political solutions that allow and orderly and timely withdrawal
from places like Kosovo and Bosnia. We will encourage our allies to take a broader role.
We will not be hasty, but we will not be permanent peacekeepers dividing warring parties.
And if you read Condi Rice's article in Foreign Affairs in 1999 to 2000,
she was clearly the main adviser to Governor Bush. She was skeptical about a lot of these
claims that the U.S. really had to shape a new world order that we had to engage in nation building.
That article was Campaign 2000, Promoting the National Interest, published January 1st, 2000.
From a section titled Coping with Rogue Regimes, Saddam Hussein's regime is isolated,
his conventional military power has been severely weakened. The first line of defense should be
a clear and classical statement of deterrence. If they do acquire WMD, their weapons will be
unusable because any attempt to use them will bring national obliteration.
We are able to keep arms from him. His military forces have not been rebuilt.
The neoconservatives' role in persuading key Bush administration officials such as Cheney,
Bush, and Condoleezza Rice to invade Iraq are all the more apparent by the fact that
prior to September 11, there was no such commitment among them. Only nine days after
the 9-11 attacks, The New York Times reported a split over the scope of retaliation.
Some senior administration officials, led by Paul D. Wolfowitz,
Deputy Secretary of Defense, and I. Lewis Libby, Chief of Staff to Vice President Dick Cheney,
are pressing for the earliest and broadest military campaign against
not only the Osama Bin Laden network in Afghanistan,
but also against other suspected terrorist bases in Iraq and in Lebanon's Beqa region.
These officials are seeking to include Iraq on the target list with the aim of toppling
President Saddam Hussein, a step long advocated by conservatives who support Mr. Bush.
A number of conservatives circulated a new letter today, calling on the president to make
a determined effort to remove Saddam Hussein from power, even if he cannot be linked to the
terrorists who struck New York and Washington last week. On Sunday, Vice President Dick Cheney
seemed to ally himself with Secretary Powell's view when he said in a televised interview that
the administration did not have evidence linking Saddam Hussein to last week's attacks. But Mr.
Wolfowitz, the Pentagon's influential deputy secretary, is a conservative thinker who has
frequently clashed with Secretary Powell and the State Department. He has continued to press for a
military campaign against Iraq that would not only punish Mr. Hussein for his past support for
terrorism at home and abroad, but would also eliminate the danger he poses to Israel and the
West in his quest to acquire weapons of mass destruction. What went into flipping Vice President
Cheney now considered one of the chief architects of the war? Mersheimer and Walt looked to his chief
of staff. A key part of the public relations campaign to win support for invading Iraq was the
manipulation of intelligence information in order to make Saddam look like an imminent threat.
Scooter Libby was an important player in this endeavor.
One need only look at the Plame Affair to see the quality of this intelligence,
the sludge which sloshed around Washington in the lead-up to the war.
Much has been said about the Camp David meeting just days after 9-11, the story of Paul Wolfowitz
and his obsession with Iraq, which perhaps planted the first seeds in convincing the
administration to topple Saddam Hussein. But aside from Wolfowitz, another powerful figure
was a critical mastermind that has escaped the same level of notoriety. His name is Irv Lewis
Libby, known by his nickname Scooter. Max Frankel of the New York Times called him
a poobah courtier who knew virtually all government secrets worth knowing.
Bob Woodward explains his influence in his investigative account of the planning for
the Iraq invasion. He was one of the most important players in the Bush National Security
apparatus. Libby had three formal titles. He was Chief of Staff to Vice President Cheney,
he was also National Security Advisor to the Vice President, and he was finally an assistant
to President Bush. It was a trifecta of positions probably never held before by a single person.
Just days after the American invasion of Iraq, Seymour Hirsch had written for The New Yorker,
last September 24, the argument that Iraq had a nuclear program underway was buttressed by a new
and striking fact. The CIA had recently received intelligence showing that between 1999 and 2001,
Iraq had attempted to buy 500 tons of uranium oxide from Niger, one of the world's largest
producers, known as Yellow Cake. Two weeks later, the resolution passed overwhelmingly,
giving the President a congressional mandate for a military assault on Iraq.
A former high-level intelligence official told me that the information on Niger was judged
serious enough to include in the President's daily brief, known as the PDB,
one of the most sensitive intelligence documents in the American system.
On March 7, Mohamed Al Baradi, the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
in Vienna, told the UN Security Council that the documents involving the Niger-Iraq uranium sales
were fakes. The problems were glaring. One letter, dated October 10, 2000, was signed with the name
of Ellele Habibu, a Niger Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation who had been out of office
since 1989. The attack was well underway by May 6, 2003, when Nicholas Kristoff wrote of the so-far
missing WMD. There are indications that the US government souped up intelligence,
leaned on spooks to change their conclusions, and concealed country information to deceive people
at home and around the world. I'm told by a person involved in the Niger caper that more than a year
ago, the Vice President's office asked for an investigation of the uranium deal. So a former
US ambassador to Africa was dispatched to Niger. In February 2002, according to someone present
at the meetings, that envoy reported to the CIA and State Department that the information was
unequivocally wrong and that the document had been forged. This unnamed former US ambassador was a
Joseph C. Wilson. He had been Ambo in Gabon and São Tomé, as well as head of African Affairs at
Bill Clinton's National Security Council. As Max Frankel explains in The New York Times,
Wilson's conclusions and other findings persuaded the CIA's director George Tenet to remove any
mention of uranium sales from a presidential speech in October 2002, but the Niger scare
resurfaced three months later, becoming a notorious 16 words. The British government
has learned the Saddam Hussein recently sought significant quantities of uranium from Africa.
The war that ensued can't be described with mere words. It was, much like the current genocide
in Gaza, a punishment campaign which, for grueling decade after decade, killed perhaps one million
people. Not just from aerial bombardment, but, again, like Gaza now, a collapse of the healthcare
industry, which gave rise to waves of mass death. And Iraq was only supposed to be the first step
in a larger plan. A reshaping of the entire Middle East, and with outlets currently trying to tie
the Hamas incursion into Gaza on October 7th to Iran, we very well may be seeing some seeds being
planted. I think we should contemplate some kind of military reaction. I'm not suggesting World War
III. I'm not suggesting sending 100,000 Marines, but there are plenty of Iranian targets. I hope
I'm wrong. As I've said before, the Israel lobby is a series, and attention should be given to the
ambitions of the Israel lobby on a nation of 90 million people just to Iraq's East. With the
rising popularity of the neoconservatives yet again, perhaps Iran is more deserving of attention
than ever. That's for the next one. The insiders who helped define the Bush doctrine are determined
to set a course that will remake America's role in the world. They believe the removal of Saddam
Hussein is the first and necessary act of that new era. And that fateful decision to take the
nation to war now rests with the President of the United States.
