Welcome to the Conscious Pivot Podcast with international speaker, business mentor, best
selling author of Pivot and your host, Adam Markell.
The Conscious Pivot shares the stories and wisdom of people who have successfully reinvented
some area of their business and personal life.
You'll gain powerful insights into how you can fully embrace new opportunities, increase
your performance, and master the art and science of innovation and resilience.
So please join Adam as he guides you on your Conscious Pivot.
Hey there, Pivot audience.
Welcome to the Pivot Podcast on Pivot Radio.
I'm so happy to be here with you today and I'm also super excited because the gentleman
that I'm going to get to share with you is really somebody special.
I'd like to say that I know him well, but that would be a lie.
I don't know him well.
I've just met him recently, but the people in my life that think very, very highly of
him, I know quite well, namely my daughter Chelsea and her boyfriend Matthew.
And I venture to say that they're not often wrong about these kind of things.
And I got to meet this gentleman at a recent ATL meeting.
It's the Association of Transformational Leaders and he spoke and moved an audience of transformational
teachers, people that have been in the space of helping folks find their, the higher versions
of themselves, people on the road to actualizing the best parts of themselves and very open-minded
folks and people that are very committed to performance and what it takes to really perform
at our best in all arenas, including business, personal affairs, relationships, health, etc.
And I did get to speak with this gentleman's brother who is also a spectacular guy, James,
but today we get the pleasure of speaking with Daniel Schmackenberger and Daniel, it's
just so great to have you on the show.
I'd love to, if you don't mind, my audience is pretty familiar with me doing this.
I'm going to pass the baton to you to just sort of, with no false humility, let us know
a little bit about yourself, whatever you think is kind of salient for us to know about
you.
And then we're going to get into a great conversation.
Thanks, Adam, I'm happy to be here and then dialog with you and sharing with your audience.
And I think what's probably salient about me for the conversation here today is I'm
director of research and development for Neurohacker Collective, which is kind of an applied neuroscience
biotech company that's focused on new kinds of approach to neuro technology for mind-brain
optimization.
So as you're talking about performance, the physiology side of brain performance and then
the way that affects cognitive and psychological performance, that's a primary thing that we're
focused on.
But the relationship of physiologic optimization, psychological optimization, interpersonal
optimization, and then optimization of the complex system of civilization, biosphere
at large, the inner dynamics between all of those are things that we focus on.
Beautiful.
And this is a fairly new company.
Is it okay to call it a startup?
Is it officially a startup?
Sure.
The company started just under three years ago.
And we've only actually moved from the R&D phase to the company phase, which means we're selling
product in six months.
And so it is early in the venture and it's going really fascinatingly wonderfully well.
Yeah, we've heard good things.
In fact, we're going to circle back at the end of the show just to find out a little bit from
you about the products that you guys are offering, because I think they're pretty spectacular,
actually been using a few of those products for the last little bit more than a month.
And it felt really terrific from it.
So we'll say that for the end.
But what I'd love to do, I shared an article with you, Daniel, earlier, and you haven't
had a chance to read it, but it led us to a conversation initially about performance.
And the article is a Harvard Business Review article that is the making of a corporate
athlete. So I'll post, our team will put that link to that article in the podcast post so
you guys can get it as well.
But it's actually fascinating that these researchers were looking at top athletes and to
see if there's any kind of a connection between the best athletes in the world and the best
executives in business in the world.
And what they found this area of commonality was recovery and rituals for recovery.
And as many folks know, who've read my book, Pivot, I'm a big fan.
As part of the momentum section of the book, I talk about resilience.
And I also talked independently about rituals, but in connection with resilience, the ability
to bounce back from setbacks, to be resilient, to be that willow tree in the wind versus
the oak that kind of breaks branches, break off, et cetera.
And what does it mean to be resilient and mentally, emotionally, spiritually, physically?
What contributes to that ability to recover quickly?
And I wanted to get your thoughts on that.
And if you could share some of your feelings or your research in that area, that would be terrific.
Yeah, sure.
So there's a number of things that contribute to what we call resilience or the
capacity for the system to continue to perform and operate well.
So rather than just a homeostatic state of the system, the homeostatic capacity to
continue to operate well, even in the presence of stressors.
And one of the things that is important for resilience is recovery, as you mentioned.
And so you were giving the example earlier of that athletes that were very successful
had faster recovery cycles, and that means recovering from heavy workouts faster, but
also even just in short breaks between their performance still within the game, having
quicker cycles of recovery.
Part of why this is an important thing is any kind of performance is going to have a
certain load to it, right?
There's going to be a certain set of physiologic processes, psychological processes that are
going to then need non-performative time to be processed.
And so the more effective the non-performative recovery time is and the faster those
cycles are, the more one will be able to continue to operate at peak rather than at a
diminished rate because some of the repair hasn't happened yet.
And so this is why sleep is such a big deal, because while we are regenerating, while
we're awake and restful a little bit, the deepest regeneration physiologically and
psychologically happens during sleep.
REM sleep is a major part of how memory consolidation from the day happens.
Psychologic processes, we get to process the experiences of the day into long-term
memory, and then Delta sleep in particular is how the deeper aspects of long-term memory,
memory consolidation happen, and most of physiologic repair, the antioxidant pathways,
the anti-inflammatory pathways, the immune pathways, tissue repair, are all happening.
Symptatic nervous system is at its minimum.
Parasympathetic is high, corresponding with melatonin high, cortisol low.
That's when all the repair gets to primarily happen.
So when people start decreasing the amount of sleep from what their body actually needs,
even a little bit, even an hour per night, the decreased repair over not that long
starts to lead to profoundly decreased performance.
We see this principle everywhere.
If you are doing agriculture and you grow crops, the crops are pulling nutrients out
of the soil. If you take all of that crop out of the soil and you're not tilling
anything back into the soil, so you're not actually regenerating the soil, you end
up taking fertile agricultural zones and turning them into deserts and not that many cycles.
So this was the dust ball, right?
I mean, this is the lesson of the dust ball era, right?
Not just the dust ball.
That's what led to crop rotation, right?
Well, it was the dust ball, yes.
But it was the reason that most of the ancient civilizations collapsed.
You know, one of the big parts of why they collapsed was over agriculture, over agriculture,
which is actually their soil actually leading to early desertification, leading to resource
shortage and then resource wars and that whole thing.
So humanity's been kind of doing that since not that long after agriculture and the areas
that figured it out and did appropriate crop rotations and tilling the nutrients back
into the soil and closed loop process.
In other words, regeneration, we're able to continue because for anything to be sustainable,
it has to be regenerative because there is a load to performance.
And so this is true at the level of economics, right?
It's spending, this is true at the level of agriculture, at the level of ecosystems,
at the level of fisheries, you know, and at the level of psychology and physiology.
Right, we're talking about depletion.
That's another word for that, right?
But the soil is depleted.
And when you talk about load, I don't want to kind of go down too many rabbit holes,
but what do you mean by load, before?
Well, when you're taking nutrients out of the soil, converting them into plants and
taking the plants out of that soil, there is a load to the soil, right?
There is a burden of how much toxicity can get moved into the soil of whatever byproducts
of the plants and how much nutrient can get taken out of the soil.
Basically, there's a cost, right?
So then we have to regenerate proportionally to be able to stay even, regenerate more to
make it ahead.
This would be the same with our physiology.
So if, you know, someone's lifting weights, they're actually inducing micro tears in
the muscle, which then induce regeneration of the muscle where it regenerates, you know,
with more actual tissue fibers and more densely bundled tissue fibers, which is why strength
increases.
But if you don't have adequate nutrition and adequate time, adequate circulation, support,
etc., for the regeneration, then those micro tears can turn into bigger tears and injury
rather than into regeneration.
And if you have faster cycles of regeneration, then you can actually continue to do it.
Right.
So what do you believe it is that contributes to a faster, creating a faster cycle of regeneration?
Because I think that's what I'm getting out of this, is that you're saying you can actually
impact the cycle in the, I guess, to regenerate more quickly or to actually degenerate more
quickly.
Well, I think there's a number of things.
The first is to degenerate less quickly, right?
So if when you're...
Degeneration is the law.
We're talking about there's nothing we can do about the fact that we are degenerating
no matter what.
It's a universal law.
Is that...
Yes?
There's a lot we can do about it.
There is...
So the second law of thermodynamics, which I think is what you're referring to, is the
idea that entropy is going to increase in any closed system.
Yes.
Humans are not closed systems.
It's a very important topic.
We're in taking new energy all the time and we're actually releasing old structures.
And one of the definitions of life, core definitions of what life is in biology is an entropy externalizing
system or an entropy pump.
And so, like, when you think about the second law, it says things are going to get more
and more disorderly.
But biology is a process of making orderly things, right?
So a plant has these very complex molecules that are organizing from very simple molecules.
How does it do that?
There's always been this kind of question about how life seems to be syn-tropic or anti-intropic.
And it's not violating the second law, but it's working with it in a very interesting
way where it's taking energy and externalizing entropy and being able to have self-organization
as a result.
So it's important to get that since we're not closed systems, the idea that we're just
subject to fixed entropy is not really true.
Now, we are subject to entropy all the time, but you can decrease the entropic load.
So we look at what is it that ages us?
So oxidative stress ages us, toxicity of various kinds ages us.
These are things that can damage cells and then lead to damage cells or senescent, right?
Cells, older cells, but old basically here means it has some damage so it doesn't function
in the same way.
So it produces metabolic byproducts that end up being harmful.
It doesn't do all the healthy processes well.
So can we decrease oxidative stress?
Yes.
Can we increase how well our body recovers from oxidative stress through better antioxidant
support pathways?
Yes.
Can we decrease toxic burden?
Yeah.
Can we increase our detox system pathways totally?
Can we decrease psychological stress and increase our psychological process?
Absolutely.
Can we make sure that where there are deficiencies of nutrients or other forms of stimulus that
are necessary for system optimization that we address them so we're not doing a deficiency?
Yes.
And then there's of course still some entropy happening, but we can navigate it profoundly
better.
Yeah.
That's fascinating.
I'm going to ask you kind of a funny question.
It's just coming up so I'm going to ask it anyway.
Is it theoretically possible that humans could live or what's the, is there an outer edge
to how long a human being can live in it if what you're saying is that we can control
that entropic process?
This is one of the most active questions in kind of the biomedical sciences world right
now is not just medicine focused on disease model, but the topic of longevity and radical
life extension itself is a totally new approach to biology.
And to the degree that we address the dynamics of longevity, we also end up addressing the
dynamics of preventing the things that kill us, right?
So medicine can kind of get obsoleted, much of medicine is just obsoleted in the process
of optimizing ongoing system efficiency and function, which can lead to life extension.
Give or take genetic maximum for most people is usually thought of in the 110, 120 kind
of range, which is the oldest we see people make it that we have documented records of.
And most people don't live that long.
And so most people are dying earlier than genetic maximum because of specific issues.
And so they're dying of cancer or heart disease or diabetes or whatever it is.
So the first step in life extension is just preventing those causes of death.
And so everybody starts to get to genetic maximum.
It's very realistic that that will become scientifically plausible in the next not many
years and that premature death from disease will become a part of history.
And that's something that there are a number of companies doing really pioneering great
work on and we're working to add to research in that space.
Yeah, beautiful.
Giving us beyond genetic maximum beyond that 120 is a totally different topic because there's
a deep question right now on is it simply accumulated stressors that are leading to
when we die and we could just stop having those stressors or is death actually genetically
programmed as a way to keep natural selection happening, right?
And so that we don't have the older species competing with the newer ones for the same
amount of finite resource when the newer ones have better genetics because they've gone
through more breeding cycles.
There's pretty good evidence that there are aspects of death that are genetically programmed.
And but this is one of the topics of debate between different researchers in the field
of radical life extension.
And so if that's the case, there's work that's being done on how would we actually change
genetically programmed death.
And given that we're in, you know, Chris, the post CRISPR world where we are working
on being able to identify gene sequences and change them.
The idea that we will extend longevity up to the kind of 120 mark regularly and maybe
beyond that is very realistic.
Interesting.
I think Buckminster Fuller was pretty on target with a lot of his predictions and that was
one of them, you know.
So yeah, remains to be seen of course, but yeah, just the topic of regeneration, it would
seem that if you pull back far enough, death, death wouldn't be part of the regenerative
cycle anyway.
Right?
I mean, how would death, how would we remove death from that cycle?
Maybe there's no answer to your question, but just about it like this.
The cells that make up your body are dying and new ones are being born and the regeneration
of your whole system is happening that way.
Right.
Life extension technologies are working is to actually help the old cells die faster
so that they aren't underperforming, causing metabolic problems and new cells come in faster.
So if you can, the body has a natural process for killing old cells because if the old cells
keep, and by old, what we mean is they are somewhat damaged, so their metabolic processes
are somewhat damaged.
So rather than produce ATP cleanly and have clean genetic transcription, they end up having
damage in genetic transcription, i.e., cancer probability, and overproducing histamine which
leads to inflammation or whatever, things like that.
So autophagy is the process by which the body identifies and can kill older cells.
There are things that we can do to actually increase autophagy so that we aren't dealing
with the problems of senescent cells.
So fasting actually triggers, you know, as soon as the body is in caloric deficit, significant
caloric deficit for a while, it starts cutting life supports to certain systems and it actually
cuts it to old senescent immune cells first, which is great, super helpful thing.
So interesting research on 72-hour mark water fasts and we start getting purge of senescent
immune cells which cause major inflammatory and autoimmune kinds of issues, so great.
There are also drugs and herbs and things that are being worked on to do that, and then
our body is actually producing new stem cells all the time, and those new stem cells are
then differentiating into tissues.
If we could increase the rate at which we produce stem cells, which means new stuff
being born, and we could increase the rate at which those differentiate into tissues
and increase the rate at which the old cells are recycled, and then also protect healthy
cells from damage, well, that's a whole different system, right?
That's true at the level of a human body, that's also true at the level of humanity
and civilization, so there's definitely this place where one of the really interesting
philosophic questions, ethical questions in life extension is, would it be a net good
thing for civilization, because if older people's rate of learning decreases and younger people
have higher rate of learning, if you keep older people alive longer and then you can
have less younger people, right, you've got to have less birth rate to then have a steady
safe population, do you have more people that are obsolete for a longer period of time and
that are less adapted to the new world that's changing faster, or the other perspective would
say we actually only start to meaningfully mature around the time we die, and that we
don't really understand how to navigate universe or even ourselves very well for most of our
early life, and that if we could actually be regenerating our physiology well enough that
those older years were still actually vital and that our learning was optimized, that
people who could live to 150, et cetera would have basically a much longer developmental
childhood and then a much longer period of productivity with a much more comprehensive
human development set. So without answering which of those it is or the dynamics between
that, I'd say it's an interesting question.
It is, it's a great conversation. Maybe this explains even why there's so many, I'm going
to make a joke here, but so many 30 and 30 plus year olds living still living in their
parents' basements.
There's no question that we breed older than we used to, right, so we went from breeding
throughout much of history pretty much as soon as breeding was possible, right, as soon as we
went past puberty to having economics and education and social structures start changing
that where 30 and moving towards 40, you know, are getting much more common while we're being
exposed to more information earlier.
And whether they're having babies later in life, and I don't know if there's any, there must be
studies that will track that, but just seems like anecdotally we see things that have had babies
right up to kind of 50, which is pretty remarkable actually.
This is actually one of the really also deep ethical topics in life extension is if we could
extend longevity without extending menopause, it would suck.
Because if, I mean, it already kind of sucks, right, if women basically are going to have the
decision to be parents or not, and it has to end at 40 or maybe a little somewhere into their 40s,
and men could make that decision much later, there is a kind of biologic inequality in choice
making capacity, where he can do other than parenting things for much longer preparatorily.
She hasn't been able to do that, right?
Now, so extending not just longevity, but extending reproductive longevity is one of the very
interesting topics too.
Yeah.
Wow.
Well, I'm going to bring us back to the to the original point of our discussion, which was
resilience.
I'm a big fan of recipes and formulas.
I know you dig formulas too.
So I'm just going to ask you, with just a few ingredients, what would your formula for
resilience be?
And you've already spoken about one, which was sleep.
So what are some of the other things that you think are really key?
Because I believe in that, you know, the results of that study, that Harvard study, they go
really telling.
And when I counsel people on, you know, their ability to pivot, make changes in their life,
whatever it is, you know, sometimes I mentor people in the business as well.
And you just got to be able to recover quickly.
I mean, this constantly setbacks the rate of disruption, the rate of change is exponentially
greater all the time.
And you just got to be more resilient.
So, you know, what, what is that?
Well, what would that recipe look like for you?
Well, even though I didn't get to read the article yet, as you shared it with me, they
spoke about physical, emotional, mental, spiritual resilience.
And that there were relationships between each of those.
And that you've got kind of a Maslow's hierarchy of those resilience types.
I think it's meaningful topic.
Yeah.
Physical resilience is necessary, but not sufficient.
Right.
So if someone is eating well, sleeping well, exercising well, and doing good
preventative and integrative medicine for optimum physiology, that's going to make a
huge difference because physiology affects emotion and cognition.
So mental and emotional are going to be very affected.
Pretty much everyone who has felt their physiology out of balance for any reason,
whether their hormones were out of balance, or they felt their neurochemistry was out
of balance, or they had, you know, infection going on, knows that their emotions and
their cognition were inexorably effective.
Right.
There are certain emotional states that were just like not accessible and other
ones that were unavoidable.
And so almost think of the physiology as like being tunable, like a musical
instrument where if it's out of tune, all the music is messed up.
Right.
And so before we even talk about upgrading the instrument, just having it in tune
makes a huge difference.
Um, but it's not sufficient.
Right.
That's the kind of hardware layers.
And we start looking at the software, the software layer of, um, how we make
mean, what we focus on, where our attention goes, what our frameworks for
understanding and perspective are.
And so, you know, when we start physical resilience, since you asked for recipes,
let's just kind of address that.
Even though I think the basic things everybody knows, and then maybe I'll add
some novel things, basic things are true and basic.
The first one is sleep.
And I would put sleep in a category separate from nutrition and exercise and
everything else in terms of its overall importance.
And I'm not, uh, underweight in the importance of the other ones.
I'm just actually weighting as heavily as it should be weighted the role of sleep.
Uh, because given that almost all physiologic repair and regeneration
happens during sleep, the whole purpose of nutrients is to regenerate new
tissues, et cetera.
When is it going to happen?
That's going to be the major part of what happens.
The exercise, the regeneration is going to occur as large as it's going to be
during that time.
So, um, if people are sleeping not enough or not sleeping well, I would say it
should be their first priority to address that.
Beautiful.
So what we're going to do here to really talk about how we'd be happy to do
that sometime, but I would put it as a tier one.
Yeah.
No, thanks to hear that because there's so much that we want to do.
And that's like the most uninteresting thing.
If it seems like to use our hours, but having all the rest of our hours in
tune makes a much bigger difference than having more shitty hours.
Yeah, this is what inspired me earlier because before we hit the record button,
folks, we were having this conversation because I asked Daniel how many hours
do you sleep and he said, you know, eight, eight's the right number for me.
And it's anybody that's telling you differently is kind of, you know, full
of it on some level.
I mean, there are, there are outliers for sure, but, uh, but I don't think, I
don't think people can hear it enough, even though as you said, it's basic.
I think people need the reminder.
And I'm glad you're, you're providing that reminder.
And some people really focus on when you sleep, um, early to sleep, early
to rise kind of dynamics.
Uh, I think that is a good thing to explore, but I don't stress on that too much.
Um, if some, I think you should find out when you feel like you perform the
best, because there is a meaningful reason to think that most humans are
diurnal animals, right?
We are daytime animals where our circadian rhythm is in relationship to
light and sun, uh, and that, uh, the quality of sleep that happens in dark is
better than not dark.
And I think that's a general truth.
It also does appear that there are a subpopulations that are, uh, genetically
adapted for sleeping, waking up earlier and, uh, waking up later that we'll
probably have to do with rotations, rotations of who is awake to keep the,
you know, tribe safe.
So whatever you find actually works best for you, go ahead and write that.
Do make sure that you're sleeping enough.
Sleeping enough means that you can wake up without an alarm energized.
And if you wake and sustainably, because anyone, when they're just kind of on
the adrenaline run of a really exciting and busy time, I do that for a short
period, if you can wake up with good energy, have energy throughout the day,
that's enough sleep.
If it's less than that, you might wish that you needed less sleep than that.
And there are things you can do with your health that can decrease sleep need
because you have less to repair.
Uh, if, if someone has health issues that lead to increased rate of oxidative
damage or increased rate of inflammation, then they'll need more sleep than they
would normally genetically need because they're getting damaged faster.
At the same time though, if someone's doing very heavy athletics, they're
going to need more sleep, bodybuilders need more sleep because it just got more
in that repair.
Yeah.
And stress.
I mean, that, that's the thing about that article that's, that's pretty key.
I think is that the stress involved in being, and the people listening to this
for the most part, and almost everybody I know, um, is under greater stress now
than, than kind of ever before.
I mean, there's entrepreneurs, people in business, whether you're working in
somebody else's business, but there's just more plates spinning, you know, with
family and work and everything else.
So it feels like there's more, there's more stress, which would seemingly
require a better system to repair and recover and, and regenerate.
And as you said, mentally, emotionally, spiritually and physically.
So let's say you've got stress on each of those dimensions, right?
Physiologic stress can come from, uh, toxins in the environment, from physical
stress, from injury, from exercise, from poor posture, from, uh, too
much computer hours, from not enough exercise, leading to circulation issues
from food that's not right for you.
All of those are sources of extra physiologic stress than it's just a
given.
And so I would say decreasing physiologic stressors while increasing
physiologic regeneration is key.
But you want to eat less inflammatory stuff, less, um, artificial, anything.
Less sugar, more micronutrients, right?
In general, uh, the, in general, people do better with less calories than
they used to be, and less people are really severely under eating.
Uh, but caloric restriction is still the main thing we know about life
extension.
Uh, we're fasting.
Chloric, periodic fasting is intermittent fasting is one way of achieving
it, but diets that had about 30% less calorie than was normally considered
adequate, so calorie means macronutrient, sugar, fat, um, you know, carbs, fats
and proteins, uh, live longer from a number of reasons, increased AMTK levels
and activation of serotonin and things like that.
So, but we want lots of micronutrients, vitamins, minerals, enzymes.
So if people can have a diet that is higher in micronutrients and lower in
total calorie, they will in general do better.
And if you think about if people lived in a hunter gather environment where
they were eating a lot of vegetation, vegetation is going to be very high in
micronutrient, raw, organic, et cetera, and rel, relative to the total
amount of calorie in it.
Um, so one thing, and just in general saying eating in a way that is closer
to the living ecosystem and less processed is going to be a general rule
of thumb before you get into specific dietary ideas.
Um, because you will have people who do better on different diets and each time
we go from, uh, being really into high fiber or high fat or ketosis, or we're
just learning a little bit more about physiology, which is a very complex
system, but eating in ways that are closer to our evolutionary environment is
a good starting place.
Um, so, and specifically avoiding, uh, stressors from food, right?
So that would be inflammatory foods.
Foods that are hard to digest, processed, toxic, sugar, et cetera.
Um, actually really cool.
I just want to stop the second because, you know, talking about food and
stress in the same, the same sentence, I think is unusual for people to hear.
Cause my, my dad always said food is medicine.
So I've had a different kind of a beat on, on it for a while, but, but to hear
that food actually causes stress, that you can actually eat food that causes
stress, I think is something that's worth, you know, underscoring.
Well, think about it when we think about an airplane and we talk about this,
the stresses on an airplane, the tension forces, the shearing forces, we're
talking about stress in terms of mechanical physics, right?
Mechanical stressors, stress doesn't just mean an emotional or a mental thing.
Stress means any force on a system that if it gets high enough, we'll produce
an alteration of that system, right?
The alteration is what we call strain in physics.
Stress is the force that will lead to strain.
If the stress gets higher than the dynamic capacity of the system to endure.
And so that's a kind of wider way to think about what stress means.
And so then we have destructive and constructive types of stress.
And so when we work out, we're stressing a muscle.
But if we stress it where it is within a range that we can recover and then we
do adequate things to support recovery, then what's happening is the system says,
well, I'm not adapted to be able to deal with this kind of stimulus.
So I need to change to be able to adapt to it.
So it gains bigger, you know, develops bigger muscles to deal with the
stimulus called heavy weight.
And this is why like Wim Hof's work in cryotherapy, cold therapy is very interesting.
If you think about in our evolutionary environment, we, for air conditioners
and heaters, we were regulating our own body temperature.
I mean, some through clothes, but largely our own metabolism changed to deal
with external temperature much more dynamically than it does now.
And so as warm-blooded creatures, how do we get warm?
Well, we could, you know, catabolism is the force where we break molecules
and release energy and heat from it.
And so if it's cold and we need to actually generate more heat, that means
we need to increase those metabolic processes.
That means we need to increase the thyroid hormones, the, you know,
the sex hormones, et cetera, that are involved in doing that and those
catabolic processes.
If it's too hot and we need to cool down, we need to change other metabolic,
you know, and cooling processes.
So it's one of those things where it's like, if you don't stress the system
enough, it will lose capacity because there's no evolutionary purpose
for it to keep the capacity, right?
And so this is what we would call adaptive or healthy stress.
Just saying, hey, this is a kind of thing that, this is a kind of stimulus
that we're going to keep being exposed to.
So we need the capacity to respond to it.
But if I put myself in a cold bath or a cold chamber where I can produce
enough heat, if I put myself in an amount of cold that I don't really feel
any stress from the system can already, its current capacity can already handle
it, it doesn't need to upregulate capacity, right?
But it has to actually be at the edge of my current capacity.
So the system says, hey, we need to upregulate capacity.
It will deal with this, but it has to not be so far beyond the
edge that it causes damage, i.e.
frostbite or hypothermia here or lifting in a way where you damage
a tendon rather than micro tears and muscle.
So healthy stress is where you expose yourself to a stimulus that is beyond
your current capacity to manage easily that leads to the system
upregulating its capacity in a way that you actually can
upregulate in relationship to.
Damaging stress is where you can't upregulate in relationship to it.
You don't do what's necessary or it's just too far out and then the system
actually just down regulates from going into strain, right?
It needs repair at that point.
It needs more repair than it can get, so it's damaged, right?
Is it irreparable in that instance?
Depends. Is a torn tendon irreparable?
No, but if no up to a certain point, yes, beyond that point, right?
Without surgery or some other artificial means, right?
So two things that just come up for me and I want to.
So one is this, you know, the side of me that that works in a personal
development and business development arena.
I'm constantly wanting to encourage people, inspire them and sometimes,
you know, other things to keep them on their growth edge for the reason
that you just said.
And that's a very interesting line of where someone's growth
edge is versus where there's kind of gone past the point of repairability
or if not that, there's some damage that's caused as a result of it.
And that's a really interesting point there.
And the other thing you said earlier about recovery, because in
in talking about resilience and in pivot, one of the things I
it's a three part process.
And the third part is our rituals for recovery.
So I'm curious, do you have rituals for recovery?
Things that you that you're doing constantly, you know,
continuously on a regular basis to ensure that you recover?
Yeah, so we only mentioned a few types of
stress in the physiologic dimension.
We didn't mention the other dimensions yet or we're repairing them,
but I'll go ahead and jump to ritual.
Physiologically rituals.
So there's there's things that are just what I call foundations.
So a healthy diet, healthy, good hygiene and movement would all just be
foundational. And those are all, they're physiological things, right?
They're physiologic foundations.
Other things that I would say, you know, kind of do regularly enough
that they're ritualized on top of that are things like crowd therapy,
hot cold therapy and particularly cold therapy
as a method for increasing system resilience.
Very meaningful.
Other kinds of therapies like PEMF, post electromagnetic field therapy,
which has a number of really
generally healing physiologic dynamics increases the rate of potential blood.
You know, so things like that, active physiologic restoration.
So, you know, beyond restoration, it's happening from rest while sleeping
on just restoration while awake, if you call meditation,
which is both, you know, psychological and physiologic.
Right.
And then I do a lot of physiologic therapies that increase the
resilience of the system.
So that's a lot of nutrients and kind of bio modulators,
so supplements, medicines, as well as not just things that are orally,
like IV nutrients, therapies, things like that.
Because when you realize that you can take more responsibility for how
your physiology ages or not processes,
something you want to start to learn and do.
And as far as other rituals.
Psychological stress, so, you know, meditation is valuable
for being able to learn how to focus the mind.
Being able to learn how to witness it and have space
for the kind of neuroplasticity dynamics for the increased body
awareness, proprioception for the increased parasympathetic process.
But beyond that, not all, there are a lot of stresses
that are just made up, right?
And so there's a lot of psychological stresses in particular
where it's not what's happening, it's stressing us out.
It's the meaning that we can give them to what's happening
and we can change the way that we give them to them.
And so going through processes of looking at where my psychologically
stressed about some world dynamic or some relationship and asking
can I change the meaning to things that either just make me more
comfortable with it or actually increase my sense of empowerment
responsibility, rituals to kind of continuously inventory
those made up stresses and then change them are really key.
Yeah, you know what, it's I'm just thinking that those three parts
to the to that resilience process, the first one is reframing.
So I'm just thinking about what you just said, taking a look at a situation
and the frame that you put it in will determine whether you're stressed
by it or not.
So if you've made a poor decision and you believe that you made
a poor decision because you're an idiot or you always make poor decisions,
well, that's one frame that'll keep you stressed and create
will be a lot that flow.
You know, that that domino tip over a lot of other dominoes.
And then the second piece is really how have you applied or have you
have you learned something from the experience that you can there after
apply, because I think that's a part of the natural, the regenerative process
is that we learn from the feedback that is biofeedback
and any feedback, really, we know.
And that's how we that's how we've adapted.
That's how the species has survived, right?
As we just continue to be able to assimilate information, make adjustments
from that feedback and then adapt and and thrive and continue to.
I love that you that you actually enumerated both of those as methods
of framing, which is kind of cognitive behavioral therapy,
meaning making reframing and then also really focusing on the lesson
rather than the difficulty and the lesson moving forward as something
that increases your adaptive capacity.
When you look at life through the lens of, all right,
so what are all the things that happen today?
They're all the things that felt wonderful and you are grateful for those
who you're focusing on actually giving attention to the things that were wonderful.
And then there were things that were difficult when you say,
is there anything that I could learn that would allow me to deal with situations
like that better in the future so that rather than just being difficult
and I try and let it go, I increase my system resilience and response to them.
And then you get the insights and you focus on the insight rather than the difficulty.
The day is just filled with things that felt great and things that made you more
capable. And those are the things that you focus on.
Have you read I'm just a question I didn't I didn't think I'd ask you in this interview,
but have you read the presence process, Michael Brown's work?
Interesting. So everybody that has not yet kind of checked that workout,
I recommend that it's pretty, pretty incredible.
And one of the things that he writes about, which has really been,
man, it's been inside of me now for several weeks.
I don't want to shake it because it's it's shaken up a lot of a lot of things
in a really great way, which is that he doesn't talk about healing and often,
especially when we talk about emotional trauma,
imprints from when we're young and how it is that those those that imprinting
from when we're very young actually determines how we frame the world.
Like you say, how we give meaning or meaning making machines.
So where does that all start?
And so if you trace it back to this this imprinting that occurs when we're young,
a lot of people and there's a lot of people out there that are talking about
not talking about that, that are engaged in helping people heal.
I mean, I'm in a healing industry in the healing arts of any kind.
And it's I'm not against any form of healing, but he's talking about instead
of using the word healing, it's about integrating and this integrative therapy
as opposed to healing therapy.
As though healing, I mean, healing makes you think immediately, what?
That there's something that must be healed with something that's wrong,
that's in the system that doesn't belong in the system,
as opposed to something that might just not be integrated in the system,
which is why it's it's the, you know, it becomes the cancer.
So, you know, it's just it's just one of those things I'll look forward to
maybe chat about in the future.
I'd love to get your opinion there.
So I'd say in the just the remaining time, this is this is a show about conscious pivoting.
So it's just wonderful to be able to speak to something that's
really committed to what it is, you know, how we're all kind of built and made up.
And before, before we talk about what your business is doing to sort of assist in the world,
because I think you're doing something really profound.
And that's what I told your brother James.
I said, I what you're doing makes more than makes sense to me.
It is just something I feel good about supporting.
And before we get to that, I'd love to just know if there's a,
if there's some pivot in your life that you've had more recently, perhaps, or,
or, you know, some time ago, if you wish, either in your personal life or your business life,
you were able to glean some special lesson from it you'd like to share.
You know, the first one that came to mind that might be interesting for listeners here was
there was a pivot to actually decide to engage in business at all.
My work previous to that was all in either non-profit or academics.
And specifically, a lot of the non-profit was think tank work mostly.
I mean, some of it was working in environmental work and social justice and animal rights,
but then quickly realized that despite the good work being done in four benefit businesses
and government and in nonprofits, there were key issues like ocean acidification and biodiversity
loss that were getting worse rapidly heading towards points of irreversibility in the face
of the collective work that was being done by everybody.
And that we didn't just need more of that kind of work.
We needed a fundamentally different set of approaches.
So we worked with a number of other think tanks and developed the,
I think, think that was focused on comprehensive civilization upgrade.
What is the future of macroeconomics that only incents positive behavior,
that aligns the incentive of all agents with the well-being of other agents in the commons
so there's no externality?
What is the future of governance and decision making that can really inform omnipositive decisions
adequate to the speed at which we need to make decisions, the complexity of the decisions,
the inner number of interrelating factors like representative democracy can't do it,
retrofits of capitalism can't do it, we have to move into.
But no other previously proposed systems can either.
But the technologies that are mandating us to move into these systems also need
possible fundamentally new systems.
The technological automation that's going to obsolete 30% of all jobs in the next 15 years
is also what makes it to where we don't need the jobs.
One of the core ideas of capitalism was how do you incent people to do the shitty jobs
of labor and economy because they need done and who's going to do them?
Well, they don't need done by humans as soon as we automate them,
which means when the jobs don't need the humans anymore,
you can also move the economic systems where the humans don't need the jobs
and start to move into commonwealth economics.
It's one of many examples where the technology that requires us to shift
is also changing the axioms of how we thought about it.
So given that having worked on economics so deeply because we realized all right,
by as long as we have war, then we learn how to manage war and as long as we have capitalism
and war together, then we make military manufacturers that are for-profit, right?
Do you look at all that together and you have a for-profit military industrial complex
sign demand that they've developed a capacity to supply a demand that demand has to continue
but then to continue to have supply.
So how do we have a world without war and a for-profit military industrial complex
coexistence? You can't, right? So this is a big set of shifts.
How do you have a world with robust health that prevents disease
while having a healthcare or sick care system that only makes money when people are sick?
You can't. You have to change underlying structures deeply.
How do you have it where whales are worth a million dollars dead on a fishing boat
and they're worth nothing alive in the oceans to anyone and not hunt all the whales to extinction?
You can't, which is why you've been hunting all the whales to extinction.
But so we have a system of macroeconomics that in a sense is exactly the opposite of
collective well-being in heaps of places that are foundational to its structure.
Given that and that I've been focused on the transition of economics to post-capitalist
economics my whole life, wanting to build a business was the last thing in my mind, right?
Counterintuitive, for sure.
I wanted to obsolete what we think of as businesses and all the nonsense of intellectual property
where right now is the best phone an iPhone or a Google phone or well not the best phone that
could exist can't exist because intellectual property keeps the good parts from being able
to synthesize and so there's so much to the and there's so much radical duplication that occurs
and then so much that goes into marketing shitty stuff as opposed to product development.
So it had an evolutionary relevance.
It's now a profoundly inefficient but also destructive set of systems.
But as I was working in just kind of the science and strategy and architecture
of how future systems could work and then wanting to be able to influence current
nonprofits and current for-profits to be able to do better things,
I saw that their structures were just not well enough set up to do a lot of the things that I
wanted to do and that we'd actually have to be able to take responsibility for
prototyping the things we want to prototype and so I didn't see a way forward that didn't
involve starting things that look like businesses even though the eventual role is to transition
the underlying structures of what we call business and capitalism and so in order to do that I had
to you know from a pivot point of view the idea of being an entrepreneur was the farthest thing
for my identity right. Philosopher yes, scientist yes, activist yes, entrepreneur fuck no right.
That doesn't mean not entrepreneurial in the outside of capitalism sense of creative right
but that was in minter right. Entrepreneur as we thought of it within capitalism the idea of
marketer was like the worst thing ever right because unlike the marketing is what only only
seconds of being a salesperson and because you know if you think about it from the point of
view of look at how much we put into marketing budgets rather than into product development
to have me-too products just not add more novel value to people's lives is I've always wanted
to get rid of marketing as a whole to get rid of the entire space synthesize all of the product
technology and then have people have access to the best shit without a marketing layer in between
that misinforms what is actually good with emotional marketing conversion analytics.
And so having to say okay so I'm going to become an entrepreneur and a marketer and
whatever to be able to actually develop the science and technology that I want prototype
wise even though it will eventually move into other systems that was not trivial for me.
It's not trivial at all that required saying even though this is very different than what
my long range goals are it is the best step in service to it and I actually have to
download a entirely new element of personality right because I can't continue to feel that
conflicted with it. No you feel like a sellout otherwise. And so it was how do I actually download
the identity of entrepreneur of marketer that sees the beauty rather than the dysfunction in it
and then it integrates with the other parts that doesn't do the dysfunctional part and
uses it in an adaptive way. And so that was actually a very interesting non-trivial pivot
to say I actually want to take science tech philosophy strategy and move it into business
because it's a vehicle that in the current landscape I can actually advance further faster
meaning. And the key there was so interesting because that was an identity level pivot right
it wasn't a strategy level pivot because it was have to add a module to identity. You went
into the phone booth like I think you you you're like Clark Kent you know you walked in as Clark
Kent but you have emerged this with a different identity same person by the way but different
identity and there has to be a shift in that phone booth right. And that's something interesting
is you know my value systems of what I seek to serve are deeper to me than what I have skill
out or what I like because what I like would have been different had I grown up in a different
culture what my skill sets are would have been different had I done a different college program
whatever and that's still changeable but what I ultimately love the most and seek to serve the
most is is deeper and less changing than those other things are so I'm like oh if actually
adding entrepreneur and marketer allows me to serve the things that I care about more in this
particular environment in this particular time period then it is actually in service to the
deepest aspect of self which is the values to bring in new modules of identity. Yeah beautiful
so share a little bit about the business that you pivoted into because I think that's
it's more than a little fascinating. So the the business right now is called
Neurohacker Collective it's in the process of going through a roll-up merger with some other
companies that we really love and we're partnering with so see that in the hopefully not too
distant future but you know we're we're focused on technologies of well-being
that can right now optimize neurologic function physiologic function in the near-term future
also psychological function to increase quality of human life human experience and human capability
um our specific approach which is different than other wellness or medicine approaches has to do
with uh complex comprehensive system science approach so when we're looking at um this involves
a few things it involves personalization it involves uh addressing multiple systems
simultaneously it involves synthesis of multiple different strategies and applied synergy you know
those kinds of things I can speak more about that in a minute but basically we saw that there were
major sources of human suffering physical pain anxiety depression etc that as well as chronic
illness that we had an approach that we believed could do something really novel to address and
our early testing showed that was true and that we were able to actually make major changes in
things that hadn't believed hadn't been believed to be modifiable or correctable things but that
beyond addressing human suffering and increasing individual human quality of life as we look at
the major macro issues of the world whether we're talking about religious extremism and female
general mutilation or violence towards children or overfishing of the oceans or total biodiversity
loss like all these issues are human behavior mediated and so changing them requires changing
patterns of human behavior and as I was talking about earlier you know the focus of changing
economics is because economics drives patterns of human behavior you make a well worth a million
dollars to add nothing alive in that incentive system drives human behavior so you have to
change macroeconomic incentives but you also so economics is one thing that affects human behavior
it's not the only thing right so all of the social systems that lead to incentive and status and you
know the kind of game theory dynamics are certain things that we need to change environmental
psychology and the way environments condition and pattern human behavior is another set of things
the thought where which is you know largely where you know I imagine you focus with your clients in
terms of changing people's definition of success their definition of self definition of other
working with integration healing trauma you know their strategies for how to navigate the world
all of that is key to patterns of human behavior so it's physiology and this was one of the things
that we really started to look at was in order to address the problems of the world at scale we have
to have humans that are not predisposed to continue causing those problems that's a big deal
we also have to have humans that are predisposed to solve the problems
and to create beauty and so this means humans that are oriented towards more empathy
more emotional resilience more creativity more multi-perspective taking and perspective
synthesis right more complex thinking to actually be able to solve complex problems
um and while all of that can be affected at the level of thought wear and must be
we saw that you know empathy is mediated over certain neural networks mediated by certain
neurochemistry and that there it can be down or up regulated physiologically so could complexity of
thinking so could impulse control right so could so many of those dynamics and we started looking at
neurochemical and neuro structural predisposition for uh dichopathy for sociopathy on one extreme
and how to not only prevent and correct those dynamics but also continue to support the evolution
of uh you know vicarious experience empathy etc beyond baseline intelligence ultimately you know
we talk about increasing human sovereignty and by sovereignty we mean the the product of people's
intelligence agency and sentience their sentience is their ability to sense the world
and this means sense themselves have more inner awareness because of that vicarious sensing of
other people empathy and uh more perceptivity about world around the mindfulness etc depth of
feeling this means their intelligence to process all of what they sense to make meaning out of it
to understand causation and dynamics and what effective solutions could look like
and then their agency their ability to actually act on and in the world with increase adaptive
capacity and power and so this is sensory input information processing actuator output closed
loop cycle right and how do we increase that whole thing which is both going to relate to their
quality of life individually and the way that they are an agent for the quality of life of everything
we touch and so we're interested in this this particular company neural hackers focused on
how do we increase human sovereignty what are all the technologies that are relevant to that
and as far as the biology goes what can we do to support the human biosystem to predispose
more sovereign adaptive agents right increase quality of human experience and human capacity
and choice making and so that's through chemistry that affects cognitive ability and
psychological resilience etc it's through but chemistry is just one pathway we are
very interested in every pathway so on physiology eeg neural feedback transcranial stimulation
closed loop neural feedback microbiomics in the gut all of those were basically technology
agnostic so it's not particular technology categories we're interested in we're interested
in technologies that work by increasing system resilience rather than overriding it to put you
in a particular range right and so fundamentally different than the you know traditional medical
approach our goal is not to identify a specific range of a biomarker we want people to be in and
if they're too high give them something that externally lowers it and if it's too low give
them something that externally raises it but to identify what's going on with their own regulatory
systems and increase the regulatory capacity of their system so they are more adaptive more resilient
as you talked about and so that's the gist of what we're working on doing here is how do we
optimize human quality of life and human capability to be a positive force for the quality of life
of everything else because realistically if we look at the balance sheet of nature right if we
think about the earth's balance sheet most humans are on the liability side of nature's balance sheet
and the humans all have to move to the asset side which means that they are doing more net
positive to the balance sheet of the commons and they are net negative and we're not even in the
realm of that and we need to be very quickly and so we want to increase the balance sheet of the
psychological emotional balance sheet of the human and where they live on nature's balance sheet
wow
so you're technology agnostic and at the moment you've developed certain products that you're
using to move that move tip those dominoes get them started right so just take a couple of minutes
we could share you know this is this is not a I know I know how you feel about this anyway so
it's not marketing or sales but I love people who are curious to just know a little bit about the
products that you've got and then last thing I'll say is you know where can people find out more
information that way they can they want to follow their curiosity they actually can
so you know the company started just under three years ago we only moved into sharing products
with people about six months ago we you know we're in testing with people over that entire time
but in terms of you know actual marketing um and so we have you didn't even choke when you said it
it's good right oh like I said we added that but uh and and so the of course the essence of how we
do marketing is education um and if people are interested in lined great um
so we have one product that is currently for sale that's available it's called qualia and
we have a handful more that are uh in various phases of development that will be coming available
soon and then a number of other ones that we're in just kind of early R&D on and why
we started with qualia a number of reasons one is um taking pills is a much more familiar thing to
people than hooking up transcranial devices to their head uh so there's much lower barrier of
entry to something that you know there's already familiarity with it requires almost no deep
behavior modification so it's also low barrier of entry from like a total behavioral input point of
view uh compared to intermittent fasting or exercise or something that takes you know some
will work uh and it can actually lead to increased predisposition to do those other things by
its dynamic on motivational chemistry um and specifically you were talking about the
pressure for productivity and how we have simultaneously an increasing pressure for
productivity while having an increasing number of topics that we're trying to be productive
across simultaneously while having more and more that is distracting um and you know shortening
attention span and things relevant to productivity in a world where we also have more
physiologic stresses from indoor outdoor pollution shittier diet etc so uh that's a lot
and as a result of it we've seen an exponential increase in off-label ateral sales of people
who are trying to deal with their productive capacity which is totally reasonable and energy
drinks and five-hour energy and other smart drugs and most of these are psychostimulant billions of
dollars in things to help people sleep so it's just truly incredible okay and so you know chemistry
to sleep chemistry to wake up and be productive chemistry to chill out and we're fans of chemistry
but we're fans of chemistry that have more comprehensively positive effects and have
longer term positive and at minimum longer term neutral rather than negative effects
and so that means that it's going to have to work with the way that the body regulates its own
chemistry rather than override the way the body does chemistry um so most of the kind of psychostimulants
that people have used for productivity enhancement cognitive enhancement aterol is a great example
and i'm not talking here about actual prescription aterol for um relevant things and we could argue
whether or not they're ever irrelevant but i'm not talking about that i'm talking about off-label use
which is huge whether it's people studying for midterms or finals or whether it's uh you know
people's tech startup or whatever um when you take a dopamine agonist like that that is going to
synthetically increase dopamine specifically and you aren't supporting the entire dopamine production
and regulatory process then the body becomes dependent upon an external right an exogenous
dopamine stimulation process so if you do that long term then you get down regulation of your own
endogenous dopamine process which means addiction right addiction dependence also if you are doing
exogenous stimulation you get a more fixed level of dopamine as opposed to more adaptive capacity
for your body to change its own dopamine levels based on what it's doing because you when you
want to chill out you don't want your dopamine high right um and dopamine by itself is not really
going to produce the kind of cognitive effects someone wants it's going to increase focus and
it's going to increase drive it's not going to increase working memory it's not it's going to decrease
some of the things that really matter and so you get a very narrow increase in some things
you get a decrease of other things that are actually meaningful to your goal in real time
and then longer term down regulation so our goal was could we produce a much more comprehensive set
of real time increases to the things that matter while having our long term effects be
neutral to positive on those same metrics and you know other metrics which would require a
fundamentally different approach it's not going to be you know any kind of pharma approach just
because the way the economics are structured where it has to be uh patentable to ever be able to make
enough money to go through FDA approval so it has to be synthetic it has to be single molecule
how could a synthetic single molecule ever comprehensively up regulate meaning synthetic
meaning it's not part it's not part of your normal endogenous chemistry and your normal chemistry
involves so many simultaneous parallel and sequential pathways how could that comprehensively
upregulate it just couldn't right it's just structurally not a reasonable approach to that
kind of thing so medicine so far western medicine has done a really good job with acute illness
and so if there's one cause of the issue like an acute infection or an acute injury then it can
deal with an acute solution to that single molecule can deal with that if it's a single pathway but
if we're talking about lots of pathways then we need a different way of approaching it and so
when you look at uh when people are taking cognitive enhancers when you look at what they
really want they want a kind of creative productive flow state where their cognitive
capacities are engaged which is different than the flow state an athlete wants where their cognitive
capacity is being online their linguistic capacities aren't really relevant but in fact
you know you hear the flow genome guys talking about flow states where prefrontal cortex is
shutting down and people are in a very just kind of automated response set but if you're trying to
write a book if you're trying to do science if you're trying to do a midterm if you're trying
to figure out how to do your tech startup you need a different kind of flow state than that right so
what does it mean to have a sense of flow a sense of heightened creativity a sense of heightened
productivity to actually have heightened productivity and uh where all of your cognitive
abilities are online well it involves cognitive capacities like speed of memory total working
memory short-term long-term memory digit span verbal fluency right all those things intensity
of concentration duration of focus task switching now these are very opposite things which is why
it's usually hard to increase them usually if i get intensity of focus i get pissed off if someone
distracts me usually if i have task switching fluid intelligence i can't focus that hard on
anything we actually want the ability to be deeply present with something and then be able to move if
we need to be deeply present come back right so how do we do all of those different functions
simultaneously those are cognitive abilities while also having increased sense of purposefulness
meaningfulness drive emotional resilience you know etc analysis critical thinking
synthesis creative thinking there's a lot of different things so that we started by kind of
modeling the space of what we're actually seeking to affect from a cognitive science point of view
and then looking at what are all the physiologic pathways that are known about that are involved
in mediating all of those functions then what chemistries can support those pathways and
then which of those chemistries are generally well tolerated synergistic with each other
have really good data on them and that was the beginning of our hypothesis process for generating
a complex chemistry formula there's lots of different ingredients affecting lots of different
pathways different neurotransmitters for kind of short-term effect but also longer-term effects
of supporting neurogenesis synaptogenesis for actually affecting you know structure and brain
um and then we went into of course an iterative process where we were taking our initial hypotheses
and testing them and then getting feedback and iterating until we got to a place that we were
really happy with it and of course there's continued iteration forever because that's nature of
evolution so that's qualia and obviously it it is not intended to treat any disease we make
no medical claims about it etc etc but the experience people have been reporting on it
over quite a lot of people now has been remarkable for a lot of people yep i'm i'm
one to add to that so i've had a very good experience with it and what's the best way for
people to follow their curiosity and learn more as you said educating and that's the best marketing
there is so i agree with that so neurohacker.com is our website and uh imagine you post this might
be able to put a link so it'll be easy for people and uh we've got a science section that describes
our approach and the formulation and site research and all that fun stuff and it's really just kind
of focused around qualia right now because it's the first product that's available as the other
products come online they'll be there and the total kind of education information on the site
sure there's a lot of projects that we're engaged on that aren't referenced on the site at all yet
because putting things up as they're actually available for people to engage with but we look
forward to having more to share soon it's exciting yeah daniel what what i don't know how long we've
been on i haven't even looked at the at the clock but it's been a blur very quick and incredibly
valuable so thank you for your time thanks for i know i think at this point when people will
will be listening uh you know viewing etc they'll be all times a day and night but uh this is your
fifth this is the fifth of these interviews that you've done all different today so i appreciate
you taking the time and i know your base is just uh you know just getting started so i appreciate
i appreciate your time and what you're doing in the world because it's a different type of solution
than i think i've heard come from really a company before and um and i'm intrigued by it you know i'm
i'm uh and i want to support it i mean that's what our company is committed to peace that's our
vision is to create peace through self-actualization so we're all about helping people just
do the things that create peace for themselves because i have this very simple philosophy it's
when enough people are are selflessly focused on just creating their own peace
we'll have a tipping point where there's there's just more peace in the world
in any given moment there'll be more peace in the world than there is anything else
i think that's a shifting event for for all of us so really really value brother thank you so much
likewise thank you it was a blast to be here and you know we're not really a company
we happen to be a company right now but and i think you would hold this
so we're people with a mission that happens to be the vehicle that allows the mission to exist right
now reason why even as a company we have collected in the name you know i have to
collect it is to really achieve the mission given the scale that it is we need to participate with
everyone that's doing really wonderful work and so if they're we will only make products if there
is a major gap between the best of what's currently available and what we know how to make
if there's something that's already near the best of what's scientifically possible we'd
much rather partner because it's really hard to make stuff right it takes a lot of cycles
if anyone's done a good job with it we'd love to partner on kind of in any space so you know
this already is the beginning of partnership between us and i'm honored yeah collaboration
beautiful cheers thank you brother
thanks for listening everyone we hope you now have the tools and greater insights to navigate
your own pivot help us inspire others by sharing this episode and leaving your comments over at
adam markel.com forward slash podcasts for more tips strategies and support as you consciously
pivot into a new business and lifestyle you love join our pivot community on facebook at pivotfb.com
