Okay, it's no small thing to go last at a conference such as this, and one might hope
of the final presentation that it says something of what this all comes to in some deep and
abiding sense.
Of course, that's going to be very difficult because we've been wrestling with a lot of
different confers being's work over the last couple of days, and nevertheless, I'm going
to try to do so and I hope compelling an interesting way, and we're going to see what happens.
So let me frame the discussion first.
What I so love about Ian's recent work is that he's not, in the least, shied away from
asking some truly fundamental metaphysical questions.
In fact, these questions in many ways pervade the work, and yet, I think a discerning reader
finds that two fundamental questions in particular frame the entire discussion, the tangled answers
of which are slowly developed or at least suggested throughout 28, I think, scintillating
chapters.
So on the front end, even before the table of contents, the question of Plotinus, but
we, who are we?
It's a question that Ian returns to occasionally throughout the book, and on the back end,
on the first page of Chapter 28, the final chapter of the book, it is the question of
being, the question of Heidegger, the question of Leibniz, the question that has haunted the
philosophical tradition, namely, why is there something rather than nothing?
These two monumental questions, of course, there's a relationship between the questions
of some tangled nature, and you might argue that the way you answer one question is going
to implicate how you answer the other, and at least what's part of the matter with things
is that we have no orienting space or position from which to answer these questions.
We do not know who we are, we don't know why we or anything exist, and of course, there's
an apophatic dimension to Ian's thought, too, he's more concerned, I'd say, with keeping
those fundamental questions alive, rather than answering them and saying, here's the
certain answer, that would be too, a leptomysphere approach, and nevertheless, I think he has
developed a profound metaphysics of parameters, metaphysical parameters for offering an answer
to these questions, or at least an entry point to these questions in terms of value, in terms
of axiology.
So I want to try to do that today with you, and I want to do so in five propositions.
So a word about propositions first, Matt had reminded us, it's come up several times, I
follow Whitehead in this, propositions should not just be reduced to the verbal content
of logical justification, propositions are not just about declarative statements of
fact, whether it's your fault.
They include that, but there's more to our engagement with propositions for Whitehead.
So instead, when I speak of propositions today, I'm speaking as lures for feeling, or Whitehead
will speak of propositional feelings as the way we feel our way into the content of propositions
as potentials.
In fact, maybe a better way to put it is that propositions are invitations for your feeling,
invitations for your attention.
And so when I use the language propositions, let's think about it in that sense, lures
for your feeling, lures for your attention.
And I want to embed these five propositions in a constellation of different resources
and quotations.
Another thing I so love about Ian's book is the entire argument is carried along by his
immense amount of resources, wonderful quotations, there's something to be valued about a quotation
which fits perfectly, an argument that's being made, and I think you demonstrated that brilliantly.
Question one, first lure for your feeling.
The cosmos is not anthropomorphic, rather, human beings are anthropocosmic.
In other words, we are an expression of this cosmos and not a deviation from it.
I like this language of anthropocosmic.
I thought I had invented it a few months ago, but it's usually the case you find somebody
got there before you.
Okay, in this case, Harvard Confucian scholar, Tuwei Ming, who says, in this view, human beings
are not merely creatures, but co-creators of the cosmic process.
We must take responsibility, he says, for this anthropocosmic interplay.
It's a beautiful way of expressing it.
Of course, he wasn't alone.
Nikolai Bardaev, one of my favorite Russian scholars, the knowledge of man rests upon
the supposition that man is cosmic in his nature.
The French Jesuit priest, Tehard, the person, the human monad is like every monad, essentially
cosmic, or one of my favorites, Raimundo Panicar, Spanish scholar.
The human community is not limited to its fellow human creatures.
The human community is also cosmic, since the human being is an integral and even constitutive
part of the cosmos itself.
Of course, it's an ancient insight that we are part of the cosmos and not a part from
it.
But it's one that we forgot, certainly in many ways, in the development of modern
philosophy.
It's one we hear forgotten in pithy statements uttered by popular scientists.
For example, consider a tweet exchange, 2019, between the astrophysicist Neil deGrasse
Tyson.
We all know who deGrasse Tyson is, and a brilliant response, I think, by the late comedian Norm
McDonald.
So Tyson gets up early in the morning at 6 a.m. of some kind.
He tweets to his very large following, the universe is blind to our sorrows and indifferent
to our pains.
Have a nice day.
It's a great way to start the morning.
To which McDonald, I think, brilliantly responds, Neil, there's a logic flaw in your little
aphorism that seems quite telling.
Since you and I are part of the universe, we would also be indifferent and uncaring.
Perhaps you forgot, Neil, that we are not superior to the universe, but merely a fraction
of it.
Have a nice day indeed.
So the logic flaw that Norm is pointing to is that Neil can only utter these statements
by removing his own existence and experience out of the universe, as if it tells him nothing
about the universe at large.
After all, we're hardly the kinds of beings who are blind to sorrow and indifferent by
pain.
In fact, at individual and cultural levels, if that's the case, we usually see those as
moral faults, rightly.
So Norm is pointing to this abstraction of the human element, the neglect to realize
this anthropocosmic interplay as two-way-me put it.
And so I think at the heart of Ian's work is a countering of this kind of pithy statement
by Negras Tyson.
And here I want to quote Ian's response as if it were somewhat of a response to statements
like those of Tyson.
So Ian says, there's a parallel between the false view that we are separate from and
over against nature and the idea that we are separate from and over against the cosmos.
This cannot be true for the same reason in either case.
We were born out of and returned to the one and the other.
It therefore makes no sense, Neil, to set us up as proud, lonely, tragic figures struggling
against nature, trying to subdue her or trying to defiantly, trying defiantly to bring love,
goodness, and beauty into a hostile cosmos.
Any love, goodness, and beauty we can bring come out of nature and out of the cosmos in
the first place.
Where else can they come from?
Where indeed.
So the central thrust of this first lure for your feeling is that our anthropocosmic experience
speaks of the cosmos at large and the cosmos also speaks in human experience.
But what does it say?
In part, it's pointing the direction as to what it says in that statement that I read.
Second proposition, second lure for your attention.
What the cosmos proclaims or speaks in human experience is value.
And here I want to turn to Whitehead and Shailer.
Consider Whitehead.
He says, our enjoyment of actuality is a realization of worth, good, or bad.
It is value experience.
Its basic expression is, have a care.
Here is something that matters.
Yes, he says.
That's the best phrase.
The primary glimmerings of consciousness reveals something that matters.
So here's Whitehead's statement with McGillchrist about the mattering with or of things.
For both thinkers, the universe is not made of aqueous dead matter.
It's more accurate to say it's made of what matters.
It's made of meaning and meaning for consciousness, meaning for experience.
Now similarly, Shailer, who's influenced Ian quite a bit, speaks of a pure value quality
which is first given and felt experience.
He uses this great analogy of color, right, just as colors are given in visual perception
through seeing them.
So too values are given in value-ception, a mode of feeling through feeling that.
And value-ception is deeper than conception, deeper than perception arguably for Shailer.
But I like this analogy of color.
If I were to show you a patch of green, for example, on the screen, we wouldn't have to
sit back and analytically deduce what color is it that we're looking at.
It announces itself to us, it proclaims itself to us.
And there's something almost trans-temporal about color too.
The green on the screen hypothetically would be connected in some way to the green of an
ancient reed in the Nile Delta, say.
We don't simply invent that.
We find it imposed upon us.
We discover it in a certain sense.
And part of Ian's argument is that we approach value in a similar kind of way.
The customary way to think of values is to see them as piggybacking on and arising out
of our consciousness, a human invention.
An alternative view is that values are not invented but discovered and disclosed, and
it takes life to discover and disclose them.
That they declare themselves in and through the responses of living beings to the world
and the world's response to them.
Okay, so the central thrust of the second proposition shared in different ways by Shaler,
by Whitehead, by McGilchrist.
The declaration of experience is value.
All experience is value experience, and experience is the feeling of value.
Okay, well, what else can we say about value?
Let's go a little bit deeper.
Proposition three.
Where there is any value, there is an attendant spectrum or hierarchy of values.
I want to return to Shaler here.
Note his statement.
In the totality of the realm of values, there exists a single order of ranks that all values
possess among themselves.
It is because of this that a value is higher or lower than another.
This order lies, he says, in the essence of values themselves and as does the difference
between positive and negative values.
It does not simply belong to values known by us.
So here's a statement of Shaler's, an objective ordering of values of some kind that is what
it is independent of what I arguably think about it.
Now, I've come to appreciate Shaler's work through reading your work Ian, and in particular
his hierarchy of values.
We've often seen this often a pyramid structure of five different hierarchies, the lowest
being utility, values of usefulness, moving up to values, essential values, virtue values,
values, wisdom, truth, beauty, goodness, values of the sacred, the holy.
Again, part of the matter with things is that we've inverted this hierarchy so that values
of utility and usefulness are at the top, the values of holiness and sacred are often
at the bottom.
This pyramid is often presented in different shades of color as well.
I like the analogy of color, it's as if values are the colors of our feelings in some way.
You can no more abstract, say, a single color from the entire spectrum of color, the hierarchy
of color of which it is a part, than you can say a single value from the whole qualitative
spectrum of values of which it is a part.
Arguably, there's an interesting, I like that analogy quite a bit.
So for Shaler, we face this hierarchy in some sense in our experience, but some sort of
value hierarchy is not confined to our experience.
So let's turn to Whitehead here, for example, one of my favorite statements.
He says, on a grand scale, our cosmology discloses a process of overpowering change
from nebula to stars, stars to planets, from inorganic matter to life, from life to reason
and moral responsibility.
What is going on, at least in part for Whitehead, cosmic evolution is in the business of achievements
of value, which weave into higher achievements of value, which make possible the dawning
of deeper kinds of value, for example, this dawning of moral responsibility, this dawning
of moral intuition.
The problem of evolution, Whitehead says, is the development of enduring harmonies of
enduring shapes of value, which merge into higher attainments beyond themselves.
Aesthetic attainment, he says, is interwoven with the texture of realization.
So Whitehead aesthetic value is the widest and most inclusive form of value that's applicable
to the universe.
It's in this life that Hartzor and his assistant, for a time, says that the most general principles
of harmony and intensity are more ultimate than the laws of physics and the reason for
there being natural laws, provocative.
Harmony intensity are aesthetic principles that are deeper than laws of physics precisely
because they're embodied within them.
And here, again, he's reflecting Whitehead, who says it's not the case that we have an
actual world which happens to exhibit an order of nature.
He says, we have a world because there is a more fundamental order of nature.
He follows that saying all order is aesthetic order and the moral order is merely certain
aspects of the aesthetic order.
Now Ian, on occasion, has had time to push back at that because it might risk reducing
moral value to aesthetic value or something to be said for that.
But I think what Whitehead is doing is situating the advent of moral value across an evolutionary
spectrum from more primal experiences of aesthetic intensity, aesthetic harmony.
After all, the formation of protons and electrons was aesthetically intense in terms of harmony
and intensity and order, but it doesn't seem that moral value arguably would apply at that
level to those occurrences.
So I think it's a statement about an arc of evolutionary experience that runs from
the aesthetic all the way in very high forms to the moral.
After all, there's the harmony of a human life, which is both an aesthetic and a moral
concept.
Okay, the third thrust then of this, the third principle, human experience and both cosmological
and biological evolution arguably presuppose this hierarchy of values, this continuum,
but hearts are called the effective continuum of felt values.
Okay, but we can still go deeper, I think.
Fourth proposition, fourth lure for your feeling, for your invitation.
In the hierarchy of values, there's an asymmetrical relation among higher values, which are inclusive
and lower values, which are exclusive.
And I want to quote here James, quote by William James, which Ian also quotes, this is a beautiful
expression of this and it's reflective.
James says, looking back on my own experiences, they all converge towards a kind of insight
to which I cannot help ascribe some metaphysical significance.
The keynote of it is invariably a reconciliation.
It's as if the opposites of the world, whose contradictoryness and conflict make all our
difficulties and troubles, were melded into unity, not only do they as contrasted species
belong to one and the same genus, but one of the species, the nobler and better one,
is itself the genus, which so soaks up and absorbs its opposite into itself.
It's just a beautiful statement by James, the kind of asymmetry among opposites and
I love the way Ian describes this.
He says this statement is one that speaks of the equal necessity, but the unequal status
of spiritual opposites in the universe.
So both thinkers are haunted by, well, a kind of axiological asymmetry.
So consider a few axiological co-ans, if you will.
Is it the case in some sense that love can include hate without being diminished, but
hate cannot include love without being extinguished?
Goodness we might say can include evil without being diminished, but evil cannot include
goodness without being extinguished.
Harmony we might say can include discord without being diminished, but discord cannot include
harmony without being extinguished, or order perhaps can include chaos without being diminished,
but chaos cannot include order without being extinguished.
And of course we can argue about those and what I'm pointing to is this haunting sense
of axiological asymmetry that seems to be there in the nature of things, but it's not
just axiological asymmetry.
So Ian has argued at various lengths to point to various other asymmetries and his quote
of Louis Pasteur I think is instructive in this regard.
So Pasteur says the universe as a whole is asymmetrical.
Life is dominated by the effects of asymmetrical forces whose enveloping cosmic existence we
sense intuitively.
I would even say Pasteur continues that living species are primordially in their structure,
in their external forms, functions of cosmic asymmetry.
So the central thrust of the fourth principle then that we intuit value as a kind of cosmic
asymmetrical force in some way.
And if that's the case, wouldn't that begin to shed light on the foundations of being
itself?
Wouldn't that give us perhaps grounds to begin to speak to the reason for or the meaning
of existence as such?
Okay, fifth and final proposition.
Namely at the reason or say the meaning for the world and life itself consists in its
ability to respond to the positive proclamations of value which asymmetrically grounded speaking.
And there's a number of things we can point to here.
In quotes rightly, I think Thomas Nagel's striking statement that value is not an accidental
side effect of life, rather there is life because life is a necessary condition of value.
So here's a statement that value itself is deeper than life.
You don't have value because of life, you have life because of value, value is the deeper
concept.
Similarly, Philip Goff and his recent work is along the similar kinds of lines, speaking
of fundamental facts that are as basic as the axioms of mathematics or the laws of physics,
facts of better and worse, or facts about how people ought to behave and he says value
facts if there are any must be primitive facts in their own right to say that they're primitive
means that in some sense they're necessary, return on some deep sense.
Now Goff is re-energizing deeper work that is done by John Leslie, the Canadian British
Canadian philosopher, his axiarchism, which says necessarily, eternally, there can be
ethical requirements for the existence of various things, needs for them to exist.
So for Leslie, the reason we have existence as such, the reason we have a world is because
it satisfies an ethical need for it.
Ultimately, we have a world because it's good that it exists.
And when we get to the element of goodness, we're at a stopping point, we've given an
axiological answer for why there is anything challenging.
Now Whitehead can be seen as part of this, for example, in a combined statement, all
ultimate reasons he says are in terms of an aim at value.
Life exists for its own sake as the intrinsic reaping of value, and that existence is the
upholding of value intensity, that existence already is an achievement of value.
So these different statements, constellation of statements, are beginning to reason the
reason for being, the reason for the world.
Maybe we can answer in terms of value.
What about the meaning of the world?
And Olosky, Russian existential scholar, value is something which pervades everything.
It determines the meaning of the world as a whole, as well as the meaning of every person.
Everything that exists, and even everything that may exist, there's that domain of possibility,
is of such nature that it not only exists, but contains within itself either the justification
or the condemnation of its being.
Whitehead on meaning.
And in fact, this is just a partial statement, but Whitehead is responding to the question
of where is it that he thinks philosophy should start, and the statement is a part of his
answer.
He says, our enjoyment of the values of human art, or of natural beauty, our horror at the
obvious vulgarities and defacements which force themselves upon us, all of these modes
of experience are sufficiently abstracted to be relatively obvious, and yet evidently
they disclose the very meaning of things.
Again, the statement about value and meaning.
So there's possibilities of value, there's possibilities of meaning that are in the nature
of things.
And so the focus is absolutely right on.
It's not we who originate the possibility of truth, goodness, or beauty in the cosmos.
He says, I see value as intrinsic to the universe, and the possibility of appreciating and responding
to value, therefore fulfilling its potential as one reason for the cosmos to have evolved
for life.
And yet arguably in a Weltanschau, which sees value as an ontological primitive, we might
have grounds to say that value is not just one reason for the universe to have evolved,
but the reason the universe has evolved, the reason, hypothetically, we have a universe
at all.
Okay, so we've seen five propositions as lures for your feeling, invitations for your attention.
One, the cosmos is not anthropomorphic, human beings are anthropocosmic.
Two, what the cosmos proclaims in human experience is value.
Three, where there is any value, there is an intended spectrum or hierarchy of values.
Four, in the hierarchy of values, there's an asymmetrical relation among higher values
which are inclusive and lower values which are exclusive.
And five, that the reason or the meaning of the world and life itself consists in its
ability to respond to the proclamations of positive value, which asymmetrically ground
its being.
And I want to conclude here with a final challenge.
And I think it's a sort of through line that runs through Ian's work, namely the challenge
of moving from a merely propositional way of knowing to a dispositional orientation towards
the world.
What would it be like to develop a kind of attitudinal axiology that is transparent to
these transcendent values, which ground our being, which find expression in us, which
arguably point an arrow over our shoulder towards an arc of human purpose and human
meaning?
And if we could do that, wouldn't that be a way of answering who it is we are and why
it is that we or anything should exist?
Thank you.
