Gorbachev's reforms raised popular expectations and also disappointed them.
In the West and in the United States, Gorbachev was often lionized, but often misunderstood
as well in his real aims.
Gorbachev sought to save the system.
In particular, he sought to cut expensive subsidies to communist movements in other countries
and to improve relations with the West by shedding the outer empire of satellite states.
In East Germany, one of the most important satellites after refugee outflows and conflict
within the ruling elite itself, the Berlin Wall fell on November 9, 1989, as ordinary
Eastern Germans pounded it down.
The scenes of celebration, those mind-boggling pictures of crowds of people celebrating on
top of the wall or smashing away at it with sledgehammers, were broadcast worldwide and
had a decisive impact on other political systems as well.
In Eastern Europe, they set off chain reactions, emulating those scenes of liberation, and German
unification followed in 1990.
Communist regimes elsewhere in Eastern and Central Europe were also simultaneously liberalizing
and abolishing the communist monopolies that had earlier been the rule.
In Poland, in Hungary, and Czechoslovakia, new governments took power.
In the case of Romania, its notorious dictator Nicolai Ciocescu met a violent end at the
hands of some of his former allies who sought to hijack the democratic transition.
This chain reaction, uncontrollable, now spread to the Soviet Union itself.
In one after another of the national republics of the Soviet Union, liberation movements
like Syudysk and Lithuania rallied their populations.
Even after violence by Soviet special forces troops in 1991 showed that Gorbachev was taking
now a harder line.
In August of 1991, Gorbachev's hardliner allies attempted a coup which failed and ultimately
led to the Soviet Union's final breakup.
The lack of confidence on the part of the hardliners was crucial in this context.
One can recall the news reports of these days as the coup plotters who had Gorbachev under
house arrest announced that they were now in control of the country.
One of the coup plotters was obviously falling down drunk.
The man who was reading the bulletin announcing the seizure of power was laughed at by the
journalists who were covering it because very obviously as he was reading these comments
his hands were shaking.
This didn't inspire confidence in the plotters themselves.
It made clear that the determination to quell resistance which might earlier have existed
under a hardline regime was lacking in this case.
Such total collapse without conflagration of the Soviet Union was and still remains an
astonishing feature.
The opposition movements in Eastern Europe as well as Russia which led to the revolutions
of 1989 in spite of their high expectations however for fundamental change were not utopian
in nature.
One might even argue that they were anti-utopian in the sense that what they were promising
was not a resolution of all social problems not a moving forward into a perfect society
rather their plaintive request was for the ability finally to live in a normal society
as they put it.
At the same time the process of getting out of the mindsets that have been cultivated
by the ideological regimes that had ruled over these liberated countries was not quick
and arguably still ongoing at this remove.
The surveys of the damage done to Central and Eastern European societies in terms of
economics in terms of environmental damage as well as in pure human terms are still underway.
Many bitter and keen Russian observers of their own society describe sadly what some
of them call a century long negative selection in which those who showed most initiative,
most creativity, most imagination and most decency were mowed down again and again by
despotic regimes.
This very fact underlines a recurring and important point the need in such societies
to confront the past when that past has been brought to a close because otherwise its ghosts
will continue to haunt.
History's blank spots in other words need to be filled in for these societies in an important
psychological sense.
The recovery of the past and an estimate objectively of what that past involved is crucial to a
reckoning and a healthy beginning for such shaken societies.
At the same time, even in such a hopeful mood, expectations were chastened.
