Lecture 2 – The Legacy of Revolutions
In this lecture, we'll be considering the inheritance of 19th century ideas and the
legacy that they would have for the 20th century.
In our previous lecture, we had discussed an explanatory framework, we had defined
utopia and terror, and discussed key elements of the ideological regimes that we'll be
discussing in our later lectures.
What we'd like to do today is to look back at the pre-existing conditions of the 20th
century, look back to the 19th century and its ideas and characteristic frames of mind.
Because the ideas that were launched in the 19th century, and certain philosophies and
ideologies would continue to work themselves out through the following century, would form
a very important legacy.
In speaking about the dynamic processes underway in the 19th century, it's justified to speak
of a dual revolution.
And centuries don't always oblige us by neatly demarcating historical processes.
So we need in fact to look at the very start of the 19th century, and just before it, at
the late 18th century for the origins of this dual revolution.
Starting in the late 18th century, and then working itself out through the course of the
19th century, this dual revolution would have consequences that are still with us today.
An unfolding political revolution, on the one hand, often linked with, and joined to,
a continuing industrial revolution, which were arguably still in.
by these upheavals, and all that the dual revolution promised gave support to a crucial
idea of western civilization, the idea of progress, progress with a capital P. Progress
implying the onward march of constant, and perhaps ultimately, inevitable betterment,
bringing about improvement and unceasing change for the better in civilization.
We need first to consider the political element of this dual revolution.
In politics, the American and French revolutions at the end of the 18th century launched new
and continuing experiments in popular government that echoed throughout the 19th century.
Advances in industry, also starting in the 18th century, produced dramatic transformation
in the ordinary lives of people in the course of the 19th century, and gave incidentally
immense prestige to the science that seems to have achieved those changes and improvements.
Together, the political revolution and the economic or industrial expanded as a whole
the sense of what was possible for all human beings, for ordinary individuals, what their
lives might have in store for them if progress continued.
Let's consider first the political revolution, what we might term the political revolution
of the masses, because it brought in a new player into politics, the notion of popular
sovereignty, masses of people in which individuals could now seek to find a voice.
The background for the political revolution were certainly the ideas of the Enlightenment.
At the end of the 18th century, as revolutions broke out, 1776 in the American colonies,
and 1789 in France, they were often informed by Enlightenment ideas.
Now let's make no mistake about this, each of these events had their own disparate and
immediate causes.
But nonetheless, the new ideas of the Enlightenment informed the thinking of many of the revolutionaries
who saw themselves being given in this time of change a chance to realize some of their
cherished Enlightenment ideals.
The Enlightenment was, in brief, an 18th century movement in western civilization stressing
the values above all of reason.
These included scientific inquiry, a certain skeptical outlook that didn't take things
simply on faith.
Implied in this also was religious toleration as an ideal, not seeking to impose in a blind
or fanatical way one's own beliefs but rather testing them against reason in free, unfettered
debate, also a certain secularism or an exclusion of total ideological or religious claims from
the public square, the values of innovation, holding that change could be good if it brought
human existence into line with reason, and a key notion of the Enlightenment, reform.
Reason could reform our lives, our politics, our beliefs, our society.
Others like Voltaire urged this message.
