Lecture 17 The Cold War
In our previous lectures, we had been discussing the ordeal of the Second World War, and we
had further discussed the plans for the future that the Nazis had hatched, which were forestalled
by their defeat in that conflict.
But when World War II had ended, it didn't bring with it the peace that so many people
longed for, but rather a new ideological confrontation, the Cold War which we'll be discussing today.
A point that we've underlined before in the context of our discussion of the First World
War and of other conflicts is that even when they are brought to a formal or juridical
end, they still continue in aftershocks, and in some sense the Cold War would represent
a aftershock, a settling of accounts that had built up during the Second World War
as a new ideological confrontation loomed.
As people took stock of the world in the aftermath of war, the costs were borne in
upon them.
The war which had involved more than 40 nations making it truly a global conflict had left
by a conservative estimate, over 50 million dead, some estimates range far higher.
It's estimated by historians that roughly half of those who were victims of the war
were civilians.
This represented an intensification of that feature of total war that it would already
remarked on in our discussion of the First World War.
In the First World War, it's estimated that some 10% of the victims of that conflict were
civilians, now that proportion had jumped to 50%.
This represented a terrible intensification.
And moreover, as a signal emblem of that intensification, the end of World War II had also ushered in
a new age of weapons of even more formidable destructive power, the atomic age.
A new age of potential destruction had been opened up, heretofore unknown to man.
And these weapons would proliferate.
While the United States had been first to use atomic weapons against Japan, by 1949
the Soviet Union had also produced a nuclear weapon, in part aided by espionage against
its former allies.
The Cold War now set in.
According to many historians, the Cold War had already in essence been starting to play
itself out in the Second World War, especially in its closing stages.
World War II had seen an uneasy alliance of the United States and Britain, Western democracies,
on the one hand with Stalin and his Soviet Union on the other side.
This uneasy alliance had already been strained during the war, but as the war ended, hopes
reasonably enough were still present that international cooperation might be continued
past the conflict, despite the stark, some argued, irreconcilable ideological differences
between the former allies.
But these differences, however, soon led to what came to be called a Cold War, not
a hot war of active armed conflict, but rather a tense standoff that threatened at any moment
to turn into an all-out armed confrontation, an ideological standoff that lasted nearly
half a century and did much to shape our world in the present day.
With the end of the Second World War and in its closing stages, people, quite understandably,
were gathering their thoughts on the sort of international efforts that might pool the
resources of an international community, that might assure human rights, that might seem
to ground hopes in peace.
And the United Nations in particular was held up as one such international institution that,
as a successor to the League of Nations project, might finally vindicate those hopes.
The United Nations organization was founded at the San Francisco Conference from April
to June of 1945.
The United Nations charter defined its aims.
And these were the noble aims of peace through collective security, the promise of self-determination,
the notion of international cooperation, and shared progress, and respect for human rights.
