Tens of thousands of clergy were arrested and executed in the 1930s as part of a program for the fundamental change in people's beliefs and minds.
In part, the party was showing just how much it held power over the past, the future, and the present day.
A key element in the conviction which the cult of personality would hold, which made the figure of Stalin different from other hero figures that we might think of in western societies, other popular figures, was the assertion of total infallibility.
If the leader of such a regime made a claim, that claim could, in a self-fulfilling prophecy, be made to come true.
As Hannah Rent, a formidable analyst of such systems, put it, if the leader of a regime declared as a prophecy that unemployment would be eliminated by the regime, unemployment indeed could be eliminated by eliminating the unemployed or hiding their very existence.
This is not the sort of thing that could happen in a free society.
The personality cult asserted a power not just over the present and the future direction of society, but also, and this is a key part of its psychological force, over the past as well.
After Stalin's repeated purges, the waves of the cleansings of society, this was not merely a measure that ended with the arrest and the execution, the disappearance of those who were considered to be enemies of the regime or enemies of the people.
It went a step further still, ominous in its significance.
Those who were purged were also obliterated from the historical record itself.
They became non-persons who had functionally never existed, most probably in Trotsky's case.
The attempts to eliminate the works and the traces of Trotsky's historical role went so far as that some works that had criticized Trotsky were banned as well because they retained some trace of this official non-person.
Some historians have suggested that sometimes the retouching or the blacking out, the inking out of faces of non-persons was a deliberately clumsy maneuver.
Sometimes traces could be seen that obviously in a photograph someone had been retouched or had been airbrushed out of a photograph.
Some historians have suggested that this was a psychological message.
The message that was being sent was that the party had power over the historical record and that this fate was not one that could be avoided.
This purging was obligatory.
It was demanded that throughout libraries of the Soviet Union works or photographs of such non-persons be purged and it could serve as a warning to those in society a demonstration of the power of the state.
One needs to consider how such a gesture could make even the prospect of potential resistance seem truly meaningless.
As has been pointed out by analysts of the regime, such regimes including Arthur Kistler who we mentioned in the last lecture, it's one thing to resist knowing that one's heroism will be entered in the historical record.
Another thing to resist and to know that that action will truly be obliterated and never remembered.
The regime established also monuments to itself.
Its claim to its own permanence, monumentality and modernity was demonstrated by the deliberate crafting of enormous projects.
One such project was the huge industrial city of Magnitogorsk.
This means literally magnet city or magnet town, magnet mountain.
The metallurgical factory city of Magnitogorsk was intended to hold the world's largest plant.
It was deliberately intended to surpass the American city that had functioned as its original model that had tended to outdo Gary Indiana.
International invitations went out to engineers to help participate in this massive, heroic project of construction from 1929.
In many ways, this industrial city that grew up seemingly overnight was an apt symbol for the Soviet regime itself.
It was built up by two kinds of people, by ideological enthusiasts, those staconovite storm workers and shock workers of industrialization and the five-year plans on the one hand, and also by forced labor and prisoners.
The results, however, as historians of science and of technology have pointed out, were less than auspicious.
The city soon became a monument to inefficiency.
So much emphasis had been placed on the propaganda value of producing this smoke-belching industrial powerhouse that less attention had been paid to the ordinary engineering questions of an efficient production setting.
