In Greek, utopia was formed out of the words for no and place.
In essence, utopia was a no-where or a no-place.
And indeed, intellectual historians continue to argue to this very day
about whether Sir Thomas Moore meant his thought experiment
as a realistic suggestion for how society might evolve,
or rather whether it was intended as a more pointed and discrete form of criticism.
We might say that this contradiction, this sense of the implausibility
given the human realities that we know of achieving that perfect society
continues to endure and has endured in all thinking about utopias.
But in spite of this recognition of the implausibility of many such perfected societies,
the word nonetheless still retains in our usage of it utopia certain positive connotations.
It might signify a dreamlike, idealistic, unworldly view of the world,
but nonetheless there still is in our usage something positive about the notion.
It is the lure of a new earth and a new human being in perfect harmony
and for all of its implausibility perhaps an ideal worth striving after.
When we speak of utopianism then as a trend,
we mean this abiding human trait of visualizing total comprehensive social solutions
and achieving that dream of a perfect society.
What we now need to do is to turn to define what seems like a very unlikely pairing
for that term of utopia, the concept of terror.
Now terror in the way we use the word frequently implies fear, panic, alarm,
but it also has a more specific political usage that we want to concentrate on and define here.
In this usage, explicitly political, terror is a political method in the pursuit and wielding of power.
It denotes the organized use of violence for political deliberate ends.
Terror thus when used politically seeks to instill fear and panic
and aims at forcing a deliberate transformation, whether of society or individuals.
Thus terror implies the deliberate and organized targeting of ordinary people, civilians,
non-combatants and innocents and indeed terror might be all the more effective
precisely because it targets such uninvolved unpoliticized individuals.
Now here too there are certain significant ambiguities in the words connotations.
Earlier revolutionaries accepted or did not reject the label of terrorist,
indeed they spoke of and praised terror as a tactic,
but terrorism and the label terrorist certainly carries a stigma today.
We're familiar with that old chestnut that saying that one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter.
This in many ways is a kind of defensive statement which aims to, as it were,
shake the stigma of the label of terrorist and it's not entirely adequate to the political realities of terrorism
because terrorists quite deliberately aim to target the innocent and the uninvolved,
which is not something that all freedom fighters do.
Nonetheless we need to consider the linkage of utopia and terror
and this exists is united in one particular concept, the concept of ideology.
Utopia and terror are an unlikely pairing that have been linked in the history of the 20th century
because in the 20th century plans for perfection presented in terms of ideology
encountered either passive or active resistance.
If individuals and societies at large would not willingly submit to being radically remade,
well then on a frequent occasion compulsion would be used to enforce the planned perfection that was kept in mind.
Such terror would in turn be justified in reference to an ideology
that, it was said, legitimized the actions of the present by pointing to that bright far-off future.
An ideology is not simply an idea.
Ideologies are systems of ideas which purport to explain all of reality
and the modern age has seen a succession of ideologies, systems of thought that describe
how the world works or perhaps how the world should work if only could be set right.
A whole succession of ideologies are ones that we'll be discussing in this course,
nationalism, socialism, communism, fascism, Nazism, a whole series of isms and ideologies.
Because of their promises of ultimate meaning and a perfect future, secular salvation,
many ideologies in fact constituted what we might call political religions,
which in some sense hijacked many of the earlier religious impulses
and now would turn them to political uses, commanding fanaticism, commitment and sacrifice from true believers.
They offered something in return.
In return, such ideologies could give their followers enormous confidence
that meant after all that such followers, such true believers were on the right side of history.
They were inevitably fated to a kind of immortality by being part of a project that was of necessity about to triumph.
And thus also by implication such ideologies would give justification to true believers
for realizing their beliefs by any means necessary, including the escalating use of violence.
In essence, ideologies were ideas that would have consequences
and for that reason in our lectures, we'll seek to take those ideas seriously
and understand how they might impel political action.
