The word fascio in Italian means a league or a unit, a group, but it also has a more ancient meaning.
It was also the name of the ancient Roman imperial symbol for the unity of the state.
A bundle of sticks tied around an axe.
The notion was that any soul individual or stick could easily be broken.
But a bundle of sticks tied together were unbreakable, and unity would be strength.
These violent fascist squads, often made up of former Arditi veterans, the stormtroopers of the First World War,
adopted the stormtroopers' anthem from the trenches that Anthem was Giovannetta or youth.
They adopted the nihilistic slogan of the stormtroopers, I don't give a damn.
They also adopted black shirts as their uniforms and the classical Roman salute of the outstretched right arm as a badge of their belonging.
The gang leaders, the mobsters who ran these units of thugs were called by the title of Ras after Ethiopian chieftains
reflecting the imperialist heritage of Italian imperialist experience.
In the streets of Italian cities, these fascist squads of black shirts brutalized and murdered political opponents
and broke up strikes claiming that they were restoring order.
This was a sign of great cynicism because in part they were creating the very disorder that they were claiming to be in the process of eliminating.
They were marked by nihilism, they loved violence, and those opponents whom they didn't kill outright immediately,
whom they cornered in the streets or in the squares, they loved to humiliate by forcing them to drink gallons of castor oil.
This was intended to be symbolically hilarious.
Castor oil intended to purge the system, and this was a symbol for the cleansing of the body politic of Italy as well,
would destroy the insides of the political opponents who were thus subjected to torture.
Mussolini now felt that after having stirred up disorder, he was ready to begin the movement to seize power.
The fascists now claimed in the fall of 1922 that a communist takeover was in the offing,
one that they aimed to preempt by taking action first.
In October of 1922, fascist leaders organized their squads from the different cities and localities of Italy to march on Rome,
and thus began the quite deliberately staged myth of the march on Rome.
From all of the localities and cities, they were intended to converge upon the capital of the Italian kingdom,
and they announced that if they weren't given power, they would take power by force.
Mussolini was not among them. Mussolini waited behind the scenes to see whether the result would be a bloodbath of his own followers.
If they'd be shot or suppressed by the established authorities, he waited to see how the events would play out.
Mussolini received behind the scenes a message which made a mockery of this supposedly heroic myth on Rome.
That message was an invitation by the king to indeed form a government.
While the fascist squads continued to march on Rome, Mussolini understood that he already had achieved power by means short of revolutionary violence.
But nonetheless, the political theater of the march was allowed to play itself out and was turned into what was afterwards celebrated as a myth of direct action.
Once in power, Mussolini set about consolidating his power in stages. He'd been invited to form the government.
He was not yet in the position of a total regime in spite of all of the rhetoric which Mussolini bombastically announced of the total power of the fascists.
But consolidating his power by slow stages, Mussolini by 1929, about the same time that Stalin has consolidated his power, was in the position of a strong dictator.
These stages were careful. Once he became prime minister, Mussolini made the black shirt squads themselves a government body, a militia essentially.
Some of these black shirted thugs in fact forced Mussolini's pace.
In 1924, some of his bully boys killed a socialist by the name of Giacomo Matteotti. This shook the regime. It was a crisis.
But Mussolini, in a dramatic moment, accepted responsibility for what had been done and now moved towards affirming up in consolidation of his dictatorship.
In 1926, having weathered this crisis, the overall secret police were formed, Italian elections were suspended, and government by decree followed.
