In ways reminiscent of other dictatorial regimes we've discussed, the East German state concentrated
on making sure that its message was passed along to the youth.
The free German youth organization, the FDR, regimented youth, sent them marching, singing
patriotic songs, hailing the advance of socialism.
To the critics of this organization, it in many ways bore haunting resemblances to the
Hitler youth.
The churches in East Germany were harassed, infiltrated or closed.
An increasingly religious ritual, traditional ritual, were replaced with secular, newly
created, newly invented traditions like youth confirmation, replacing earlier confirmation
in the Christian rite with a pledge of one's loyalty to socialist ideals.
The flip side of such attempts to indoctrinate and win loyalty through propaganda was an
atmosphere of coercion and controlled by the secret police of the East German state known
as the Stasi.
Stasi was a bureaucratic acronym that stood for the Staatssicherheitsdienst or the State
Security Service.
The coercive forces of the police also manned the borders.
Border troops guarded the wall and Berlin itself as well as stretching down across the
German-German border and these troops had orders to shoot to kill.
Flight from the Republic was an official crime and in this case one could pay for that crime
with one's life.
Dissidents and others who protested against the regime within were kept under constant
surveillance and were spied upon by a remarkably extensive web of stool pigeons and informers
in their midst.
Taken all together, the State Security Police, the Stasi, established a remarkably intricate
repressive apparatus for spying on East Germans.
There were not only the regular secret police but also those informers who were called unofficial
collaborators who were rewarded and encouraged to denounce and spy upon co-workers and families.
When this was later revealed after the collapse of the East German regime, its results obviously
could be shattering on those who had been thus betrayed by family members and friends.
And the numbers of those who were tied in to this web of complicity was enormous.
An estimated quarter of a million people worked for the Stasi from 1950 to 1989.
This when one breaks down the figures included one secret policeman for every 166 citizens.
When informers were added, this would be one security person for every 6.5 persons.
And I point out in my classes on German history that the implication for a classroom of students
such as the one listening to a lecture would be that almost certainly in their number would
be a significant number of informers.
The Stasi generated enormous amounts of paperwork in the process of spying on its own citizens.
It's been estimated that this included 121 miles of files on targets and the Stasi also
maintained feared prisons like Hohenscheinhausen.
Their activities included the bugging of apartments, collaboration with international
terrorist groups, trafficking in people, in fact, as older individuals could be bought
free by relatives in West Germany and allowed to emigrate, as was also sometimes the case
for some dissidents, and the Stasi was especially proud of its active, fraternal collaboration
with the Soviet KGB.
The Stasi thought of themselves as being in that lineage.
They were proud of being descendants of Lenin's Cheka, the secret police that had been established
right at the beginning of the Bolshevik Revolution.
The East German state would also seek to win for itself a sense of legitimacy, a sense
of the agreement of its population in the legitimacy of its own rule.
At the same time, there were difficulties.
The inequalities in terms of how people were treated, the party elites versus ordinary citizens,
were all too patent.
The failures in providing a higher standard of living were also quite clear.
At the same time, rhetorically, these shortcomings would be justified in an elegant term of phrase
as really existing socialism.
It was claimed that the East German state had achieved the closest advance to socialism
that had yet been achieved and thus the promised land was but a hands breath away.
