This man later would become president of his country, but in this period was imprisoned for his human rights activism.
He articulated ideas that others were also proposing at this time, ideas summed up in the phrase civil society.
Civil society was the notion that there should exist a buffer zone between the isolated individual and the state.
There should be a zone of protection between the great power of the government and the naked soul individual.
Civil society, in other words, were all of those private, non-governmental relationships as well as ties that existed between people in families,
in churches, in independent organizations.
And this notion seemed especially attractive because it seemed to offer a prescription for recovery from totalitarianism of the sort that Hannah Rent had analyzed.
Another man whose role would be important, though a subtle one, in this period was the pope of the Roman Catholic Church, John Paul II.
He was born Carl Wojtyla and, as a pole, was the first non-Italian pontiff since 1522.
He had been shaped as a young man by his experience of a series of occupations of Poland, Nazi and then communist control.
His championing of human rights with the religious message influenced the Eastern European transition in important ways.
And yet, there still remains something about this remarkable set of democratic revolutions in 1989 that still evades the sort of close, quantifiable analysis that historians might like to achieve.
I'd argue that one element, which is very difficult to even recover at this distance from those events, which played a crucial role in these transformations,
were the anticipated futures of the actors, their perceptions of what lay beyond the horizon, what the future likely held.
These changing perceptions of the future tended to give more confidence to dissidents while they eroded the ideological confidence,
one so strong of the communist parties of the regime.
In particular, there were concrete reasons for this.
Economic failure, which was now undeniable, as well as political repression, eroded confidence in those earlier future visions presented by the communist regimes.
And jokes, indeed, circulated in this period, which made clear that the sort of popular sense that this is where the future lay had seriously deteriorated.
There was a joke, for instance, which asked, is communism truly a viable form of government?
And in this joke, the answer came, of course communism is a viable form of government.
Because of this kind of mess existed under capitalism, it would have collapsed long ago.
Another joke suggested that communism was like the horizon. It always receded into the future.
This sort of bitter irony already testified to the sense of a loss of confidence in the future utopian visions being presented by a once vital ideology.
In this context, the apparent economic progress of the United States or of Western Europe was a stark contrast to those who lived under other regimes.
There's also another intangible element that around the 1980s was important, but difficult to trace exactly,
the movement taking place in the richer, more prosperous countries of Western Europe towards European unification
also had a subtle effect on dissidents in Eastern Europe who felt that while this European unification was taking place in the West,
they might be left out, that the doors in some sense might be closing on their European identity part of a project that they wanted to share in.
And this sense of there being no time to lose, I think demonstrably, hurried along the events of the revolutions of 1989.
Now further, technology could play an important role in hurrying along the revolutions of 1989 to 1991.
We need here to note a recurring phenomenon that we've tried to emphasize in our lectures, and that's the ambiguous role of technology in the functioning of repressive regimes and in resistance to those regimes.
On the one hand, technology could certainly enable for the government remarkably extensive surveillance, jamming a foreign radio or TV transmissions in order to keep its populations isolated,
but then on the other hand, technology could also play a subversive role.
Television and radio broadcasts, for instance, from the Radio Free Europe or Voice of America broadcasting systems, as well as perhaps more insidiously and slowly,
Western movies that were imported into the Soviet Union or communist societies also could have the opposite effect of seeming to open the societies that were subject to their influences to the notion of broader horizons.
