Perhaps it is in human nature to imagine utopias in which that human nature is overcome.
People need visions of a future.
We need the notion of a better tomorrow in order to get up in the morning
and to set about with some hope and vitality about our everyday business.
But technology might play a role here as well.
Perhaps we're nearing a new threshold in our debate on human nature.
Is the utopian dream of changing human nature and manipulating it about to be accomplished by technology?
In our own times, advances in genetic engineering and in pharmacology
are accelerating at such a dizzying pace that some social critics are worrying
that the consideration, the thinking through of the long-term implications
of this technological change might yet be lagging behind.
Aldous Huxley's surmise in his fictional work The Brave New World
that cloning would someday yield a new human condition and a new human nature
is perhaps about to be tested in reality.
Is a post-human future in store for us?
That's a question well worth considering.
Let's ask in conclusion what lessons one might learn from the long and violent record of the 20th century.
What lessons might emerge from studying its record of utopian terror?
We might return to the key elements that made up the regimes we've considered
in order to consider their lessons.
Those key elements were masses, machines, mobsters, and master plans.
In terms of the role that masses played, one sees the importance, by contrast,
of emphasizing for a healthy model of society the value of individuality.
Not in the sense of being a lonely, atomized individual,
but rather individuals who unfold their own characters
but are still embedded in true everyday human community, civic society,
rather than given over to the loneliness of crowds.
Genuine individuals are likely to be better able to resist
that marching impulse of organized crowds that ideological regimes sought to create.
While machines of control were important to tyranny's,
technology itself, as we've seen, is clearly neither unequivocally a curse
nor an unproblematic answer given its surprising potential for liberating effects or enslavement.
This urges us to think about technology and to use it and to be affected by it consciously.
The role of mobster mentality in elites seeking power in disordered or shaken societies
urges us, by contrast, to cultivate the virtues of an active citizenry,
which is what is truly necessary to build responsible states and democratic societies.
Finally, the fraudulent splendor of those total master plans, those utopian blueprints,
is abundantly clear in the historical record.
We must keep in mind that those ideas had consequences,
and thus ideas need to be taken seriously.
There is moreover another caution about amnesia as a danger.
The very fact that the ideological dictatorships of the 20th century did not exist in vacuums,
but as we've tried to emphasize, interacted, fought with one another,
on other occasions learnt from one another, and occasionally imitated one another,
carries a crucial implication.
It's dangerous to be unaware of their record if that record continues.
There's a special danger in forgetting these phenomena and crimes of the 20th century,
which could lead to revivals.
And the signs here are not all that positive right now.
After communism's collapse in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union,
scarcely any leaders were held accountable or were put on trial for their crimes.
The same is true in the case of other regimes worldwide, whom we've discussed such as the Khmer Rouge.
Such amnesia, though is perhaps initially comfortable, poisons responsible politics in the long run,
and distorts the mature historical consciousness that a society needs.
In Russia today, for instance, and I've found this even in discussion with Russians whom I've met,
in the course of my teaching, communist symbols have returned,
while newly discovered mass graves in Russia are ignored by the public at large,
in spite of the efforts of brave organizations like Memorial,
who seek to keep alive the memory of these atrocities.
In a poll that was conducted throughout Russia in 2003,
on the very 50th anniversary of Stalin's death,
53% of all those who were asked of this Russian audience approved of Stalin,
only 33% disapproved. Amnesia indeed.
In Germany in 2003, an East German communist theme park is being planned by a Berlin company
to allow people to go back in time and to experience those days of fervor.
Here, kitsch being produced through the experiences of suffering is a way of adding insult to injury.
But I'd like to close on a basis for cautious optimism.
Philosophers continue to debate whether utopias are indispensable to human beings as we really are,
perhaps the precondition for any kind of progress.
Our survey of the historical record of the last century urges us to be vigilant
against revivals and new forms of the total ideologies,
as well as urging us to take on a certain humility and caution,
even as we engage in utopian thought experiments.
Finally, the heroism and humanity of the witnesses to the century we've considered,
as well as countless other unknown people who confronted terror regardless of their own fates
and often paid the ultimate price, provide an example that's not utopian or imagined,
but historically and existentially very real.
Their courage and humanity are causes for hope for us in our new century.
We hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our great courses series.
Our courses are available to order online.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com
or call our customer service representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12.
That's 1-800-832-2412. Thank you very much.
