Throughout his rise to power, and even once installed as dictator, Hitler, both at home
and abroad, repeatedly benefited from being misunderstood and underestimated.
This took place in the international arena as well.
Even movies like Charlie Chaplin's fantastic lampoon of Hitler and Mussolini, The Great
Dictator, popularized the comic image at odds with Hitler's true menace.
And some historians have pointed out that this was perhaps a message that came not at
a right time.
It was precisely when Hitler needed to be energetically stopped that a picture of a buffoon who was
ineffective was being propagated in this otherwise comic classic.
In what Hitler considered to be the most perilous, dangerous, risky period for his plans, that's
to say the consolidation of his rule and rear movement in Germany in the first years after
1933, he repeatedly claimed that he as a former soldier desired nothing more than peace.
He hid his true, aggressive foreign policy goals for the future.
Another key in Hitler's effectiveness was a remarkable ruthlessness.
Hitler showed a readiness to use ruthless violence to achieve his ends beyond merely
the bloodthirsty rhetoric so common in his speeches.
And early on this was made especially clear when he massacred some of his own loyal followers
when they seemed to be interfering with his plans.
This was made clear on June 30th, 1934 in the so-called blood purge.
Scores of Hitler's own SA stormtrooper leaders and other targets were murdered by the SS
in what came to be called the Night of the Long Knives.
Hitler feared that these earlier bully boys, the Brownshirts had done their task, had accomplished
their political role of helping him come to power and now could only be an element for
disorder and chaos, a liability for the regime.
Thus he had them executed.
In a remarkable tribute, Joseph Stalin in the Soviet Union on hearing news of the Night
of the Long Knives expressed his admiration for Hitler's character and strength.
In secret deliberations of Hitler with his generals and diplomats, such as those recorded
in the secret Hossbach memorandum of 1937, Hitler, while he talked peace in public, was
already charting an aggressive foreign policy of rearmament and future conquest.
Another key in Hitler's success was being able to rely on security forces of remarkable
capacity for terror, in particular the SS.
After the purge of the SA in 1934, the SS, Hitler's own protective Schutzstaffel or
bodyguard, led by Heinrich Himmler, commenced a dramatic institutional growth.
It took on ever larger responsibilities growing from a small force of bodyguards into a huge
empire within an empire, a pillar of the Nazi regime.
Heinrich Himmler was, in many ways, a wan and remarkably pale, unremarkable individual.
He was a former failed chicken farmer.
He was not a man that seemed remarkable in any way, but he did have a genius for bureaucratic
empire building.
And under his leadership, the SS, as a Nazi elite, would carve out for itself a special
role in executing the racial initiatives of the Third Reich.
A final point that was a key to Hitler's effectiveness was the use not only of terror,
but also drawing on terror in combination with a remarkable conviction and popularity
on the part of the German population at large.
One needs to keep in mind that the population was not merely terrorized into obedience,
but rather, in many cases, enthusiastically integrated itself into the Nazi vision of
society.
In the many organizations which the Nazis used to Nazify German society, ordinary Germans
found a place.
A joke from the period testified to what many ordinary Germans understood as the all-pervasive
nature of the Nazification of Germany.
In this joke, a little girl in Nazi Germany said that her entire family was very actively
involved in the movement.
Mother was in the stormtroopers, her older brother was in the SS, her smaller brother
was in the Hitler Youth, her mother was in the Nazi Women's Organization, and she was
in the girl's organization, the League of German Maidens.
As the joke continued, the little girl was asked, well, how does your family find time
to actually get together as a family?
And the little girl answered, oh, that's no problem.
They meet at party rallies every year in Nuremberg.
