Industrialization had very important consequences for society and politics.
It remade the physical landscapes of Europe,
in the course often of one generation of tremendous upheaval and change.
First, the landscapes of Europe, later of other parts of the globe,
and often disrupted traditional ways of life.
The movers and the shakers of the Industrial Revolution
were not figures, soul individuals like Robespierre,
but rather a kind of individual, the engineer.
One can imagine mothers of middle class sons wishing that their sons
would become engineers in these dramatic days of the Industrial Revolution
because the cult of the heroic engineer rose up worldwide.
Engineers were those who reshaped the physical world,
and this cult of the heroic engineer celebrated their very visible achievements,
the Suez Canal, the Panama Canal, the American Transcontinental Railroad.
At the start of the 20th century, Henry Ford, a Michigan mechanic and engineer,
became worldwide an emblem of trust in science and technology.
Such idealization of Henry Ford also ignored some of his uglier beliefs,
but at the same time, Henry Ford's Model T automobile developed in 1909
and soon mass produced with assembly line techniques
showed new possibilities of scientific management and engineering.
Social critics raised anxieties about the human effects of this mechanization,
this speeding up of our lives.
Some of the remedies that were proposed for this, including Coca-Cola, by the way,
as a brain tonic that was supposed to help us deal with a more fevered pace
of our current lives, I would suspect, given the caffeine content of that drink,
might have made matters worse rather than better.
But at the same time, even as these anxieties about the increased pace of our lives
were abroad, great hopes were also vested in technology's ability
to solve those problems through vast, gigantic technological or industrial projects
to solve human problems.
At the same time, there were thinkers who proposed sciences of the masses
to deal with these problems.
The two revolutions in politics and in industry, which we've discussed,
produced a new world oriented towards the masses.
This included the media, the newspapers, including irresponsible yellow journalism,
movies, later radio and television, throw on entertaining and informing the masses.
In politics, parties had to appeal now to mass constituencies
to master their votes in parliamentary systems.
In the 20th century in Western societies, visions of what the future
could bring for ordinary people had expanded enormously,
leading to a revolution in expectations which politics needed to address.
Science in this context had immense allure and prestige.
For some individuals, it could in fact take the place of traditional religious belief.
It seemed that science might be able to solve society's contradictions.
Evolutionary thought in particular promised new understandings of progress.
The British scientist Charles Darwin, who published his work on the origin of species in 1859,
had suggested that the progressive adaptation of creatures to their environment
and its challenges produced a phenomenon of evolution,
a struggle for survival which led from so-called lower animals to higher, more complex forms.
This certainly chimed well with the Victorian ideal of progress,
and it suggested that science could also be applied to humans,
something that Darwin had been more skeptical about.
Inevitably, these ideas in the natural science would be applied by some to humans
and their societies in a trend called social Darwinism
that often would have horrified Darwin himself.
Such social Darwinists approved the energetic application of evolution to human society
to encourage, as they put it, the reproduction only of the fittest and the best.
Such doctrines would also give support to new modern varieties of racism,
not the sort of ethnic animosity that unfortunately is universal in human experience,
but rather a supposedly scientific racism which would rank mankind into a hierarchy of unequal races
and which would endow an earlier traditional antisemitism founded on religious hatred of the Jews
into what historians now call a biological antisemitism,
a hatred of the Jews as a supposed other in biological terms.
At the same time, the importance of ideas seeking to cope with the challenges of industrial society
found an answer, so it seemed, in one idea, that of socialism.
It has been called one of the most important modern ideas of mankind,
and I think that's a fair description.
A different imagined future was offered by socialists,
based not on competition, as endorsed by the social Darwinists,
but rather on cooperation in future societies without private property.
