Lecture 6 Total Revolution in Russia
Welcome to our lecture on Total Revolution in Russia.
In our previous lecture we had considered the impact of total war
as the First World War transformed societies and domestic politics of the combatant nations.
In today's lecture we'll examine how total war led to a new kind of political upheaval,
an attempt at total revolution claiming to usher in an entirely new era in human history
in the case of the First Great Empire to collapse as a result of the strains of the First World War, the Russian Empire.
The Russian Empire was battered by total war as military disaster led to increasing social disintegration.
One thing was clear to contemporary observers, in spite of the onset of modernization in economics
and to a lesser degree in politics in previous decades in the Russian Empire before 1914,
Russia was unprepared for the rigors and the demands of a total war and total mobilization.
To contemporaries, Russia's agrarian autocracy seemed fatally backward.
Backwardness was a word that was often used in discussing the Russian Empire these days,
backward both in economics and in politics.
In economics its agrarian structure was still remarkably primitive
by comparison to that of other developed economies.
Industrialization while making remarkable leaps forward in the previous decades
had not yet led to the sort of level of industrialization that was common in other western countries
and in politics the rule of the tsar, an emperor who ruled as he believed by divine right
seemed synonymous in the eyes of many educated Russians with the backwardness of their imperial structure.
These dissatisfactions would grow into a rejection of the system as social and indeed ethnic fractures
in this multinational, multi-ethnic empire expanded during the course of the war
as part of the strains of that phenomenon of total war.
At first in 1914, many Russians and indeed even members of other ethnic groups in the Russian Empire
had shared in some of that enthusiasm which we have remarked upon for August 1914
as crowds swelled in the capitals of Europe so too in the former St. Petersburg soon renamed Petrograd
in order to make it sound less German, crowds had gathered to celebrate the advent of the war.
Intellectuals and political parties supported the war
and hoped that it might be a modernizing liberalizing influence upon their own state.
There was however a party that resolutely opposed the war and they were the Bolsheviks.
Radical socialists led by Lenin from exile were uncompromising in their determination
and indeed their perspective, their assurance that this conflict was doomed to failure
was soon vindicated by what was to be seen on the battlefield.
Military failure and scandal undermined the court
especially after the Tsar himself took command of the armies in 1915 personally.
According to military historians and political historians of Russia this was a disastrous stroke
because it took away from the Tsar his deniability, it associated him personally
and his dynasty with the failures of the war as it unfolded.
Indeed it was clear on the battlefield of total war that Russia was not in a position to supply even its own troops.
There's one anecdote in particular which makes this dreadfully clear.
In the case of the fighting on the Eastern Front of Europe between the Russians and the Germans
there were cases of Russian soldiers who were not even given rifles before being moved up to the front.
They were told by their generals not to worry.
They should simply advance to the front line where they heard the guns booming
and when they would encounter the bodies of dead Russian comrades
they were to grab the rifles that they would find on the ground and move forward.
One needs to imagine the sort of fury that would start to grow slowly
even in the proverbially patient Russian peasant soldier
at the notion that his life was being toyed with and counted for so little in such a conflict.
