More disturbing still, these socialist parties all too often tended to grow more moderate over time.
Because they felt, in some cases without even being honest with themselves,
but felt in some portion of their political strategizing,
that Marx's prediction about the inevitable and irresistible worsening
of the conditions of the working class environment was not, in fact, taking place uniformly.
It seemed, in fact, that the conditions of the lives of workers
could be organized and improved not only through violent revolution on a worldwide scale,
but in a more ordinary and less dramatic way by efforts to unionize,
efforts to press for legislative reforms that would improve those conditions
and put them on a more humane scale.
However, in spite of their increasingly more moderate organizing activity,
the parties nonetheless remained in their rhetoric radically revolutionary.
Though they were in practice becoming more moderate,
they did succeed, at least in this, in alarming the ruling classes
and the middle class who grew to fear what might happen if the socialist came to power.
There was one party in particular that represented the platonic ideal
of what a developed socialist movement should look like in the 19th century,
and this was the German Social Democratic Party.
The German Social Democratic Party had been founded in 1875.
It drew on Marx's ideas and developed into the largest, most comprehensive
workers' movement in the world.
It was, quite literally, the envy, the object of admiration of socialists worldwide.
And there were times, certainly in the United States,
where self-respecting radicals would have learned German in order to read in the original
the literature of the German social democrats.
And these social democrats seemed to be on their way to power, potentially.
By 1912, to the horror of German conservatives and elites,
Germany's Social Democratic Party had become the largest party in Germany.
It might achieve power by the ballot box.
There were, however, and perhaps truer to Marx's revolutionary temperament,
more radical socialists who rejected this trend towards moderation
and argued that it was necessary to drive forward with more emphasis on conflict and violence.
There was also another distinct group which did not share in Marx's prescription
for scientific socialism.
They would have rejected it as confining, as inauthentic,
and Marx would have returned their scorn for what he would have seen as their unrealistic
or utopian expectations.
These were anarchists.
In the course of the close of the 19th century,
there was a wave of anarchist actions, attacks, and assassinations
which stirred real anxieties in western civilization from about the 1880s to the early 20th century.
These were not coordinated, but they nonetheless were attacks
and incidents of terrorism that stirred anxieties,
that some worldwide unsettling conspiracy was afoot.
One needs to take aboard the succession of such events
to gain a sense of their cumulative horror to members of settled or ordered societies
at the close of the 19th century.
The assassination and quick succession of an Austrian empress, a Russian Tsar.
The American president, kings of Italy, Serbia, and Portugal,
prime ministers of Spain and Russia, and the president of France.
Many of these attacks were committed by self-described anarchists.
Anarchists by their very nature are determined to do away with organized government
and thus are quite opposed, often to strictly hierarchical and strictly organized movements.
Thus, these anarchists suffered from a chronic disorganization.
The creed of anarchism that they espoused was not of a peaceful variety,
one has certainly such anarchists as well, but rather of a nihilistic variety
that pledged to break with human societies it was currently ordered
in order to clear the decks as it were for a new day.
Such anarchists of the nihilistic variety and violent variety
followed what they called the philosophy of the bomb.
This was not entirely coherent, not entirely thought out,
but they hoped that terrorist actions, which they called propaganda of the deed,
would have some effect upon the masses, that it would stir them out of their inactivity and towards revolution.
Though the attacks that they undertook from the 1880s to the start of the 20th century
were not coordinated, they nonetheless stirred anxieties
and produced conspiracy theories among the property classes and elites anxious
that this might be part of some more disturbing phenomenon worldwide.
At the same time, with such conspiracy theorizing,
the property classes of Europe needn't have looked much further than to their own societies
to find a phenomenon of violence that was disturbing in the extreme.
This was the phenomenon called imperialism.
