This was referred to as the unleashing of Hutu power, and it was an organized process, a well-planned venture indeed.
What were the origins of this Hutu power movement?
Some Hutu political leaders championed the notion of Hutu power in order to consolidate their own rule.
There were certainly also many moderate Hutus who did not, in fact, cleave to this message of hatred.
But this minority was an important one in stirring society and moving it in a particular direction.
These political leaders, this elite championing Hutu power, began to carefully and deliberately cultivate a widespread racial hatred of the Tutsi.
Frictions had been there before, but now this hatred was to be inflamed further.
The publications which were subsidized by the government dehumanized the Tutsi minority by referring to them in demonic terms.
They were labeled in Yenzi or cockroaches.
They were dehumanized by being referred to in these terms, but then paradoxically were also dehumanized by being referred to as devils in human form.
Not human, but in fact, implacable opponents.
And here we see that much of the stereotype demonizing of different ethnic groups that unfortunately has been all too common through the 20th century
has often been this sort of compound of irrational, irreconcilable opposites.
On the one hand, the minorities are said to be powerless and subhuman.
On the other hand, nearly superhuman in their alleged malevolent force.
They are exactly the same terms in which the Nazis had cultivated their hatred of the Jewish minority.
At the very head of this movement was the president, Juvenal Habiarimana.
He was the leader of the dominant party, the MRND, which stood for the National Revolutionary Movement for Development and Democracy.
Noble words hiding a genocidal reality.
In a clear aspect of a turn towards political religion, the harnessing of religious impulses, but turned towards politics,
the official government newspaper published in 1990, so well before the genocide itself,
a document which was called, sonorously enough, the Hutu Ten Commandments.
The Hutu Ten Commandments praised Hutu ideology,
preached Hutu purity through separation and no intermixture with the Tutsis,
and a merciless approach towards the Tutsis.
To mention just a few of these commandments, the military forces were to be under Hutu control.
Any Hutu who was not with the Hutu power movement, who was a moderate,
who might object to this preaching of ethnic hatred, was ipso facto a traitor to the Hutu cause,
and for all practical purposes would be treated like the Tutsi will be treated,
and in a phrase, a sentence that would speak volumes about what was to follow,
Hutu should stop having mercy on the Tutsi.
Hutu activists now began to organize a militia of paramilitary forces throughout the country
who were prepared at the sign, at the proper time, to initiate mass murder.
This militia was called, in some ways, in a term that obfuscated their real task, the Interahamwe,
which has been translated either as those who work together or those who attack together.
They would work at murder, they would attack the Tutsi minority, and their Hutu friends.
The militia began to gather weapons, and indeed the government bought weapons abroad.
It ordered machetes on a mass scale.
More than half a million machetes were bought, which represented one machete for every third Hutu man.
Even children were recruited into the militias, young people who had not as yet assimilated
some of the social norms that might otherwise have been inculcated and were ready for the task of mass murder.
What were the inspirations for this sort of movement?
Well, the inspirations were many, and in fact many of them will go back to some of our earlier lectures
in which we've considered similar ideological movements.
A fundamental point of our lectures has been that many of these ideological movements have not existed
in a vacuum or isolated from broader trends, but have looked to other despotisms, other ideological regimes,
even ones they're ideologically opposed to, for examples of how to rule or how to attack.
Vivid evidence of this was given in a government document that was found after the genocide
in government offices which quoted Lenin and Joseph Goebbels, the Nazi propaganda minister on the uses of propaganda.
Two men who were ideologically opposed, but who are now linked together in that they were emulated by the government and its activists.
