We need to pause for a moment, however, to dig more deeply into the mystery of this tale
of two dictators.
Why would Stalin do this?
Why would a man whose paranoia, whose distrust was legendary, who distrusted his own followers,
who distrusted probably all of mankind, choose this one man, Adolf Hitler, as a man in whom
to repose his confidence?
This is a mystery that likely will never be entirely satisfactorily solved.
Stalin's decision to trust Hitler remains obscure in the absence of Stalin's own personal
testimony, but we can at least begin to understand this mystery by considering Stalin's ideological
mindset.
Without it, we will be simply at a loss entirely.
The ideas in his mind, his expectations, his sense of what the future held in store
are in part the key to this mystery.
Stalin's Marxist ideology suggested to him that the Nazis were not so much a rival ideological
modern movement of the sort that he spearheaded in the Soviet Union, but were rather the last
gasp of capitalism.
At its most naked, undisguised, brutal self, the last episode of a world historical stage
not a modern contender for ideological supremacy.
Thus, Stalin felt that playing for time would be crucial, allowing history to work its way
out towards the inevitable triumph of the communist ideology.
For Stalin, then, it might have made sense to seek to placate or appease Hitler in so
far as that was possible, in dividing up Poland and the rest of Eastern Europe, as a way of
then redirecting Hitler's energies and ambitions westward, away from the Soviet Union, away
from Stalin's own regime, against the other capitalist powers, to let capitalist forces
battle at him out among themselves in a battle royale.
In the meantime, Stalin seems to have expected he would have gained time, time to prepare,
if necessary, for a future war, and incidentally to mend the damage that he had done by his
own self-inflicted purges that had done so much to cripple the functioning of the regime.
In his expectations, thus, we might surmise, in the coming world struggle, in some sense
a replay of World War I, the capitalist powers fighting in the West would be worn down, would
exhaust one another in a battle of attrition, and Stalin, then, might ultimately hope to
pick up the pieces of this world historical climax, ushering in a final triumph.
If Stalin and his followers had paused to really carefully read Hitler's Mein Kampf,
they might have had a more sober understanding of precisely where the ambitions of their
Nazi ally lay in the long term, and they would have been less optimistic about the chances
for avoiding this conflict.
It was precisely this moment, this bombshell of the news of the Nazi-Soviet pact, that
for many contemporaries seemed to bring into focus, at least briefly, some resemblances,
some common ground, some occasions when the Communist and the Nazi regimes could make
common cause, revealing what some contemporaries felt to be affinities between these regimes.
Regimes that were sometimes summed up in one word, in spite of their ideological conflicts
as totalitarian regimes.
Stalin examined the definition of this form of rule and its origins.
Totalitarianism is used, thus, to denote regimes that were unlike the earlier tyrannies or
despotisms of the pre-modern age.
These were, in fact, supposed to be a new form of tyranny, which aimed not just at acquiescence,
not simply at repressing populations and fighting off their resistance, but at something
more, aiming at total control of populations through both terror and ideological belief
and enthusiasm, demanding not just passive assent, but active participation and mandatory
enthusiasm on the part of subject populations.
Total regimes wanting total control of their populations' heart and soul.
The origins of the term are fascinating.
In 1923, an Italian journalist who was critical of Mussolini's fascists had used the word
totalitarian in his criticism of the fascists, saying that they wanted it all.
Their ambitions were total, hence they were totalitarian.
When Mussolini heard this term of criticism, he and the fascists rather liked it and accepted
it, now as a self-definition.
Thank you for watching.
Have a great day.
Have a great day.
