Lecture 16 Nazi Genocide and Master Plans
In our previous lecture, we had discussed World War II, the war unleashed by Hitler
as a waystation onto the realization of his ultimate goals.
In this lecture, we'll examine in detail Nazi genocide and future master plans.
We'll consider the Nazis' program of mass murder against the Jews and Hitler's future
plans for the construction of a racial utopia.
The Nazis set off on the road to mass murder with escalating persecutions, with medical
killing, and then with execution squads sent into occupied countries.
These programs would lead to the construction of those institutions, the factories of death,
the extermination camps of Eastern Europe during World War II.
For the future, Hitler and the Nazis looked forward to a colonial utopia in the East.
Nazi architecture and monuments would suggest the vast scale of Hitler's ambitions, and
only the end of the Second World War in 1945 and the defeat of Germany would bring these
plans and their megalomania to an end.
The Nazis had been quite explicit about their goals of achieving a racial utopia.
Now, within German society at this period, a joke circulated which cast doubt on the
validity of this racial aim.
The joke went as follows.
What should an ideal German look like, representative of Hitler's planned Aryan future race?
The joke said, with conscious irony and paradox, that the ideal German should be as blonde
as Hitler, who in fact had dark hair, as slim as Göring, the notoriously fat fighter ace,
and Nazi leader, as tall as Goebbels, who was in fact diminutive, and as chaste as Röhm,
the stormtrooper who had decidedly not been so.
But in fact, this joke, while it certainly stripped away the veneer of ideological hypocrisy
in these leaders presenting themselves as model Germans in terms of their own racial
criteria.
The Nazis would have responded by arguing that they in fact were in the process of reshaping
the raw material of the German people, unsatisfactory as it might be at present by their standards,
on the road to creating or breeding the master race of the future.
And this program, this impetus, this dreadful dynamism, would lead to murder as a tool in
the realization of these utopian nightmares.
The road to murder led, first of all, through eugenics.
Eugenic thinking was in fact not a German monopoly, we've discussed in an earlier lecture.
It had been a mode of thinking remarkably widespread worldwide during the first half of the century.
This mode of thought, often associated with social Darwinism, had urged social policies
that would plan a superior population for the nation through the encouraging of good
births, as they were called, and discouraging, as a flip side, the reproduction of those
who were judged unfit.
German eugenics was not initiated only by Nazi medical experts, but in fact had a strong
tradition in Germany long before 1933.
It's also a dreadful commentary that American eugenics measures, and in particular the
forced sterilization laws that were common to many American states before, in the 1930s,
were often held up by German eugenics as a model, an inspiration for their own movement.
The existence of such laws is something that I think has been largely suppressed from the
collective memory in the United States, but deserves to be recalled.
The Nazis would make eugenic policy one of their key notes.
Soon after coming to office, the Nazis passed a law in July of 1933, which authorized the
forced involuntary sterilization of those with hereditary diseases.
Those could include mental illness, epilepsy, blindness, or alcoholism, which was judged
to have a genetic basis.
Hundreds of thousands of Germans were sterilized involuntarily.
The education, preparing the way for even more radical policies in the future, sought
energetically to propagate eugenic thinking in the younger generation, with readings or
math-word problems about the social costs of what were considered those who were unfit.
