Mussolini's fascists in Italy would clamor for an imperial mission in Africa.
They would speak of the mystique of a civilizing mission in that continent.
In Germany, the situation was particularly acute.
With Germany's loss of colonies that had not been very rewarding to begin with at the
close of the 19th century as a result of defeat in the First World War, the cry would go
out for the respect that such colonies could afford in the future.
In Germany, there arose a particular and popular pseudoscience known by the name of geopolitics.
This geopolitics claimed to be scientific.
It claimed to offer the keys to the existence on a healthy basis of human societies.
It raised demands for what was called national autarky, a word very popular at the time,
not only in Germany, but worldwide, denoting the dream of a utopian dream of total economic
self-sufficiency, cutting oneself off from any reliance on the outside world.
This geopolitics also foresaw a time when the world would be divided into blocks of
superpowers moving far beyond the sort of nationalism that had been important in the
19th century to racial blocks united by ethnic affiliation and, especially in the German
case, concern over what was called living space, or Lebensraum in German, the obsession
for a territory of a scale into which one could expand and grow a people's population.
Now, in fact, in spite of such frenetic and fevered dreaming, renewed imperialism didn't
prove durable.
Nationalist movements had already spread to non-Western areas under colonial control.
The very spectacle during the First World War of Europeans battling Europeans in what
was sometimes called Western Civilization's suicide attempt, or a European civil war,
had inspired non-Western peoples in the hope that they might gain their independence and
shrug off the burden of imperialism.
Their hopes had been quelled and disappointed in the Versailles Treaty and the Paris Settlements
that had not afforded them the respect for their national independence that some had
hoped for.
And indeed, it was in this period after the First World War that the growth of nationalist
movements in non-Western societies would often be met with ferocious, brutal repression
and imperialist punitive expeditions now using aircraft and, on occasion, poison gas, which
were intended to stamp out, once and for all, the demands of non-Western nationalists.
But even such campaigns would fail to quell demands for independence.
This would sometimes seek to appeal to some of the ideas that had been taken aboard from
Western societies as well as homegrown notions such as non-violent resistance championed
by Mahatma Gandhi in the Indian Movement for Independence.
Against this background, one needs to cite early examples of ferocious violence against
non-Western peoples.
In part, a sort of a rearguard action, I think already suggesting how such attempts were
doomed to failure, the notorious Amritsar massacre in India in 1919, when British-ordered troops
killed hundreds trying to quell what was seen as a nationalist event.
The notion that societies faced crisis in terms of the resources available to them and
in their future was also summed up in what was considered at the time a science known
as eugenics.
Eugenics was a made-up term denoting a utopia of the good birth.
That's the original meaning of the term eugenics itself.
Eugenics was a term that had been invented in 1883 by a British scientist, Francis Galton,
who incidentally a cousin of Darwin, whose ideas he drew upon, arguing that societies
needed to take in hand the process of breeding of human beings to no longer allow this to
be a process that would unfold by accident or by whim, but to steer the process consciously.
This could include positive eugenics, meaning the encouragement and subsidy of those who
deserve to reproduce, according to the adherents of this set of ideas, as well as more ominously
negative eugenics determined to stop or forestall the reproduction, to discourage at the very
least the reproduction of those considered to be unfit.
