Lecture 5 Total War, Mobilization and Mass Death
Welcome to this lecture in which we'll be considering the impact of the First World
War as a new kind of war, total war. In our last lecture we had considered the
coming of what contemporaries called the Great War. In 1914 this advent of a new
great conflict had been welcomed by crowds. In today's lecture we'll consider
the reality that would unfold. In 1914 in that August madness that greeted the
advent of war, as we'd mentioned in our previous lecture, crowds and masses had
rushed together to celebrate this coming of a new conflict and among those
crowds were people who would later play important roles in 20th century history.
In a crowd in Munich for instance, an anonymous unknown figure who participated
in these celebrations of the August Madness was a young would-be artist by
the name of Adolf Hitler. His face, later captured in a photograph of these
times, was exultant with a feeling of belonging finally to something larger
having found his place in the crowds, the masses that had gathered to celebrate
the war. That analyst of crowd psychology, who we'd mentioned earlier in our
lectures, Elias Canetti, wrote in his crowds and power that at this moment in
1914, one might discern already the beginnings of the Nazi movement in that
moment of the coalescing of crowds and masses. What we'll consider in today's
lecture is the phenomenon of total war. It would take some time for
contemporaries, even as they understood that they were living through events of
great magnitude, to really appreciate the full extent of the horrors of modern
industrial war and how all-pervasive this phenomenon of total war would be.
We'll examine, thus today, the implications of the slide into this more
radical form of struggle which demanded the mobilization of entire
populations, societies, and hearts and minds. Total war was a new kind of
industrial war, mobilizing not only soldiers, but entire populations and
economies. And precisely because of its all-encompassing nature, this kind of
conflict would have repercussions that would spread through all spheres of life.
Total war merits close examination as a phenomenon in our lecture due to its
future implications as well. We would see trends emerging in the course of these
four years of total war, which certainly would be amplified and accelerated in the
rest of the 20th century. These included the use of high-tech weaponry on the
battlefield, but also other trends, the increased targeting of civilians for
organized violence because of their role in total war, the growth of the
centralized state, tremendous government power increasing during the course of
that conflict in order to mobilize for the necessities of total war, and as an
implication of this mobilization, the increasing erosion of the private sphere,
the life of the individual being impinged upon by the great powerful
centralized governments in ways that earlier would have been considered
unacceptable, and as a final outcome, the lessened status of the individual. The
sense that the worth of human beings had somehow been cheapened by the mass
slaughter and suffering of the First World War, and these were all trends which
would continue in the violent 20th century. By its nature, total wars aim had
to be total victory after the hatred, after the propaganda, after the
mobilization and psychological revving up for this kind of conflict. One could
settle for nothing less than total victory or total defeat. As a result, the
First World War became a war not of one or two decisive engagements, winning
quick victory, but rather a slow grinding war of attrition. It was
necessary clearly to mobilize entire societies. Vast numbers of people were
mobilized for this conflict, most dramatically in the case of the mass
armies that were rushed or marched to the frontiers in preparation for war. It's
estimated that some 70 million soldiers were put into uniform and participated in
the war worldwide. Of that number, around 10 million would be killed, would
fall victim to this conflict. Back on the home front, as it was called, industry
was put into high gear to produce armaments and munitions in the process,
dislocating and warping the priorities of civilian economies of peacetime days.
