In the Nazi genius for perverting the German language for their ideological aims, new phrases, new terms, new names were crafted to label those who were considered unfit, and these were chilling terms.
They included the term nutzlose Fressel, useless eaters, or Lebensunwertes Leben, life unworthy of living, and Nazi doctors would decide who was worthy of living and who was not.
The policy that next came into being was the euthanasia policy.
In 1939, a program of euthanasia, or so-called mercy killing, was instituted in Germany secretly, using the Second World War as a cover to justify these measures.
We need for a moment to look back to the phenomenon of the First World War and some of its devaluation of human life to see that there were in fact earlier precedents for such a policy.
It is now emerging in current research that's being done on German asylums and hospitals in the period of the First World War that what amounted to a policy of euthanasia was perhaps,
the historical record is now in the process of being researched more carefully, but perhaps there were policies that amounted to passive euthanasia as those who were considered mentally ill or were physically unfit were considered less deserving of limited food resources
in a time of total war and limited resources in the First World War.
Some historians are arguing, and the research is still ongoing, that this experience of the First World War in some sense informed and prepared the way for active euthanasia in the Nazi regime during World War II.
The Nazis now set about an active program of killing of those whom they consider to be a drag on the national unity and resources.
Departments and hospitals were ordered to collect information on children and then on adults who had handicaps or mental illness, and those who were so referred were passed into the hands of SS experts who would in essence condemn them to death.
An estimated 100,000 people were killed in the course of this program of euthanasia.
The program was then halted precipitately in August of 1941 for reasons that are still being debated by historians.
Some argue that the very beginnings of growing resistance and unease on the part of some in German society who objected to euthanasia were instrumental in bringing the program to a halt.
Other historians have argued that in fact a simpler bureaucratic feature was at work.
The euthanasia program had killed as many people as they had planned to kill initially and thus was halted for the time being.
An institution that would play a very important role in now stepping into the forefront and executing the racial plans of the Nazi regime was the SS under Heinrich Himmler.
It was to be a key institution in the Third Reich's racial policies.
SS medical personnel had been involved in the euthanasia program, where many of them had gained experience in the business of scientific, medicalized mass murder.
The Reichsführer SS, Heinrich Himmler, now sought to craft within the SS a new racial elite devoted to the breeding of a master race.
In 1939, he became Commissar for the Strengthening of Germandom, a title which in essence gave him enormous powers in the occupied eastern territories to seek to realize the racial utopia.
Under Himmler's deputy, Reinhard Heydrich, the SS pressed forward with a policy of, and this was a consciously ugly word in German society, a policy of end-Judung, the removal of the Jews from Germany.
By 1939, more than a fourth of all German Jews had emigrated.
Those who were left were those who could often not find refuge elsewhere in the world, the most vulnerable in society, who awaited their fate.
The SS also provided master experienced executioners, the Einsatzgruppen, the Special Forces groups or strike groups of the SS, who were at first in 1939 sent into Poland to eliminate intellectuals and leaders and to quell potential resistance.
They and other Nazi officials then set about also deporting tens of thousands of Polish Jews from those areas in western Poland that were to be annexed to the greater German Reich.
Those tens of thousands of Polish Jews were now essentially expelled into the remaining areas of occupied Poland, which the regime planned to use as a so-called dumping ground or reservation for Jews and others who were considered racially undesirable.
The areas otherwise in Nazi influence were to be cleansed of Jews.
