The prison soon now filled with former members, former true believers of the Khmer Rouge regime itself.
As we've noted before, the revolution could be a mother that eats her children, as had been the case in the French Revolution,
a phenomenon now being echoed in the Khmer Rouge regime.
And that regime now neared its collapse.
That collapse, however, came from a surprising quarter.
It came precisely at the hands of fellow communists.
After the Khmer Rouge, perhaps out of desperation, began attacking Vietnam and its communist regime in border clashes,
the Vietnamese government now invaded in 1978.
To many, this came as a surprise.
This was a refutation of communist international solidarity as communist Vietnam invaded communist Cambodia.
And soon the Khmer Rouge government was overthrown by the invading Vietnamese in January of 1979,
bringing its three years of rule at long last to an end.
The Vietnamese now set up a communist puppet regime which broke with the Khmer Rouge,
denounced their crimes, and was friendly to Vietnam.
But the Khmer Rouge story did not end there.
These red Cambodians, the Khmer Rouge, would continue their fight.
Even after their overthrow, their guerrilla forces retreated into the jungles and continued to fight in the border areas,
and even from within Thailand, neighboring country, until 1992.
At long last, a United Nations-brokered plan sought to solve this continuing struggle and conflict
by including the Khmer Rouge in elections in Cambodia for a new state.
What happened to the shadowy leader, Pol Pot?
In 1997, under circumstances that are still shrouded with mystery and obscurity to this very day,
Pol Pot was arrested by his own associates and allies.
Some suggested that his condemnation for treason and then his subsequent house arrest
were merely a show trial without serious intent on the part of his former allies to hold him responsible for his actions,
but was instead intended as a fig leaf for the new respectability that the Khmer Rouge aimed to achieve.
In April 1998, it was announced to the world that Pol Pot had died in the jungle.
In mysterious circumstances of natural causes, he was never brought to public trial.
In an interview that was held with Pol Pot shortly before he died, he was asked about his legacy.
He had what amounted to last words as well.
In this case, he acknowledged that many looked on him as a man who was responsible for many deaths,
a man whose policies had yielded suffering, but he tearfully announced that he was not to blame.
He had trusted subordinates who had done bad things and that this was his legacy,
not a show of remorse, but rather a shedding of responsibility.
In terms of responsibility and responses, we need to ask how did the world respond to the unfolding of the Cambodian tragedy?
In part because of the intense secrecy of the regime, it's shutting off of the country from the outside world.
News of Khmer Rouge activities would filter out only very slowly,
but relief workers in neighboring countries started to observe a horrifying phenomenon.
Refugees fleeing the Khmer Rouge regime tended to tell the same stories again and again.
And though their stories boggled the imagination, the sheer weight of accumulated witness testimony
slowly allowed outside countries to form an impression of what had been unfolding within the country.
And nonetheless, the response of the outside world had been ambivalent to say the least.
As part of Cold War politics, Thailand, China, as well as the United States continued to support the Khmer Rouge
long after their overthrow by the Vietnamese communists seeing this group criminal as they might have been before
as many considered it a counterweight to the Vietnamese.
The question is now, at long last, how will these events be remembered?
How will individuals be held responsible?
In Cambodia today, memorials are set up throughout the country.
The skeletons, the skulls of those who died in the killing fields are displayed in the open, in open-air museums.
The documentation of the executions, including those haunting pictures of the condemned
taken by their executioners that I mentioned, are preserved as an eloquent witness to the tragedy.
But only slowly has movement grown to hold some of those who committed these crimes responsible.
Resistance to trials of the surviving Khmer Rouge leaders still continues and progress has been very slow.
The resistance derives from different quarters, both in Cambodia and abroad,
especially the Chinese government has objected to the setting up of such courts.
Some Cambodian politicians suggest that indeed it's perhaps better to bury the past,
to allow bygones to be bygones, and to forget this legacy of killing.
Many ordinary Cambodians cannot agree.
As they see killers still among them walking free,
they raise the question of how a country can steer towards a healthy future without dealing with the ghosts of its past.
In our next lecture, we'll consider three other trajectories of communist rule
in East Germany, the Soviet Union, and North Korea.
