Now, in a great paradox, international aid flowed.
It flowed not to the Tutsi victims within the country, but rather to these refugee camps.
Where humanitarian aid workers themselves began to understand that in a cruel paradox, the
camps themselves were a continuing spot of domination by the Hutu elites who are now
preparing for a revenge due to their expulsion from the country against those who earlier
had been their victims in the months previous. This was a dreadful paradox. Humanitarian aid
had come too late and was now, in some cases, furthering the ends of those who were the guilty.
What can we speak of the aftermath, the moral reckoning that would follow afterwards? The
record needs to be dealt with of international passivity. The reasons for international inaction
were complex, and they included stereotypes of Africa, many cases verging on racism of those
people simply being the kinds of people who were prone, supposedly, to tribal violence,
which was a reality from time immemorial, supposedly. They also included the reality of
many nations considering that they simply weren't interested. Their national interest seemed not
to be involved. Furthermore, the very remoteness of Rwanda meant that visual images, the horrific
images now imprinted on international consciousness, took much longer to reach a world audience.
Some journalists have pointed out that footage of the genocide itself, or still photographs of
the killings as they were taking place, were few and far between. But moreover, the harsh
verdict is that many in the outside world simply just didn't believe that these events, or the
Rwandan situation, were important enough to merit international intervention. In the case of some
countries such as France, its government continued to support the Hutu regime till late in the day.
Indeed, the record was, in many ways, an even darker one in terms of international inaction.
While the killings were taking place, and as it was becoming increasingly clear of the vast
reach of this atrocity, diplomats in the United Nations and in the United States government,
cynically and very deliberately, calculatedly avoided using the word genocide to describe
these events. The G word was avoided, because this terming, this naming of what was going on
as genocide would thus obligate them to take action against what had been agreed to be an
international crime. In November of 1994, the UN Security Council approved a resolution for
an international court to try the crimes of genocide that it was belatedly recognized had
taken place in Rwanda. Afterwards, in March 1998, US President Clinton visited Rwanda and
apologized for international inaction. The reckoning also continues in Rwand itself today. A
fragmented, tattered, bloodied society needs to find a way forward. In 1995, the United Nations
was helpful in setting up an international criminal tribunal for Rwanda across the border in
Arusha, Tanzania. There, trials of the accused are still ongoing, as they are in other jurisdictions
elsewhere in the Western world as well. Thousands of potential defendants are yet to be brought
to trial. The world ultimately found that its inaction did not enable it to look away entirely
from these horrors. We'll consider in our next lecture the case of another regime,
the Iraqi government, whose ideological actions and behavior would have necessity draw international
attention to it and would thus lead to the regime's overthrow as well.
