The fury of the revolutionaries also focused on those whom they saw as especially tainted,
those who had moved away from their original roots, those in particular who had been tainted as they saw it through education.
And what amounted to a manhunt now began, of those from the earlier Cambodian society who were educated,
those, for instance, who spoke foreign languages.
Friendship had often been the language of advancement in the colonial period or of cultivation.
All such people were now targeted for persecution or extermination.
The wearing of eyeglasses in particular could be the distinguishing feature that would slate one for execution,
because such a person clearly was one who had need of such corrective lenses for reading or for education or other subversive activities.
Such so-called enemies of the people faced a dire fate.
Religion was also focused upon as a target.
Buddhist monks as well as members of the minority religions who were represented in Cambodia,
including Muslims as well as Catholics, were persecuted and suspected of being enemies of the people.
The fury of the revolutionaries would also begin to target ethnic minorities.
And here we see some of the energies of nationalism beginning to perhaps combine with a revolutionary ideology.
The ethnic minorities of the Chinese and Vietnamese were now also eliminated, viewed as impure, imperfectly Cambodian.
Executions now became commonplace.
Many of the executions took place without the benefit, as it were, of modern technology,
but instead were meted out with the most primitive of objects and tools.
Agricultural tools, the hose in particular, would be used in executions in which the victim would be struck from behind with a blow aimed at the neck.
And it's been suggested symbolically that this mode of execution was supposed to be reminiscent of the guillotine of the French Revolution and its hygienic, as it were, mode of killing.
One thing in particular was an object of pride for the Khmer Rouge functionaries who meted out these revolutionary executions.
They prided themselves on being polite as they did so.
This was supposed to emphasize that this form of revolutionary justice was not personal, was not motivated by hatred,
but rather by the purity of revolutionary rationality and revolutionary fervor.
Those who were not immediately executed were instead sent to prisons, strewn throughout the country.
Conditions in some of these prisons were so bad indeed that many guards are said to have died there as well from the privations.
One riveting record of the terrors of the Khmer Rouge regime are the photographs which were carefully bureaucratically recorded, filed,
and organized by the Khmer Rouge administrators of these prisons, showing the faces of those who were imprisoned there or who faced imminent execution.
And when views picture after picture of such photographs, men, women, children, mothers, and their children,
one sees a range of dismaying human emotions, fear, anxiety, resignation, the faces of people who faced a dreadful fate.
It is a riveting and terrifying documentary legacy of the Khmer Rouge.
Pits where the bodies of those who were executed were thrown came to be called the killing fields of Cambodia,
and the country was dotted with them.
Hundreds of mass graves, both large as well as small, are scattered throughout the land,
and indeed the newspapers of the recent months have conveyed the reports of ever more such mass graves being discovered today.
It's estimated that some two million died as a result of the Khmer Rouge policies out of a total population of seven million in Cambodia
as a result of the executions, the killings, hunger, and abuse.
Some recent estimates by historians and students of this period in this country range even higher,
due to the new evidence emerging in those recently discovered mass graves I mentioned a moment ago,
so some estimates suggest that even that figure of two million might need to be revised significantly upwards.
