The penalties, the flip side of this official approbation of socialist art, socialist realism,
the penalties for forbidden art or speech would also consequently be severe.
The poet Oseb Mandelstein, who later was sent to a prison where he died for criticizing
Stalin in his verse, delivered what one might consider a decisive verdict on this.
He equipped that in the Soviet Union, poetry enjoyed a status that it had nowhere else in
the world, because in the Soviet Union, poetry was a matter of life and death.
One could literally be condemned for poetry which didn't follow the party line.
Society was also to be reinvented and restructured along the lines that the party approved of.
This was part of a larger trend towards largeness both in the arts as well as in social and
economic projects.
This is a trend that is often sometimes called gigantism.
Planning emphasized enormous scale as well as mass social participation in the projects
that the regime felt was emblematic of its ambitions.
In society, new roles were to be crafted.
Women were urged to enter factories and the professions and indeed they did.
The family was to be reconstituted along new, often collective lines.
Mass nurseries were established in places of work as well as orphanages for the many
orphans of the Civil War.
This would often be a very valuable source of party cadres and committed communists who
would follow the party as a parent.
Community youths were enrolled in organizations in which the state could seek to influence
them away from the context of the family.
Young people were enrolled in the Young Pioneers organization where they wore the uniform of
the red kerchief around their neck.
Public mass exercises and mass calisthenics were propaganda events celebrated in the media
as well as having the added function of instilling a sense of collectivity on the part of the
young with an emphasis on the we rather than on the I.
A new social discipline was being inculcated here as well and it was done so through particular
institutions which infiltrated throughout society as well as the workplace to steer society
in the direction that the party and the regime intended.
Community cells were established in workplaces and collective farms.
They steered and supervised the actions as well as the political consciousness it was
hoped of co-workers while more ominously informers who had infiltrated throughout society kept
individual life under surveillance, keeping a watchful eye for signs of ideological straying
from the party line.
Public campaigns also sought to present models of good communist behavior and proper ideological
consciousness.
One especially notorious example of such a model was that of the boy martyr Pavlik Morozov.
Pavlik Morozov had been a 14-year-old committed Young Pioneer from the small settlement of
Gerasimovka in the Urals who was famous for denouncing his own father, his own family
for hoarding of food supplies that were properly the property of the state.
His own family members stabbed him to death in revenge for an action that could very well
cost their lives.
This figure was celebrated in the propaganda of the Soviet Union.
Young Pioneers were erected to the young Morozov.
Young people were urged to follow his example in putting loyalty to the state first.
The Moscow headquarters of the Young Pioneer organization were named after him.
He was held up as an example of proper behavior.
But this was an act that had even shocked Stalin, hardened as he was, even though Stalin
approved of the idolization of this young man, his private reaction was quite a different
one.
In considering Morozov, he had said what a little pig to have done such a thing to his
own family.
But the regime's needs would come first.
Part of the ideological emphasis on the transformation of society also sought to enforce a militant
atheism, continuing the trends we'd seen under Lenin's founding of the regime.
Churches, monasteries, places of worship and synagogues throughout the Soviet Union were
destroyed.
Some of these institutions were in fact turned into museums of atheism, which now became
in a strange sense temples to unbelief.
And such institutions endured into the 1970s, I recall on a visit to the Soviet Union visiting
such an institution and thinking of how uniquely it expressed some of the aims of the regime.
