The Khmer Rouge were a group about which little was known.
They moved forward to take control of the country, dressed in their distinctive black uniforms,
and checkered red and white scarves and their plain sandals, a very austere uniform,
the population awaited to see what would happen.
And indeed, what happened next, what we'll be describing in the lecture today,
was something that at the time remained largely unknown to the outside world.
Secrecy, shadowy realities would be a hallmark of the Khmer Rouge,
and especially their mysterious leader, Paul Pot.
The man who would later be known as Paul Pot, which was an assumed revolutionary name
that didn't have any specific meaning, was simply a pseudonym that had been assumed,
by a man who was named, born as Saloth Sahr, to a farmer family,
apparently undistinguished along the border with Thailand.
The man who became Paul Pot later claimed he had spent two years as a Buddhist monk
before going on the route of his new personality.
And if so, this would be an intriguing similarity to other cases of leaders we've seen
who had had a religious education and were perhaps affected by the forms of religious doctrine
and belief which they had observed.
On turning to politics, the man who became Paul Pot cut himself off entirely from his family
and his earlier life.
In many ways, this foreshadowed what would happen with Cambodia itself.
A radical break would lead to radical isolation and a cutting off from the rest of the outside world.
Years later, his family would be stunned to realize that the leader of the country
was in fact their family member.
Paul Pot's turn to radicalism was also intriguing.
In the course of the 1940s, he was active in the resistance against the French colonizers,
directed by Ho Chi Minh, the leader of the Vietnamese communists.
In 1946, Paul Pot became a member of the Communist Party of Cambodia.
In 1949, he left the country to study in France.
This was a contrast to Mao's relatively more limited experience.
Paul Pot's years in the West clearly shaped his ideas.
While in France, he was supposed to be studying radio-electronic engineering,
but it seems that he neglected his studies and instead devoted himself to communist political activities.
There was a vibrant communist movement in France at the time.
After failing his examinations at university, Paul Pot returned to Cambodia in 1953
and taught at a private school at Phnom Penh,
meanwhile beginning to organize underground and to agitate for the Communist Party in Cambodia.
The Communist Party had been founded in 1960.
By 1963, Paul Pot had become its general secretary,
a man working underground and excelling in such activities.
Paul Pot became prime minister of the new regime established in Cambodia from 1975,
right up until its overthrow in 1979.
Now, when we consider Paul Pot in the context of some of the other dictators whom we've discussed in our lectures,
we see a figure who's really in remarkable contrast to the others.
Throughout his rise to power, as well as the period of his dominance in Cambodia,
Paul Pot remained obscure, shadowy, unknown.
In contrast to such dictators as Hitler or Stalin or Mao,
no cult of personality was encouraged around Paul Pot.
This man, an anonymous comrade as it were, by his very unknown nature,
his shadowy identity, was supposed to be all the more imposing.
Once he's here, Paul Pot diverging from the models of some earlier dictatorships,
the very dictatorships in some cases that he wished to overtake.
He was perhaps carving out a new path for his new regime.
No statues, no omnipresent portraits were established to the shadowy leader of the Khmer Rouge.
And as I've mentioned before, his family would later be shocked to discover
that this man whom they knew well from his youth was in fact the leader of the country.
This was perhaps also indicative of the radical break which the Khmer Rouge announced they were bringing to the country itself.
And this was summed up in the term applied to the beginning of their rule, the year zero.
We see here perhaps echoes or references back to the revolutionary calendar of the French Revolution,
marking the beginning of a new regime, a new age in human history.
