In 1929 Mussolini pulled off a diplomatic masterstroke.
He signed the Lateran treaties with the Vatican, which earlier had been alienated from Italian
statehood, now guaranteeing that the Catholic Church had made its peace with his regime,
at least for now.
Though Mussolini described his regime as totalitarian, in fact its control was far from total to
begin with.
Mussolini now turned to a closer examination of fascist ideology and style.
What was fascism?
What ideas did it stand for?
Mussolini had once been asked, Senore Mussolini, what does fascism mean?
And he had answered, me.
Well, that wasn't a very useful answer for our purposes.
We could dig a little deeper to understand the key notions of fascism, chief among them,
action.
Mussolini once summed up fascism itself in that one word, vigorous action and violence
were to be at the heart of the ideology.
The Italian people, for so long robbed of United Statehood, were to be remade through
wars and the conquest of new empires.
The slogan of the fascist movement was credere, obedeere, combattere, believe, obey, and fight
the cardinal virtues.
Mussolini was also identified with the authority of the state and its personification, Ilduce,
the leader, Mussolini himself.
The state stood above individuals and expressed something larger than their aggregation.
Larger than the sum of its parts, the state was to be a higher unity.
And Mussolini, the leader, called Ilduce, by the way, always supposed to be rendered
in capital letters in print, was to dominate the masses, who somewhat chauvinistically
in his macho attitudes, he considered to be feminine in nature and mastered by the force
of his personality.
The leader, Mussolini, was in his very appearance somewhat unlikely as a dominator of the masses.
He was not very tall, in fact, just a little bit under average height at five foot six inches,
but he would seek to accentuate his height by always speaking with his chin thrust upwards
to make it appear that he was being viewed from a height.
Mussolini's characteristic oratory and bombast seemed to produce results in the cheering
of the crowds.
The slogan Mussolini is always right seemed at such moments to achieve its vindication
in the masses.
The fascist morover claimed to be inaugurating a new world era, and the march on Rome was
designated the year zero of a new fascist calendar.
We've already seen the establishment of new calendars, for instance, in the French Revolution
of the 18th century.
Nostalgia for the glories of ancient Rome permeated fascist propaganda in a cult of
what was called Romanita, or a revival of the ancient Roman glories.
Fascist monuments, huge and overbearing in style, resembling in uncanny ways those of
the Soviet Union, mimicked Roman glories.
At the same time, fascists promised progress, technological change, and the modernization
of Italy.
In one of their characteristic phrases, they claimed they would finally make the trains
run on time.
It's a testimony of the durability of such phrases that we sometimes hear even American
politicians sometimes using this phrase without understanding that it doesn't have positive
implications or its historical origins.
Mussolini ordered public works projects on a gigantic scale, the building of the Autostrada
Superhighways, the draining of the Pontine Marshes, and the battle for grain to make
Italy self-sufficient in food.
Even free time was regimented by the regime, which claimed to be total in the Dopolavoro
organization.
The fascists also tried to regiment youth.
They tried to project an image of their own youthfulness, breaking with the old and the
traditional, to produce a new man.
Italian youth were inducted into organizations which wore black neckerchiefs, unlike the
red neckerchiefs of the youth organizations of the Soviet Union.
Their organizations were called the Balila, or the Fili della Lupa, the Sons of the Wolf.
Fascists exercised math, sports, and the part of youth served both as propaganda and preparation
for war.
The fascists also claimed to have an entire new economic philosophy that transcended earlier
class conflict and exploitation, which was called corporatism.
This corporatism allegedly would set up corporate bodies representing workers, owners, and professionals
inducted into the government and forming a new corporate state without class conflict
of economic harmony.
These styles of rule, these potent symbols of the fascists would be imitated worldwide
in an illiberal wave, the rise of dictatorships.
Worldwide, but especially in Central and Eastern Europe, and also in South America, dictatorships
as well as fascist movements or fascist style movements arose imitating Mussolini's image
of a strong man in the fascist style.
