This racial utopia would be achieved by the purification and consolidation of the German people within,
the elimination of the Jewish minority, and then aggressive expansion abroad.
Other elements of the Nazi ideology included opposition.
Opposition to democracy, which was considered weak and individualistic.
Opposition to Marxism, though the Nazis claimed to represent a truer German socialism not based in materialism.
Opposition to pacifism, to individualism, which was considered self-serving.
Opposition to capitalism, opposition to what was called a soulless rationality and against the intellectual life.
Influenced by the model of the mobilization of the masses of World War I, the Nazis valued a strong state standing above individuals,
military mobilization, and war, which they considered the guarantee of the health of the nation.
How was it that the Nazis championing this extreme ideology could come to power?
In part, it was due to the hard work of organization as they sought to come to power using democracy to destroy democracy.
While in prison until 1925, Hitler had dictated a manifesto, which he called Mein Kampf, which might be translated as my struggle or my battle, my war.
In it, in this otherwise unreadable book full of bad prose and ludicrous ideas,
Hitler did announce in a prophetic way his route to power, and this was summed up as the legal route to power.
Using the ballot box to come to power legally and then to destroy German democracy, to enter parliament, to destroy it.
Hitler outlined his plans to create a mass party, and in the original sections of this book,
he discussed remarkably innovative ideas on the use of manipulative propaganda to win the confidence of the masses.
The Nazis, motivated by their fanatical hatred of the system, outdid other parties in organization and intensive activity.
In some cases, they borrowed models from their ideological enemies, the Communists,
as when they set up a nationwide party network in imitation of the Communist Party's cells permeating other countries.
But the Nazis were at first disappointed by the results of their attempts to propagandize and mobilize Germany.
They only gained less than 3% of the vote in the 1928 parliamentary elections.
The true opportunity would come with crisis, the crisis of the Great Depression.
From 1929 on, the Great Depression, destroying developed industrial economies, hitting the United States and Germany,
especially hard, sped the Nazis' way to power in Germany.
Weimar democracy, as historians have pointed out, was already often a bad way, perhaps even more abundant,
before the Nazis come to power in 1933.
From 1930 on, Parliament was hard put to pass effective legislation.
In the 1930 election, the Nazis scored a breakthrough success, becoming the second largest party,
a true mass movement within German society.
In the July 1932 elections, they built on this success, becoming the largest party in Germany.
And that dream of Hitler, of the legal route to power, seemed almost within their grasp.
We want briefly to outline some of the remarkably innovative means of Nazi propaganda.
These included, above all, mass meetings.
Mass meetings that were supposed to be a vivid symbol of the gathering together of Germans into the people's community,
or the Volksgemeinschaft.
They generated excitement and an image of dynamism for the Nazi Party.
In the year 1932, the Nazis organized up to 3,000 meetings every day nationwide,
in the large German cities, as well as small towns and villages.
The Nazis used modern technology, including airplanes, to orchestrate their campaigns.
They were also aided by another feature of the Nazi Party's self-image,
and that was the image of the youthfulness of this movement.
The youthfulness of Nazi Party members and activists was another crucial attribute in selling the Nazi movement to Germans at large.
The average age of a new member of the Nazi Party in the course of the 1920s was 29 years.
Compared to the relatively older demographic of established German parties, this was striking for its youthfulness.
