This was a religious site saturated with symbolism.
Its towers or minarets surrounding the mosque were made up of scud missiles.
The details of the mosque's fountains as well as the minarets
all recalled certain important dates or numbers of Saddam's background such as his alleged birthday.
And within the mosque, a Quran said to be written in his own donated blood was put on display.
Under construction recently still was the mosque of Saddam the Great, not a very modest title,
which was intended as the second largest center of worship in the Muslim world after Mecca.
Saddam's personality cult was also to be bolstered.
In October of 2002, a plebiscite referendum on his presidency was held
which yielded nearly unanimous results in a cowed population.
In 2002, the government also issued an important symbolic little booklet,
a little white book of Saddam Hussein's sayings,
in some sense reminiscent of Mao's little red book
that had played such an important symbolic role in the Cultural Revolution in China.
This little white book was given the not very modest title,
Saddam Hussein, Great Lessons, Commandments to Strugglers, the Patient and Holy Warriors.
We see here, as we've seen in other cases of commandments being listed for ideological movements,
a playing on religious motifs.
In this case, rather than a mere 10 commandments, as we've seen in other cases,
there were 57 such commandments.
These sayings were also displayed in public places.
They were incorporated into the curriculum at schools.
They were read after prayers five times daily and were meant to indoctrinate the population.
In private, this image of Saddam Hussein as an austere and pious man
was contradicted by the reality of Saddam Hussein's habits,
which were reportedly enormously indulgent,
including the good life of Cuban cigars and a special predilection for Rose wine.
Friends of mine who are connoisseurs of wine tell me that this particular favoring of Rose wine
is good evidence of insanity.
Saddam Hussein's narcissism was reflected in his appearance, his vast retinue, and his private habits.
But his gambling nature also steered him towards renewed conflict.
In November of 1998, Saddam Hussein ended cooperation with United Nations inspectors
after systematic long-standing subterfuges in hiding his programs for weapon development.
Defectors from the regime later revealed details of weapons programs, including weapons of mass destruction,
chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons programs that had eluded the inspectors from the United Nations.
Observers of Saddam describe one of his central weaknesses as a propensity to miscalculate in international affairs.
In part due to the fact that his closed circle surrounding him
are loath to give him accurate information about the true balance of power.
Having yes men around one, in this case, what would ultimately be a liability of the regime.
By 2003, confrontation with the United States loomed.
The United Nations was unable to enforce its resolutions on disarming Iraq, and thus confrontation intensified.
American, British, and other coalition forces went to war against Iraq
in mid-March of 2003 in a conflict that lasted about a month.
The speed with which their military operations unfolded
undercut what seems to have been the expectation of Saddam's regime
of being able in a protracted conflict to manipulate world media.
They had been successful in this regard before.
After the war, CNN revealed that it had omitted to report
many details of what it knew about the regime's brutality
for fear of losing access and of being punished for these revelations.
Saddam's regime had been capable of manipulating even western media.
As the war unfolded, the minister of information of the regime, Mohammed Said al-Sahaf
became something of a cult figure for people who followed the media
as he reported brazenly his lies that the regime was still standing proud,
that the allies on their way into Iraq were being held at bay,
even as split-screen TVs showed American and British forces already occupying the country.
His last known remark, and it's an epitaph for a regime, was
I now inform you, he said to the reporters, that you are too far from reality.
He perhaps had believed his own propaganda as Saddam had as well.
The regime melted away. Saddam and his sons vanished.
Hannah Arendt, that student of totalitarian regimes,
would not have been surprised at the totality of this collapse.
The interior world, the utopian mindset of an ideological regime
came crashing down with shocking rapidity.
Before the war began in earnest, it's now reported that a son of Saddam Hussein Kusay
engaged in what is probably the largest bank heist in history
by taking one billion dollars from Iraq's central bank.
In this case, it seems that the regime came full circle back to its mobster origins,
shared with other ideological regimes.
Now in Iraq, a reckoning is being made as mass graves are being uncovered
and as a shattered society will have necessity to try to find its way towards a healthier model.
We'll consider in our next lecture the verdict and the lessons to be learned
from these many cases of the brutality of ideological utopias.
Thank you.
