Butcher 22, Rwanda
In our previous lecture, we had considered the international context of the end of the
20th century. We had considered the remarkable democratic revolutions of 1989-1991 with their
surprising lack of violence. But we had also considered the darker portent of turmoil in the
Balkans in Bosnia and Kosovo with the repetition of scenes of horrors that many had hoped would
now be extinguished from the European continent after World War II, replaying themselves before
the world's eyes. In today's lecture, we want to consider an event happening at roughly the same
time towards the end of the 20th century, which the world very much wanted to look away from
and to ignore. And that is the genocide in Rwanda. In 1994, as the world looked on, truly horrific
events unfolded in the Central African country of Rwanda, where tension between two different
social groups erupted into genocide. A genocide which, in spite of the way it was presented by
the media or presented in newscasts, was not spontaneous, was not predetermined, was not
inevitable, was not simply native to that region, but which was encouraged by the state. And this
is really one of the central points of the lecture today. The Hutu-dominated government of Rwanda
organized the mass murder of the Tutsi minority. It organized it with preparation, with calculation,
with malice aforethought. This genocide, as so many of the other genocides we've discussed,
were not simply elemental outbreaks of human hatred, but rather were prepared well in advance.
The state would provide weapons, particularly machetes for the killers, would direct their
movements through radio broadcasts and lists of those who were to be killed, propaganda in the
form of songs, as well as written commandments, preach destruction. And in the course of 100
days in a ferocious pace of slaughter, 800,000 people would be killed, while the international
community tried to look away. We need to consider the context first of all the earlier background
of Rwanda. Rwanda, a Central African nation about the size of Vermont, was celebrated in earlier
decades as very nearly a Switzerland of Africa. It was called the Land of a Thousand Hills.
It was felt to be idyllic for the order, the development that obtained there, and the relative
tranquility that many hoped would continue. But there was trouble underneath, nonetheless.
In this densely populated country of 8 million people, land was at a premium, was being perhaps
overworked, and the competition for land could exacerbate existing ethnic tensions. Tensions
that had a longer history, tensions between the two groups of the country, the Hutus and the Tutsis.
Now, some question is even raised as to what the principles of division are between these two
groups, the Hutus and the Tutsis. They speak the same language. They have roughly the same religious
background. Thus, the differences between them are subtle. Traditionally, the minority Tutsis were
herders and landowners, while the majority Hutus were farmers. Certainly, there were stereotypes
about the physical appearance of the Tutsi and the Hutus. The Tutsis were said to be tall and thin.
The Hutus were supposed to be lower in stature and more heavy set, but these were stereotypes that
often had no correspondence in the reality of the people being talked about. In many cases,
it was hard for people themselves to know which group someone should be ascribed to.
In the past, the Tutsi minority had been dominant. Some scholars have advanced the argument that the
lines of division between these groups were in fact not set in stone or ethnic in nature,
but that rather the groups in bygone centuries had been fluid, that the designations of Tutsi
versus Hutu had in fact been based more on class, on one's wealth and standing in society, and
occupation, herding versus agriculture, not on ethnic difference. In reality, intermarriage
between these groups was common, further exacerbating the difficulty of making clear ethnic divisions.
