Cloning and eugenic manipulation had produced a society not of equality, but a stable society
of unequal castes, hardwired into their position in society from the dominant alphas to the
epsilon drudges in society, breaking apart what earlier thinkers had considered a human
nature that united us all into divided, biologically determined, unequal brands of humanity.
The violence which the 1930s already brought to bear as a premonition of the greater violence
of the Second World War to come, and how few the attempts were to resist that violence
as it grew, were most remarkably announced in the Italian fascist invasion of Ethiopia,
trying to carve out that imperial state which the fascists saw as a guarantee of their vitality
and their movement's dynamism.
Italy's invasion of Ethiopia, or as it was then called Abyssinia in Africa in 1935, was
an important milestone of the decade contemporary saw in retrospect, because it showed not only
the aggressiveness of the fascists that had been clear from early on, but also revealed
the weakness of collective security, international opinion, and what was called the international
community as a whole.
Mussolini aimed to carve out for Italy an African empire on the model of the ancient
Romans, as well as to redeem the remarkable defeat by the Ethiopians of an Italian army
in Ethiopia in 1896.
The Italian forces didn't shy away from, indeed they celebrated and reveled in, the most remarkable
use, destructive use of modern technology.
The Italian army used airplanes and poisoned gas against the Ethiopian forces, so that even
their valiant defense of their homeland was ultimately quelled.
Mustard gas was showered down upon Ethiopian forces at first with shells, and then later
pumped down over them by airplane.
Ethiopians were hunted like animals by airplane.
Their population centers were bombed from the air in a sign of the greater bombardments
from the air by aircraft yet to come.
The Italians, in spite of declaring their victory by 1936, nonetheless would have to
contend with resistance that followed in a heroic and determined way from the years
to come.
They followed what they quite deliberately called the policy of terror, and of tenfold
retribution in atrocities for resistance on the part of Ethiopians who were also rounded
up and put into concentration camps as we'd seen as an earlier phenomenon of imperialist
campaigns.
But in 1936 the country was annexed to Italy as part of its empire, the Italian king was
declared emperor of Ethiopia, and Mussolini's own followers declared him to be not just
like a god, but a new god in human form.
One of the byproducts of this Italian conquest of Ethiopia, which was to redown as disaster
to the fascist regime later, was that Mussolini began to believe such praise himself.
But we want to stop for a moment to consider what the international reaction to this clear
provocation on the part of one member of the League of Nations against another constituted.
The international reaction was weak.
The League of Nations certainly condemned the act in the strongest of diplomatic language.
But when it came to actually putting teeth to its words, only mustered weak sanctions
against Italy and was careful not to include what might have had a strategic effect, an
oil embargo against that state fearing that this was too provocative.
This helpless response on the part of the League of Nations to what was clear aggression
discredited that institution and led it soon to fade away.
In Geneva, speaking to the League of Nations, the Ethiopian emperor had prophetic words to
say.
Disappointed by the weak reaction, he told the delegates, first it was us, next it will
be you.
The German dictator Adolf Hitler praised Mussolini's action and the earlier tense relations
between these dictators competing as they were to announce their own brand of the wave
in the future now began to warm.
Italy and Germany became fast friends, leading to the formation of an alliance, the Rome-Berlin
Axis of October 1936, a milestone on the way to the Second World War.
