Lecture 19 – Cambodia and Paul Potts Killing Fields
In our previous lecture, we examined the rise of communist China under Mao's leadership
and the remarkable ways in which Marxist ideology was adopted to Chinese conditions.
In today's lecture, we'll examine a similar case, and in fact, a linked case, that of
Cambodia and the Paul Potts Khmer Rouge regime.
This was a regime lasting three years in duration, which was, even by the standards of the dictatorships
we've been discussing in this course, strange in its nature and distinctive.
And I think we need to return to that thought that we've brought up several times before,
the notion that we need to consider the regimes which we've been discussing in relation to
one another.
The Khmer Rouge in Cambodia would seek to outdo all other revolutionary regimes that
had come before, and most immediately, sought to surpass Mao's China.
In Southeast Asia, Cambodian communist leaders who had been educated in France, and who were
led by the mysterious leader Paul Potts, would turn their entire country into a social experiment.
When they came to power in 1975, the Khmer Rouge declared that they were starting a new
epoch in human history.
They would build a pure racial utopia, and to this end, they emptied the cities, expelled
people into the countryside, purged the population again and again of those who were considered
enemies of the people.
They would, in the last analysis, end up causing the deaths of some two million people
in Cambodia, or over a quarter of the population.
We need to consider, first of all, Cambodia's longer history, its past.
As though the Khmer Rouge announced that they were building the bright future, in many ways,
the idealized rural paradise, which supposedly had existed in some previous age, was a model
to be striven after as well.
In the past, a Khmer empire had ruled in Indochina from the 9th to the 13th century, so there
was a glimmer of bygone glories, but then the country had come under the rule of the
Ties from outside.
Cambodia then became a French protectorate in the 19th century, and it was occupied by
Japan in World War II, afterwards it would become an independent kingdom in 1955.
The Cold War conflict that we've outlined in a previous lecture would then hit Cambodia
very hard with dire results.
Though Cambodia declared neutrality in the Vietnam conflict raging next door, it was
nonetheless infiltrated by the Viet Cong, the Vietnamese communists, and indeed sections
of the Ho Chi Minh trail supplying the insurgents ran through Cambodian territory.
Allies of the Vietnamese communists at least at this stage were the Khmer Rouge.
They were the Cambodian communists who were active from 1963.
In 1970, the Cambodian monarchy was overthrown, and American and South Vietnamese forces also
intervened secretly in the country.
American bombing raids directed against the movement of communist forces in Cambodia
took a dreadful toll on civilians and destabilized the Cambodian government.
When the United States withdrew from Vietnam and South Vietnam collapsed, replaced by
a communist control of the entire country, the Khmer Rouge now moved to take control
in Cambodia as well.
In April 1975, as the government collapsed, the Khmer Rouge entered the capital, Nong
Pen, and began to put their revolution into action.
Their new state was renamed Democratic Campachia, and I've sometimes mentioned in lectures
that it's especially a bad sign when a state needs to call itself democratic.
That's usually a sign of bad things to come.
And yet, many Cambodians felt that surely after such dislocation, after such turmoil,
after such violence, the Khmer Rouge surely would be offering a better way of life and
at least stability.
