Another legacy of the immediate post-war period and the emphasis on human rights was the genocide convention.
In 1948, the United Nations General Assembly passed the genocide convention which made genocide an international crime.
The term genocide was a new one, the phenomenon obviously one that had a much longer history.
In part, its popularization of this term was due to one man, a crusading jurist by the name of Raphael Lemkin.
Raphael Lemkin was a Polish Jewish refugee who had come to the United States and he represented a lonely prophetic voice
in arguing that people who committed what before then had been a crime without a name needed internationally to be held to account.
He in fact had already been thinking in these terms before the Nazi genocide.
In the course of the 1920s, he had been shocked and dismayed to hear of the Armenian genocide of the First World War
and had struggled with the implications both legal and moral of the existence of such crimes.
He crusaded ultimately successfully for the prescription of this crime of genocide,
a word that he had invented by combining the Greek word for a tribe or an ethnic group, genus, with the Latin word for murder, side.
The term was defined in ways that were controversial then and are still controversial today.
The convention defined it the crime of genocide as the intent to destroy in whole or in part national, ethnic, racial or religious groups.
Some critics argued that this particular definition might set the bar too high.
Certain crimes might be downplayed as it were because they didn't meet all the definitions requirements.
Others argued that the bar might be set too low, pointing out that the question of determining intent was a notoriously difficult one
and people are still wrestling with the question of which particular atrocities qualify for the full term of genocide and which fall short of it.
So the question remains controversial today. The convention's effect has also been slow to be felt as we'll see in our following lectures
when we examine particular cases of international inaction in the face of what clearly meets these criteria of genocide.
At the same time as laws and conventions were seeking to draw some conclusions from the experience of the previous decade,
in the terms of literature, another lesson was drawn and that was to be seen in George Orwell's great novel of dystopia, 1984.
The British journalist George Orwell wrote his dystopian novel 1984 in the year 1948.
He simply reversed the years of his writing to indicate a coming future not all too distant.
He depicted a society of totalitarian rule drawing on contemporary trends,
particular modes of government and modes of politics that he observed in his own world around him,
and, and this is significant, his own reading of Zamiatin's classic dystopian novel of the Soviet Union written in 1920, his novel Wee.
In 1984, perhaps the most famous of the dystopian novels of the 20th century,
his protagonist, by the name of Winston Smith, lives in a society dominated, totally dominated by the omnipresent, mysterious big brother and a dominant party.
In terms of the novel's plot line, outer repression as well as inner resistance within Winston himself dooms him and his love for a young woman.
Winston Smith works in the Ministry of Truth, which is devoted entirely to the task of revising historical records to bring them into line with a shifting version of the truth of the party,
and is engaged in the constant purging of the past, throwing outdated and now untrue historical records into what Orwell very notably called the memory hole, a sort of incinerator.
A political language was developed by Big Brother's regime entitled Newspeak, which was aimed at the task of eliminating thought crime,
eliminating the very possibility of thinking thoughts that were not appropriated by the regime.
When we consider the resemblance that this sort of linguistic control of a society depicted in Orwell's novel has, we think of Viktor Klemperer,
that analyst of Nazi perversion of the German language, and see some remarkable parallels.
