I think we're prone, given the historical record, to think that it's defeat above all,
that unleashes crisis in a defeated country.
We think of the role that defeat in the First World War would have in ushering in the Nazi
movement in Germany.
Paradoxically, victory could also have such effects as in the case of Italy.
At the Versailles negotiations, Italy felt that it was cheated.
Though it was officially on the side of the victors, Italy was denied the territorial
gains that had been promised by the sometimes cynical diplomacy of the Western Allies.
And thus, as Italians left the negotiations, their nationalists denounced what they called
the mutilated peace of Versailles.
The sacrifices of so many lives, it seemed, might have been for naught.
And thus the aftermath of the war would bring post-war turmoil for Italy.
This turmoil included workers' strikes, rural unrest, unstable governments, and the growth
of a communist movement as well that alarmed the established elites.
The organization of veteran paramilitary groups, resembling the Freikorps in Germany, now took
to the streets in order to do battle in a virtual civil war resembling that of Germany.
At the same time, there was a certain drama to this street theater of violence, one which
created an aura around conflict and the notion that direct results could be achieved by direct
action.
In 1919, a particular media event took place which would further accentuate and underline
this mystique.
The romantic poet Gabriele Denunzio led a raid that captured the contested port of Trieste,
which Italy had demanded, in protest at the outcome of the war.
What this seemed to indicate was that direct action could produce results, and Mussolini
was envious of Denunzio and resolved to take direct action himself.
This is a recurring point we'll see in our lectures, that the leaders and the dictators,
the despots we describe in our lectures, were often not acting in a vacuum, but rather had
particular models, whether more remote in time or close in time, that they were following.
Mussolini would now seek to stage-manage a myth of his own, that myth involving the stage-managed
orchestrated movement of masses of people, another recurring theme, was to be the march
on Rome, which would in turn be imitated by dictators, or would be dictators like Hitler,
in the years to come.
Mussolini sought to use the post-war turmoil in Italy as the staging ground for his new
political movement, which would fuse nationalism, which had been revealed as such a potent force
in the First World War, with some revolutionary ideas and some relics of his socialist career.
The fascist movement presented itself as a safeguard above all against communist revolution,
and thus could win adherence for the more conservative middle classes, or the aristocracy
and other established elites.
In spite of this trumpeted announcement of opposition to the communist model of the future,
however, in person Mussolini was a little bit more ambivalent.
He could on occasion express his clear admiration for the communists and what they had achieved
in terms of new politics.
Mussolini in particular expressed his admiration for Vladimir Ilyich Lenin of the Soviet Union
as a man who he said was an artist who used human beings as his material in forming a
new world, clearly something he wanted to emulate.
We will see how precisely such publicly announced opposition of one ideological movement for
another in the 20th century could benefit both sides, producing perversely a kind of
linkage between ideological mortal enemies who gained in dynamism by claiming to oppose
another ideological movement.
The analyst of crowds and crowd psychology, whom we'd mentioned in our very first lecture,
Elias Kaneti, had pointed out that any crowd could gain energy by opposing another crowd
and vice versa, leading to a complicated dialectical process in which one crowd fed off the other
for its dynamism.
Mussolini had a potent symbol for the dynamism of his movement, the black-shirted squads,
the fascists.
The fascist movement began in March 1919 in Milan, officially.
It took its name from the particular combat squads which Mussolini had gathered, known
as the fashi de combattimento.
