Okay. Well, there's just two more things I want to talk about quickly. One is speaking as we're
traveling down the road from intellectual heights, there's political correctness and group
think mentality, which you've attacked happily. And the notion that it's to some extent shame
once again comes in here. I was talking to Ian McEwen recently about his, he received a prize
and went to Israel and was castigated for that. And I know, of course, you've spoken out against
Israel's treatment of Palestinians. I have, but I'm Jewish and I see the right for Israel to exist
as a state and I have family who live in Tel Aviv and if I want to visit them, I'll bloody well
visit and I will not be told not to. Exactly. Okay. So let's talk a little bit about this curse of
the combination of political correctness and virtue signaling that you cannot say
certain things now, which is the opposite of the enlightenment in some sense.
Yeah. I mean, I'm temperamentally a liberal, but a hand-wringing liberal, a milk toast liberal,
an unsure, worried, carpet-slip, a becardiganed, you know, E.M. Forstery sort of a liberal.
I'm not a hard line lefty. I have a sympathy with a lot of social justice,
imperatives and quests and so on. But I just want the left to be smarter than it is. I want it to
be aware of how it's alienating, you know, well-meaning good people are just outraged and upset and
frightened by the redaction of human lives, you know, a person being cast into outer darkness
without trial, without due process for, you know, all kinds of reasons and for the language being
used to carelessly. Yes. Yeah, languages can be a ticking bomb. You can occasionally, obviously,
if you start talking about people as cockroaches and so on, we're all aware of how, you know,
racist language can be a vicious precursor to racist behavior and to blood on the streets.
But it is just language. But, you know, I think I agreed to be on stage with Jordan Peterson as a
debate. He's not someone I necessarily agree with. I was surprised, but I guess I understood it was
all very open-minded. I've drawn the line at Ben Shapiro, I think. But Jordan Peterson, I thought,
well, that's the point is to say, you know, there are things I disagree with this man,
but I do agree with him on the fact that, and from my point of view, it's because I actually
lament the failure of the left. I think, yes, the rise of Bannonism and the alt-rise and its
equivalents across Europe is more a catastrophic failure of the left than a particular triumph of the right.
