Okay, brilliant. Shall we make a start then? I think most people have joined now, so welcome
everybody to the first session of the Introduction to Critical Realism webinars. Today we're talking
about ontology and this is the first of six and the following sessions will engage with epistemology,
methodology, approaches to analysis, key concepts and critical realism as a framework. So
yeah, make sure you do join the other sessions as well. So just a few very brief bits of housekeeping.
So firstly, please use the Q&A tool during the webinar. So if you have any immediate technical
issues or want to make a comment, use the chat box. But any questions that you have for us,
please put them in the Q&A section. And if you do that throughout the session, we'll try and pick
those up and make sure that we're answering all the questions. You can also comment on questions
in there and vote the ones that you really want to hear answered. Okay, so I think it'll be good
to start with some introductions. So I'll introduce myself. First of all, I'm Jack Newman from the
University of Surrey. My broader research interests are around British politics, social security policy,
local government. Although my interest in critical realism goes back about eight or
nine years to when I was doing my master's degree. And coming from a political science
background, I came across critical realism through the structure agency debate and trying to find a
suitable argument or solution to this problem of structure and agency. So that's my background
and how I came to critical realism. Caroline, do you want to introduce yourself too?
Yes. So I'm Caroline Coon, and I work at the University of Paspar as a lecturer there in the
School of Education. And I'm very interested in the combination of, I would say, technology,
education from a sociological perspective, I would say. And so I came to critical realism in a
later stage in my PhD where I, when I started to make sense of the data, I just couldn't
with what I had at hand. It wasn't possible for me. And I was really kind of struggling. And I
realized I need something to help me hear some theoretical kind of. And so I came across in a
conversation with someone at the University of Cape Town that they were using critical realism in
when they were exploring open educational resources. And once I started to read and read and read,
it was quite difficult at the very beginning. But I realized that was really what I needed to
make sense of what I was seeing in the data, particularly things that weren't there present,
that weren't, that they weren't showing, but that they were there. And yeah, so I started
to study it by myself because my supervisor didn't know anything about it, but he trusted me.
So I did a long journey into critical realism. And I think it is incredibly worth while our time.
And so that's how I came into it. Yes, that's me. Brilliant. I'll just say a couple more things,
and then we'll hopefully get some introductions from you guys, the audience. And so yeah, just to
be clear, if you have any technical issues or want to make comments or introduce yourselves,
please use the chat function. If you have any questions, please use the Q&A button,
or you can raise your hand as well during the discussion section. So here's how today's going
to run. We've got three parts to the webinar. Part one, we'll ask what is ontology. I know that this,
many of you will know what ontology is, but we're trying to make sure we kind of keep everyone
with us. And it's worth going back to, I think, for those who do not know already. And then we'll
talk about what a critical realist approach to ontology is. And then we'll conclude in the third
part by looking at the implications of a critical realist ontology. And hopefully we'll be taking
questions throughout and we'll have some discussion and we'll leave some extra time for discussion
at the end. And we're due to finish in about an hour and a half time. Okay, yeah, I'll hand back to
Caroline. Yeah, I was just wanting to ask the audience if anyone is keen to just introduce
themselves, what you do, do you study, do you work, and in a way, what brought you into critical
realism. We're a lot of people, it means we can't, not everyone can take the mic, but it would be
lovely to hear from some of you, so that we have an idea of who is in the room and the rest can
write it in the chat, which I see is already happening. There are lots of introductions
in the chat. So anyone who would like to take the mic, that would be great. Yeah, that is what we
would like to happen. Chris Roberts here. I'm relatively new to the field. I mean, years ago,
when I probably do my masters and I was sort of this thing called the internet had just been
discovered and I was, my supervisor was very much into sort of delusional guitaries, sort of bodies
without organs, and I found that a bit kind of radical. So I kind of moved from that more to
sort of constructivist view. My field is education, particularly health professional education,
but very, so it felt quite limited by what constructivist approaches to educational,
particularly transformational settings, you know, you know, trying to get sort of systemic
change in the health professionals education sector. But you know, the lack of sort of,
you know, sort of theories or sort of big models. And I guess then through a colleague or sort of
introduced to critical realism, it seemed to be a sort of really fit, good fit. It seemed to be
not rejecting some of the sort of the positivistic, post-positivist sort of positions, but critical
of them and seeing them in a very different way. And yet not seeing everything as sort of socially
constructed. There are noble things out there, but we just got fallible knowledge. So it just kind
of fitted for me. And I guess the work that I've been doing at the moment with colleagues
is more at that kind of the first, you know, the first sort of possibility of naturalism
kind of approach with this stratified ontology. I was thinking I was got some more to the, you
know, meta reality was just getting further and further away from a comfort zone. Although the
recent IACR, Frederick van der Berg was talking about, you know, how can you not want that project
of emancipation, a kind of sort of utopia in the air? And so shouldn't we consider the whole body
together? Thank you, Chris. That's great. And I would say, I mean, Deleuze and Guattari is so
different than critical realism. So it's just really fascinating how, you know, how theory
really in philosophy illuminates from different standpoints and different people from very
different angles. So great. And thank you, Chris. Anyone else?
Well, I see a lot of activity in the chat. So great. Shall we then, Jack?
David has his hand up. Yeah, thank you. I didn't see it.
David, go ahead. Oh, is that was that for me? Yeah. Yeah, so I'm David Palmer. I'm an anthropologist
at the University of Hong Kong. And I do a lot of work in relation to the anthropology of religion
in China and Asia. And I also, my work also goes into the sociology of religion. And I know
Phil Gorski, and he's been kind of promoting critical realism for the past many years. And I'm
actually, in a sense, from a postcolonial perspective, I'm quite interested in looking at how can we
seriously take different ontologies seriously? And what are the ontological foundations of
sociological theory and sociological methodology? So I'm, I'm, I think it's extremely important to
really have a deep awareness and critical thinking about the ontological assumptions of our own
discipline and the implications of that. And now moving directly into a project that I'm working
on now, I'm actually working on a book and a course, actually, that I'm going to be teaching
just in a couple of hours on science and religion, which I'm co teaching with an experimental physicist
who is a Christian. So we, we take, and I take more the Asian, like Taoist kind of perspective. So
we're really in trying to construct a framework for rethinking and reframing the relationship
between science and religion. We've come across a lot of concepts that are very,
that are very seem to resonate a lot with critical realism. So I would like to really
get a more systematic understanding of this approach.
Thank you, David. That's, that's great. Thank you. So interesting. Yes, Jack was saying so many,
you know, so different points of view and different needs as well. I think that is fascinating. Thank
you so much. I can't see hands up or anything. And, and also conscious of the time I shall,
we shall start our presentation. And, and, you know, we're welcoming the chat because we read it
then afterwards. And yeah, thank you so much. I'm reading here. Hasuki, Keinde, so interesting.
Thank you. Shall we start then, Jack? I am so Jack will go with the first part about what is ontology
in general terms. And I'll follow them. What is the critical realist understanding of this concept
of ontology? And then some practical and physical philosophical implications. Brilliant. Thanks,
Caroline. Yes. So let's get started with the question of what is ontology? And I'm sure some
of you have an idea. Some of you might think you have a good idea. And so let's just go through
the basics of what this, what ontology means. And I want to start out with this definition that you
always see in the textbooks here. So ontology is the philosophy of being an existence. Now,
I remember reading this in the textbooks back when I was a master's student and not really having a
clue what this meant. I think quite often it's a useful definition if you already know about ontology
but not very good as an introduction. So I just want to unpack this a little bit. So when we talk
about philosophy in this sense, what are we thinking about? So we're thinking about assumptions.
That's it. That is beliefs that people hold. They might not even realize they hold these beliefs.
We're talking about controversies. So areas of disagreement or debate. And we're talking about
theories. So systems of thought. They might be approaches to social science or they might be
religions perhaps. So ontology is a set of assumptions, controversies and theories.
What are they about? Moving to the right hand side of the slide there, we're thinking about being and
existence. So what do we mean by being an existence in this context? So when we're thinking about being,
we could think about the essence, experience or state of consciousness of living things.
What it is to be a person in the world or perhaps what it is to be an animal or non-person in the
world. And then much more broadly than this and perhaps more importantly, to ontology is also
about existence in general. Everything that is in some way real beyond our perception of it.
So yes, it's about our experience in the world. It's also about how the world actually is
outside of our experience. So yeah, when we're talking about ontology, we're thinking about
the assumptions, controversies and theories that are about reality in general, I suppose.
Okay, so I want to introduce a couple of skeptical challenges just to get us start
thinking about ontology. I pulled out a couple of quotes from Descartes here who is kind of
one of the key philosophers of modern Western philosophy. And he argues in his or writes in
his meditations, there is the fact that I'm sitting here seated by the fire, attired in a dressing
gown. So that's what that's where he was when he was writing his meditations. But and here's where
the challenge comes in. How often has it happened to me that in the night I dreamt that I found
myself in this particular place, that I was dressed and seated near the fire whilst in reality,
I was lying undressed in bed. So Descartes raises the problem of how we know that we're awake and
not dreaming. And if you go to menti.com there and enter the code, some of you have done so already,
if so go on to the next slide. And it'd be great if you could answer the poll that's on there just
to have a think about this. Yes, and I'm here waiting for your answers to just see what you
think if you're dreaming or if you're not dreaming, or if you're if you're not sure about what's
happening. Because the interesting thing here is to kind of challenge our thinking about whether
our day to day perception of reality is really giving us a true window or a true insight into how
the world really is around us. I'll just give you a moment to have a think about that one. Yes, I'm
here. Sorry, Jack, what was the particular question again? So if you go to menti.com there and enter
that code, it should give you a question for you to answer. The current question is,
are you 100% sure you're not dreaming right now? So I have six people that are not dreaming, seven,
eight. And then I have two people that are not really sure. And two people that are dreaming. So
we have 12 now that are not dreaming. And we're still have two that not three now that they are
dreaming. Yes, 13, that 14 that are not dreaming, three that are not sure. So I think the tendency
is to think that you're not dreaming. Okay, so you guys have a fairly, a fair amount of certainty
that your perceptions are giving you a true indication of reality perhaps. Yes, 15.
Wow. Okay, let's take another similar question then, just to get us to think about this question
of our immediate perception of the world around us. So I don't know whether anyone's seen the film
The Matrix. I recommend it, if not, it's a good film. But I just want to introduce a premise here.
In the top picture there, this chap, Neo, is living in the world day to day,
and he gets met by this person, Morpheus, who explains to him that actually he's not living
in the world. He's really laid in one of these tanks that you can see in the bottom picture.
And a simulation of reality is being pumped into his mind. So that's the kind of premise of the
film there. So Morpheus says, Have you ever had a dream, Neo, that seems you seem so sure it was real?
If we're unable to wake up from that dream, how would you tell the difference between the dream
world and the real world? Now, I'm not trying to, again, you can go to Mentimeter and answer the
question there. I'm not trying to convince you that we're all living in a simulation far from it.
I'm just trying to open the prospect that our day to day perceptions don't give us a kind of clear
picture on what reality is really like. And reality may be other than our perception of it
on a day to day basis. And Chris is saying in the chat, I'm not dreaming that I cannot
connect to the Mentimeter pool. Sorry, Chris. Yeah, it not always works. I have it in front of me.
It is active. And I'm sorry if it doesn't work. It's just that sometimes happens.
But I like your answer. It's a good answer. I also quite like Mauricio's answer that in his,
in dreams, I don't pay bills. And that's how I know. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. I'm here. I'm keen to see if it's possible to live. One is saying I'm
no, it's not possible to live in a simulation. And another one says yes, it is. And then we have
two people, but three people that don't think four, that we were living in a five, that we're
living in a simulation, five people and six people. And then we have three that that yes,
we can live in a simulation. So it's eight, nine and three. So nine or more. No, we can't.
And three that yes. And then 10, no. So yeah, 11, 12. It's a tendency again here, isn't it? But
yeah, that people don't think it's possible that we're living in a simulation 13 and three has
stayed stable in the yes answer. So yeah, it's, it's interesting really to just think about this,
I would say, for say yes. Yeah. A lot more, a lot more certainty in this group than yesterday's group.
Yesterday's group were all very skeptical and worried that they were dreaming and worried
that they might be living in a simulation. You guys are a lot more sure of your place in reality.
Okay, so thanks for taking part in that. I think it's useful to start thinking about these
ontological questions, but I just want to distinguish between two sets of questions here,
between ontology on the one hand and epistemology on the other hand. Epistemologies will be covered
in next week's session, actually. So when we're thinking about ontology in relation to many of
the issues we've just been discussing, we're thinking about questions, is there a reality
beyond our experience of the world? And then what is the nature of that reality? Is it, for example,
a simulation or not could be one such question? And what is the difference between reality and
experience anyway? Even is there a difference? Whereas epistemology is very much more looking
at questions of knowledge. What counts as knowledge? How is it that we can come to know
anything? And can we be certain of anything? And what do we mean by truth? These are questions
of epistemology that will be tackled next week. Now, some approaches kind of reject the distinction
between these or try and blur the distinction. Critical realism tries to look at the two
separately. And this week we'll be focusing on ontology. So I've got one more problem or question
for you, which is about friendship, the idea of friendship. Now, do you think that friendship
is just a way of describing the thoughts and actions of two individuals? Or is a friendship
between, excuse me, two people also a real thing in its own right? So just to rephrase that I'll
say it again, is friendship just a word we use, just as shorthand to describe what two individual
people are doing? Or do you think that friendship is a real thing in the world? Is it some object or
real thing? So I'd be very interested to hear your thoughts about this. Either put your responses
in the chat box or raise your hand perhaps and we can get one or two people responding on the
microphone. So yeah, do share some thoughts on this. While we wait here, I just wanted to take
something that I find quite interesting in the chat. Those critical realism offer the red pill,
so we can see what is really happening behind the simulation. And I just, why do I pick this?
Because this is an interesting question that you will be kind of fleshing out throughout the six
sessions. And I think today maybe it points to that. I don't have the answer, but it's interesting.
And I hope that you can find some pointers, I think, in these six sessions.
Yeah, so here we have it's ideationally real. I think friendship is real, but it is bound in time.
Friendship is not an object, but it's real. So it's an entity. Yes, okay. Or the effect of friendship
are real. Yeah, there we have the effects. Friendship is like wetting your pants. Everyone can see it,
but only you know it's real warmth. That's a good way of describing it. I think friendship is real
and has many layers. Yes, social, cultural, and personal layers. Yes, it's about the layers. That's
a good point. It appears and disappears. But when it's there, it's certainly there.
Yeah, great. Thank you. So many answers. Yeah, quite a lot of people who are giving critical
realist answers as well. And I just want to clarify what that means just with one final
slide here. From a critical realist perspective, how do we know something is real? So a kind of
traditional criteria that Baskar points out is the perceptual criteria for reality. So if the
phenomenon, say friendship, can be perceived, then it is real. But Baskar argues that that's not enough.
That's not enough to decide whether something is real or not, because there are some things we
perhaps can't perceive, but still want to insist they're real. So there's also the causal criteria
for reality. And I think some people were getting at this in the chat box. For something to be real,
it needs to be causally efficacious. That means it needs to be able to cause an effect in the
world. It needs to create an outcome. So it may not be a cause that is triggered. So it may not
be a cause that actually has an outcome, but it could be a cause that has the potential to have
an outcome. So this causal criteria for reality is one we could apply for friendship. As somebody
said there in the chat box, so a friendship has effects in the world. And this could be the basis
of which we argue that is real. Okay, that's me done for this section on what is ontology.
I'll just give you guys a moment to ask some questions if you want, using the Q&A feature,
or to raise your hand and come in on the microphone. If you have any questions or want to
share any thoughts at this point, and then in a moment we'll start the next session, the next section.
Any questions?
There's one hand up from Mauricio. Okay, yeah, Mauricio.
Hi, I think one interesting question would be who cares or why care about
the reality of reality from a critical realist perspective. Thank you.
Okay, do you have any thoughts on that before we answer?
Yes, I come from Sociologists of Discipline, so to me the fact that something is real is in that
critical realist viewpoint means that it is in a way oppressive. It's something that happens,
whether you want it or not, like paying bills. And therefore, it is important because
things that are real are the things that can be analyzed, can be described, and so on.
And I think it is important to distinguish between what is real and what is not,
and in order to give enough, I think credence, but also weight, but also analytical importance
to things that are real beyond the objectively perceptive and so on. So for me that's,
I study how a constitution was made, so to me looking at that mechanism is important because
it's a real mechanism that has real effects on the social structure, for example.
Okay, brilliant. Yeah, I think you've answered the question very well. I'll just add one other
thought which is thinking about a kind of discipline, a social science discipline,
and going about establishing the theories and deciding what to research there. And I think
when we're working out what isn't real, it's very important for deciding what the main concepts
are going to be for the discipline. What are we going to investigate? What aspects of the world
are we going to ask about or focus on? So I think that would be another aspect that builds on your
thoughts there. Okay, brilliant. Caroline, any other thoughts or any other questions?
Yeah, there are two things here. I want to say that one of the things that critical realism
really advocates for is emancipation. And to be honest, I think what it really
offers us is a theory of social change. I mean, I'm simplifying this. Not only it's a philosophy
of science, but I think it is really geared to be able to intervene in the cogs of the machinery
of society. And I think, yes, it is important to ask the question, who cares and why should we care?
And there is where critical realism offers us tools and ways of thinking that we can then
enact some change. Yeah, there is an interesting question here about friendship and structures.
If it is a structure, although it's only between two people, I mean, can we say friendship is a
social structure even only between two people? And that's an interesting question. Jack, I'm not sure
if you have any thoughts around this. Is this really very nuanced things that makes us be confused
at moments? Is it a structure because it's only between two people? Is one individual a structure?
How is that? I think there are very differing, or my review is that there are very differing
understandings of the word structure in the literature. So you always have to be careful
when you're reading the word in a sociologist or even a critical realist. So I think Popora,
who someone mentioned earlier, gives one of the best critical realist understandings of
social structure. And he talks about relational structures between social positions in society.
Tony Lawson is another one that gives a good understanding of structure here. So I would
say that a friendship is part of the social structure, is part of relational social structures.
Whether we say it's a structure in itself, I don't know, I think that depends on how you're
using the word really. But I would certainly say that friendships are part of the social structure,
relations between people, positioned people. And I think it will also, when you do your
research, and if you are researching friendship in particular, you will then be reading different
definitions and you will see what suits your investigation as well. So I think that that
is something that is important. So yeah, it's fascinating so many. There are other questions
in the chat. There is one which I think might be interesting about the difference between ontology
and metaphysics. I would say this is a broad question that it might take more time than what
we have to clarify. If there is any, I don't know, short answer there, Jack, I'm not sure. I think
it's a really broad and deep question. Yeah, and maybe just one quick thought on the difference
there would be that ontology tends to be concerned with the category, categories of things that are
real. So what are the parts of the world that we define as real? And how do we kind of organize
those categories? Whereas metaphysics as a whole tends to be thought of as a larger concern
that includes those kind of skeptical questions I was asking at the start and is a broader question
about the underlying natures and structures of the universe. Although there are clearly overlaps
between the two, significant overlaps between the two, that's one way of thinking about the
difference, perhaps. Yeah, okay, so I believe, and again, aware of the time and conscious of the
time that we will continue with our second part, which will be more focused on the critical
realist ontology and what is it in critical realism? That is defining of realities of what is real.
And so if you go to the next slide, please, Jack. Yeah, so to begin with, we have always these two
worlds, the natural world and the social world. And Baskar already in his critical naturalism
says that these two worlds are not apart and he didn't want to make kind of a sharp difference.
Nevertheless, he said, we can't reduce one to the other in so far that is critical. So the
social world can't be reduced to the natural world. And it has its properties and it is, we have to
study it as something that really emerges as part of the natural world. And so one of the things I
think here that I, you can see underneath this pictures is that you in the natural world would
do experimentation. So you have a closure really, your experiment is like a closure of that natural
world. And then you want to predict and then find these causal laws, whereas in the social world,
you would be exploring. And you can't do any closure because it is an open system. And we're
going to go into into that open system definition in the next slide. And but what you can do really
is explain, but you can't predict. I think this is one of the key things in critical realism.
And if we go to the next slide, Jack, please. So here, I would say, are these kind of three
main tenants of how social reality is defined in critical realism. And it's really stratified,
it's deep, so we don't have a flat ontology, which is only what we can see. It's an open and
complex system. So stratified. And we're going to I'm going to explain these three things in detail,
but just stratified means that we have levels of reality. An open system means that this social
world is really multi determined. So we have multiple causalities. And we don't know accurately
these causes, which counter the other, which reinforce others, which cancel others. So it's
really this kind of very multi determined space. And that's why it's an open system.
And emergence is the property that emerges from systems that are complex. And so in I would say,
and please, this is a simplification. Yeah, there is a lot of explanation deeper. And so that's
the reading that you do. But this is just kind of to pinpoint main things. So you can't really
rely on on empirical data, if you want to answer your research question from a critical
realist perspective, because the world is much more than than what we can see, perceive, and you
know, what catches the eye. And the next one, Jack, please. And here this, this metaphor of the iceberg,
I think, not me, many think that it's a very good metaphor to explain this stratified or
stratification of reality. And although I'm going to start from the bottom up, because I think
in the in this kind of the iceberg really tells us that if an iceberg is to stand there for million
and millions of years, it's because it has a strong mass underneath the water, and it gives
its solidity. And I think that's a really good thing to think about when we are investigating
social reality under a critical realist perspective. So these generative mechanisms,
which are those that make things happen in the world, they live underneath of what we can see,
they're really invisible, most of the times, at first sight, I mean, here. Then what happens is
that these generative mechanisms interact with each other and then events happen. But these
events not necessarily can be observed all the time. So they live also underneath the water,
but they happen, although we can't see them when these generative mechanisms interact with each
other. And then what happens is at the empirical level are these events that we really can observe.
But this is only just the 10% of that reality that we're investigating. So again, I think the main
takeaway here is don't trust what you can see and just go deeper. Yeah, the next one, please.
And so this is really, again, just kind of putting together these ideas of we start with
the empirical level, because yes, it's what we can see. It's what we talk with our participants,
is what we find out about the reality we are interested in. But this only opens the door
through then using theory that allows you then to go to this deeper level where the structures
and this generative power or mechanism are, I would say, hidden most of the times. And that's
why emancipation, I think for me at least, is something that we really thrive for when we
use critical realism. What is that invisible thing that is, and someone said oppressive,
yes, these structures normally are oppressive. So how can we really see them? The next one, please,
Jack. And the open system that I was mentioning before is, I think I don't have to explain that
much, but what it really means is that the social world is a causal network of interacting forces
that counteract each other, reinforce each other, cancel sometimes. So it's very difficult to really
say something in a predictive manner. So if A is here, B will happen. It's not necessarily the case.
And so you can't really make any closure. You have to be always aware that you can only say
so much about social reality. The next one, please, Jack. And what this really brings us to think about
that we are not working with causal laws. We're really doing multiple causality. That's what
we're looking for. Are there multiple causes that are responsible for the event that we are
investigating? And human beings are themselves open systems. And I was thinking about this when
you asked about the question of structure and friendship. So we are open systems and we're
capable of communication, creativity and resistance. This means that there is always the
possibility of something new happening. And this, I think, is an evidence that we really can't predict
because there is always something new happening. There is always some creation that we have not
expected or that is not. We couldn't really predict for that. The next one, please, Jack.
And the phenomenon of emergence, I think, is quite interesting because it refers to the
properties that arise when different parts constitute a whole. And the flock of birds is
an example that I have used to illustrate this because I think it really makes the case of how,
when birds are together, things arise. So an emergent entity is constituted by the parts,
how they are arranged in relation to one another. And the unique properties, the whole holds
due to the arrangement of the parts. So what we can see here, I would say three important things,
the parts, the arrangement of these parts. How are they arranged? And then they form this whole
and what is this whole? And if we go to the next slide, there is a more precise explanation of this,
which is really, this is from National Geographic, a study about flock of birds. And what I want to
take from this example is that, so I'm going to read the left hand side. While it sounds like
waves spread best in bigger flocks, the waves transmitting information about direction spread
best in smaller flocks. So here we can see how the size of the flock matters for the effect
or the property that is going to emerge, namely how they change direction when they do their
emigration, or also sometimes when they arrive to a particular space. So smaller flocks tend to
have a more rigid behavior, if you wish, because the waves travel more quickly. So what I want to
stress here is that the way in which these birds are arranged, is there a big flock,
is it a small flock, really determines the effect of the transmission of the information
about the direction. And I think that is key, although this is in the natural world, but
Pascal said they're not different. They are in a way different, but they are as well together.
So the next slide, please. And the same thing happens here with fish, shawls, it is exactly the
same, how they behave together is completely different than what they do by themselves.
And the next one, please, Jack. What is really the aim of social science and OSAS researcher
is to discover these emergent properties. So the entities, the agents, the structure,
and their emergent generative power, this is really, or the mechanism, what social
science is about. All of this is within a critical realist perspective. And this in society,
if you go to the next slide, Jack, what it allows us really to see here, and I'm not going to read
all of that. I'm conscious about the time. I'm going to just go to the last bit. A context where
the resources are allocated unevenly will have different effects on the individuals that operate
within it. And here we see the whole is the society, how the parts, which in this case are the resources,
are allocated, how these are arranged in a society have effects and they have different
effects. If you think about Latin America, I'm going to talk about Venezuela, particularly my
experience to not generalize resources are incredibly unevenly allocated. Now, how society
lives there is incredibly different than if we think about Norway or England, although I know
things are changing, but nevertheless, the resources are allocated in a different way than
in Venezuela. And we see how society and its individuals have completely different effects
in how they live. And then that does as well as we are, you know, that then brings to different
and different consequences. And so I think with this, I think that if you go to the next slide,
I think this is the, yeah, that the so what I believe is important here is that we look at
these three things. So how can we go to these deeper layers of society or social reality, sorry,
how we should not stay in the empirical, how we always need to be conscious that what we are
investigating is an open system. And in every open system, it's we have this complexity when things
just come together. And in the coming together, and here is I think the social structures as
Tony Lawson defines is the this is really about the positions of these parts. So I think here,
yeah, those are the three things that we should kind of take into account when we investigate.
And these generative powers are really the object of analysis, what are they and what are they doing?
And I, yeah, if you have any questions, I think this is a good time to just break a bit
the talking. And any question, if someone would like to take the mic, I think there are some
questions. Yeah, so there's there's a few questions that have that I've dug out of the chat. So if you
do have questions, please pop them in the Q&A section, just make some a bit easier for us to
find an answer, especially when there's a few coming in at once. But just I want to go back to a
few that came out of the chat from from earlier on. And so we have one from Stephen, with the
that I think builds on the discussion of friendship, saying wouldn't this imply that ideas as real as
objects. And I think that's a really interesting question. And I would I would personally say
yes, I mean, it depends what you mean by as real as something, but just just to kind of just define
and back the answer up. And if you think about the human individual, and argue that the URIs
an individual person is real, then we could say that actually, we're just made up of smaller parts,
as Caroline has just been saying, and that those are real, and that those are made up of smaller
parts, and those are real. So unless we believe that there's some bottom layer of reality from
which that is the only thing that's real, if we want to claim that we as people and other
objects we see around us are real, and I think it makes just as much sense to say that ideas and
social structures that emerge from us are real objects. And one final thought on this building
on the causal criteria for reality is that critical realists talk about reasons being causes,
and the way that the reasons we do things, the justifications for things, the ideas we have
about things can be causes. So hopefully that answers the question, but do come back in the chat
or by raising a hand if you want to. Caroline, were there other questions? I have a couple more
here, but I don't know if you have any at your side. I'm just looking at the Q&A, but I think we'll
leave them to the end. Is that right? Okay, yeah. Daniel has a hand raised. Daniel, did you want to
come in? I just would be interested. I know that Pascal is making a difference between a transitive
and intransitive dimension. Would that not be an important concept to discuss friendship?
Okay, just want to elaborate on that a little bit just to clarify.
Sorry, I didn't understand. What do you mean? Yeah, could you just say a little bit more just
to be clear on why that you think that relates to friendship? Yeah, I'm just good to have it.
Okay, I'm not totally sure, but I would say that Pascal would say that in a friendship as I wrote
in the chat that there are different layers of friendship. And perhaps regarding a personal
friendship, I have with somebody that something that can change quite quickly. But the concept
of friendship, what we do think of friendship is something we have in our culture. And that's not
that easy to change our ideas. And I think if I understand Pascal right, he would even say that
behind the concept and our cultural ideas about friendship, there is something deeper
in reality and a lethic level where friendship is real and does not change. Would you agree?
Okay, yeah, no, I think I would agree. That's really interesting. So we have the transitive
dimension being the dimension of knowledge and knowing and the tools of understanding, so to
speak, the way in which we understand and explain the world and the intransitive being the world
itself, the thing we're studying and looking at. So I'm really just repeating your answer back to
you, Daniel, but just for clarity for some of those who are listening. And so when we're talking
about the transitive, we're thinking about how we see friendship as a society, perhaps how we see
friendship as sociologists, maybe, as well. But then there is something real going on as well
underneath there. There are causal mechanisms that mean that a friendship between two people can have
effects in the world. It's real regardless of whether other people acknowledge it or notice it
or study it or not. So I think that's the idea of the distinction there. And hopefully that's
answered the question. Please do come back if not. Caroline, is there anything else to pick up on?
No, well, I think that if it has effects, this is one thing where we then need to say, okay,
wait, let me go deeper here. Let me think about this. I think this is really the kind of first
thing where you say, okay, this has effects. And that's the criteria that we used in our last slide
to when something is real and when it's causally efficacious. So I think that is really something
to think about. But yeah, brilliant. Even Daniel was saying it, right? We've got quite a few of the
questions here. Shall we take these or should we take the next section and come back to them all at
the end? I suggest, yeah, we don't have that much to go. So we could take the next section and then
we start with our Q&A. And in our last half an hour, I would say that would be great.
Okay, that's a good idea. So we don't have, yeah, we only have a couple of slides left each. So we'll
say this and then we'll open a bit more space for others to come in and to answer some of these
other questions that are in the chat and Q&A. Brilliant. Okay, so thinking about the implications
of a critical realist ontology, I just want to quickly look at a few philosophical implications.
There are perhaps a lot more than I've summarised on this slide here, but just to raise a few.
So firstly, one implication is that there is a reality beyond our experience of it.
So I think that's, I suppose, might be obvious to some people, but is an important
point to make when we're conducting social science and to be aware of that there is a
reality beyond our experience. Perhaps more controversially, the implication of critical
realism is that there's a reality beyond actual events. So there are potential causes that could
have been triggered or could have happened that didn't. And we can think about these as being
part of the real, these causal mechanisms or causal properties of entities. And there's this
point that reality is not necessarily how it appears to us, which raises that problem about
whether we can be sure about the world around us and about reality, which gives us that fallibility
although we can generate knowledge on the basis of assumptions we find compelling,
we can't be 100% sure we might always be wrong. So, and then finally, I just want to go to these
bullet points at the bottom of the slide and highlight that when we're conducting research,
we need to consider both causality and meaning. So traditionally, positivists have focused on
causality and interpretivists have focused on understanding meaning. Critical realism calls
for us to do both to try and explain society and explain causality and to understand meaning as well.
We need to focus on both structures and agents, so both the social context in which people live
and their unique kind of creative powers as individual agents to make change in the world.
We need to understand relations between people, so those friendships we were talking about,
but maybe also those, or maybe even more importantly, those economic relationships
like landlord and tenant, for example, or employer and employee. But then we also need to understand
and think about relations between ideas and the way in which two ideas might contradict one another
and this might have causal consequences in the world. Archer talked a lot about this in her
theory on culture and uses examples from religion where contradictions arise in the Bible and that
has a causal impact on how society develops. And then finally, we need to think about both the
natural and social. So as Caroline has said, critical realism insists that we need a kind
of general philosophy for understanding both and although the social world is very different in
lots of ways, we need to be aware of both. And when we're studying society or our various
disciplines in social science, we need to be aware of our bodies and the physical world around us
as well as the kind of ideas and discussion and language and discourse, etc. Okay, so those are
just a quick run through some philosophical implications. I hand over to Caroline for more
practical implications. Yes. And thank you, Jack. I want to again insist that these implications,
particularly the practical ones, are going to be kind of unfolding along these seminars.
So I do encourage you to go to all of them because I'm just kind of, you know,
I'm even touching the tip of the iceberg because there are epistemological implications which
are going to be addressed in the second seminar. One thing that in my experience, I have experienced
myself, is very important, is the critical realism so that philosophy of science has an
immediate implication in my research design or in our research design. What is the methodology?
Which are the methods I'm going to use to collect which data? Is it enough? Does it
allow me to go deeper? Or does it open the door to then go deeper? And I think that is one of the
key things that, yeah, one needs to be aware if I'm using this, okay, what are the implications for
my methodology for my design of my investigation? And it's always important to ask, what is the
nature of the object that we're investigating? What is it made of? What are the constituent parts?
What are these? How are they? I think Jack was saying these kind of basic concepts, which are
they? I need to really be very aware that that is very, very important. And if you read, I think
someone made that comment in the chat at the beginning, the guide that Tom Fryer did, which is
really an amazing work, that also I think signals, at least for me, a deep understanding and that's
why he's able to do the comics of it, because it's a deep understanding that has been really put to
and brought to another level. So you don't go looking for something that doesn't exist. And so you
don't ignore the full reality of the world. And if you set up off with a bad theory of ontology,
you really are risking that you'll end up with a math project or, yeah, or just,
yeah, it can go really wrong, I have to say, if our ontology is not well determined and defined.
And if we have this kind of, yeah, this position that we are clear about. And I think in this seminar
of this morning, we have very experienced people with not only PhD students, but people that are
more experienced. Nevertheless, I would like to just make a comment. I arrived quite late to
critical realism. And I came also from a very practical space. I was a math teacher, which I'm
still, but I worked a lot in this kind of teaching environment with a more pragmatic approach to
what I was doing. And when I confronted myself with doing a PhD and thinking about ontology and
epistemology, I would say I think I didn't take it that seriously at the time, because I was ignorant
really. And I changed at a later stage, but I took a year to understand what is this ontology really
about. And once I have it clear, then I could do all the rest. And so I just want to say that,
yes, it is important to have a clear ontological stance and being aware of what are these implications.
And I think with this, we've come to an end. And we go to our Q&A. I think it's great with
our time. And we have some questions here in the Q&A. So, yeah, any questions, I think,
from this, or shall we just, and yeah, someone was asking about a reference, and I just said
they are here in these slides. And we're going to put the link to the slides in the critical
realist network site at the end of today. So, yeah, there's so much going on in the chat.
Sorry, I was just trying to find my unmute button there. Yeah, just before we go to the Q&A,
I think we've picked up everything in the chat. If you've asked questions in the chat,
and we've not touched on them, please pop them into the Q&A. We'll make sure we get to all those
there. I just want to pick up on one other that was asked by Christopher, which is whether
objects have agency. And this depends on how we use the word objects. And I just want to say that
you will find the word objects and objective used in so many different ways in the literature
about ontology and epistemology. So, be very wary when you see that word and try and read
around it to understand what the author is saying. In my own kind of understanding, I would say that
yes, objects can have agency because we are both objects and agents. Our body has a physical
existence in the world that makes it an object that can kind of knock against things or we can
walk into things, etc. But also it has an internal existence that is able to think and
has a kind of unique creative capacity in the world to observe and
to make change and to kind of accept or reject ideas, etc. So I would say that's one way in
which objects have agency. And then there's various kind of guess work about what other
objects have agency. We assume animals have agency to some extent as well and then I will
leave it up to your own imagination to see how much further you want to take that. Some people
might argue that society as a whole has some consciousness or agency. I'm not personally
convinced by that one, but that is a position that some people argue. And I suppose it's one of the
reasons that critical realism is often compatible with religious approaches, though I'm not myself
religious, other people within critical realism are. So that's quite a broad question. Answer to
your question, but hopefully that's helpful. Caroline, did you want to pick a question?
Yeah, I think a Hindi. I'm not sure if I'm pronouncing well the name, but I had a question that I
asked. And again, him or her, I'm not sure if the name, because I'm not familiar with it, but
if you can put that question in the Q&A, because it was a question about structure and agency,
which I think is quite important, it's about how can social structure be applied, contextualized
at individual levels or the micro level in relation to human agency. So you're specifically
talking about structure and agency relationships at the individual level. And yeah, I just wanted
to say, I think the work of Margaret Archer is illustrative for this. She, her work on
reflexivity and the inner conversation, she has two books about that, the one of, yeah, I think
it's 2017, if I'm not wrong. But so she offers, and her, as well, I think her morphogenetic cycle
really allows you to think about the agency and this kind of how your inner conversation
is something really important, because it's what mediates your agency. Now, I would suggest there
is another Paolo Donati, who has worked with her in the relational subject. And I think Donati has
a more social approach to reflexive engagement, what the inner conversation, there is a critique
that we don't talk only to ourselves, we talk with others. And the inner conversation is not,
it's not the only thing that mediates agency, there are other, other conversations, if you wish. So
I hope to answer that question, Kehinde, I think that will allow you to, to explore this, this
question deeper with Archer's work. Yeah. Thank you, Jack, for putting that reference there.
Can I just also say that I know there are a few people here who've read quite a lot of critical
realism. So I don't want this to be the case that Caroline and I, the experts and you guys are all
asking the questions. If you have any contributions to add to what we're saying, that would be great
too. So please raise a hand and jump into the, to the discussion. Okay, so shall we pick up
another question here. Question from Mateus, do the natural and social overlap,
some social structures maybe influenced by the natural? Yeah, absolutely. So I think one, one
way of thinking about this is in terms of emergence. So the idea that the social emerges from the
natural. And when we use that word emergence, we're not necessarily talking about over time
here. We're thinking in any particular moment, there is the natural world that includes our
bodies and human made objects, for example. But from that, that natural world of atoms and cells
and biology emerges the social world of agency and thought and then social structures and ideas,
etc. So that would be one way in which they overlap that one emerges from the other. But then
thinking introducing time into the equation and thinking about this over time, we can say that
of course they interact constantly on, you know, a second by second basis, the natural and the
social world interacting. And I think exploring the interaction between them is a really important
kind of approach to social analysis. So yeah, really good question. Thanks. Please come in
and raise your hand if you want to add anything to that.
Christopher, I'm not sure, Jack, if you, if you did answer this question, because I'm not that great
at multitasking and hearing and reading at the same time. But I think it's a, it's a, it's a
question that is interesting. Can we distinguish the stratified levels of actual empirical and real
in data? So for example, interview data, document analysis, when doing qualitative research about
a particular social phenomenon, phenomena. So do you have any, any particular answer to this,
Jack, first to begin with? I, I, sorry, I was in the chat there. Just give me a moment. Yeah. So I
think in, in, I believe that this is our task as social researcher is to find the tools we need
to be able to, if the data does not allow us to go to that deeper level, which I think it doesn't
necessarily happen. So for example, if I, if I, if, if my entry point would be focus groups and I
do some discussion using a particular, you know, activity, and I want to trigger some conversations
about digital engagements, for example, with tools, how do you engage with what you engage, why you
engage, that data will only allow me to uncover this 10% the empirical level. If I want to go
deeper and explore these mechanisms that are there, I certainly need to put the theory in the
context of my research. Yes, I can't just say, you know, forget about my data and then go and look
for the theory that will allow me to identify which are the mechanisms that are responsible,
as we know, in an open system for these, for example, in my case, the lack of engagement.
Then I think you need to, with that in mind and your data, you need to go to the theory.
And there is where that combination, your experience as a practitioner in the field,
and having read quite a bit about the structures that you're exploring, I think you put them
together, but not necessarily the data allows you per se to go deeper into those levels. That's
how I see it. I'm not sure if there is another, and again, as Jack said, if anyone in the audience
would like to chip in, we're happy to do that because, yeah, that's kind of, yeah, my experience with it.
Okay, so I'm reading some of these questions. Yeah, I'm just just looking at the questions
to think of which one to answer. Maria is saying here, how do we know that we are actually unpacking
real as that unpacking is dependent on our perceptions? And this is a question I asked
myself a year and a half and every day, you know, how do I know that what I'm doing is real?
And yeah, Jack, if you want to jump into that one. Yeah. And so two thoughts on that one.
The first would be perhaps a bit of an unsatisfactory answer, but would be to say that critical
realism does insist on the fallibility of knowledge. I think I mentioned this to someone
in the chat earlier that critical realism is not offering kind of 100% certainty
in everything it does. Rather, it's trying to find the most compelling and convincing
understanding of reality using introspection and logic and as well as kind of our existing theories
and empirical understandings of the world. So it's trying to build the most compelling case
on the basis of that. On the other hand, perhaps, or hopefully giving a slightly more convincing
or slightly more satisfactory answer, hopefully, is that I think if we look at Baskar's argument
that there are underlying causal mechanisms in reality, I think there is, I personally find that
quite compelling because he asks what, how does the world have to be for us to kind of experience
it this way? How does the world have to be for science to be possible? He argues. So I would say
that although there are those skeptical challenges we were talking about earlier,
there is a degree of security we can have in our beliefs, even if we can't have certainty,
because our experiences of the world, especially when we talk to others and they have similar
experiences, do help us see or help us kind of follow the logic that Baskar's arguing.
Yeah, not a fully satisfactory answer, I'm aware, but hopefully that helps and I'd be interested
to hear other thoughts on that too. Yes, I think it's, yeah, it's not, and again,
you know, I don't think, I think the fallibility is something really important here and that's
going to happen. The epistemology you're going to, in the next seminar, you're going to explore that
deeper. But that's, I think that is an important part of the answer. Just picking another question
from the Q&A, which is again, this is quite blurry, but the question is quite interesting
regarding objects of study. The motto, don't go looking for something that doesn't exist,
seems sensible, but what about concepts that are intensely contested, or that many people
would question the basis of? And I think here, critical realism is interesting to work with
contested ideas. Are they real? Are they not real? And I would say this is kind of
reducing, again, the complexity of this philosophy of science, making a reduction in this instant
that I'm talking to you, which means this is not the only answer to this. But I think there is this
question, is it real? And if it's real, then I will study it using critical realism. Again, I'm in
this philosophy of science. So if it's not real, then I need to go for what is then the real aspect
of this phenomenon that I'm investigating. I think that's how I would approach this. And myself,
I'm looking at datafication as a phenomenon. Is it real? And why is it real? It's very contested.
What is it? What is it not? So I think, yeah, you know, and the basis of the real, again,
what you can say about is not definite, is not uncriticisable or academically,
you can always critique it and find a better explanation where you can say, well, you know
what, I think this is not real because that I'm here, I'm offering maybe this aspect of it
is real. And that's why it is, I think that is the way to go.
Thanks. And can I just pick up on the question from Gonzague and apologies by mispronouncing that.
Why do social researchers still not use critical realism in their inquiries?
What likely explanations could you provide on this issue? So it's difficult to kind of explain
why others aren't using your theory. I think that's always a problem with any kind of belief,
but just to share a couple of thoughts on that. One would be from my own discipline,
political science at least, and I'm sure it applies to others, that there isn't as much
critical reflection about our underlying ontologies and epistemologies as there should be.
It's something that lots of us learn at master's or PhD level. And then when lots of social
scientists go out to conduct research, the pressures of the academic world, perhaps,
and lots of other reasons might mean that they focus a lot less on their underlying ontology
and epistemology. So there is a kind of general lack of criticality that we could think about.
That would be one side of the explanation. And I think the other side of the explanation comes
from the influentialness of post-structuralism, and particularly the work of Foucault and others,
and those who have built on Foucault's work, who rejects the idea that the world contains
objects with essences, who reject the idea that the world contains structures, and instead
emphasise the fluidity and contingency of the world to the extent that there are no
entities within it. And I think there are lots of problems with that philosophical approach.
It's been very influential via Foucault and Judith Butler and others. I would personally
disagree with it, but I think that's one of the reasons that critical realism isn't more widely
used, because those who do reflect on their ontology and epistemology are often taking
this alternative post-structurist approach. So I think for those engaging with critical
realism as a theory in their thesis or research, that debate between critical realism and
post-structuralism I think is very helpful in outlining and defending a critical realist approach.
Yeah, and Stephen is saying that his supervisor says it's a cult, and I'm reminded by Ben Mansky,
who is part of the group of people organising the seminar, saying that in the United States,
where he is working, it's the same thing. It is something that is very, very much criticised as
a cult. And you know, again, I think there is really here, for me, my experience at least,
it needs to catch you. It needs to really ring a bell when you're doing your research. You just
kind of say, wow, this really is what I was looking for. This allows me to explain the
unexplainable until I got this, this kind of this philosophical approach to social science.
So I think also you need to really be, you're always going to be uncomfortable because I think
that is really what knowledge generates in us when we are creating this thing that we really
don't know. We're in this kind of really space where we don't know. But I think critical realism,
you know, it can be for different people, different things. And don't let yourself,
how do you say be deterred from using it? Because everyone, you know, they're people that defend,
you know, let's say new materialism, which has been a new, which also has a part of realism,
because Barat talks about agential realism. But there are, you know, there are people critiquing
this fiercely, others taking it and writing books. And so it's really, I think, what you,
your hunch, your inner investigator voice, what is it saying to you? And then you go
and explore it deep and you will be able to answer questions and, you know, and argue for
your position. It's not an easy one. Yeah, go for it.
Sorry, Caroline, after you.
No, go ahead, go ahead.
Yeah, I just wanted to come in and add to that, which is, as I said earlier, that quite a lot
of people who use critical realism also hold religious positions. And although I don't myself,
I'm personally an atheist. I think that often puts people off and people almost take the attitude
that religion doesn't have a place in social theory. But I would suggest that if you're religious,
then religion does have a place in social theory, because it is about your ontology
and how you understand the world to be. And we should be making that explicit and debating
and discussing it rather than trying to keep it separate. So that's one point. And I think the
other is that maybe some critical realist texts focus too much on only the critical realist tools
of understanding, whereas actually, I think the majority of those using critical realism
are exploring it in relation to other social theories, in relation to other social ontologies,
they're engaging at those boundaries and building those bridges. And I think that's where the really
interesting work is being done. So yes, that would be some thoughts on that question. And I just
want to very briefly say something that a few times in the chat, people have been talking about
abduction and retroduction. If those words are confusing you, we will come back to those in
future sessions. I'm sure that'll be picked up in the methodology, perhaps the epistemology
session and perhaps others as well. So we shall come back to those issues.
Yeah. And you know, I think social science is contested and that's the beauty of it.
And that's the richness as well. And I think the religion example is brilliant because I'm
myself an agnostic as well. And when I started to read about it, I really was puzzled with it.
And I was saying, you know, it stopped me in the sense of it made me read with more care.
And it made me read more to say, okay, let me see if this is really aligned with my ontology of the
world. But I think it's our position that we need to be able to defend it in our, if you're doing
your PhD in your Viva. I, for example, in mine, had quite hard questions to answer. But I knew it
because I really didn't understand anything about it when I started. And I think that is the important
thing. It doesn't matter if the people that are evaluating your thesis believe in it or not,
I think what is important, if you have been so coherent that you are arguing your methodology,
your explanation, your findings, the way in which you look at social change, non deterministic,
all of that, if that is in line, you'll be able to defend it. And is it that you're doing a research
project or your PhD, or you're doing something as a professional researcher, it doesn't matter,
but you will be able to, you know, to make a sound case. I think that that is key.
Excellent. I think we have answered the questions in the Q&A as far as I see it. But
I'd be very keen for people to raise their hands if they want to come in with
comments or other questions. We have eight minutes left. So if you do want to have other
comments you'd like to make or questions you'd like to ask, please type them in or raise your hand
and come in on the mic. It would be great to hear from some of you if there are any other
thoughts. We'll just give a minute or two to see if anything else comes in before we wrap up.
Yeah, Thanos, I think your comment is really to the point. So your supervisor said you're crazy
and at the end it's a great thesis. I think it allows really to make, because it is really,
you have to read to understand, you have to really go into it. It really allows it to
make a sound work. I think it was my case as well. And maybe just one other thing on that is that
it doesn't necessarily have to be the case that to use critical realism, you read everything that
is written by critical realists and mobilise it all as some kind of gigantic structure.
I think it's fine for you to be pulling out key ideas or key concepts that you find particularly
useful. As long as you're paying attention to ensure that there aren't key contradictions between
that and other parts of your theory, then it's okay to take parts from critical realism and
include that in your research. I don't think we should be concerned about whether you're
applying critical realism as a whole or not. And there our other sessions are going to be great.
I think the last one talks about the framework and how you then are able to include in your
scaffold structure these theories that make sense to your work. And there are people trying to build
bridges between one thing and the other, Frederick van den Berger being one of them. So there is a
lot of work going on in the social science and how can we communicate different maybe ways of
looking at the world who's using critical realism and the strength it offers.
Yeah, just another question or comment from Christopher about the relationship between
Paulson and Tilly's realist evaluation and the kind of more bascarian critical realist tradition.
So despite coming from the University of Leeds as both a Masters and PhD student,
I'm not that familiar with Paulson and Tilly. I have read realist evaluation,
but I'm not that familiar with their work or its influence. But I would say there's an interesting
divide really that is that there's a kind of blurred boundary there. There is an International
Association of Critical Realism Conference, and there is a realist evaluation conference.
So on the face of it, they look separate, but actually you'll find people using both at different
each conference, and you'll find people trying to overlap them in various ways.
I think they're basically different frameworks for social analysis that broadly accept some of the
same ontological positions would be a way of understanding it. Perhaps like I said,
I don't have the knowledge to go into a huge amount of depth about the precise differences
between them. But just as a more general comment is that Paulson and Tilly's realist evaluation
tends to be more widely and easily applied to policy and to more empirical research, and Bascar's
work tends to be more theoretically elaborate or in-depth, but is more a challenge to apply,
as some of you probably discovered. But hopefully the rest of the sessions in the series will
make that a little easier. Yeah, and that realist evaluation, I think what it really does, it
it uses these kind of concepts of generative mechanisms, the outcomes, and the context. I
think it does really use that, but then they use it in the way that is useful for them.
But I think they're, again, I don't know a lot, but I read two papers when I was trying to put
these causal pathways together from my own work, and it was illustrative in the sense of how do
you make your causal pathways? If you're explaining something, where are these mechanisms
really interacting and producing the outcome that I can see? It is helpful, but yeah, we don't need
to take things like lots of activity going in the chat, which is great.
Just to say that there's been one of the questions about when the realist evaluation
conference is. I don't know, but here's a website that should take you to the
details of the last conference, and hopefully through there you'll be able to find information
about the next one.
Yeah, and thank you for sharing your resources, which are quite useful as well,
so thank you for that. It enriches the space.
So I think without any further questions, I think we can draw the session to a close here.
I just want to say a huge thank you to everyone who's asked questions and contributed in the
chat. There's been absolutely loads going on there and loads of great exchanges of ideas,
and thank you all for attending. Make sure you come along to the next session on epistemology
and to follow the whole course through to the end, and we'd really appreciate your feedback
as well, so please drop us an email or get in touch with feedback and use the forums that
are on the Critical Realist Network website to ask questions and take the discussion forward as well.
Yes, thank you very much. It was a pleasure, and it's always so much that one learns being
in these spaces, so I'm grateful for your being here.
