The lecture is James A. Sellers, Professor of Mathematics and Director of Undergraduate
Mathematics at the Pennsylvania State University since 2001. He received his B.S. in Mathematics
from the University of Texas at San Antonio and his Ph.D. in Mathematics from Penn State.
Professor Sellers has written numerous research articles on partitions and related topics.
To date, more than 60 of his papers have appeared in a wide variety of peer-reviewed journals.
He was privileged to spend the spring semester of 2008 as a visiting scholar at the Isaac
Newton Institute at the University of Cambridge, pursuing further studies linking the subjects
of partitions and graph theory. Professor Sellers was named the Cedarville
University Faculty Scholar of the Year in 1999. In 2005, he received the Mary Lister
McCammon Award for Distinguished Undergraduate Teaching from his department. In 2006, he received
the Mathematical Association of America Allegheny Mountain Section Award for Distinguished Teaching.
Since then, he has also received the Teresa Cohen Mathematics Service Award from the Penn State
Department of Mathematics and the Mathematical Association of America Allegheny Mountain
Section Mentoring Award. Professor Sellers has enjoyed many interactions
at the high school and middle school levels. He has served as an instructor of middle school
students in the TechSprep program in San Antonio, Texas. He has also worked with Saxon publishers
on revisions to a number of their high school textbooks. As a home educator and father of
five, he has spoken to various home education organizations about mathematics, curricula,
and teaching issues. Professor Sellers prepared the course workbook
that comes with these lessons. The workbook includes summaries of each lesson, a glossary,
a bibliography, a list of formulas, and supplementary problems with detailed solutions to accompany
each lesson. To get the most out of this course, you should review the summary before watching
each lesson and work through the problems and solutions afterward.
