One of the things that separates algebra from arithmetic, or makes algebra algebra, is the
replacement of some of the numbers in our mathematical problems with things called variables.
In essence, a variable is some sort of symbol. Usually it's a letter from the alphabet that
represents one or more numbers in an algebraic expression. Using variables in certain algebraic
expressions provides us with the needed flexibility to solve a wide range of problems. And so
algebra is very important because it allows us to solve that wider range of problems that
arithmetic just can't handle. But you might ask, what's an algebraic expression? Well,
a definition is something like this. An algebraic expression is a combination of mathematical
symbols which might include numbers, variables, and maybe symbols for operations as well.
So for example, each of the following is an algebraic expression. You might take something
like x squared times y times z cubed. That in itself is one algebraic expression. You
might also have something like 5xy plus 7ab. That sum of two terms is also called an algebraic
expression. Or you might take something like 2 divided by x plus 3 divided by y. Again,
that's an algebraic expression. It has some numbers in it like the 2 and the 3, but it
also has those variables in it like the x and the y that appear in the two denominators.
Or you might have the expression that many of us are familiar with, pi r squared. That
alone, pi r squared is an algebraic expression. And I want to point something out there. You
actually see two symbols besides the two, of course. There's a pi and there's an r.
The pi is actually a constant. It represents a number. Many of us know it as something
close to 3.14. It's not exactly 3.14, but it's close. That is not serving as a variable
in that case, but the r is. So there's really only one variable there. That's r. And the
pi and the two are representing numbers. In all of these expressions that we've just
mentioned, each of the letters from the English alphabet served as variables, in fact. And
I want you to notice that the variables are often in italics. Every once in a while, you'll
see a small letter x in an expression. It might not be italicized. That x is being used
as a multiplication symbol. To be honest, we won't use such an x very often just so
we can avoid confusion between whether an x is a multiplication symbol or whether it's
a variable. But they are used from time to time by various authors and textbooks and
also on internet math sites, for example. So we will use a small x from time to time
for multiplication. Otherwise, you might see something like a small dot, small filled-in
circle, or maybe just parentheses around numbers and terms in order to represent multiplication.
Well, if instead of these things that we've just talked about, we only had numbers. So
for example, instead of x squared y z cubed, we had had two squared times five times four
cubed or something like two cubed times five times four cubed. We would have just had an
arithmetic problem then, not really an algebra problem. But once we start to replace some
of the numbers with variables, something like x squared times five times four cubed, then
we have something called an algebraic expression. And that's where the algebra can come in.
The flexibility of that letter x is very, very helpful.
Well, throughout this course, you're going to encounter variables and algebraic expressions.
And in this lesson, my goal is really to work with you on interpreting or translating English
phrases into algebraic expressions. It's very important that you're able to set up math
problems, word problems a lot of people call them, so that they can be solved using algebra.
Ultimately, if all we can do is manipulate symbols, we're not really that useful. So
we need to be able to take English phrases and convert them into mathematical symbols
and expressions. So for the next few minutes, I want to translate a number of different
English phrases into algebraic expressions. So for example, we're going to try to translate
the phrase five more than n into symbols in just a moment. We'll also translate phrases
like the difference of x and seven, seven less than x, the product of y and 13, and
the quotient of t and eight. So those are several English phrases that I want us to
translate today. And I want to translate them into algebraic expressions or into mathematical
symbols that we can then use in a mathematical problem. So let's start with the first phrase
that we had, five more than n. Well, if I had six bananas and you have five more than
me, then I would hope you would say that you had six plus five or 11 bananas. The same
is true with the variable included. When we say five more than n, we translate that into
mathematical language as n plus five. We actually add five to our variable n. The phrase more
than will typically translate to the operation of addition. And here's a tip that I think
we want to keep in mind. Many, many problems are easily solved if you pay attention to
these word clues, things like more than meaning addition. And from there, let's look at another
example. The second phrase I gave you earlier was the difference of x and seven. The difference
of x and seven. I want to translate that now into mathematical language into symbols.
One of the keys in this phrase is the word difference. Now, you should ask yourself what
operation, addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, does the word difference correlate
to or go with? Well, difference typically is going to go with subtraction. So when we
say the difference of x and seven, we mean in symbols x minus seven. So that's an example
where we see subtraction coming in to an English phrase. Okay, the third phrase was seven less
than x, seven less than x. So now I want to try to translate that into an algebraic
expression. Well, notice the similarity of this phrase to five more than x. We saw that
just a few moments ago. In this case, though, we want a number which is smaller than x by
the amount seven. Remember, we said less than. So I want an amount smaller than x by the
amount seven. This then is another way of referring to subtraction. If you want something
smaller, you should subtract. In fact, the answer here is x minus seven. And that's exactly
the expression we saw with the phrase, the difference between x and seven. So we should
just pause here briefly and notice two different English phrases can go with the same mathematical
or algebraic expression. That's going to be very important that we'll see that flexibility
as we're translating from the English into the algebra. Okay, let's look at another example
then, the product of y and 13. Remember what we're trying to do here. We're trying to translate
English phrases into algebraic expressions. This is going to be important for us as we
build up our understanding of algebra. We'll be handed these word problems. We need to
be able to translate them into algebra before we can actually complete the problems. So
the product of y and 13. Well, you may have heard the word product in the past when you
were doing math. To what operation does product refer? Well, the answer in this case is multiplication.
So when we ask for the product of y and 13, the algebraic expression we should write down
is y times 13. And remember, you might use a little dot between the y and the 13. You
might use one of those little x's as well. I'm going to encourage you to practice using
the dot instead of the x. Nothing wrong with the x, but I just want to avoid that confusion
later on between the little symbol for x for multiplication and the variable x. Now, you
should note that when you're multiplying a variable like y with a number like 13, it's
perfectly fine to write it as y times 13. However, the typical practice is that we would
write the number in front of the variable. And therefore, I would suggest we practice
writing this as 13 y or 13 with a dot and y instead of y times 13. They're both fine.
They both mean the same thing, but 13 y is more typical to write than y followed by a
13.
Okay, so now let's keep going with our translation of these English phrases. The other one that
I mentioned to you earlier was the quotient of t and 8. So now we've seen addition and
subtraction and multiplication. What does the quotient refer to? Well, the answer is division.
So the answer here is pretty straightforward. It's t divided by 8 or t over 8. Now, let
me point out you have two different notations here then for that quotient. You can use the
division symbol, the dot, the little horizontal line and another dot, or you can write it
as a fraction with t divided by 8. That's a really good reminder that fractions are really
about division. Now, before we go anywhere, let's point out, you might have said, well,
the quotient of t and 8, why wasn't the answer 8 over t? That's a great question. I'm glad
you asked it. Well, what would the phrase need to be in order to have 8 over t as the
answer? Well, we would have asked for the quotient of 8 and t rather than the quotient
of t and 8. So it's very important that we watch the order in which these things happen
in our phrases. It's going to be very important as you translate pieces of word problems into
algebra.
Okay, so let's move to the next level of problems involving variables and expressions. I want
you to notice that in the previous examples, we were given a letter, n or t or x or y,
which would stand for our variable. But in lots of word problems that you're going to
encounter, the name of the variable is not going to be given to you. This means that
you and I have to provide the variable names, and that means lots of choices. For some students,
the vast number of choices can sometimes be paralyzing. I've known students who were just
afraid to move forward with a problem because they didn't know what to call the variable.
I don't want you to feel this way. When you're in doubt, just use a variable name with which
you're comfortable. Just pick x or pick n. It won't be a problem to do so. There's not
a better name over another name. Just choose one, and once you get comfortable with this
practice, you'll start naturally picking various letters for your variables. But for now, don't
try to get creative. Just use n or use x or use t if you'd like.
Okay, with that said, let's look at an example where no variable was actually given to us.
I want us to write an algebraic expression for the phrase, eight more than two times
his age. Eight more than two times his age. Well, let's start by identifying the quantity
which needs a variable. In this case, it's the phrase his age. So let's begin by letting
a equal his age. How do we know that age was the quantity that needed a variable? Well,
let's look back at the original phrase for a moment. Eight more than two times his age.
Let's just walk through the phrase one word at a time, and let's see what the words mean.
Eight more than two times his age. Well, eight is just a number. That's not going to need
a variable. More than also is not a variable. It's not a noun, for example. So I don't need
a variable for more than two is a number. It's just going to be a two in a few minutes.
And times, well, that's not going to be a variable, but I bet you know what it is going
to be. It's going to be an operation. And the last phrase is his age. So the only thing
that really needed a variable was his age. And I've declared that phrase his age to
have the variable a. It's very important as we move forward mathematically that we declare
what these variables are. So rather than just sort of jumping into the problem without stating
that a is his age, we really should pause and write it down on your paper a equals his
age. Often the students who do jump right into a problem by defining a letter with a
given variable can't remember later on what the variable letter actually stands for. And
the problems are going to get more complicated. And you won't know whether a is his age or
her age or something else. So when especially when multiple variables are involved, you
really want to declare at the beginning of the problem what each variable stands for.
Okay, let's go back to our problem then. We've said now that a is his age. I want us to write
the algebraic expression for eight more than two times his age. Well, we know his age is
a. What is two times his age represented by? Well, two times refers to multiplying his
age by two. So two times his age is represented algebraically as two times a. Again, you
might write that just as two with an a, or you might write it as a two with a little
dot and an a. Either way, fine. Now, how do we build up to eight more than two times his
age? Well, we need to focus now on the eight more than. And that means that we want to
add eight to two times his age. Well, two times his age is two a. Adding eight to that
is going to be eight plus two a. Or as most people would probably write it, two a plus
eight. Either of those two answers, by the way, is fine. It's the commutative property
of addition, which allows us to write either eight plus two a or two a plus eight. Let's
try another problem of this form where the variable is not given to us. Let's translate
ten less than three times the width. Okay. Now, the first thing we need to do is to declare
our variables. What is the unknown here? It's going to be the width. And so I'm going to
let w equal the width. Now, I want to point out again, you could have let x be the width
or t be the width. I chose w because it's going to remind me of width. Then we see that
three times the width is simply three times w. So I can just write that as three w. And
lastly, I need to incorporate the ten less than three times the width. Well, do you remember
a few moments ago, we looked at an example with less than and we pointed out that that
refers to subtraction. So the phrase ten less than three times the width can be represented
by three w minus ten. And that's going to be ten less than three times the width. Now,
you might have thought, I thought the answer was going to be three times the quantity w
minus ten. So you'd be doing w minus ten say in parentheses and then multiplying on the
outside by three. Well, that would have been an answer to a very similar phrase, namely
three times ten less than the width. Well, that's a slightly different phrase three times
ten less than the width. Notice that the difference is not in the words. In fact, the words are
exactly the same. It's just that they're in a different order. So that order is going
to really matter as we move forward. Well, we've spent some time discussing variables
and then using variables as the building blocks to create expressions. Our next goal is to
use these expressions to create equations. So here's a new term for us. Let's make sure
we define it. An equation is simply a mathematical sentence that uses an equal sign. That's it.
That's what an equation is. And typically that equals sign in a mathematical equation
plays the role of the word is or equals in an English sentence. So for example, one way
to translate the phrase seven plus three is ten is to write down the equation seven plus
three equals sign ten. Notice that the is there is replaced by an equal sign. One of
the most important skills that we need in algebra is the ability to translate these
word problems from English to equations. And we'll use that skill throughout the course.
But for now, I want to look at a few small examples just to get us started. So let's
do the following example. Let's translate this sentence into an equation. The area of
a rectangle is the product of the length and width of the rectangle. Well, here we
have not one and not two, but actually three different variables to define. And that's
what we need to do when we start such a problem. So let's do that first. Since there are no
numbers here to clue us in, we have to look more carefully at the language and pull out
anything that might signal a number that might be an unknown quantity. And for us in
this problem, those are going to be area, length and width. All three of those things
need a variable. So here's what we're going to do. Let's let A be the area of the rectangle.
Let's let L equal the length of the rectangle. And let's let W equal the width of the rectangle.
Now the first part of the equation, the English sentence is very straightforward because it
just said the area is. And that means that the first part of the equation is going to
be A equals A for area and the equals sign for the is. But now I don't know what the
right hand side of my equation needs to look like. Well, according to the sentence, it's
supposed to be the product of the length and width of the rectangle. Now, if we start
to translate that a little bit, it means it's the product of L and W. Remember, L was for
length of the rectangle and W was for width. But what's product again? We saw it earlier.
It's multiplication. So the right hand side is L times W or simply LW. And therefore,
I can glue all those pieces together and make my equation. It's just going to be A equals
LW. Now, you could have written that as A equals L, a little x, W, or maybe just A equals
L in parentheses times W in parentheses. These would have all been fine. We'll probably move
away from that little x symbol for multiplication. But using parentheses or a little dot, they
will continue to show up. Okay, let's build another equation then, since we're on a roll.
How about the following? Let's translate this sentence. The number of songs that Tom has
on his iPod is four more than twice the number of songs that Sam has on his iPod. Okay, what's
the first thing we do in these translations? We have to say what our variables are going
to be. So I say we use the following. Let's let T be the number of songs that Tom has
on his iPod. Nothing special about T, but that's my choice. And I'm going to let S be
the number of songs that Sam has on his iPod. Why did I choose T and S? Well, T helps me
to remember Tom and S helps me remember Sam. But again, you could have chosen X and Y or
A and B or lots of other choices. Now, let's go to the translation. The left-hand side
of the equation is easy. It's T because T is the number of songs that Tom has on his
iPod. The is in the sentence is going to be replaced by an equals sign. So up to this
point, I have T equals and then something on the right-hand side of the equation. Now
we need to work on what that right-hand side is. Well, twice the number of songs that Sam
has is exactly two times S. Twice is going to be translated into that two, and then of
course it's going to be multiplied with S, the number of songs that Sam has. Because
we know that the number of songs Tom has is four more than twice that number, we're going
to add four. So the right-hand side of my equation is two S plus four, and therefore
I know that my equation is going to look like T equals two S plus four. Well, before we
move away from that example, let me give you one more thought. In the previous problem,
let's say that the number of songs Sam has is 10. I want to know how many songs does
Tom then have? Sam has 10 songs, and we know that the variable S stands for the number
of songs that Sam has. So to figure out how many songs Tom has, I'm going to let S equal
10, and I'm going to plug that 10 in for S in the equation T equals two times S plus
four. And that means I'm going to have the following. T is going to equal two times 10
plus four, because I've substituted 10 in for S. Well, I can now simplify that right-hand
side. Two times 10 plus four, according to my order of operations, I need to do the two
times 10 first. Two times 10 is 20, and then I add the four, and 20 plus four is 24. So
if Sam has 10 songs, then Tom has 24 songs. Believe it or not, that's algebra. We just
used algebra to help us figure out how many songs Tom has based on how many songs Sam
has. Well, let's look at another example with this translation in mind, and maybe even
solve a quick algebra problem in the process. Let's translate the phrase, the number of
boys in the class is two-fifths of the number of students in the class. Now before we go
anywhere with this example, let me point out that the class is going to consist of boys
and girls. So when I say the number of students in the class, I'm referring to the number
of boys plus the number of girls. Now let's go to the actual translation. Again, the phrase,
the number of boys in the class is two-fifths of the number of students in the class. We
need to start by defining variables. It's the first thing we need to do. There are two
unknown amounts in the problem, the number of boys in the class and the number of students
in the class. Notice that the number of boys in the class, it's going to be less than the
total number, but that's fine. We don't have to worry about it at this point. So let's
let B be the number of boys in the class and let's let S be the number of students in the
class. So I have two variables and I'm going to work with those to do my translation from
the English into an equation. The first phrase that I see in my sentence is the number of
boys in the class. Well, thanks to the declaring that I did earlier for my variables, that
phrase is exactly B. It's that simple. And the word is in the sentence is going to be
replaced by an equals sign. So my equation is B equals something. The right hand side
is a little more complicated, but not by much. So let's look at that right hand side of the
equation now. It comes from the phrase two-fifths of the number of students in the class. Well,
the number of students in the class is S. So what I want is two-fifths of S. So now we
have a question. How do we translate the word of into algebra? Well, here's a very important
rule to keep in mind. In these kinds of sentences, the word of refers to multiplication and it's
going to do that always. So keep in mind when you see something like two-fifths of S, it
means two-fifths times S. And now I can tell you my equation. It's going to be B equals
two-fifths times S. And there you go. There's the equation that we were asked to write.
Well, let's use it. Once we have such an equation, it would be nice to use it somehow. So let's
talk about the following question. Let's say the number of students in the class, total
number of students is 35. How many of those students then are boys? Okay, here's an important
question that we need to ask ourselves. Which variable is going to get that 35 plugged into
it? We have two variables. We have the variable B and we have the variable S. We need to know
which one is going to get the 35 plugged in. Well, what did that 35 represent? The total
number of students in the class. And if you go back to the beginning of the example when
we wrote down what our variables were going to be called, we know that the total number
of students in the class is S. So that 35 is going in for S. And that means we're going
to plug 35 in for S into the equation B equals two-fifths times S. So let's do it. Plugging
in 35 for S gives us B equals two-fifths times 35. Now I need to multiply that fraction
two-fifths with the number 35. I don't know about you, but for me it's better to write
35 than as 35 divided by 1. That always seems to help me because then I have two fractions
sitting next to each other, a numerator on one and then a denominator and then another
numerator and another denominator. And at that point I can see things more clearly like
how to multiply and maybe some cancellation as well. When you write two-fifths times 35
over 1, can you see any of the cancellation that's natural there? I hope so. Notice that
the 5 and the 35 cancel just a little bit and the 5 just becomes a 1 in the denominator
and the 35 becomes a 7. So now you have 2 over 1 times 7 over 1, which of course is
just 2 times 7 and that's exactly equal to 14. So the number of boys in the class, remember
B stands for the number of boys, is exactly 14. And it's important that you always stop
at the end of such a problem and ask yourself, what does the number that I got at the end
mean? In this case that 14 means the number of boys in the class.
Well, today we've learned about variables, algebraic expressions and equations, very
important building blocks for a lot of the algebra that we're going to see in this course.
We'll definitely see them again very, very soon and we'll see them often. Next time we'll
talk about performing operations on algebraic expressions and I'll see you then.
