We've seen algebraic expressions in our previous conversations, and today I'd like to discuss
how we can simplify expressions as well as combine expressions with the usual operations,
things like addition, subtraction, and so on.
But before we do that, I'd like to spend some time on operations between expressions,
and I'd also like to talk about evaluating expressions.
So let's start with the following example.
I want to evaluate the expression t plus 5 quantity cubed minus 4t when t equals negative
2.
Well, when we're asked to evaluate an expression, it means we're supposed to plug in the numerical
values for each of the variables and then simplify the result.
We've done a little of that already in a previous lesson, but I want to work on some more complicated
expressions today.
Here we have only one variable, it's the letter t, and we're to plug in negative 2 for t.
That's what we mean when we say evaluate.
Well that would give us negative 2 plus 5 cubed minus 4 times negative 2.
And from our past conversations on order of operations where we have to handle things
inside parentheses, then exponentiation, then multiplications and divisions, and then additions
and subtractions, we need to do the following.
We're going to take the negative 2 plus 5 that's inside the parentheses and we're going
to simplify that first.
Negative 2 plus 5 is 3.
So now I have 3 cubed minus 4 times negative 2.
The next thing to do is the exponentiation.
And so I'm going to take the 3 cubed and turn it into 27.
Remember 3 cubed is 3 times 3 times 3.
That's actually going to be important later on in this lesson today.
So now I have 27 minus 4 times negative 2.
Well 4 times negative 2, remember that's negative 8 because when you multiply two signed numbers
and their signs are different, you get a negative answer.
So now I have 27 minus negative 8.
And 27 minus negative 8 is the same as 27 plus 8.
At that point I just add those two numbers and I get 35.
And my final answer is 35.
Let's look at a second example of evaluating expressions which highlights different types
of expressions involving exponents.
I want to do the following.
Let's evaluate AB whole thing squared and A times just B squared for A equals 3 and
B equals 4.
So let's begin with AB whole thing squared.
If you use A equals 3 and B equals 4, you're going to have the following.
AB squared is 3 times 4 whole thing squared.
Now you need to do the work inside the parentheses first.
3 times 4 is 12 and 12 squared or 12 raised to the 2 is exactly 12 times 12 which is 144.
So AB squared when A is 3 and B is 4 is 144.
Now next let's do the same kind of evaluation but with the term AB squared.
Well in that case you have 3 for A and 4 times B, 3 times 4 squared.
Notice that the squaring is only happening to the 4 that's very, very important here
and you have to do that exponentiation before you do the multiplication.
Remember your order of operations.
4 to the second power is 16 and that gives me 3 times 16 which is 48.
Now I need you to notice that those two answers are very, very different, 144 and 48 when
we did those two evaluations.
And that means that the two expressions themselves are very, very different as well.
They look similar, one just looks like it has a few parentheses and the other doesn't
but in fact they're very, very different.
So note that as we walk through this algebra.
In fact AB to the second power is AB times AB and if you put all that together you have
AB AB and you can move the A's together and move the B's together and you'll get A to
the second times B to the second.
Notice now in that case the A has been raised to the 2 but in the other expression A times
B squared the A was not raised to the 2.
So they're very different expressions and they're going to give you very different evaluations.
Let's look at one more evaluation example before we move on in the lesson.
Let's take a word problem of the following form.
A farmer has a plot of land and it's shaped like a right triangle.
The area which I'm going to call A of that triangle is given by A equals one half B
times H. Now what is B and H in this case?
Well B is 100 feet and H is 300 feet.
Let me just point out what B and H really stand for.
B is often thought of as the base of your right triangle and H is often thought of your
height or of the vertical part of that right triangle.
Well with B equals 100 and H equals 300 I'd like to determine the area of the farmer's
plot of land.
So it means I want to evaluate the expression A equals one half B times H when B is 100
and H is 300.
It's going to give us one half times 100 times 300.
And if we multiply the one half with 100 it's going to give us 50, a half of 100 is 50.
And that means I need 50 times 300 which is 15,000 square feet.
So the farmer with this right triangle piece of area has exactly 15,000 square feet to
work with.
Okay so we've seen several examples of evaluating expressions at different numerical values.
What are some other ways that an expression can be manipulated or simplified?
Well just as with numbers we can do addition, subtraction, multiplication and division and
even exponentiation on our expressions.
So we're going to look at some rules now and we're going to follow those rules.
They're going to look very similar to rules that we've already seen but now we're going
to do those rules on algebraic expressions not just numbers.
So let's start by adding two expressions.
So what's the key here if I wanted to start adding two expressions?
Well if they involve variables then it's very important that the expressions must be identical
except for the number in front in order to actually add those two pieces together.
So what does that mean?
Well the number in front of an expression is known as its coefficient and so for example
the coefficient in 3x to the fifth is exactly the three that's in the front.
If I wanted to add 3x to the fifth and 6x to the fifth I actually can.
It's okay that the three and the six are different.
The key is that the powers on the x's are the same.
They're both five and therefore 3x to the fifth plus 6x to the fifth is 9x to the fifth.
It's just like three apples plus six apples is nine apples.
But I would not be able to add something like 2x to the fourth and 3x to the fifth because
the powers on the x's are different.
In one case it's a four, in the other case it's a five.
That would be like two apples and three oranges.
There's nothing more you can do with that.
Let's look at a few other examples of trying to add some expressions together.
Let's consider something like 7x times y squared and 3x squared times y.
Notice that the power on x in the first expression is one but the power on x in the second expression
is two.
By the way I should pause just for a second.
In that first expression 7xy squared you don't see a one on that x as a power.
When the power is not written there the power is one.
So 7xy squared is the same as 7x to the one times y to the two.
Notice that the powers on the x's then are different between the two expressions.
In 7xy squared the power on x is one.
In 3x squared y the power on x is two.
As soon as that difference happens I cannot add those two terms together.
But what about something like x times y squared plus x times y squared?
Can I add that together?
Can I simplify that expression?
And the answer is yes, xy squared plus xy squared is exactly two xy squared.
How about something like 7xy squared with 3xy squared?
Well except for the seven and the three which are the coefficients in front of the terms
these are the same expression.
So they can be added together and in this case we would have 7xy squared plus 3xy squared
equals 10xy squared.
And how about something like 7xy squared and 3y squared x?
At first those don't look like the same expressions if you read them.
But if you look at them just a bit closer you realize that the 3y squared x can also
be written as 3xy squared.
Remember that property of multiplication we called it commutativity when you can commute
the terms inside by multiplication you can rewrite that term.
So that expression becomes 3xy squared.
Once you've done that rewrite you realize that what you're really doing is adding 7xy
squared and 3xy squared.
Both of those are the same term except for the coefficient in front so they can be summed
together and you get 10xy squared.
Okay let's try a more complicated example now.
Remember we're just trying to simplify these terms, simplify these expressions.
I'm going to give us a bit more complicated one now.
Let's simplify 5a squared b plus 3ba squared minus 6a squared b plus 8 times ab whole thing
squared.
Well I want to combine all these terms, I want to shorten the expression as much as
possible.
That's what I mean by simplifying.
So let's just march through this as we go through.
We have 5a squared b plus 3ba squared minus 6a squared b plus 8 times ab squared.
The first two terms can actually be grouped together once I realize that the 3ba squared
is the same as 3a squared b.
And when I group those two together I realize they are the same term except for the coefficients
but that's okay.
5 plus 3 is 8.
So those two terms are going to become 8a squared b and then I have minus 6a squared
b plus 8 times ab squared.
Well 8a squared b minus 6a squared b is just 2a squared b, subtraction is going to work
just like the addition, and so I'll have 2a squared b plus 8 times ab squared.
Remember from our earlier comments that ab whole thing squared is a squared b squared
and because of that I cannot simplify this expression anymore because one of the terms
is of the form a squared b and the other one is actually a squared b squared.
So my final answer is as short as it can be.
Well in a nutshell like terms can be added and subtracted just as 7 bananas plus 3 bananas
gives me 10 bananas but 7 bananas plus 3 apples cannot be simplified.
And so when I'm looking for light terms for addition and subtraction I simply need to
see if the two expressions are identical except for the possibility of the coefficients
in front, the numbers in front being different.
Well let's talk next about multiplication of expressions.
So before we do so I want to remember a few rules where exponentiation is involved when
we're multiplying two terms.
So here's a pretty straightforward example.
What is a cubed times a to the fifth power?
I just want to multiply those two together and when I do so a cubed times a to the fifth
is the same as a raised to the 3 plus 5 and a raised to the 3 plus 5 is a to the eighth.
Now one error that some students fall into here when they're multiplying a cubed times
a to the fifth is that they want to multiply the exponents and if you did that of course
you would actually get a to the 15 because 3 times 5 is 15 but that's wrong.
A cubed times a to the fifth is a to the eighth and you can remember that if you write it
all out in long form.
A cubed is a times a times a and another a to the fifth multiplied with it is a times
a times a times a times a.
This long string of a's being multiplied together and what do you have?
You have a times a times a times a times a times a times a times a times a times a and
that's exactly a raised to the eighth power by definition.
So when we're working with these exponents and we multiply two terms together we want
to add the exponents and that's the first rule we need to remember.
And you have any number x which is not equal to zero and you have any two exponents let's
say a and b so that you have x to the a times x to the b that quantity can be simplified
to give me x raised to the a plus b.
So x to the a times x to the b equals x to the a plus b.
There's a similar rule for division that we need to remember and in that case you actually
have to subtract the exponents instead of adding.
So when you have x to the a and you divided by x to the b it's the same as x to the a
minus b.
So an example would be the following.
Let's say you had x to the seventh and you wanted to divide that by x cubed.
Well by the rule I just gave you x to the seventh divided by x cubed would be x raised
to the seven minus three.
Seven minus three is four and therefore the final answer would be x to the fourth.
We can look at that again just like I did with that long string of a's a moment ago
by doing the following.
X to the seventh is x times x times x times x times x times x times x in the numerator
divide that by x times x times x in the denominator which is x cubed and now you can start canceling
x's from the numerator and the denominator and you'll be left with x to the fourth on
top divided by one.
All of the x's in the denominator will go away and of course x to the fourth divided
by one is just x to the fourth.
Where did that four come from?
It's just seven minus three.
Well I'd like to say we ought to look at a numerical example just to make sure this is
okay.
So let's do that real quick with some powers of two.
Let's say you wanted to find thirty two divided by four.
So using long division of course thirty two divided by four is just eight so I know that
thirty two divided by four is just going to be eight as my final answer.
What if I had written it though as powers of two instead?
Well thirty two is two raised to the fifth power and four is two raised to the second
power and thirty two divided by four then would be two to the fifth divided by two
to the two or two squared as some people say and if you start canceling two's out of the
numerator and denominator you'll see that two to the fifth divided by two squared is
exactly two cubed and that three is coming from five minus two.
So in fact my rule for dividing two powers of the same variable really does hold.
So these two rules that I just shared with you for multiplying and for dividing powers
are extremely important.
You'll want to memorize them now, you'll want to keep remembering them, refreshing your
memory as you go through this course.
You're going to want to become comfortable with these two rules because you will see
them often as we walk through algebra together.
Now a lot of the rules in algebra are presented as an example so you really should memorize
those but you should also think through about what's going on.
Memorize the example but also memorize the rule I think that's going to be extremely
important.
Okay let's look at some examples of multiplication and division of expressions now which are
a little more complicated.
So here's one which involves only multiplication.
I want us to simplify the following expression.
U to the fifth times v cubed multiplied by t squared times u to the seventh times v to
the fourth.
Notice that we're really just multiplying five small terms together, a u to the fifth
of v cubed, a t squared, a u to the seventh and a v to the fourth.
Okay next I'm suggesting that we reorder all the terms to our advantage.
Remember we're allowed to switch the way the terms are written thanks to the commutative
property of multiplication.
So let's get all of the letters or the variables next to one another that are the same and
if I do that reordering I'm going to have t squared times u to the fifth times u to
the seventh times v cubed times v to the fourth.
Notice I've got the u's together now and I've got the v's together and now I recognize
that I can use the rules that I just mentioned to you a moment ago.
In particular I can merge the two powers of u together and write that as u to the five
plus seven and I can do the same thing with the powers of v and I get v raised to the
three plus four.
Notice that the t squared doesn't have another term with which to combine.
It's not a problem.
It's a bit lonesome but it's not a problem for us mathematically.
The t squared is just going to sit out in front by itself.
And once I add those exponents together I'm going to have t squared times u to the twelfth
times v to the seventh and that's going to be my final answer.
Okay, I would suggest then that we simplify a slightly more complicated example than the
one we just did by introducing some other types of exponents.
So let's simplify the following.
Six a to the fifth times b to the fourth times c cubed, that's one term, times five a to
the negative three times b to the eighth times c to the zero times two a to the negative
two times b to the third times c to the seventh.
Okay, now notice here that I've actually introduced a lot of different situations compared to the
previous example.
First of all we have numerical coefficients floating around.
They're the numbers out in front and in this case they are six, five and two.
They're not a problem but they are there.
Notice I've also thrown in a zero exponent c to the zeroth power.
Again, that's not a problem.
It's a little odd looking but it's okay.
And we have some negative exponents now.
They're also not a problem.
The rules will still follow even with those negative exponents.
So let's just work with them as if they were just any other number.
And first let's rewrite the product so that the like terms are near one another.
Again, I want to try to get the variables which are the same letters next to one another
so I can apply my rules.
Notice that I can also pull out or put together the numerical coefficients out in front.
I can literally pry those out and put them in front of the variables and that's exactly
what I'm going to do here.
The following, I mean I have six times five times two, those were the numerical coefficients
times a to the fifth times a to the negative three times a to the negative two times b
to the four times b to the eighth times b to the third times c to the third times c
to the zero times c to the seventh.
It's a mouthful to say but it's all right there on the screen.
Now the product of the numerical coefficients is straightforward to do.
We're simply going to multiply those like an arithmetic problem.
Six times five times two and that's going to give me 60.
So the final answer's coefficient in front is going to be 60.
After that, multiplying all those terms together, remember, remains that we just add the exponents
and so that's what I'm going to do here.
I'm going to end up with 60 times a to the five plus negative three plus negative two
times b raised to the four plus eight plus three times c raised to the three plus zero
plus seven.
Now I just add those exponents and what do I get?
Well I get 60 times a to the zero times b to the fifteenth times c raised to the tenth.
Now most people would write that as 60 times b to the fifteenth times c to the tenth since
a to the zero is one as long as a is not zero.
And so I'm going to suggest that our final answer for simplifying all of that work is
60 b to the fifteenth times c to the tenth.
And before we move to another example, I just want to point out we started with a big mathematical
expression before we got down to this much smaller expression.
And I think it's very important that we notice that these algebraic rules are allowing us
not to work with big expressions but actually simplify them down to much smaller ones.
Okay, so let's look at another example now.
Let's look at one that involves some division.
We haven't done much with division yet in this lesson.
So let's simplify the following.
20 x to the fifth y cubed divided by 5 x squared y to the negative fourth.
Now I see that negative exponent, it's okay.
It's really not a problem.
The rules will still follow even with that negative exponent.
But I do want you to notice that this is the same as simplifying 20 x to the fifth y cubed
divided by 5 x squared y to the negative four.
From here, we should be able to handle the numerical coefficients first and pretty simply.
The numerical coefficients are 20 divided by 5.
And that of course is the same as 4 divided by 1 or just 4.
So our original ratio or quotient is now simplified to 4 x to the fifth y cubed divided
by x squared y to the negative four.
Now we need to use our division rule that I mentioned earlier.
I want to put together the powers of x and I want to put together the powers of y.
The rule in that case was that the exponents had to be subtracted one another.
The power on the x in the numerator minus the power on x in the denominator and the
same for the powers of y.
So I'm going to have 4 times x raised to the 5 minus 2 times y raised to the 3 minus
negative 4.
Since 3 minus negative 4 is the same as 3 plus 4, which is 7, we know that our final answer
for this problem of simplification is 4 times x cubed times y to the seventh.
Now I'd like to think a bit about simplifying some more complicated expressions.
And so let's do one more, at least for now, which involves exponentiating something that's
even larger.
So here it is.
Let's look at the following example.
Let's simplify a cubed times b to the fifth all squared.
Well a cubed times b to the fifth all squared means exactly a cubed b to the fifth times
a cubed b to the fifth.
It's that simple.
When you square something, you just write two copies of it down one after the other.
So now you have a cubed times b to the fifth times a cubed times b to the fifth.
You can now use your commutative property of multiplication to get the a's next to each
other and to get the b's next to each other.
And at that point, you can use your rule that says you add the exponents in order to simplify.
And so you'll have a cubed times a cubed, which is the same as a to the three plus three.
And you'll have b to the fifth times b to the fifth, which is the same as b to the five
plus five.
At that point then you have a to the sixth times b to the tenth.
And that's just using the rules that we've seen.
If we follow those rules, we'll be fine.
So I'd like to look at the following example of simplification, which is by far the most
complicated one we've seen in the lesson.
I want us to simplify the following expression.
A cubed times b to the fifth divided by c to the fourth times a squared times b.
And I want to raise that whole quantity to the seventh power.
That's pretty complicated compared to the other things that we've seen, but it's okay.
Let's just follow our rules and let's see where they take us.
Well, the first thing I would really like to do is I'd like to split up that fraction
into actually two pieces with that power of seven there.
And what do I mean by that?
Here's what I mean.
The quantity I started you with is the same as a cubed times b to the fifth raised to
the seventh power divided by c to the fourth times a squared times b raised to the seventh
power.
How do we simplify then an expression along those lines?
Well, a cubed times b to the fifth all raised to the seventh is the same as writing down
a cubed times b to the fifth seven times.
And that means that you would actually have an a cubed seven times and you would have
a b to the fifth seven times.
So in that numerator, what would the power on a actually be?
Well it would be three plus three plus three plus three plus three plus three plus three
plus three.
It would be 21 as the total.
So you would have a to the 21, what would the power on b be?
Well, you'd have to add five to itself seven times and of course that's 35.
So your numerator would become a to the 21 times b to the 35.
What does the denominator become?
Well, I know how to handle the c to the fourth.
I'm just going to write it down seven times and if I write down c to the fourth times
c to the fourth seven times, it'll be the same as c to the four plus four plus four
plus four plus four plus four plus four.
What is all that fours added together?
It's 28 and so I would have c to the 28th power in the denominator.
I'd also have an a to the 14th power and I would have a b to the seventh power if I
use the same sorts of techniques.
And now once I've written the numerators in this sort of expanded form, I can now combine
them with the rule about dividing two powers of a variable.
Well, let's do that here.
I would have a to the 21 on top divided by a to the 14 on the bottom and that's a to
the 21 minus 14, which of course is a to the seven.
So part of my final answer is going to be a to the seventh.
I would also have a b to the 35 on top divided by a b to the seventh and if I subtract those
two exponents, I'll have b to the 35 minus seven, which is b to the 28.
So now I have a b to the 28th in my final answer as well.
Notice the c doesn't have anything to cancel with in the numerator, so I'm simply going
to have a c to the 28th in the bottom.
So my final answer is going to be a to the seventh times b to the 28th divided by c to
the 28th.
Well, that was a complicated problem.
Definitely the most complicated we've seen in the lesson, but that's okay.
As long as we follow our rules, we'll be fine.
By the way, we've actually used a third rule for exponents in this last example and that
rule is this.
If you have x raised to the y and then that whole quantity is raised to the z, it's the
same as taking x and raising it to the product y times z.
So for example, in the earlier example, we had c to the fourth raised to the seventh power.
That's the same as c to the four times seven, which is c to the 28.
And we saw that in that example.
Today we've looked at a number of very important rules for simplifying algebraic expressions.
Next time, we'll begin talking about principles of graphing in two dimensions.
You'll probably want to get some graph paper and a pencil as we work on that lesson together.
I'll see you then.
