Throughout this course we'll spend a good teal of time drawing the graphs of various
equations in two dimensions.
We'll especially spend a lot of time drawing the graphs of straight lines.
And as I mentioned in the previous lecture, you're going to need graph paper and a pencil
if you want to do these problems with me throughout this lesson.
I want to spend our time together in this lesson talking about some basics related to graphing
in the coordinate plane or the xy plane.
As we start, let me share a bit of history about graphing in the xy plane and also share
a number of vocabulary terms we'll use throughout the course.
In fact, there will be a number of vocabulary terms throughout this lesson.
It's okay.
We'll learn them as we go, but there will be several of them, so I just wanted to warn
you.
First, let's talk about that history.
The xy plane, which is sometimes called the Cartesian plane or the Cartesian coordinate
system, is named for the French mathematician and philosopher René Descartes, who was born
in 1596 and died in 1650.
René Descartes' major contributions to mathematics was his desire to unite algebra and geometry
or to try to visualize algebra.
With this in mind, the Cartesian plane emerged in Descartes' work, and it served as an extremely
important tool for those who developed calculus, namely Newton and Leibniz, who completed their
work in the latter part of the 17th century.
So what is this Cartesian plane or xy plane?
Well, simply put, it's the plane or two-dimensional space formed by two number lines.
One is horizontal, and the other is vertical, so that they intersect at right angles.
The horizontal number line, or horizontal axis, is often referred to as the x-axis.
The vertical axis is often called the y-axis.
There's nothing special about using the letters x and y here.
Most of the time, these axes are called the x and y-axis, but if we're working with different
variables other than x and y, we can certainly change the names of the axes if we need.
Now let's take a closer look.
These axes intersect at a point, remember it's going to be at right angles, and the point
at which the intersection occurs has a special name.
It's called the origin, so we're going to want to remember that the origin is right
in the middle, right where the two axes intersect.
And those two axes actually cut the Cartesian plane into four sections, and those sections
are called the quadrants.
So if you take a look after you've drawn an x-axis and a y-axis, you should think about
labeling the parts of that drawing.
So you can label, for example, the origin, which is the point where the two axes meet
one another.
You can label the x-axis.
Often people will label the x-axis with an x on the right-hand side, and you can label
the y-axis, and often people label that y-axis with a y at the top of that line segment.
Now once you've done that, you can then talk about the pieces of the plane that have been
cut out, if you will, by the axes.
And in this case, there are four pieces.
They sort of look like rectangular pieces, although in fact they sort of go off to infinity,
so they're not really rectangles.
But those four pieces are called quadrants, and here's how those quadrants are numbered.
Quadrant one is going to be in the upper right section of the plane, of the Cartesian plane.
Quadrant two then is the upper left section of the Cartesian plane.
Then quadrant three is the lower left section, and quadrant four is the lower right section.
So the quadrants go one, two, three, four.
In some sense, it might be good to remember that they go counterclockwise starting in
the upper right corner.
Now the origin, the axes, and the quadrants give us the skeleton of the Cartesian plane.
But from here, the natural question to ask is, well how do we label the points in the
plane?
In fact, that's probably the biggest question of this lesson.
How do the points in the plane get labeled?
Otherwise, this whole Cartesian plane isn't really helpful to us.
Well, let's look at a few more terms, a few more vocabulary terms that we need as we
try to decide how to label the points in the plane.
Each point in the plane is identified by two numbers.
We're going to call those numbers coordinates.
There's going to be an x-coordinate and a y-coordinate.
The x-coordinate is sometimes called the abscissa, and the y-coordinate is sometimes called the
ordinate.
I will use those terms throughout this lesson and other lessons, but to be honest I'll probably
call them just the x-coordinate and the y-coordinate most of the time.
The x-coordinate and the y-coordinate, when they're put together, those two numbers form
what's called an ordered pair of numbers.
And this is a very important rule now that you have to keep in mind.
When you write down that pair of coordinates, the x-coordinate always goes first, the y-coordinate
is always, always written second.
So for example, the ordered pair 5, 2 has x-coordinate or abscissa 5, and the y-coordinate or ordinate
is 2.
But how exactly do we know which point in the plane is then identified by this ordered
pair?
Well, here's how.
The x-coordinate or abscissa tells us how far to move horizontally to find our point.
By the way, you may struggle sometimes to know what horizontal versus vertical means.
One way I remember that is that horizontal starts with the word horizon, and the horizon
is out way in front of me this way, and so I remember horizontal in that way, and then
vertical must be the other one going this way.
So the x-coordinate tells me how far to move horizontally, and if the x-coordinate is positive,
then I move to the right of the origin.
If the x-coordinate is negative, then I move to the left of the origin.
This is exactly what we do with the usual number line.
If you think about it, we discussed that in an earlier lesson.
If you're on just the regular number line and you want to look at, say, positive 5, then
you go 5 units to the right of the origin.
If you want to look at negative 3, then you go 3 units to the left of the origin.
So that makes perfect sense.
By the way, the x-coordinate might be 0.
That's perfectly legal to happen, and if the x-coordinate is 0, then I simply don't move
either to the left or to the right.
I just stay at the origin at that point.
But then I have to look at the other number in my ordered pair.
That's called the y-coordinate or the ordinate.
Now what do I do with that piece of information?
Well, if it's positive, then I'm going to move up the vertical axis from the origin.
If it's negative, then I'm going to move down.
So in some sense, it acts like another number line, just a number line that's been turned
on its side.
So again, if my y-coordinate is positive, I'm going to go up.
If my y-coordinate is negative, I'm going to go down.
What if the y-coordinate was 0?
That's perfectly possible to happen.
If the y-coordinate is 0, then I'm not going to move either up or down.
I'm just going to stay in the same position where I was.
OK, so with that piece of information in mind, let's plot a point.
I think that would be a good idea, good way to start.
Let's plot the point 5, 2.
Start with the x-coordinate.
That x-coordinate is 5.
It's positive 5.
That tells me I need to start at the origin and move 5 units to the right.
Once I'm there, I now need to move up or down depending on that y-coordinate.
In this case, that y-coordinate is positive 2.
That means I need to move from here up 2 units and draw a nice big circle right there and
fill it in.
That point is exactly the one represented by 5, 2.
Good, we just plotted our first point.
Well done.
Let me ask you a quick question about it.
In what quadrant does that point live?
You've only got four choices for the answer, either 1, 2, 3, or 4.
5, 2 lives up in quadrant 1.
Very good.
If you've got quadrant 1, great.
You're going to want to remember where those quadrants are.
They're going to be very helpful as we work on future problems.
Let's plot a couple more points.
I say we start by plotting something like 3, negative 4.
Thankfully, this problem has a little bit of difference in it because I now have a negative
coordinate.
Which of those two coordinates is negative?
It's the negative 4, and that's the y-coordinate.
Well, we'll come to that y-coordinate in just a second, but remember how we start when we're
plotting a point.
We start at the origin again, and we take the x-coordinate and go either left or right
depending on the sign of that coordinate.
In this case, that's the number 3, and that number 3 is positive.
So I start at the origin, and I move right three units.
From there, I need to work with the y-coordinate.
In this case, that's negative 4.
It's negative.
That means I have to go down the vertical axis, if you will, four units, and so I'm
going to go 1, 2, 3, 4 units down in the process.
Once I've done that, I can draw a nice circle, and that dot represents the coordinates 3,
negative 4.
Now, we could ask the same question that we asked earlier, which quadrant does that point
live in?
It's 1, 2, 3, or 4.
Which one is it?
It's 4.
Exactly right.
Keeping in mind that the quadrants go 1, 2, 3, 4, that point is in quadrant 4.
Well done.
Well, let's get some more practice on this.
Let's plot another point.
How about negative 2, negative 5?
Well, the abscissa now, remember that's the fancy name for x-coordinate, is negative 2.
That's negative.
So I'm going to start at the origin, and now I'm going to move to the left two units.
So I'm going to be here now.
Then the y-coordinate, or ordinate, is negative as well.
It's negative 5, and that means I'm going to move downward 5 units in the process.
Once I've done those two steps, moving 2 to the left and 5 down, I'm actually at my
point's location, and I can draw it in with a little dot, with my pencil.
And now, let's ask the same question again to close.
Which quadrant does that point live in?
And now the answer to that is quadrant 3.
Okay, I'd like to take this a little bit further by plotting a couple other points, and now
I'd like to try to plot one that has much bigger coordinates, and then use that to motivate
us to think about our Cartesian coordinate system.
So let's try plotting negative 25, 30.
Now I've already done a few examples with you, and none of the coordinates that we had
looked at up to that point were very big, right, 3, 4, 5.
Now I'm looking at two coordinates that are both pretty big, negative 25 and 30.
And this leads me to talk about your actual plot on your graph paper.
You and I actually made some assumptions in the previous examples that I didn't really
want to mention at that point, but I'll mention them now.
You and I made the assumption that every little piece of the grid was exactly one unit, at
least that's the assumption I made.
I didn't really talk to you about labeling those units, but in fact, most people would
have just labeled them as 1, 2, 3, 4 in the horizontal direction and then 1, 2, 3, 4 in
the vertical direction as well.
But if you want to plot negative 25, 30 on a piece of graph paper, and you assume that
each unit is exactly one in measurement, your point is probably not going to be on
the piece of graph paper unless you have an immense piece of graph paper.
Imagine if I asked you to plot the point negative 2,500 comma 3,000, your graph paper would
have to be immense.
So we have a way to get around that.
Notice that we weren't required to make each unit of the graph paper exactly one.
We could have, for example, made it 5 or 2 or 10.
We could make them whatever we want, and it's very important that we keep that in mind as
we're trying to draw these points.
So in this case, as we're plotting negative 25, 30, might I suggest that we make each
unit exactly five in distance instead?
In other words, if you've drawn your two axes and you've got the origin labeled, the next
unit over from the origin in the horizontal direction, label it five.
You're allowed to do that.
Then take the next one and label it 10, then 15, 20, 25, and so on.
And then in the vertical direction, you can do the same thing, starting back at the origin
again, moving up, make the first line five, then 10, then 15, then 20, and so on.
You can do the same thing in the negative direction.
In the horizontal, it would be negative 5, negative 10, negative 15, and so on.
And in the downward direction below the origin, negative 5, negative 10, and so on.
And now you can plot this point, negative 25, 30, with no trouble.
Your paper no longer has to be this big in order to plot it.
Negative 25 would require you to go, remember, to the left in the horizontal direction, but
now, because your units are five at a time, you only have to go five over.
Five times five is 25.
So you've moved in the left direction, in the horizontal direction, and now you need
to go up 30.
But remember, each jump is five units.
So you only really have to go up six squares on your graph paper, five times six is 30.
And once you've done that, you've plotted your point.
Notice that's our first point we've plotted in quadrant two in this lesson, but you did
it by shrinking the scale of your graph paper.
That's perfectly acceptable to do.
Not a problem at all, but what's the key?
The key is, if you need to show your teacher, show whoever's teaching this course to you,
what you've done, you have to label those axes.
Very, very important tool for us to remember throughout this course.
Your axes must always be labeled.
Most of the time, we expect each square to be one in its distance, but in this case,
we made each square five, perfectly legal.
In fact, if you think about it, doing such a thing is like zooming in or out with a camera.
That's all we've done when we've gone from making each box one unit wide to each box
five units wide.
Well, with that said, I'd like to look at another example then, which has the same kind
of feeling to it.
Let's actually plot the point four thirds comma five thirds.
Why not use fractions?
Perfectly legal to do so.
Let's plot four thirds comma five thirds.
Now, if you make your units five wide and you want to plot four thirds comma five thirds,
you're going to be there a long time.
It's going to be hard to figure out where to put the points.
However, just as we went from a unit length of one to a unit length of five, we can also
go from a unit length of one to a unit length of one third.
That's also fine to do.
And so here's what I would suggest on a new piece of graph paper.
Draw your axes again, label your origin, and now as you're labeling the points away from
the origin, make them one third in length.
So in particular, as you're going down the x-axis to the right, the units would be one
third, two thirds, three thirds, four thirds, and so on.
And then going up the y-axis again, each line segment would be one third and then two thirds,
three thirds, four thirds, five thirds.
Now where does the point go?
Well, now the point is going to land on one of the cross hairs in the graph paper, which
is great because the x-coordinate here is four thirds.
That means you need to go over four units to the right and the y-coordinate is five thirds.
That means you go five up, one third, two thirds, three thirds, four thirds, five thirds.
You draw your dot, you're done.
So keep in mind this idea of units and how to label your graph.
It's very, very important that we do that.
Now one last example in this vein, let's plot negative 0.75, negative 1.25, a decimal number
for each of the coordinates.
No problem.
Now here's a question though, what should we make our units?
Well you have choice here.
You could make each one one, and that's not a problem.
So your graph would just be one, two, three, and so on as you label the x-axis and the
same for the y.
I'm going to suggest here, however, that for negative 0.75 and negative 1.25, making each
square exactly 0.25 in width would be perfectly acceptable as well.
As soon as you've labeled the axes that way, finding negative 0.75 over here and negative
1.25 downward, down in quadrant three, will not be difficult at all.
Again, I didn't have to choose 0.25 as the length on my grid, but by doing so it makes
it pretty straightforward to plot this point.
Okay, I'd like to put a slightly different spin on these examples by looking at another
type of problem.
Here I'm going to give you the two points labeled A and B already in the Cartesian plane.
And now the question I want us to answer is, what are the coordinates of the points?
See in the previous examples, I gave you the coordinates and we plotted the points.
Now we've already plotted the points, I'd like us to determine the coordinates.
So we're sort of doing the problems backwards.
Well let's start with A.
I want you to notice that A resides five units to the left of the origin, and that means
its abscissa, or x-coordinate, is negative five.
Don't fall into the trap of thinking that A's x-coordinate is positive five.
It would be in a totally different quadrant then.
So the x-coordinate for A is negative five because the point is five units to the left
of the origin.
That point also sits two units above the origin, or two units above the x-axis, so its y-coordinate
is two.
And therefore, the ordered pair of coordinates for A is negative five comma two.
Now some students might be tempted to write the answer here as two comma negative five.
In other words, switch the roles of the x and y-coordinate.
But that's a totally different point.
In fact, two comma negative five lives in a totally different quadrant.
So again, you have to be very careful not to switch the order in the ordered pair.
Now that was A. Let's do B.
Well look at B for just a moment.
Something odd is going on there, namely B lives exactly on one of the axes.
So is that a problem?
Like should we stop here?
No.
Let's think through the process for just a second.
First, the x-coordinate of B is going to determine how far to the left of right of the origin
B goes.
Well, how far to the left or right of the origin does B go?
Answer?
Not at all.
It doesn't move away from the origin in the horizontal direction.
You don't have to move either to the left or to the right.
And therefore, the x-coordinate of B, or the abscissa of B, is zero, which is fine.
What about the y-coordinate of B?
Well, in order to get to B from the origin, you have to move four units down from the
origin.
By having to move down, it means that the y-coordinate has to be negative.
And in this case, it's negative four because you've moved four units down from the origin.
And therefore, I can write down the ordered pair for B.
That's exactly zero comma negative four.
As I mentioned before, you might be tempted to write down negative four comma zero here.
Again, that would be wrong, but it does raise a question.
Where does negative four zero live in the Cartesian plane?
Well, if you think about it for a moment, it has to live somewhere on the x-axis.
Why is that?
Because the y-coordinate of negative four comma zero is zero.
And if the y-coordinate of negative four comma zero is zero, it means you don't move up
or down.
So that point must live on the x-axis.
Not really in a quadrant so much, but right on the x-axis, four units to the left of the
origin of zero.
As we look ahead to our upcoming algebra work, I'd like us to plot several points at the
same time in the Cartesian plane and see what kind of graph we see.
So let's look at the following example.
I want us to plot several points, zero comma two, one comma four, three comma eight, negative
one comma zero, negative two comma negative two, and negative four comma negative six.
Once we have them all plotted, I want us to connect the dots and let's see what kind of
graph we have at the end.
Now your first thought is, oh my word, six points.
Can we do that?
And the answer is, yeah, sure.
Just one at a time.
Take your time.
We'll plot them together.
So let's start by drawing the x and the y-axis and labeling them.
Remember, the x-axis is the horizontal axis, put a little x at the end on the right.
The y-axis is the vertical axis, put a y on the top of that.
I'm going to suggest a labeling of each axis, say, from negative 10 to 10, with each unit
being just one in length.
You're going to have to label those axes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight,
nine, ten in the positive x direction, the negatives in the negative x direction, and
then the same in the y-axis as well.
Notice that graph paper here is very, very helpful.
It can be very difficult to take a piece of blank paper and actually make all of these
measurements work out evenly.
And that's why I suggest that graph paper is very, very helpful.
Now let's plot these points that I asked you to plot.
Okay, zero comma two.
Well the zero tells me that my x direction hasn't changed.
In other words, I don't move to the left or the right.
And the two is the y-coordinate.
So it tells me to move up, because it's positive, two units.
So this point is going to be on the y-axis, and I'm going to draw it in at zero comma
two.
Done.
We can push that point aside now in our minds and go on to one comma four.
Now the one tells me that I need to start at the origin and move one to the right, that's
the x-coordinate, and then move up four as we go in the y direction.
And so I'm going to go one, four.
That's going to land me in the first quadrant, and it's going to be at the point one comma
four.
Draw that in with our pencil.
Next, three comma eight.
Okay, the three again is my x-coordinate.
It's positive, so I'm going to move from the origin three units to the right, and then
I'm going to move up eight units.
And notice at that point, as the point one comma four, both live in quadrant one.
So that's perfectly done.
All right.
We have three of our points done.
Let's do a few more.
Next I asked us to plot negative one comma zero.
Now the negative one is the x-coordinate, or abscissa.
It's negative, so I have to move to the left one unit from the origin.
And then the zero is the y-coordinate.
I don't move any up or down because it's zero.
And therefore that point lives right on the x-axis.
I draw that in.
The next point is negative two comma negative two.
Both the x and y-coordinates are negative.
So I'm going to move two to the left and two down, and I can draw that in pretty quickly.
And lastly I have negative four comma negative six.
Both points, both coordinates again are negative.
So how am I going to get to my point?
Negative four for the x tells me to go four to the left on the x-axis.
The negative six tells me to go down six units and draw in my point.
Which quadrant is that in?
Quadrant three.
Very good.
You should now have six points plotted on your piece of graph paper.
Fabulous.
Now, I want you to connect them as carefully as you can.
Use a ruler or something like that if you want.
But connect the dots, if you will.
And now here's a question for you.
What geometric figure do you see?
Well, if you've drawn it carefully, and we've got everything correct, what you should see
is a straight line segment.
In fact, all of these points that I just had you plot should lie on the line whose equation
is y equals 2x plus 2.
We'll talk more in future lessons about how to derive the formula y equals 2x plus 2.
I haven't shown you anything along those lines yet.
And we'll also learn how to draw this line given just the formula y equals 2x plus 2
and not the specific points.
We'll learn how to translate between the equation and the plot of the graph.
In fact, a significant part of this course will focus on lines and linear equations.
So the example I just showed you is really just the tip of the iceberg of what we'll
see in the future.
In this lesson, we've learned a lot of new terminology related to plotting points in
the xy-plane or cartesian plane.
I would really encourage you to memorize and understand all of these vocabulary terms that
we've seen because we'll definitely continue to put these ideas into practice throughout
the rest of this course.
Next time, we'll start doing some algebra by talking about linear equations and how
to solve them.
