In our previous work together, we learned how to solve a number of types of linear equations.
We called them one and two step equations.
My goal in today's lesson is to continue that discussion by solving more complicated examples
of linear equations.
So let's get our feet wet with an example that isn't much more complicated than the
ones we saw in the previous lesson.
Let's solve 5r plus 9 plus 2r equals 86.
I want to point out that this is a linear equation because all of the variables, in
this case the r's, are raised to the first power, r to the 1 basically.
So let's get to our solution.
The first thing we need to do is notice that the variable r is actually present on the
left-hand side in two different places, the 5r and the 2r.
So what do we do?
Well, don't worry about it, just add those two terms together.
5 oranges plus 2 oranges is 7 oranges, so 5r plus 2r is 7r.
At that point, our equation simplifies to 7r plus 9 equals 86.
But that's just a two-step equation.
We can solve that, we were doing that in the previous lesson.
First, let's subtract the 9 from both sides.
7r plus 9 equals 86, 9 subtracted from both sides is going to leave me 7r on the left
because the 9 minus 9 will cancel.
And on the right, I'll have 86 minus 9, which is 77.
So the new equation at this point is 7r equals 77.
I'm trying to isolate that r, so what do I do next?
I divide by the 7.
And when I do that, on the left-hand side, the two 7s will cancel, leaving me with just
r.
On the right-hand side, I'll have 77 divided by 7, which is 11.
Our solution then to the original equation is r equals 11.
Now, as we've been doing in our previous lessons, we should check to make sure that what we've
done is correct.
So in this case, I go back to my original equation, 5r plus 9 plus 2r equals 86, and
I replace all of the r's, in this case both of the r's, with 11.
When I do that, I'm going to have 5 times 11 plus 9 plus 2 times 11 equals 86.
5 times 11 is 55 plus 9 plus 2 times 11, which is 22, equals 86.
And now I just need to simplify that left-hand side, 55 plus 9 plus 22.
Well, 55 plus 9, that's 64, 64 plus 22, that's 86.
So I have 86 equals 86, which is a true statement.
I want to point out that it would have been very difficult to guess that the answer was
11, based on the original equation.
That was not easy, but you and I now know how to solve these equations, which is fabulous.
So let's try another example, which is similar to the one that we just did, but it appears,
at least at first, to be a bit more complicated.
Let's solve the following.
Three-fourths x plus two-fifths x equals 15.
Okay, I see those fractions, and you might be a little concerned about them at first,
but it's really not a problem.
So what are we going to do to handle those fractions?
Well, one way to handle them is to get a common denominator and then add the fractions.
We can do this, remember, because we're just adding like expressions.
One fraction times x plus another fraction times x.
But I'd like to share another idea, which is mathematically the same, but it actually
gets rid of the fractions in one step.
And that idea is this.
Let's multiply both sides of the equation by 20.
So I'm going to have 20 times three-fourths x plus two-fifths x on the left, and I'm
going to have 20 times 15 on the right.
Now someone has to be asking, why in the world did you pick 20?
Why didn't you pick 15, or 100, or 5,000?
Well, what's the least common multiple of four and five?
Four and five are my two denominators of the fractions.
Well, the least common multiple of four and five would be the least common denominator
of the two fractions if we went down that path, but the least common multiple of four
and five in this case is 20.
Let me say it a bit differently.
20 is the smallest number, which has four as a factor and also has five as a factor.
And because of that, I've chosen to multiply both sides by 20.
Now let's go from there.
I've got the 20 times three-fourths x plus two-fifths x equals 20 times 15.
I want to now distribute that 20 into the parentheses on the left-hand side.
And when I do that, I will have 20 times three-fourths x plus 20 times two-fifths x.
On the right-hand side, I'll have 20 times 15.
But notice what happens with the 20 times three-fourths.
Something really nifty happens.
The four cancels with part of the 20 and leaves us with a five so that the term 20 times three-fourths
x simply becomes five times three-x.
The fraction is gone, which is great.
Look at the second term on the left, 20 times two-fifths x.
Well, the five that's in the denominator of two-fifths again cancels with part of the
20 and it leaves us with four times two-x.
Look at the left-hand side now.
You should have five times three-x plus four times two-x.
No fractions.
They're completely gone.
Now look at the right-hand side.
It's kind of gotten a bit bigger.
20 times 15 is 300.
That's okay.
That number is still manageable.
But the point now is we've gotten rid of the fractions.
And for some of us, that's actually a very comforting thing to do.
Now, let's move forward from there.
Five times three-x is 15x.
Four times two-x is eight-x.
So the left-hand side becomes 15x plus eight-x.
And that all equals 300.
15x plus eight-x.
Those two can be added because they're like terms.
It's just a number times x plus another number times x.
15x plus eight-x is 23x.
And so my equation now is 23x equals 300.
How do I finish isolating that x?
I divide both sides by 23.
The left-hand side has the 23s cancel.
I just have x then.
And on the right-hand side, I have 300 divided by 23.
So my solution is x equals 300 divided by 23.
Now, before we go anywhere, you might ask the question, does 300 over 23 simplify in
any way?
Can we make it reduced any lower than 300 divided by 23?
Well, the answer is no.
And the reason for that is 23 is actually a number that doesn't have any divisors other
than 1 and 23.
Well, if 23 then doesn't divide evenly into 300, that fraction will not reduce.
And you can check maybe with long division that 23 does not divide into 300, and therefore
our solution is 300 over 23.
It can't be simplified anymore.
Now, let's look at a different type of multi-step equation, and let's try to solve it for its
variable.
Here's the equation.
Negative 3 times the quantity a plus 5 equals 12.
OK, I need to get that a variable isolated.
I need to get a by itself on the left.
How do I do it?
Well, one way to approach this problem would be to distribute that negative 3 into the
parentheses.
And if we did that, we would have negative 3 times a plus negative 3 times 5 equals 12.
And if we simplified that left-hand side, we'd have negative 3a minus 15 equals 12.
Why does it become minus 15?
Well, because negative 3 times 5 is negative 15.
Remember those rules with multiplying two signed numbers where the signs are different?
And if you have plus a negative 15, it's the same as minus 15.
Now at that point, you have negative 3a minus 15 equals 12.
That's a two-step equation.
We've done those before.
We did them in the previous lesson.
So at this point, we could finish that problem if we wished, just using what we did to solve
two-step equations.
But I think there's a different approach to this problem, which is just as good.
And I'd like to show you that approach as we finish this example.
So the first thing to do when we have negative 3 times the quantity a plus 5 equals 12 is
to divide both sides by the negative 3.
Why do I do that?
Because it will cancel out the negative 3 that's on the left-hand side, and I will simplify
the left-hand side quite nicely.
So I'm going to divide both sides of my equation by negative 3.
When I divide the left-hand side by negative 3, I'll have negative 3 times the quantity
a plus 5 divided by negative 3 equals 12 divided by negative 3.
The negative 3's on the left will cancel, leaving me with a plus 5.
The right-hand side becomes 12 divided by negative 3.
When using my rules for dividing signed numbers, that's going to become negative 4.
So I'm now down to a plus 5 equals negative 4.
Now, I just need to find a at this point.
That means I need to get rid of the plus 5 that's on the left.
And in order to do that, how do I get rid of a plus 5?
I subtract, and I subtract a 5.
If I do that on both sides of the equation, the left-hand side will simply be a, and the
right-hand side is negative 4 minus 5.
Negative 4 minus 5 is negative 9.
Think again about that number line.
Start at negative 4, and then go to the left 5 more units because of the minus 5, and
if you do that, you'll land at negative 9.
So my solution in this case is a equals negative 9.
I think we should keep up the good practice of checking our solutions, and so let's do
that here.
Checking your work is the best way to make sure your work is accurate, and I recommend
it as a step to make sure that your grades are as best they can be.
So let's go back to the original equation and let's plug in a equals negative 9.
If we do that, we have negative 3 times a plus 5 equals 12.
That means plugging in a equals negative 9 will give us negative 3 times negative 9 plus
5 equals 12.
I'll have negative 3 times negative 4 equals 12, and therefore 12 equals 12.
That's a true statement, and so we did have the right solution to start with.
Excellent.
Now, let's transition to a new level of complexity in these problems and look at a really complicated
looking equation, at least at first.
Let's solve the following equation.
5x plus 3 equals negative 4x plus 39.
Okay, now that's much different than anything we've seen up to this point.
Can you tell why it looks a lot different than before?
Well, it's because we have x's now on both sides of the equation.
In all of the equations we've solved up to this point, we've kept all the x's on one
side of the equation.
So here's now a rule to live by when it comes to solving linear equations.
As soon as possible, we need to get all the variables on one side of the equation and
all of the constants or the numbers that are by themselves on the other side of the
equation.
It doesn't matter which side of the equation you put each piece, you can put all the variables
on the right and all the constants on the left if you'd like, but it's important to
get all of those variables on one side together, and all of the constants or numbers without
variables on the other side.
So in this case, I'm going to put all the constants over on the right-hand side, and
I'm going to put all of the variables on the left-hand side.
So we started with 5x plus 3 equals negative 4x plus 39.
I'm going to subtract 3 from both sides, and that's going to get rid of the plus 3 on the
left.
And when I subtract 3 from both sides, I'm going to have 5x on the left equals negative
4x plus 39 minus 3, and 39 minus 3 is 36.
So I have 5x equals negative 4x plus 36.
Now I want to get all of the x's over to the left-hand side.
The 5x is already there, so I just need to move that negative 4x over to the left-hand
side.
How am I going to get negative 4x from the right over to the left?
I simply add 4x to both sides.
By the way, it's OK to add variables to both sides of our equation.
Up to this point, we've just added numbers, but now we're adding 4x.
It's OK to add a term like that.
Once we do that, the left-hand side will become 5x plus 4x, which is 9x, and the right-hand
side will have the negative 4x and the 4x cancel, and you'll just be left with 36.
So now we're down to 9x equals 36.
That's a pretty straightforward equation to solve.
How?
You've just got to get rid of that 9, and in order to do that, you divide both sides
by 9.
9x divided by 9 is just x, and 36 divided by 9 is 4, and therefore our solution is x
equals 4.
Let's check.
We should always check.
Let's plug in x equals 4 for our variable everywhere in the equation.
Remember, there's one on the left and one on the right in the original equation.
Doing that, I'll have 5 times 4 plus 3 equals negative 4 times 4 plus 39.
The left-hand side then becomes 20 plus 3, and the right-hand side becomes negative 16
plus 39.
Well, the left-hand side simplifies to 23 pretty quickly, and the right-hand side is
also 23.
That's a true statement, and therefore we had the right solution to start.
Now, let's look at a real-world example of how such an equation can actually come up in
a word problem.
So I want you to consider the following puzzle.
When 3 times my age is increased by 6, it's the same value as when 5 times my age is decreased
by 80.
So here's the question.
How old am I?
By the way, I'm sure some of you are saying, well, that's not really that real-world.
Okay, I understand, although my age really is a real-world question.
But these kinds of problems or puzzles actually do require some very important algebra techniques
to solve.
So it's good practice, and these kinds of questions do come up also on exams and tests
that you might have to take.
So let's go for it, even if it doesn't sound very real-world in the process.
We need to start by defining our variable or variables.
You always need to do that when you're working on a real-world or word problem type of issue.
Well, in this case, there's really only one unknown quantity, and that's my age.
So let's let a equal my age.
We need to write an equation which translates all of that English into mathematical symbols.
Well, the first part of the sentence translates to 3a plus 6, or 6 years more than 3 times
my age.
Then we had the word is or equals in the middle of that sentence.
We need to replace that with an equals sign, and then we talked about multiplying my age
by 5 and then reducing it by 80, and that means the right-hand side is 5a minus 80.
So the equation that we're going to work with is 3a plus 6 equals 5a minus 80.
Notice that we now have an equation with the variables on both sides.
Very similar to the equation that we just solved in the previous example.
So let's now solve that for the variable a, and just remember, the variable a is my age,
and that was what the problem asked us to figure out, my age.
Now, we've got two choices from here.
We could move all of the a's to the left-hand side and all of the constants to the right-hand side,
or you could move all of the a's to the right-hand side and all of the constants to the left-hand side.
Either of those is fine.
In this case, I'm just going to move all the a's to the right-hand side.
Why?
Personal preference.
I get to pick.
You get to pick as well.
So I'm going to move them to the right.
Actually, there's more reason to move them to the right than to the left.
If I move them all to the right, it will keep the coefficient in front of the a positive.
I kind of like that.
You don't have to do that, but it will do it in this case.
And by moving all those a's to the right, I'll have a positive coefficient.
Again, you could move them to the left if you're more comfortable with that.
In fact, if you'd prefer that, when I'm done with this example, you might move the a's
to the left and do all of the equation manipulations to see if you get to the same solution.
Might not be bad practice.
Now I want to move all the a's to the right-hand side, and let's move all the constants to
the left.
And if I do that, I need to subtract 3a from both sides.
By subtracting 3a from both sides, 3a minus 3a on the left will go away.
And I'll just have 6 on the left-hand side.
On the right-hand side, I'll have 5a minus 3a, which is 2a, and then minus 80.
But lose the minus 80, it's just there by itself for now.
So I have the equation 6 equals 2a minus 80.
Now I need to move the constants to the left-hand side then, and how am I going to do that?
I need to get rid of that minus 80 so that it's away from the a.
In order to do that, I'm going to add 80 to both sides.
And when I do, the minus 80 on the right with the plus 80 will cancel.
And I'll just have 2a on the right-hand side.
On the left-hand side, I'll have 6 plus 80, which is 86.
And so my equation becomes 86 equals 2a.
Well, I want to get a by itself.
How do I do that?
I divide now on both sides by 2.
And the 2 that's in front of the a will cancel with the 2 in the denominator, leaving me
just a.
On the left-hand side, I'll have 86 over 2.
That simplifies to 43.
And so a equals 43.
Now what was a again?
A was my age in years.
And so the problem says that I'm 43 years old.
Now we could check the solution by plugging it back into the original equation.
But for the sake of time, I'm not going to do that here.
You might try that in your own time and make sure that we work the problem correctly.
But even if we're not going to check it exactly, let me ask you this question.
Does 43 years make sense?
Does that seem like a decent answer?
I mean, if you look at me and you say, yeah, he looks like he's in his mid 40s.
That looks about right.
OK, fine.
But what if our answer had been negative 43 for my age?
Would that make any sense at all?
No, of course not.
What if our answer had been negative 5 for years?
Of course that makes no sense.
What if the answer had been 2 years?
A equals 2.
Again, I'm not 2 years old.
That's pretty clear.
And what if the answer had been 430 instead of 43?
Maybe we would have made a little arithmetic mistake.
Do I look like I'm 430 years old?
I say not.
So I'd hope that if any of these numbers had come out as your answer, that you would have
stopped and said, eh, those don't make sense.
And in the process, use that as a prompt to go back and make sure that all of the work
you did was correct.
I encourage you to keep this kind of critical thinking in mind as we continue throughout
this course together.
I'd like to turn a corner now and talk about two other types of equations and their solutions.
So quick question.
Have you noticed that all the linear equations that we've discussed up to this point have
had exactly one solution?
Do you think this will happen for every linear equation we write down?
Well, let's see.
Let's solve the following equation.
Four times 5x minus 6 equals 5 times the quantity 4x plus 2.
Well, let's start by distributing the four that's on the left-hand side and distributing
the five that's on the right-hand side.
When I do so, I'm going to have 4 times 5x minus 4 times 6 equals 5 times 4x plus 5
times 2.
OK, what is that when you simplify?
Well, 4 times 5 is 20, so I'll have 20x minus 24, which is 4 times 6, equals 20x, that's
the 5 times 4x, plus 10, which is 5 times 2.
So I have 20x minus 24 equals 20x plus 10.
Now let's get all the x's on the left-hand side of the equation.
To do that, I'm going to subtract the 20x from the right-hand side.
And when I do so, indeed the 20x on the right-hand side is going to cancel, but notice what happens
to the 20x on the left.
I have 20x minus 20x, they're gone.
That's 0x as well, which is just 0.
And what does that leave me?
It leaves me the equation negative 24 equals plus 10.
Now we've done nothing wrong at this point.
All of our algebra is correct.
So if we stop for a moment, we need to ask ourselves this question, is negative 24 equal
to 10 ever?
No, it's never equal.
Negative 24 is never equal to 10.
So we haven't made a mistake, what in the world is going on?
Well, we could actually check our work by putting the x's on the right-hand side and
we get the same answer.
So what does it mean?
Well, it means that the equation we started with actually doesn't have a solution.
We haven't done anything wrong.
It's just that the equation I started you with has no number that we can plug in for
x in that original equation to come out with an equation that's true.
In other words, there's no solution.
This sort of thing can happen.
So don't get too nervous.
If you don't see a solution, sometimes a solution just isn't there.
Now, should you pause and maybe check your work to make sure you haven't made some sort
of small mistake in your arithmetic, sure, it probably wouldn't hurt to pause and make
sure that we didn't lose a zero somewhere or add when we should have subtracted.
But the point is we should make sure that our work is correct.
Yes, we do.
If there's no solution, there's no solution, no problem.
Okay, so we've now seen examples where you can have one solution.
We saw lots of examples like that over this lesson as well as the previous lesson.
And we've seen an example now where there are no solutions, which is fine.
Now I'd like to show you another interesting situation that can occur if you pick the right
equation.
So let me start us by looking at this equation.
Consider 4 times 5x plus 10 equals 5 times 4x plus 8.
Perfectly good looking equation, nothing overly spectacular about it, but let's start with
that and distribute the 4 that's on the left and the 5 that's on the right.
Now if I do those distributions, I'm going to have the following.
4 times 5x plus 4 times 10 equals 5 times 4x plus 5 times 8, okay?
Nothing odd there, we're fine so far.
Now 4 times 5x, 20x, 4 times 10, 40, 5 times 4x, 20x, 5 times 8, 40.
So my equation is 20x plus 40 equals 20x plus 40.
Now before we go anywhere else, I want you to notice that currently the left hand side
of my equation and the right hand side of the equation are equal no matter what we plug
in for x because the two sides are the same.
That is basically the opposite of what we saw in the previous example and it leads us
to another vocabulary term for our course.
Here's what that vocabulary term is.
It's the word identity and here's a definition for an identity.
An equation that is true for every possible value of the variable is called an identity
and that leads us to think about the previous example we were just looking at.
I had the same thing on both sides of the equation which means no matter what I plugged
in for x, the left hand side was going to equal the right hand side and that means that
the equation we started with was an identity.
That leads us to a big picture comment that we should make about linear equations.
So let me make that comment now.
Every linear equation that you will ever see is going to fall into one of three categories.
First, the equation might have exactly one solution.
Second, the equation might have no solutions at all or third, the equation might be an
identity which means every number is a solution.
We spent our time today in today's lesson looking at a lot of different types of linear
equations and how to solve them.
I've tried to show you lots of different examples hoping that you'd be encouraged with all that
practice to have confidence in solving equations in the guidebook.
I think you've seen so many different types of examples that you can probably do your
work with confidence now as you practice with the guidebook questions.
Next time, we'll begin talking about graphs for linear equations by talking about the
concept of slope.
I'll see you then.
