In this lesson we're going to talk about a new mathematical topic for you and me.
It's called systems of linear equations.
Now of course we've been dealing with linear equations already so this isn't completely
new but the idea of a system of linear equations is new for us.
These kinds of problems are going to arise very naturally because they basically deal
with trying to find when two lines intersect and knowing when two lines intersect has lots
of applications.
So what in the world is a system of linear equations?
Well it's actually basic and it is this, a set of two or more linear equations form
a system of linear equations.
In some ways we want to think of the equations as linked together and we say that an ordered
pair that makes all of the equations in the system true is a solution of the system.
So let's take a quick example and just make sure we understand this idea of a solution
of a system.
Here's a very small system of linear equations, y equals 2x minus 5 and y equals x minus
2.
Those two equations taken as a little group forms a system of linear equations.
A solution of this system is x equals 3 and y equals 1 or written as an ordered pair simply
3, 1.
Let's quickly confirm that 3, 1 really is a solution of this system.
In the first equation we substitute x equals 3, y equals 1 and we get 1 equals 2 times
3 minus 5 or 1 equals 6 minus 5 or 1 equals 1 and of course that's a true statement.
Now we're not done though checking that this is a solution of the system.
We have to make sure that this point is a solution for every one of the equations.
So now I have to go to the second equation and make a very similar substitution.
I want to let x equals 3 and y equals 1 and I will have 1 equals 3 minus 2 or 1 equals
1 and that's true as well.
What does that mean?
I've now shown you a solution for both equations in the system and therefore I say that 3,
1 is a solution of the whole system.
Well I'll try to show you at least one word problem by the end of this lesson but for
now the biggest question we should ask is this, if we're given a system of just two
linear equations how would we find the solution?
See in what I just did with you I actually gave you the solution and we just checked
to make sure it was a solution.
I'd like to now know how we find the solution if the only thing we're given is the set
of linear equations.
By the way before we go anywhere, systems of linear equations can be bigger than just
two equations.
You could have three equations or four equations.
We're just going to focus on systems of two linear equations here in this lesson.
Now in this lesson I'm going to show you two specialized techniques for solving systems
of linear equations.
They're called solving by graphing and solving by substitution.
And I want to start with solving by graphing.
You can probably imagine that graphs are going to come into play here.
So here's a question.
From a graphing perspective what does a solution of the system y equals 2x minus 5 and y equals
x minus 2 look like?
I mean what does it mean to be a solution if you're thinking about it in the context
of the graphs?
Well such a solution needs to be a point on each of the two lines and it needs to be
the same point on both lines.
How can that happen?
It happens if the point is an intersection point, a point where the two lines cross.
So let's solve this same system by graphing that I looked at earlier.
The technique is actually pretty straightforward.
You start by just graphing the two lines that you were given and finding the intersection
point.
So I've graphed the two lines for you in this figure and now I see that the two lines
actually do cross one another.
Now of course we had to make sure we knew how to draw the two lines but we've done that
in previous lessons.
So I've drawn them here for you and now I want you to notice where the intersection
point is located.
The point where these two lines cross is exactly 3, 1.
And of course the y-intercepts are negative 2 and negative 5.
But I see from the sketch of this graph or I should say the sketch of these two graphs
that the intersection point is 3, 1.
As soon as I see that intersection point that's the solution.
And therefore by graphing if I draw the graph carefully on some graph paper I can sometimes
find that intersection point really accurately and in this case that's exactly what we did.
Now before we move on to the next example let me make another comment.
Notice something like graph paper is really like a must here.
You could draw these graphs somewhat sloppily on a piece of blank paper but if you really
had to find that 3, 1 you'd have to really draw carefully.
And what if you saw the intersection point but you said it was 2, 1 or you said it was
3, 0.9 or something like that.
That's not going to cut it.
You've got to have more accuracy than that.
So this graph paper isn't just a helpful thing it's really a must in these examples.
And let me also point out that it would probably be very smart to check your solutions after
you've done them by graphing by plugging in the information into the equations just to
make sure you got everything right.
I think that would be very, very wise.
Now with that said I'd like to move to another example and I want to solve this system that
I'm about to give you by graphing.
So we're going to use our graph paper and we're going to solve the system that way.
The system is going to be y equals negative 2x plus 3 and y equals 3x minus 7.
So before I draw the graphs notice that we're guaranteed to find a solution based on the
equations we were given.
Now you might say to me, how in the world do you know that?
Well look at the slopes for just a second of the two lines that I gave you.
One of the slopes is negative and the other slope is positive.
So if you just think about what the graphs are going to have to look like in general,
one of the lines is going to have to go like this and the other line is going to have to
come up like this because the slopes have different signs.
Well the two lines will have to cross somewhere then.
There's no way they can be parallel because one of them is going to be going up like this
and the other one is going to be going down like this.
So I don't know where that crossing point is going to be yet and I certainly don't know
at the angle at which the lines are going to cross one another but I don't care about
that.
I don't care about is where is that intersection point and now I say we can actually find it.
So what we want to do is draw the graphs of the two lines in question and when you do
that you notice that both lines are in slope intercept form so you know where the intercepts
of both lines are and you can figure out another point on each line using the slope and then
you can just connect the dots to find your two lines.
As soon as you've done that you look for the intersection point between the two straight
lines you've just drawn and again if you're fortunate you'll be able to see what that
point of intersection is.
In this case the numbers work out very well and the solution appears to be at x equals
2 and y equals negative 1 down in the fourth quadrant.
So I claim that my solution is 2, negative 1.
Now as I said a few minutes ago I think it would be wise to actually check that that's
the solution now that we think that's what it is by plugging in x equals 2 and y equals
negative 1 into each of the two equations that we started with.
So let's do that here.
The first equation was y equals negative 2x plus 3.
I'm going to plug in x equals 2 and y equals negative 1 and here's what I'll get.
Negative 1 equals negative 2 times 2 plus 3.
Just saying the same thing as negative 1 equals negative 4 plus 3 and negative 4 plus 3 is
negative 1.
So I have the statement negative 1 is negative 1 and of course that's true.
Great.
I'm not done though until I plug in the same information to the other equation and make
sure I get a true statement there.
So in that case I'm going to plug in 2, negative 1 into the equation y equals 3x minus 7 and
when I do that I'm going to have negative 1 equals 3 times 2 minus 7 that's the same
as negative 1 equals 6 minus 7 which is also negative 1 equals negative 1.
So indeed 2 comma negative 1 really is the exact solution of this system and we found
it by graphing.
Now I'd like to look at another example with graphing.
I think it's very important that we practice what's going on as we solve these systems
with graphing.
So let's look at a slightly more complicated example.
Let's look at this system of equations 4x plus 2y equals 5 and 6x plus 3y equals 13.
Now we see here that the equations are definitely not in point slope form or slope intercept
form.
They're actually in something called standard form.
They are definitely equations of lines but in order to graph them I'm going to suggest
that we try to write them either in point slope form or slope intercept form and of
course if we could write them in slope intercept form that would be the most helpful for trying
to draw the graph because once you know the intercept and you know the slope you can draw
it pretty quickly.
So let's take these two equations and before we do anything else let's just rewrite them
into slope intercept form.
So the first equation is 4x plus 2y equals 5 and I want to write it as y equals mx plus
b.
So the first thing I want to do is try to isolate that y and I'm going to start by getting
rid of the 4x.
Now to get rid of the 4x means I'm going to subtract 4x from both sides of the equation.
When I subtract 4x from the left hand side it will cancel with the 4x that's already
there and I will just have 0 plus 2y or 2y on the left hand side.
The right hand side already had a 5 in it, it now also gets a negative 4x because if
I subtract 4x from the left I must subtract 4x from the right and so my new equation looks
like 2y equals negative 4x plus 5.
I basically just subtracted 4x from the left to the right.
Now I want y by itself and there's that 2 there, I need to get rid of it.
How do I get rid of that 2?
Well I can either divide by 2 or multiply by 1 half, it's the same thing.
So let's just divide both sides by 2 and when I do the 2 on the left hand side will cancel
leaving me y which is fabulous and on the right hand side I'll have negative 4x divided
by 2 plus 5 divided by 2.
4x divided by 2 becomes negative 2x, 4 divided by 2 is 2 and of course 5 divided by 2 is
just 5 divided by 2, 5 halves, there's nothing else I can do with that.
So the first equation in the original system that we had is now written as y equals negative
2x plus 5 halves.
Please understand that is a different looking equation from what we were given but it's
the equation of the same line.
Now let's look at the second equation that we were given, 6x plus 3y equals 13, again
I want to get it into slope intercept form so I want to make it look like y equals mx
plus b.
Want to remove that 6x from the left and get it over to the right hand side, I do that
by subtracting 6x from both sides and I'll have 3y on the left equals negative 6x plus
13 on the right.
Now I need to get rid of that 3 that's next to the y and the way to do that is to divide
both sides by 3.
When I divide the 3y by 3 I just get 1y or y.
When I divide negative 6x by 3 I get negative 2x and when I divide 13 by 3, well I just
get 13 divided by 3 or 13 thirds which of course as a mixed number would be 4 and 1 third.
So I can take my original system now and rewrite it so that both equations are in slope intercept
form and here's what they look like.
Y equals negative 2x plus 5 halves and y equals negative 2x plus 13 over 3.
Now what do you notice?
Well notice that both lines have the same slope.
That negative 2 that's in front of the x in both lines is the slope of both lines.
Notice that the 2y intercepts at the end of the two equations is they are different
and therefore what do you have for these two lines?
If you think about them graphically they have the same slope and different y intercepts
that means they are parallel.
Now what does that mean about finding a solution to this system of equations?
If the two lines are parallel will they ever cross?
No of course not that's a property of parallel lines and therefore you will not have a solution
to this system.
Take a quick sketch a quick look at a sketch of the graphs of these two lines I've done
it for you here quickly and notice that's exactly what happens you have these two parallel
lines they will never cross and therefore this system has no solution and it's important
that we remember this now.
If you're given a system of linear equations you don't have to have a solution it's okay
if you don't but you should make sure that you haven't made any mistakes in your arithmetic
or your algebra before you come to the conclusion that you don't have a solution.
Well we've seen a few examples of solving a system by graphing I think that's good.
We've also talked a bit about the pros and cons if you're a visual person and you like
to see the mathematics and you like to look at graphs then solving these systems by graphing
is fabulous.
One downside though is that the technique isn't very precise for example what if the
solution of the system had been a point like one-third comma seven-fifths well it might
be pretty difficult to see that that's the exact point on the sketch of a graph even
if you use some graph paper and you're very very meticulous and careful about how you
draw the graphs.
So that's a downside to solving these systems by graphing if the solution is a bit messy
it may be hard to see it with the graphs.
But there's another technique thankfully because otherwise we'd have some problems then but
we don't have problems because we can solve these systems of equations using what's known
as substitution.
And the idea behind solving by substitution is this you substitute information from one
of the equations that you were given into the other equation that you were given and
then you solve that new equation.
The solution of the new equation is then the solution of the system.
So we're going to substitute information from one equation into the other and then we're
going to work on that new equation to find our solution.
So let me show you an example it's a very nice way of solving these systems.
Take the system 2x plus 3y equals 4 and negative 6x plus y equals negative 7.
I want you to notice that solving this by graphing it would require a bit of extra work.
You'd have to rewrite the equations again just as we did in the previous example into
something like slope intercept form and then you could sketch the graphs.
Instead of doing that I'd like us to use substitution just for the practice of it.
So notice that by adding 6x to both sides of the second equation the equation would
become y equals 6x minus 7.
So just a little bit of algebra allows us to rewrite the second equation as y equals
6x minus 7.
Now here's where the substitution comes in.
That means that we can now replace the y in the first equation with the quantity 6x minus
7.
So I can go back to the first equation and replace any y that I see in the first equation
with 6x minus 7 because y equals 6x minus 7.
And once I've completed that substitution the first equation then becomes 2x plus 3
times 6x minus 7 equals 4.
Notice that the 3 is multiplied with the whole quantity 6x minus 7 not just with the 6x.
So you want some parentheses there around the 6x minus 7.
Now notice what we've done.
The variable y is now gone.
We have one equation that only has x's in it.
So if we can now solve for x we'll be well on our way to finding the solution of this
system of equations.
So let's go after this equation that we just wrote down and see if we can solve it for
x.
We have 2x plus 3 times 6x minus 7 equals 4.
If we distribute that 3 into the 6x minus 7 we'll have 2x plus 3 times 6x minus 3 times
7.
So I've put the 3 in with the 6x and the 3 with the 7.
That's equal to 4 on the right hand side.
This is the same as 2x plus 18x minus 21 equals 4 when we start doing some of the arithmetic.
2x plus 18x is 20x minus 21 equals 4.
And now adding that 21 over to the right hand side or adding 21 to both sides so that the
minus 21 cancels on the left you're going to have 20x equals 25.
Can you get x by itself there?
Can you isolate the x?
Sure.
Divide both sides now by 20 and you'll have x equals 25 divided by 20 and that reduces
down to 5 divided by 4.
Now you're not done.
That tells you the x value of your solution but you need a y value.
Remember that y is supposed to equal 6x minus 7?
If you let x equal 5 fourths, which you just found a moment ago, in the equation y equals
6x minus 7, you can actually find y.
If y is 6x minus 7 and x is 5 fourths, then y is 6 times 5 fourths minus 7.
Doing a little bit of cancelling between the 6 and the 4, that's the same as saying y is
3 times 5 halves minus 7 or 15 halves minus 7 or 15 halves minus 14 halves, if you rewrite
7 as 14 halves and 15 minus 14 is 1.
So 15 halves minus 14 halves is 1 half.
What's the point?
Well the point is that the solution of your system is now known.
It's x equals 5 fourths and y equals 1 half or to write it more concisely it's just the
point 5 fourths comma 1 half.
As I'd commented earlier, it might have been hard to see that point if we had used solving
by graphing but we didn't use solving by graphing.
We used this new technique called substitution and we were able to see that this was the
point.
Now we could check it if we wanted by plugging in 5 fourths and 1 half into the two original
equations.
Let's do it very, very quickly.
The first original equation was 2x plus 3y equals 4.
We're going to let x be 5 fourths and y equal a half and when we simplify we'll have 5 halves
plus 3 halves equals 4 or 8 halves equals 4 or 4 equals 4 and that of course is true.
In the second equation we had negative 6x plus y equals negative 7.
Again letting x equal 5 fourths and y equals 1 half you're going to have negative 6 times
5 fourths plus 1 half equals negative 7.
Simplifying that a bit you'll have negative 3 times 5 halves plus 1 half equals negative
7, negative 15 halves plus a half equals negative 7 and negative 15 halves plus 1 half is the
same as negative 14 halves.
Negative 14 halves really is negative 7 so negative 7 is negative 7 is the statement
that comes out and that's true.
Now I'd like to transition just a bit into a word problem which can be solved by building
a system of linear equations and then solving the system.
So we're going to apply now this idea of a system of linear equations to a word problem
just to get a feel for how to translate the English into one of these systems of linear
equations.
So let's say a farmer grows both corn and wheat on his 500 acre farms.
He's got a total of 500 acres.
He wants to plant 100 more acres of corn than of wheat and the question is how many acres
of each should he then plant?
Now you might actually be able to just take out a piece of paper and scribble down some
ideas and before you know it you'll have your answer.
That's not really my point in doing this example.
I want us to translate it into a system of linear equations first and then see if we
can work through the algebra to find the solution.
You never know how complicated these kinds of questions can get so I don't want us to
fall into the trap of just thinking, well let me try scribbling some numbers and see
if it all works out.
Let's rely on the algebra to help us.
So the information in the problem tells us what the equations of the system should be.
Before we go to any equations, let's write our variables down.
We do it all the time.
I'm going to let C equal the number of acres of corn to plant.
That's why I chose C for corn and I'm going to let W be the number of acres of wheat
to plant and now let's try to take from the English phrases what our equations ought to
be.
Well the total number of acres that the farmer has is 500.
So W plus C needs to equal 500.
Remember W was the number of acres of wheat to plant and C was the number of acres of
corn to plant.
We're assuming the farmer is going to plant all of his acres so W plus C is going to be
500.
That's an equation.
That's one of the equations in our system.
Secondly, we're told that the number of acres of corn is supposed to be 100 more than the
number of acres of wheat.
So what does that mean about the relationship between C and W?
Well C is supposed to be 100 more than W and in some of our previous work in translating
like this, that means that C needs to be 100 plus W or you could write it as W plus 100.
The point is C needs to be 100 bigger than W.
Well we now have our system of equations.
It's going to be W plus C equals 500 and C equals 100 plus W and now we are set up to
actually do substitution in order to solve this system of equations.
Why is that?
Because I know that C is exactly 100 plus W.
So if I go back to the first equation that we wrote down, W plus C equals 500, I can
replace the C there by 100 plus W and when I do that, the first equation goes from W
plus C equals 500 to W plus 100 plus W equals 500.
I've now substituted for the C and now I only have W's and numbers which means I can find
W now if I just do some algebra.
So here we go.
W plus 100 plus W is 500.
I can put those two W's together now by addition and I get 2W plus 100 equals 500.
We're one our way.
That means if I subtract 100 from both sides of my equation, I can start to isolate that
W. If I subtract 100 from both sides, the 100 on the left will cancel and I'll be left
with 2W on the left equals 500 minus 100 on the right and that's of course 400.
So my equation is now 2W equals 400.
Well if 2W equals 400, W equals 200 simply by dividing by 2 on both sides of the equation.
So W is 200.
Am I done?
No.
I'm almost done.
I'm at least halfway there.
I now need to find out C. Well if W is 200 and C was 100 plus W, then C is 100 plus 200
which is 300.
Now we've gotten some numbers but we should never stop in a word problem when you just
get numbers at the end of the page.
You should make sure you understand exactly what these numbers actually mean.
W equals 200 means the farmer needs to plant 200 acres of wheat and C equals 300 means
the farmer needs to plant 300 acres of corn.
Now let me make a quick comment about solving by substitution before we close out our lesson.
The technique goes really well when one of the equations can be easily solved for one
of the variables.
For example, in the problem I just did, the second equation already tells you that C is
exactly 100 plus W. In other words, we already knew how to replace the C by another quantity.
But what if the original system had been much more complicated?
For example, what if it had been 3C plus 5W equals 250 and 4C plus 10W equals 1,750?
Solving by substitution here would not be real friendly.
It can be done but it's not the easiest thing to do because neither of the two equations
looks like it's easy to isolate one of the variables, to get one of the variables by
itself.
And of course, solving by graphing, as I've already pointed out, has even more problems
to it, especially when it comes to trying to see accurately how you're going to find
your solution.
So what are we going to do?
It sounds like there's a lot of problems here.
Well, I'll tell you in just a second.
Today we started talking about systems of linear equations, sets of two or more linear equations
that are linked together somehow.
And we talked about how to find the solutions of these systems and we did a lot of examples
using graphing as well as using the technique called substitution.
But as I just pointed out, there may be problems with each of these two techniques.
So next time, we'll learn another technique for solving even more complicated systems
of linear equations.
It has a name.
It's called solving a system by elimination.
And we'll discuss that technique in the next lesson.
And I'll see you then.
