In the last lesson, we looked closely at solving systems of linear equations by graphing and
by substitution.
And although those two methods are really useful in some circumstances, they aren't
always flexible enough to handle more complicated systems.
So in this lesson, I'm going to introduce another method to handle systems of linear
equations which are a little more complicated.
It's called solving by elimination.
Now in fact, solving by elimination can also be used to solve the kinds of systems we saw
in the previous lesson.
But today I want to show you some pretty complicated examples to see how the technique
is used.
So what's the idea behind solving by elimination?
Well it's pretty basic actually.
It boils down to three math facts.
And here are those three facts.
First of all, if A equals B and C equals D, then A plus C equals B plus D. In other words,
if you have two equalities and you add the left-hand sides of both and you add the right-hand
sides of both, then those two sums must also be equal.
So A equals B and C equals D implies that A plus C equals B plus D. Similarly, if A
equals B and C equals D, then A minus C equals B minus D. In other words, I can subtract
the two left-hand sides from one another, and I can subtract the two right-hand sides
from one another, and I'll have a new equation which is still true.
And the third math fact which is very important in this lesson is if A equals B and you multiply
both sides of that equation by another number, say C, then C A equals C B. So those three
math facts are going to actually prove to be the foundation for solving systems by elimination.
They might not look like they're much, and they might not look like they're going to
help, but they really will be handy as we start to talk about solving by elimination.
So let me start with an example of a system of linear equations that I want to solve,
and let's just talk it through as we go.
Here's the system.
Now, we should talk for just a moment about what happens if I were to just add the two
left-hand sides.
I mean, you might be saying, well, why did you think of that?
Well, let me show you why I thought of it so that in a moment when we do other examples,
you'll think of these ideas as well.
Just take the two left-hand sides for just a moment and add those two left-hand sides.
What do you get?
Well, you have 2x minus 3y, that's the first left-hand side, plus 6x plus 3y.
And that's going to give you 8x, of course, the 2x and the 6x can be added together.
They are like terms like we've seen before.
So that's 8x, minus 3y plus 3y gives you 0y.
And so that means that the left-hand side actually simplifies when you add 2x minus
3y to 6x plus 3y, it simplifies to just 8x, okay, plus 0y, but I'm not going to think
about plus 0y, it's just 8x.
And now something very, very significant just happened.
We have eliminated the variable y from the left-hand sides of those equations.
And the elimination of y is exactly why we call this method of solution, the solving
systems by elimination.
So if we add the left-hand sides like that, we would need to add the right-hand sides
as well, and then one of our math facts that I mentioned a moment ago would help us.
So let's go back to the original equations now, and let me walk us through how the system
could actually be solved with elimination.
We had 2x minus 3y equals 12, and we had 6x plus 3y equals 60.
If I add the left-hand sides together, and I add the right-hand sides together, I'll
have a new equality.
The left-hand sides add together to give me 8x.
That's what I was just saying a few moments ago.
The right-hand sides, 12 plus 60, will give me 72.
Remember if you're going to add the left-hand sides, you need to add the right-hand sides
as well.
You would never want to add the lefts and maybe subtract to the right-hand sides.
That would not work.
So you would then have 8x equals 72.
Can you solve that for x?
Well, that's just a one-step equation.
We've seen how to solve those a few lessons ago.
To solve 8x equals 72 for x, you just divide both sides by 8.
The 8x will have cancellation with the 8 in the denominator, and you'll just have x.
72 divided by 8 on the right-hand side will equal 9, again due to some cancellation.
So look what just happened.
We took this system of linear equations, and all of a sudden we know that part of the solution
is x equals 9.
But we still need to find y.
How would we find the value of y at this point if we know that x equals 9?
Well, just go back to either one of the original equations, plug in 9 for x, and solve for y.
So for example, let's go back to 2x minus 3y equals 12, and plug in 9 for x, and let's
see what happens.
If you plug in 9 for x, you're going to get 2 times 9 minus 3y equals 12.
2 times 9 is 18, so the left-hand side is 18 minus 3y, and the right-hand side is 12.
You want to isolate the 3y.
In fact, you want to isolate the y in a moment.
How do you isolate that y?
Well, you need to get rid of the 18.
To get rid of that 18, you subtract 18 from both sides of the equation.
That's perfectly legal to do.
18 minus 18 on the left is going to be 0, so the left-hand side will become negative 3y.
12 minus 18 on the right-hand side is going to give you negative 6.
12 minus 18 is negative 6.
So you now have negative 3y equals negative 6.
You want to isolate the y, so you divide by negative 3.
That leaves you just y on the left.
On the right, you'll have negative 6 divided by negative 3.
And when you divide two negative numbers, you get a positive number back, and then of
course, 6 divided by 3 is 2.
So y equals 2 is part of your solution.
Remember, x equals 9 was also part of your solution, and therefore, the point, the ordered
pair that is the solution, is 9, 2, 9 for x and 2 for y.
Now, we should always check our answers.
I've been saying that to you from the time we started these lessons together.
We should check, check, check, because you never know if we've made a mistake here and
there.
Let's now check that this is a solution.
The way we do that is to plug 9 and 2 in for x and y in both of the equations.
Let's do it very quickly.
2x minus 3y equals 12 was the first of the original equations we had.
9 for x and 2 for y gives us 2 times 9 minus 3 times 2 equals 12.
That's 18 minus 6 equals 12, which is 12 equals 12, and that's definitely true.
Now, the second equation we had was 6x plus 3y equals 60.
Again, I need to see if x equals 9 and y equals 2 will satisfy that equality.
We'll make a new true statement.
So I'm going to have 6 times 9 plus 3 times 2 equal to 60.
6 times 9, 54, I hope you have those multiplications memorized.
6 times 9 is 54, 3 times 2 is 6, 54 plus 6 really is 60, and therefore, that's a true
statement as well, and since that ordered pair 9, 2 solved both of those equations,
we say that it's a solution of the system.
So I want to move to another example now.
Notice what we did, though, by solving by elimination, we were trying to get rid of
one of the variables in some legal fashion.
So let's go to a second system now, and let's see if we can figure out how to do the same
sort of technique.
Here's the new system, 5s plus 4t equals 27, and 3s plus 4t equals 31.
Well, in the previous example, do you remember what I did?
I added the two left-hand sides.
Let's try that here.
Maybe it works again.
So I'm going to take the 5s plus 4t, and I'm going to add it to 3s plus 4t, and what do
I get?
I get 8s plus 8t.
Now let me ask you a question.
Did we accomplish our goal?
Well, what was our goal?
Our goal was to get rid of one of the variables.
Did we get rid of one of the variables?
The answer is no.
And that's a signal when you're doing solving by elimination that what you've done is not
the thing to do, because it didn't take you towards the solution.
It actually made the problem just as problematic, just as ugly, if you will, as it was before.
So let's go back to the original equations and ask ourselves, what could we do instead
of adding the two left-hand sides in order to cancel out or eliminate one of the variables?
Well, notice that there's a 4t in both of the left-hand sides.
That means if I subtracted one of the equations from the other and used my second math fact
from the beginning of this lesson, I could get rid of the 4t.
By the way, it doesn't matter which one you subtract from the other.
You could subtract the first one from the second, or you could subtract the second one
from the first.
In this case, I'm going to go ahead and subtract out the second one in this problem.
So let's go back to my original set of equations, 5s plus 4t equals 27, and 3s plus 4t equals
31.
And now I want to subtract out the second equation.
If I'm going to subtract the left-hand side of it, I need to subtract out the right as
well.
What is that new equation going to look like?
It's going to look like negative the quantity 3s plus 4t equals negative 31.
Well before you do any of the subtraction, you should distribute that minus sign that's
on the left-hand side.
And if you put that minus sign that's in front of the 3s plus 4t into those parentheses,
you'll have negative 3s minus 4t equals negative 31.
So you now have two new equations, 5s plus 4t equals 27, and negative 3s minus 4t equals
negative 31.
And now you basically just add those two.
In essence, by multiplying by a negative and adding, it's the same as subtracting.
And when you do that, you'll have 5s minus 3s, which is 2s, equals negative 4 on the
right-hand side.
What happened to the t's?
Well 4t minus 4t is 0t, and so I'm not going to write it down.
So I now have 2s equals negative 4.
Again, let me point out that you had to subtract both the left-hand side and the right-hand
side of the second equation.
Some students will fall into the trap of forgetting to subtract out the right-hand side.
Make sure you put that minus sign on both sides of that second equation.
And secondly, a lot of students miss putting that minus sign in front of the 4t.
Remember we had to distribute that minus sign into the parentheses, and some students will
distribute the minus sign in front of the first part, but they'll forget to distribute
it in front of the second part.
And that's a very common mistake as well.
Now what have we done?
I now have 2s equals negative 4, so I have eliminated the variable t.
And that was very, very important.
Once I have 2s equals negative 4, I can divide both sides by 2, and when I do that I get
s equals negative 2.
But you're not done.
You still need to find the value of t, which is part of the solution.
So if I substitute s equals negative 2 back into either of the two equations we started
with, I should be able to find t.
In fact, I will be able to find t.
So just for fun, I'm going to use the second of the original equations to find that value
of t.
We could use the first if you want, but I'd like to let the second equation have a little
fun as well.
So here we go.
3s plus 4t equals 31.
I know that s has to be negative 2, so I'm going to replace the s by negative 2.
And I'll have 3 times negative 2 plus 4t equals 31.
3 times negative 2 is negative 6, and then plus 4t equals 31.
Now if I take that negative 6 and add 6 to it and add 6 to the right-hand side, remember
if you add to one side of an equation you must add the same amount to the other, you
will cancel the negative 6 from the left because negative 6 plus 6 is 0, and on the right you'll
have 31 plus 6 is 37.
So your new equation will be 4t equals 37.
Solving both sides of that by 4 will give you t equals 37 divided by 4.
And therefore you know your full solution now.
s is negative 2 and t is 37 over 4.
Or to put it in an ordered pair it's just negative 2 comma 37 over 4.
Notice that solving this system by graphing would have been difficult.
We learned about solving by graphing in the previous lesson, but if you had tried to identify
37 over 4 in the sketch of one of these lines it would have been very, very difficult to
do.
So this solving by elimination I think was a better way to do it here than by graphing.
Now let's check the solution to make sure we're correct.
I know I talk to you about this all the time.
You're probably tired of me saying it, but it's very, very important that we do it.
We go back to our original equations and we plug in this information to make sure it really
is a solution.
So we have 5s plus 4t equals 27.
That means 5 times negative 2 plus 4 times 37 over 4 needs to be 27 since I'm using
my solution information.
5 times negative 2 is negative 10.
4 times 37 over 4 is going to be 37 because the 4s will cancel each other and you'll have
negative 10 plus 37 equals 27.
And of course that just says 27 equals 27 and you're good to go.
Let's look at the second equation quickly.
You have 3s plus 4t equals 31.
Plugging in s equals negative 2 and t equals 37 over 4 gives you 3 times negative 2 plus
4 times 37 over 4 equals 31.
That's the same as negative 6 plus 37 again equals 31.
And negative 6 plus 37 really is 31, so 31 equals 31 and that guarantees now that we
have a solution to the system of equations with which we started.
Now let's move to another example that I think looks like it's going to cause more
trouble at first, but I'm going to show you a technique for getting past that trouble.
Here's the example.
I want you to solve the system negative 2x plus 15y equals negative 32 and 7x minus 5y
equals 17.
Well let's try to use the techniques we've already seen in the previous examples.
Just to see if they work.
Let's add the two equations together.
When you add those two left hand sides, you're going to get 5x plus 10y.
The 5x comes from 7x minus 2x basically and the 10y comes from 15y minus 5y.
Did we accomplish our goal?
In other words, did we eliminate a variable?
Answer?
No.
Okay?
Let's try subtracting both of the equations from one another.
Again, keeping in mind if you subtract, say, the second equation, you've got to make sure
you distribute the minus sign.
When you do that and you subtract the second equation from the first, you'll get negative
9x plus 20y equals negative 49.
Have you eliminated a variable there?
No.
So neither of these techniques is working right now.
What do we do?
Do we get it?
No.
Let's go back to the start of this lesson when I said that there were three math facts.
We used the first one and the second one already, but we didn't use the third.
Let's use it now.
The third fact was that if A equals B, then C times A equals C times B. So why don't we
go back to the equations we started with and multiply one of the equations by something
to help us?
Remember, if you multiply the left-hand side, you must multiply the right-hand side by the
same amount.
Look at that second equation and multiply it by 3.
What would we have as our system then?
Well, our system would be negative 2x plus 15y equals negative 32, and now I'm multiplying
the second equation by 3, it's going to become 21x minus 15y equals 51.
Remember I have to multiply every term in that equation, both on the left and the right,
by 3.
And look at the y's now.
If you were to add these two equations together, the y's will disappear.
They will be eliminated.
Remember, that's the name of this technique.
So I'm going to add these new equations together, and when I do so, the x's survive.
You see how many x's will be there?
It'll be 19x plus 0y, so I'm going to ignore that, equals, what's the right-hand side?
The constants add together to give you 19.
And now the new equation is 19x equals 19.
Well, let's go to solve that.
X equals 1, of course, because 19 times 1 is 19.
So x equals 1 is part of my solution.
But it's not the whole solution, I still need to find y.
So I go back to one of my original equations, I plug in x equals 1, and I try to find the
y.
Here we go.
Negative 2x plus 15y equals negative 32, that was one of my original equations, plug
in x equals 1.
The first term then is just negative 2 times 1, which is negative 2.
So I have negative 2 plus 15y equals negative 32.
I want to get the y by itself.
So I add 2 to both sides, the negative 2 plus 2 cancel, I'll be left with 15y on the left
by itself.
When I add 2 to the right-hand side, I get negative 32 plus 2, which is negative 30.
So my new equation is 15y equals negative 30, dividing both sides of that equation by 15
It's the y by itself, and the right-hand side is negative 30 over 15, which is negative
2.
And my final solution then is x equals 1, y equals negative 2, or just the ordered pair
1, negative 2.
Well I keep talking to you about having to check our solutions, and I know that it's
very, very important.
But in this example, I'm going to go ahead and pass on that, I'm going to let you do
the check of the solution of this system of equations, because I think you can do that
on your own at this point.
We've done several of these together.
I'll let you go ahead and do it in this case.
Now I'd like to move on then to a word problem, and just to see how these systems of equations
can actually be used in order to solve what sounds like at least a real-world situation.
So here's the example I want to give you.
A photographer offers two packages for photographs to the students at a school.
The first package includes 20 wallet-sized photos and one 8 by 10 photo, and the total
package is $30.
The second package, which is different, it includes 10 wallet-sized photos and three
8 by 10 photos for $40.
Using a system of equations, let's determine the cost of each type of photo.
That is, how much does one wallet-sized cost, and how much does one 8 by 10 cost?
That's the problem.
Well we really need to identify our variables.
I've been saying that all course long, let's do it again here.
We have two variables to try to pick out.
I'm going to let W equal the cost of a wallet-sized photo, and I'm going to let X equal the cost
of an 8 by 10 photo.
Now you might say, where'd you get those?
Well the last sentence in the problem said, figure out how much one wallet-sized photo
costs and how much one 8 by 10 photo costs.
Those are the two variables I just named.
You could have called them other letters.
I'm going to call them W for wallet, and then X for an 8 by 10.
I couldn't really think of a good letter there.
So those are my two variables, W and X.
Now I need some information from the other parts of the English in that problem to help
me get two equations.
Well the first package cost basically will translate into the following equation, 20W
plus 1X equals $30.
Now where did I get that?
Well remember, the first package was 20 wallet-sized photos plus 1 8 by 10 is going to cost $30.
That's where 20W plus 1X equals 30 comes from.
The second equation from the same part of the problem tells me that 10W plus 3X equals
$40.
10W stands for the cost of 10 wallet-sized photos, and 3X stands for the cost of 3 8
by 10 photos.
So I now have two equations, 20W plus X equals 30, and 10W plus 3X equals 40.
Now I'd like to solve that.
I'd like to find W and X based on that system.
How am I going to do it?
Well I'm going to use elimination, and in particular, you know, I want to eliminate
one of the variables.
I'm going to choose to multiply the top equation by negative 3 and then add them.
By the way, before we do that, you might say, why don't you multiply the second equation
by negative 2 and then eliminate the W's?
That would have worked.
You can do that.
We'll get the same solutions either way.
But I'm just going to pick to multiply the first equation by negative 3 and eliminate
the X's.
There's nothing special about eliminating the X compared to the W, so we're good to
go.
When I multiply that first equation by negative 3, I'm going to have negative 3 times the
quantity 20W plus X equals negative 3 times 30.
I must multiply on both sides by the same amount.
I then need to distribute that negative 3 very carefully, especially on the left-hand
side, so that I don't miss that little X that's inside the parentheses.
When I distribute that negative 3 in the first equation, it becomes negative 60W minus 3X
equals negative 90 on the right-hand side.
Negative 3 times 30 is negative 90.
So the first equation has been transformed into negative 60W minus 3X equals negative
90.
The second equation hasn't been moved at all.
It's 10W plus 3X equals 40.
Do you see now that if I add those two new equations that the X's will cancel, X will
be eliminated?
That's exactly what I'm going to do.
So when I add those two, what do I get?
Well, negative 60W plus 10W is negative 50W.
That's the left-hand side.
The X's have gone away.
And the right-hand side is negative 90 plus 40, which is negative 50.
Well, negative 50W equals negative 50 means W equals 1.
If you don't just see that automatically, divide both sides by negative 50, and you'll
get W equals 1.
Translation, each wallet-sized photo basically costs $1 by itself.
Now I want to go find X.
I go back to one of my equations in the original system.
In this case, I'm going to go to the second equation.
It doesn't matter which one.
And I'm going to plug in 1 for W because W equals 1.
And I'm going to solve for X.
So I have 10W plus 3X equals 40, which means I have 10 times 1 plus 3X equals 40.
10 times 1 is 10.
So I have 10 plus 3X equals 40.
Subtracting 10 from both sides of the equation gives me 3X on the left equals 30 on the right
because 40 minus 10 is 30.
And if I divide by 3 on both sides of 3X equals 30, I'll be left with X equals 10.
Remember that X was the cost of each 8 by 10 photo.
So X equals 10 means that each 8 by 10 photo cost $10.
And remember, each wallet-sized photo was going to cost $1.
Again, I'm going to leave it to you to check that this is the solution.
It can be done.
It won't be complicated.
But for a matter of time, I'd like to move forward and let you go ahead and check that
solution on your own.
OK.
I want to look at one last example that seems to defy all the tricks we've used so far.
And I just want to make sure that we see this kind of an example because you might see
it in your future math work.
So here's the example.
I want to solve 15X plus 3Y equals 9 and 10X plus 7Y equals negative 4.
I want you to notice that adding the equations is not going to eliminate anything.
Subtracting the equations isn't going to eliminate one of the variables.
And it doesn't appear that there's an obvious choice for a number to multiply one of the
equations by in order to eliminate one of the variables.
So what am I going to do?
I mean, it seems like we can't really do a whole lot.
Well, here's what we're going to do.
I'm going to choose to multiply the first equation by negative 10 and the second equation
by 15.
You might say, wait a minute.
Are you allowed to do that?
In fact, I am.
I can multiply one of the equations by something and multiply the second one by something else.
I'm not bound to just multiply one of the equations by something.
If I multiply the first equation by negative 10 and the second equation by 15 and I add,
I will then eliminate one of the variables.
Do you see which one it is?
I'm going to eliminate the X.
Now, I could choose differently.
I could go back to the original set of equations and I could multiply the first equation by
negative 7 and the second equation by 3.
If I multiply the first equation by negative 7 and the second by 3, when I add, do you
see what gets eliminated?
The Y variable gets eliminated.
And I'm going to go ahead and approach it that way right now.
So let's multiply the first equation by negative 7 and the second equation by 3.
Remember, I have to distribute, so I have to be very careful as I do this.
But once I've distributed the negative 7 and the 3 through those two equations, I'll
be left with the following.
Negative 105X minus 21Y equals negative 63 and 30X plus 21Y equals negative 12.
Now, there's a lot of arithmetic there.
The biggest number we see is the 105.
It comes from 15 times 7.
And it's negative because it was negative 7 times positive 15.
Now take those two new equations and add them and you see that the Ys will disappear and
you'll be left with negative 75X equals negative 75.
The Y is gone and X is simply equal to 1.
X equals 1 is part of my solution and now I go back to one of the original equations
to find Y.
Well, 15X plus 3Y was 9, so 15 times 1 plus 3Y is 9.
That means 15 plus 3Y is 9 or 3Y equals negative 6 if you just subtract 15 from both sides.
Dividing by 3 gives you Y equals negative 2 and that means that the solution to this
system of equations is 1 comma negative 2.
Well, today we've solved lots of different systems of linear equations which would not
have really been easily solved with either graphing or substitution.
But thanks to this technique of eliminating one of the variables, we see that we can solve
a really large number of different types of systems of linear equations.
In our next lesson, I'm going to shift gears a bit and talk about linear inequalities,
which are mathematical sentences where the equal sign has been replaced by a less than
sign or a greater than sign.
There's some really interesting twists to these kinds of problems, so I look forward
to talking with you about them then.
