We've spent a number of lessons discussing linear equations, which are of the form y
equals mx plus b. Notice that the right-hand side of these equations include a linear term
with x raised to the first power and a constant, a number, which we often call b. What if we
added an extra term on that right-hand side, what's often called a quadratic term, or a
term where the power on x is 2? And we looked at equations of that form. Let's call them
y equals ax squared plus bx plus c. For example, we might consider y equals x squared plus
5x plus 4, or y equals 3x squared minus 8x plus 2. These are called quadratic equations.
The term quadratic comes from the Latin word quadrare, which means to make square. And
so sometimes we say that x to the power 2 is x squared. We'll spend several lessons speaking
about quadratic equations, so I'll not try to say everything I can in this one lesson about
quadratic equations. But I would like to spend some time sharing a number of thoughts by way of
introduction. First off, the graphs of quadratic equations, like y equals 5x squared plus 7x
minus 3, or y equals negative 2x squared plus 3x plus 4, have a special name. They're called
parabolas. And I've shown you the graphs of two particular parabolas here. Now, I want
you to notice the distinctive u-shape of each graph. It's interesting to note that both
ends of each graph go in the same direction. They either both go up or they both go down.
This is very, very different from the graphs of the linear equations that we've seen in the past.
Remember when we graphed y equals mx plus b, one end would have been going down and the other
would be going up or the other way around. The left hand end might be going up and the right
hand end might be going down. So the whole concept of parabolas is very, very different. You have
both ends either going in the same direction up or both going down. And this concept can throw a lot
of students for a loop. It's just kind of weird to think that we can draw an equation even though
that's exactly what we've been doing with straight lines. But now we have more shapes in them. You
might even think we have a real shape now, this u-shape. And so it can be challenging to some
students. So what I'd like to suggest is we break down where that u comes from and talk about why
we know it really is going to be that shape. So first of all, what is telling that thing to be
a u to go up or to go down in terms of the ends of the graph? Well, it turns out that it's nothing
more than just the sign of the coefficient in front of the x-squared term. When that coefficient
in front of the x-squared term is positive, the ends go up. So for example, in the equation
y equals 5x squared plus 7x minus 3, the graph I know will go up in terms of its ends because
the coefficient in front of x-squared, which is 5, is positive. But if you hand me a different
quadratic equation like y equals negative 2x squared plus 3x plus 4, I immediately know
that it'll be a parabola with the ends going down. And the reason that is is exactly because
the negative 2, which is the coefficient of the x-squared term, is negative. That's all we have
to look for. Just that one clue in each quadratic equation tells us immediately whether the parabola
goes up or the parabola goes down. Well, that's pretty cool, I think. You just have to watch for
that one piece of information in order to figure out what the graph will look like. But what else
can we say? Just because I know the ends go up doesn't mean I know exactly how to graph every
parabola. Well, we could also talk about the x-intercepts of these parabolas. What do I mean
by x-intercepts? They're going to be the places where the parabola crosses the x-axis. So here's
a question to ask, which is kind of conceptual, but I think a very important one. Could there ever be
more than two x-intercepts for a parabola? Well, the answer, of course, is no,
because the parabola is just this u-shape. So it would never have the ability to sort of come back
down again and cross the x-axis a third time. Once that u-shape has crossed the x-axis twice,
it would not have the ability to wrap back down on itself, if you will, and make a third x-intercept.
Okay, that's cool, but does it have to have, does every parabola have to have two different x-intercepts?
Well, of course not. The parabola might sit right on the x-axis, for example, and only have
one x-intercept. For example, if you look at the graph of y equals x squared minus 6x plus 9,
you'll see that the parabola actually just sits, looks like it's just sitting right on the x-axis.
In fact, we can even see from that graph, if we draw it carefully on graph paper, that the x-intercept
is exactly 3, x equals 3. So I can have parabolas that have two different x-intercepts. I can have
a parabola, several parabolas, in fact, with only one x-intercept. What about having no x-intercepts?
Is it possible to have a parabola that misses the x-axis altogether? The answer is yes. Take,
for example, y equals x squared minus 4x plus 6. What's true about that parabola? It actually sits
completely above the x-axis. And again, it's never going to come back down ever, so it will never
cross the x-axis. It could have been the case if I had given you a different quadratic equation
that you could have had a parabola that was going downward, but if it sat below the x-axis,
then that parabola would also have no x-intercepts. So there are lots of parabolas that have no x-
intercepts. There are parabolas that have exactly one x-intercept. There are parabolas that have
exactly two x-intercepts. And those are all the possibilities for the number of x-intercepts
that can happen with a quadratic equation. For now, I really think that's enough to talk about
when it comes to graphs of quadratic equations. I promise we'll talk more about their graphs in
a future lesson. You might be saying, how would I know where to put it exactly in the Cartesian
plane? I promise I'll share that with you in future lessons. But for today, I'd like to transition
to more algebraic comments about quadratic equations. First, we're going to see many
solutions, I'm sorry, we're going to see many examples in math word problems where we're going
to need a quadratic equation and we're going to need to multiply out the expressions in order
to get those quadratic terms. So to get our feet wet, I'd like to do some examples where we take
different terms and multiply them together to get a quadratic polynomial or a quadratic expression.
So let's start with this example as a starter. Let's simplify the product 5x times 8x minus
3, where the 8x minus 3 is in parentheses. Now, what do I mean by the command simplify here?
What I really mean is I want you to multiply it out or I want you to expand the product.
And to do that, I'm going to need the distributive property, which tells me how to distribute the
5x into parentheses. Now, we've been using the distributive property already. We used it in
previous lessons. But now I want you to notice that I'm actually distributing a thing with a variable
in it. Often, we were just distributing numbers here and there into the parentheses. But today,
we're actually going to distribute variables and numbers, terms like 5x in this example,
into the parentheses. Is it any different from what we were doing before? Absolutely not. It
might make the algebra a little more complicated because we'll get different powers of x. But
beyond that, it's the exact same technique, the exact same rule. So let's expand this 5x
times 8x minus 3 by distributing the 5x into the parentheses. Here we go. The 5x has to be
multiplied with the 8x and it gets multiplied with the negative 3 and you get 5x times 8x
minus 5x times 3. The 5x times 8x can be written slightly so that the 5 and the 8 are next to each
other. Remember, we're allowed to multiply these terms in any order that we want. And so 5x times
8x is the same as 5 times 8 times x times x. And that quantity is going to be 40 from the 5 times 8
times x squared or x to the second power. So the first term is going to be 40x squared.
What's left? Well, there's a minus 5x times 3. And again, I can put the 5 and the 3 together.
5 times 3 is 15 and the x doesn't really have a buddy to multiply with. So it just comes along
and I get 15x with a minus sign in front because there was a minus sign in front before.
So 5x times 8x minus 3 is the same as 40x squared minus 15x. Now I want you to notice something
very important as we transition out of all of those lessons we've done on linear expressions
into this first lesson on quadratic expressions. We started with 5x and 8x minus 3. By themselves,
those are both linear. If you had had y equals 5x and y equals 8x minus 3,
both of their graphs would have been straight lines. But now when I multiply them together,
or when I take their product to use the fancier language, we get back a quadratic expression.
40x squared minus 15x. And this is going to be a very common way to get quadratic expressions.
We're going to construct them by multiplying two linear expressions. Things where the x is only
raised to the first power. And by multiplying two of those together, we can get an x squared term to
pop out. Of course, we could also go backwards and factor out the common term from the quadratic
polynomial. And in fact, this is a very important technique with quadratic expressions as well.
So now I want to sort of do the opposite of what we just did by considering the following example.
I want us to factor out the greatest common factor in the expression 10x squared plus 20x minus 40.
Now you might be saying to yourself, what in the world is the greatest common factor? Well,
the greatest common factor of 10x squared plus 20x minus 40 is the largest factor
that appears in each of the terms 10x squared, 20x, and 40. So I want to know what's the biggest
thing that I could factor out of each of those three at the same time. So let's factor each of
the terms separately and look for this greatest common factor. Well, 10x squared is the same as
2 times 5 times x times x. 20x is 2 times 2 times 5 times x. And 40 is 2 times 2 times 2 times 5.
So I do those three factorizations. And now what I want to know if I want to the greatest
common factor is what pieces appear in all three of those factorizations at the same time?
Well, notice there's a 2 in every one of those factorizations. And there's also a 5 in every
one of those factorizations. And there's nothing else in common with all three of the terms. For
example, there aren't two 2s in all three of the terms. And in fact, there aren't, and there isn't
even an x in all three of the terms because the 40 doesn't have an x in it. So the greatest common
factor then is going to be a 2 multiplied with a 5, and 2 times 5 is 10. And what does that mean?
It means that 10x squared plus 20x minus 40 can be written as 10, that's my greatest common factor,
times some big thing. Well, what is that thing? I'll call it something. I'm going to have 10 times
something equals 10x squared plus 20x minus 40. Well, if you start to look at how you would pull
a 10 out, almost like peeling it out of each term, you'll see that 10x squared of course is just 10
times x squared. 20x is the same as 10 times 2x, and 40 is the same as 10 times 4. And now I see
that I can factor that 10 out of every one of the terms and just write it as 110 out in front of
x squared plus 2x minus 4. So what we have done by starting with 10x squared plus 20x minus 40,
and rewriting it as 10 times x squared plus 2x minus 4, we have factored out the greatest common
factor of that expression. And that's going to be very, very important as we move forward with
factoring techniques in later lessons. We will always want to be able to factor out the greatest
common factor. Well, let's do one more example along these lines of greatest common factors.
This is not something we want to rush through. So let's look at the following. Let's find the
greatest common factor of 10x squared plus 20x. Notice there's no 40 at the end of that. I just
want 10x squared plus 20x. We've already factored the 10x squared and the 20x. They are 2 times
5 times x times x, and 2 times 2 times 5 times x. Now, what do these two factorizations have in
common? Well, notice that both of them have at least one 2. Notice that one of them only has
exactly one 2, but both of them have a 2, both of them have a 5, and now both of them actually
have an x as well. So the greatest common factor of this new quantity we're looking at is 2 times
5 times x, which is 10x. And what that tells me is I can factor out a 10x from 10x squared
plus 20x. When I do that, I see that 10x squared can be written as 10x times x,
and 20x can be written as 10x times 2. Do you see that 10x that they both have sort of floating
around in there? You can now pull that 10x out in front, and what you're left with after you
remove those 10x's and write it out in front, you're left with just a new term inside parentheses
of the form x plus 2. The x is coming from that extra x, and the 2 is coming from the fact that
you had 10x times 2 at the end. Well, we've now seen how to multiply a polynomial by a single term
called a monomial when it's just got one term in it, and we know how to factor out a greatest common
factor. For example, in the previous example, I was looking at 10x. That was factoring out a
monomial because it just has one term in it, 10x. Nothing else is being added or subtracted to it.
What's the next thing to do? Well, the next thing to do is to multiply binomials. Now,
what in the world does that mean? Well, a binomial is a sum or a difference of two terms. You've
heard things like bicycle, which has two wheels. Well, a binomial has two pieces being added or
subtracted together. So 2x minus 1 is two terms being added together, a 2x and a 1. Actually,
they're being subtracted. x plus 5 is two terms, an x and a 5 being added together, 5x minus 7,
two terms, 5x and a 7 being subtracted from one another. All of those are called binomials,
and I want you to notice that they look like linear expressions, don't they? Because the x
in each of the things I just mentioned is raised to the first power. What I'd like to do now is
multiply or expand things like x plus 5 times x minus 3 or 2x minus 1 times 5x minus 7. Now,
that may be a little silly looking to you. Maybe you think, I really need to know this.
Believe it or not, the ability to multiply such binomials together is extremely important when
we start talking about quadratic equations. So I want to do several examples now as we finish
out this lesson together today, where we're just multiplying these two binomials together.
So let's start with this example. Expand x plus 5 times x minus 3. One of the most often
used approaches to multiplying this kind of thing is called the FOIL method. You are going to hear
me say FOIL many, many, many times in this course. What in the world does FOIL stand for? Well,
the F stands for first, the O stands for outer, the I stands for inner, and the L stands for last.
So in this case, the first terms would be the x and the x, because they're the first terms in
both sets of parentheses. The outer would refer to the sort of outer edge. That would be the x
that's on the first term, the first binomial, and the minus 3 that's on the last or latter end,
the outer edge of the second binomial. The inner refers to the inner two terms. That would be the
5 and the x from the second binomial. And the last refers to the last terms in each binomial.
That would be the 5 and the negative 3. And therefore, the FOIL method for expanding x
plus 5 times x minus 3 says we should do the following. And this is extremely important,
so I'll try to walk through it carefully. x plus 5 times x minus 3 is going to equal x times x,
that's the F in FOIL for the first terms, plus x times negative 3, that's the O in FOIL, that's
the outer terms, plus 5 times x, which is the I for inner terms. See, the 5 and the x are sort of
on the inside there. And then finally, we add 5 times negative 3. And the 5 and the negative 3 are
the L. They are the last terms in each of their respective binomials. Now, what have I done?
What I've really done is just multiplied every possible thing inside the first set of parentheses
with every possible thing inside the second set of parentheses. And that's exactly what you have
to do when you multiply these two things together. But once you've written that down,
it's pretty easy to just sort of combine it all together. The x times the x becomes x squared.
The negative 3 with the x becomes a negative 3x. The 5 multiplied with the x becomes 5x. And that
5 multiplied with a negative 3 becomes negative 15. Notice, we can't get away from multiplying
sign numbers. We've been doing it a lot in this course. And now when you string all that together,
you have x squared minus 3x plus 5x minus 15. And here's the only question you have to do to finish.
What can be added together? Which terms are like terms so that you can combine some of the terms?
Well, I only see an x squared. There's not multiple x squareds floating around. So the x
squared doesn't have anything to be added or subtracted with. But notice the minus 3x and the
plus 5x. They're both basically an x term with different constants in front. Minus 3x plus 5x
is exactly plus 2x. So those can be combined. And the minus 15, you can't do anything with it either.
So the final answer here for multiplying out x plus 5 times x minus 3 is exactly
x squared plus 2x minus 15. Now that may have seemed complicated. And if this is your first
time to see the FOIL method, I would completely understand. But I promise that this will make
much more sense after you do a lot of examples. So before we move to another FOIL example,
let me quickly point out that we just used two linear expressions, an x plus 5 and an x minus 3
multiplied together to give us a quadratic. x squared plus 2x minus 15.
Okay, let's move to another example so we can practice this FOIL together.
Let's multiply out or expand 2x minus 1 times 5x minus 7. Now this example looks a bit more
complicated. I threw a coefficient in front of the x to give me 2x and I threw another one in
front of an x to give me a 5x. But all I need to do again is FOIL. So here we go. 2x minus 1
times 5x minus 7 is 2x times 5x. That's the f plus 2x times the negative 7. Those are the outer
pieces plus negative 1 times the 5x. Those are the inner pieces plus negative 1 times negative 7.
Those are the two last pieces in each of the binomial terms. And now you just multiply it all out.
2x times 5x is 10x squared. 10 coming from the 2 times 5, x times x is x squared. Plus you have
2x times negative 7. That's negative 14x. Then you have negative 1 times 5x, which is a negative
5x. And then negative 1 times negative 7. Be careful. That's positive 7. And that leaves us with
10x squared minus 14x minus 5x plus 7. Notice again that the middle two terms can be combined.
The minus 14x and the minus 5x to give you minus 19x in the middle. And that's all you
can do to simplify this so that your final answer is 10x squared minus 19x plus 7.
Well, as I mentioned a few minutes ago, these quadratic expressions can naturally show up
in word problems as well. For example, someone might give you a sketch of a rectangle with
side links 2x minus 1 and 5x minus 7 and ask you to find that expression for the area of
the rectangle. Well, the area of a rectangle is length times width. So if the length is 2x minus
1 and the width is 5x minus 7, then their product 2x minus 1 times 5x minus 7 will give you the
area of the rectangle. And that's what we started with in our earlier example. So we were actually
working with something that could have been in a word problem if we wanted. Now, I'd like to turn
a corner in the lesson to discuss expanding some very special products that are related to quadratic
expressions. So let's start with the following. I want us to expand x minus 7 squared. Now,
that doesn't look like the examples I did earlier. In the two examples I did earlier,
I had an x plus or minus something multiplied by a different x plus or minus something. Now,
I'm actually saying just take one thing x minus 7 and square it. Is that really like the previous
examples? Well, think about it. When you say something squared, you just mean that thing times
itself again. So x minus 7 squared is the same as x minus 7 times another x minus 7. Does that
look like what we've been doing earlier? Yeah, sure it does. Once I've written it as x minus 7
times x minus 7, I can now foil again. I promised I'd be saying foil a lot and I'm really meant it.
So let's multiply out x minus 7 times x minus 7 with foil. Well, you're going to have x times x,
that's the f in foil for firsts, plus x times a negative 7, that's the o, plus the negative 7 on
the inside with the x on the inside, that's the i, and then you'll have the negative 7 with the
negative 7. That's the l for last pieces of each binomial. Multiply them out. x times x is x squared.
The x times negative 7 is negative 7x. The other term also gives you a negative 7x,
and then the last term gives you plus 49. Negative times a negative is a positive. Combining those
two middle terms, which are the only two that are like terms, you're going to have x squared
minus 14x plus 49. Where does the 14 come from? It's just 7 added with 7. So I have x squared
minus 14x plus 49, that's the same as x minus 7 whole thing squared. Let's try another example
that kind of feels like this, but it's a little more extended. Let's expand 4t plus 5 whole thing
squared. Again, I want to use foil to multiply this out, so I need to write 4t plus 5 times
another 4t plus 5. That's what it means to have a square, and now I'm going to foil. Well,
it looks a little more complicated because those fours, but it's not. So let's just jump into it.
The 4t times the 4t, those are the first terms, plus the 4t out here times the 5, that's the o,
plus the 5 times the 4t, that's the i, plus the 5 times the 5, that's the l. It's that simple. Well,
okay, maybe it doesn't look simple, but once you've written that out, all you have to do now is just
multiply everything together, add the like terms, and you're done. It's a very nice recipe,
a very nice rule for doing these kinds of problems. Now let's multiply the terms together.
4t times 4t, 4 times 4, that's 16, t times t is t squared. So 4t times 4t is 16 times t squared.
Perfect. Now 4t times 5, that's 20t. 5 times 4t, that's also 20t, and 5 times 5 is 25. So once I
foiled, I have 16t squared plus 20t, plus another 20t, plus 25. Those two 20t's in the middle are
like terms because they're both include a t to the 1, so I can add them together. 20t plus 20t
is 40t, and so I have 16t squared plus 40t plus 25. Now I'd like to look at one more very special
type of example, which is known as a difference of two squares, just to give you a feeling for this
before we close out our lesson. Here's the example. I want to multiply out or expand x minus seven
times x plus seven. Okay, pretty straightforward looking problem. Notice that the sevens are the
same, but there are different signs inside each of the two pieces of each of the two parentheses.
So x minus seven times x plus seven, let's foil. x times x minus the 7x plus the 7x minus 49. In
fact, I think I just said that as phi all instead of foil. If you really wanted to foil, it would be x
times x plus seven x minus seven x minus the 49. Now notice what happens to the middle two
terms. You have plus seven x and you have minus seven x. What are you going to have when you add
those two together? Zero x. I'm not going to write zero x as part of my final answer though.
All I'm going to have that remains is x squared minus the 49. The middle term goes away,
and notice that x squared minus 49 is a difference of two squares. Remember, difference means
subtraction. x squared, of course, is a square and 49 is seven times seven. So when I write down x
squared minus 49, I have a difference of two squares, and you'll be seeing differences of two squares
throughout the next several lessons in this course. Well, today we've talked about the foil method
and how important it is to multiply out these binomial terms in order to get a quadratic expression.
We'll be talking about this as well as quadratic expressions throughout the next several lessons.
But in our next lesson, I want to start talking about one of the most important algebra topics
that's related to quadratics, and that's called factoring trinomials. And I'll explain to you
what a trinomial is in that next lesson. I'll see you next time.
