Welcome back. In the previous lesson we talked about the foil method and today I'd like to
mention that it's very important that you have a grasp of that method, the foil method,
before you continue on to this lesson. So make sure you've done some review of the foil
method as we move forward today. We've spoken about quadratic polynomials of the form AX
squared plus BX plus C, where A, B and C are some numbers. One of the most important things
we'll want to do is solve equations that involve these kinds of expressions. Those equations are
going to look like AX squared plus BX plus C equals 0. Why? It's a great question to ask,
why will we need to solve these kinds of equations? Well, because the values of X,
which are the solutions of this equation, are very, very special. They're called the zeros of
the equation because they are the X intercepts of the graph of the function AX squared plus BX
plus C. So we really need to be able to solve equations like AX squared plus BX plus C equals
0. Okay, well, what can we do to solve an equation like, let's say, X squared plus 8X plus 7 equals
0. Well, there are actually a lot of different approaches to that kind of a problem. But in this
lesson, I want us to focus on one of the most important and most popular approaches to solving
such a problem. It's called factoring. So let's start with the following example. I want us to
factor the expression X squared minus 8X plus 7. So how do we even start? Well, what do I mean?
I want to write down X squared minus 8X plus 7 in a factored form. And the factored form is going
to look like X plus M times X plus N, where M and N are just some numbers. Basically, it's the opposite
of doing the FOIL method. I'm trying to undo the effect of foiling X plus M times X plus N to get
back to the expanded polynomial. So this lesson is all about thinking about FOIL backwards, basically. The
issue is just figuring out what these numbers M and N ought to be so that we have the factored form of
the polynomial we started with. That's the key. And that's why it's so important that we understand
the FOIL method because we need to now think about it basically backwards. Well, first of all, if the
factorization of the polynomial we began with really is of the form X plus M times X plus N, then when I
multiply the M and the N together, I have to get the constant in the original expression. And that was
7. That is coming from the L in FOIL. When I multiply the number M times the number N, it has to be 7.
That's coming from the L part of FOIL. Well, if you stop and think about it for a second, there are
actually tons of ways to choose M and N so that M times N equals 7. For example, let's be a little silly
about it. We could let M equal 121 and we could let N equal the fraction 7 divided by 121. If you multiply
121 times 7 over 121, the 121s will cancel and M times N will just be 7. Well, that's true mathematically, but
it's kind of silly. I'm going to assume throughout this lesson that M and N are actually whole numbers, that they
are integers, so that the math is simpler for us. And now, if we make that assumption about M and N, it turns out that
there aren't that many choices for what those two numbers can be. Think about it. What two whole numbers can you
multiply together to get 7? Well, the choices are either 1 with 7 or maybe negative 1 with negative 7 or some other
combination like that, maybe plus 1 with negative 7 and so on. So, for example, the factored version of the polynomial we
started with might be, and I emphasize might be, x plus 1 times x plus 7. Well, once you've written down a guess, so to
speak, for what the factored form is, how do you check your answer? Well, the answer is you do the FOIL method. So, I'm going to
now multiply out or expand x plus 1 times x plus 7 using the FOIL method to see what I get. So, let's do it. x plus 1 times
x plus 7 is going to equal x times x, that's the f part of FOIL, plus x times 7, that's the o part, plus 1 times x, that's the i
part, plus 1 times 7, that's the l part of FOIL. And when you multiply that all out, you're going to have x squared plus 7x plus 1x
plus 7. And remember from our previous lesson, the 7x and the 1x are going to be similar terms they can be put together, and 7x plus 1x is 8x.
So, when I multiply out x plus 1 times x plus 7, I get x squared plus 8x plus 7. Now, what was I trying to factor? I was trying to
factor x squared minus 8x plus 7. We're close, but the sign on that little 8 in the middle is wrong. And that means that whatever I chose in the
beginning for the two numbers, m and n, needs to be changed just a bit. So, let's try a different choice for m and n. What about taking x plus 1 times
x minus 7? Let's just try it. We're learning about this for the first time. Let's just try a few different options. If we expand x plus 1 times x minus 7, we're going to get x
squared plus x times the negative 7, that's the o term, plus 1 times x, that's the i, plus 1 times negative 7. All right. And if you multiply that stuff out, you're going to have x
squared minus 7x plus 1x minus 7. Again, the middle terms will combine. They are like terms. Negative 7x plus 1x is negative 6x. So, when I expand this quantity, I'm going to have x squared minus 6x minus 7.
Now, I don't know about you. We've actually really messed this thing up now, because not only do we no longer have an 8 in the middle, but we've also messed up the sign in front of the 7 at the end. Remember, I want a plus 7 at the end, not a minus 7. So, let's try one more option, and just a hint, this is the right one. So, stay with me as we do this. I wanted you to see some of the others, because you have to go through this same thinking process of trying to figure out
which of these options is right. So, now that we've gone through a couple that aren't going to work, let's do the one that does. Let's choose x minus 1 times x minus 7. Well, when I foil that, I'm going to have x times x minus 7 times x, that's the o part, minus 1 times x, that's the i part. And then I'm going to have plus a negative 1 times a negative 7.
Okay, that's going to give me x squared minus 7x minus 1x, and then the negative 1 times the negative 7 is plus 7. Remember, when you multiply two negative numbers together, you actually get a positive number back. And if I combine the like terms in the middle, I will have x squared minus 8x plus 7.
That's exactly what we wanted. So, I now know how to factor x squared minus 8x plus 7. It's exactly equal to x minus 1 times x minus 7. Now, before we move to another example, let's notice a few things from the example that we just did, because we're going to try to get a system down here for how to do these factorings. It's very, very important that we do that.
First, I want you to notice that the sign in front of the constant term at the end, which is coming from the L part of the foil, it's going to be positive if the signs of the two binomial terms are the same, whether they're both positive or both negative. In the example we just did, when I had a minus 1 and a minus 7 inside the factored parts, multiplying them together gave me a plus 7.
And of course, when I had plus 1 and plus 7, multiplying those together gave me plus 7. So, when the signs inside the two binomial terms are the same, the constant term after I multiply will be positive.
But there was another case where I took a plus and a minus inside the binomial terms. When we multiplied that out, I got a negative 7. So, when the sign of those constants are different inside the binomial terms, the product will give me a negative
constant at the end. This is actually a very important clue when you're trying to factor a quadratic expression. So, that's one very important rule that I'll try to walk through in some more examples in a moment.
The second comment I want to make is that the middle term in the quadratic expression, like the negative 8x that we had in the example we just did, comes from adding the O and the I terms in foil.
So, for example, the negative 8x actually came from the negative 7x and the negative 1x, which were coming out of the O and the I.
So, bottom line, and this is very important, if you can juggle these two facts in your head, the fact that the L is giving you the constant piece and that the O and the I added together give you the middle term of your quadratic,
factoring actually will come natural to you after you do some practice. So, it's all about practice here, so let's do some more practice. Let's factor another quadratic. How about x squared plus 9x plus 20?
Okay, I know that this quadratic expression is going to factor as a product of two linear binomial expressions. They're going to look like x plus m times x plus n.
By the way, I know that because the x times the x is going to give me the x squared in x squared plus 9x plus 20, and the rest of the part from the foil will give me the 9x and the 20.
I also know that the signs of both of the numbers inside the binomials, in other words, the sign of m and the sign of n, they will be positive because all of the coefficients in x squared plus 9x plus 20 are positive.
So, I'm good to go here. I don't even have to worry about minus signs in this problem. All I need now is to figure out what m and n ought to be.
Well, let's start by focusing on the l part of the foil method. Remember that the multiplication of m and n, which is coming from the l part of foil, has to equal 20 because 20 is the constant in my quadratic.
So, I have to ask myself what kind of numbers could m and n be so that when I multiply them together, I get 20.
Now, I've chosen a case here where there are many different possibilities. For example, 1 times 20 equals 20, 2 times 10 equals 20, and 4 times 5 also equals 20.
And in some problems later on, you might have to worry about doing them in different orders. So, instead of doing 2 times 10, you might have to think about 10 times 2.
In this example, we don't have to worry about flipping the two terms around, but in some later examples, you might. The point is that there are lots of choices.
So, I'm going to suggest we just pick one of the pairs that I just mentioned and write them in as m and n and just multiply this thing out and see what we get.
So, let's just start with the 1 times the 20 very, very quickly.
If I have x plus 1 times x plus 20 and I multiply the two together with the foil method, I'm going to have x squared plus 20x plus 1x plus 1 times 20, which of course is 20.
I just marched through the FOIL pretty quickly. And that gives me x squared plus 21x plus 20. 20x plus 1x is 21x.
Now, is this the polynomial that I wanted? Well, notice that we got the 20 right, which is great, but the middle coefficient here was supposed to be 9 and we got 21.
So, the choice of 1 and 20 was not correct. But if we stop and think for a second, we might be able to figure out how to get a 9.
Remember that the coefficient of the x term, the middle coefficient, in this case the 9 that we want, comes from the sum of the O term and the I term inside FOIL.
In the case of x plus 1 times x plus 20, it's not an accident that we got 21 because 21 is 20 plus 1 and those are coming from the O and I terms.
So, what we really want in this example is a pair of numbers who multiply together to give you 20 and who add together to give you 9.
Now, remember what our pairs were? They were 1 times 20 or 2 times 10 or 4 times 5.
Do any of those pairs add up to 9? The answer is yes, of course, 4 and 5.
And so now I'm going to suggest that the factorization of x squared plus 9x plus 20 is actually x plus 4 times x plus 5.
Let's just very, very quickly check that.
x plus 4 times x plus 5 would be x squared plus 5x plus 4x plus 4 times 5, which is 20.
And if you add all that up, adding the like terms in the middle, of course, you'll have x squared plus 9x plus 20 and you're done.
So, the factorization of x squared plus 9x plus 20 really was x plus 4 times x plus 5.
Now, I want to make a very clear point here.
Notice how this factoring process is actually just making us think about the FOIL work in reverse.
We're just foiling backwards and if we have foiling down really, really well, then doing the FOIL backwards in our head actually will work.
It just is going to take some practice, so you want to make sure you spend the time really nailing down the FOIL process.
Okay, let's move forward now to another example because there's lots of different things that can happen.
I promise I've shown you two examples and they're important, but there are lots of other examples to show.
So, let's factor this quadratic expression x squared minus 3x minus 40.
Okay, we know that we can start by writing down two sets of parentheses and we can put an x in front of the first and we can put an x in front of the second.
Now, what can we say about the signs inside of those two sets of parentheses?
That's very, very important.
Do you remember what we need to look for in order to figure out those signs?
The answer is we need to look at the sign of the constant in the quadratic that we started with.
The constant there is negative 40. It's there on the end.
And that sign is negative, of course, because the negative is in front of the 40.
Since that number is negative, the sign that we put inside each parentheses needs to be different.
In other words, I need to have x minus in one of the sets of parentheses and I need to have x plus in the other set.
And that's because when I do the FOIL process at the end of it, I'll have a negative number times a positive number for the L part and a negative times a positive is negative.
And I want negative 40.
Believe it or not, you've actually written down most of the factorization.
You now have x minus something and x plus something else.
And now we just need to fill in what those somethings are.
Now, what are they going to be?
Well, they need to be two numbers whose product gives us 40.
Now, I've chosen this example carefully because there are lots of ways you can get two integers to multiply together to give you 40.
One times 40, two times 20, four times 10, five times eight.
And you know, if you think about it for a second, just knowing your multiplication facts quickly is extremely helpful in factoring.
And of course, you've been doing multiplication facts for a long time.
Here's an example of where they really come in handy because you need to be able to know how to get two numbers whose product is 40.
Now, let's try one of the pairs that we just wrote down or we just mentioned and see if plugging in that pair of numbers into the two binomials actually gives us our factorization.
So I'm going to choose the two and the 20 because two times 20 gives me 40.
And so that means I'm going to write down x minus two times x plus 20.
Okay, let's foil.
I told you we're going to say foil a lot.
Let's multiply these out.
Times x is x squared plus 20x, those are the outer terms, minus 2x, those are the inner terms, minus 40.
Notice that minus two times plus 20 is minus 40 or negative 40.
So you have x squared plus 20x minus 2x minus 40.
20x minus 2x can be simplified to 18x because again, those terms are like terms.
We have the same power of x in them.
And so I have x squared plus 18x minus 40.
Well, we got the correct constant term and we rigged it that way if you think about it.
We got the negative 40.
The question is, did we get the whole polynomial, the whole expression the way we wanted it?
And the answer is no because we just got an 18x.
What we want is a negative 3x.
Now, where did the 18 and 18x come from?
Well, if you look at that foil for just a second, you'll realize that the 18 came from 20 minus 2.
And that's because the signs inside those binomials were different.
You had a plus in one of them and a minus in the other.
So what I then want is a pair of numbers who I can multiply together to get 40,
but whose difference now is negative 3 because one of the numbers is going to be subtracted from the other.
You get the idea here, you have to juggle these two pieces of information and make them both work out at the same time
in order to get the right factorization.
So let's look at the pairs of numbers again that multiply together to give us 40
to see if any of them have the property that subtracting one from the other will give us a 3.
Well, you've got one times 40, but of course, if you subtract one from 40, you get 39.
That's nowhere near what we want.
You have 2 and 20, 20 minus 2 is 18, still not helpful.
10 and 4, 10 times 4 is 40, but 10 minus 4 is 6.
That's still a little bit too big.
And then you have 5 with 8.
And of course, 8 minus 5 is 3.
Well, that's a hint that the 5, 8 pair is what we want.
But you know what? We're not done because you still have two possibilities going on.
You might have x minus 5 times x plus 8, or you might have x minus 8 times x plus 5.
You see the difference there?
I've put one of the numbers in the first with the minus sign,
and I've put the other number in with the second set of parentheses with the plus sign.
Which one is it?
I want the middle term to be negative 3x.
Well, I'm going to tell you right now which one it is.
It's going to be the x minus 8 times the x plus 5.
And if you already saw that, fabulous.
If you didn't yet, it's going to come with practice, I promise.
But let's check to make sure that x minus 8 times x plus 5 really works.
Let's foil it out to see if we get what we want.
Well, x minus 8 times x plus 5, when we multiply it by foil,
is going to give us x squared plus 5x minus 8x and then minus 40.
Again, negative 8 times plus 5 is negative 40.
When I combine the two middle terms, the 5x minus the 8x,
I'm going to have negative 3x, 5 minus 8, negative 3.
And that means that my polynomial, once I multiply out these two binomial terms,
is going to be x squared minus 3x minus 40.
Perfect. That's exactly what we started with.
And so I know my factorization is x minus 8 times x plus 5.
Now, let's ramp up the level of difficulty just a bit by considering the following problem.
Let's factor 2x squared minus 11x plus 12.
Now, do you see how this example is different already?
Notice that coefficient in front of the x squared.
It's a 2 this time, not a 1.
Earlier it was a 1, right, because I had 1x squared, basically.
Oh, gosh. What are we going to do?
Can we handle it with that 2 in front?
Is it somehow really weird?
No, it's not. Just stay with me.
First of all, draw your sets of parentheses.
Okay? Leave them blank on the inside if you want.
Draw them nice and big.
And now here's what you're going to do.
We've been starting by writing x with another x.
But of course, when you multiply those two, you'll actually get a x squared.
You won't get 2x squared. You'll just get 1x squared.
How are you going to handle a 2?
Well, inside your parentheses, you're going to write an x in one of them,
and you're going to write a 2x in the other.
So let me suggest we put the 2x in the first set of parentheses
and an x inside the second set of parentheses.
Could we write it the other way?
Could we put an x in the first and a 2x in the second?
Of course.
But I'm going to put the 2x in the first and the x in the second.
If you want to try it later in the other direction, you certainly can.
Once you've written the 2x inside the first set of parentheses and the x inside the second,
you realize that when you do the f part of foil, you'll have 2x squared and you'll be in good shape.
Now, let's think of the signs that we put inside the two binomials.
That's usually the next step we try to think about.
Well, the sign in front of the 12 in the quadratic expression that I gave you is positive.
That means that the signs inside the two binomial pieces must be the same.
Now, they might both be positive or they might both be negative at this point.
The next thing to do is to look at that middle term,
which is negative 11x that was in the original quadratic expression.
It's negative.
What does that mean about the two signs that we need to put in the binomial pieces?
Well, they have to be minus signs.
Look, if you made them plus signs, then everything would be positive when you multiplied out the two binomials.
So we must make both of the signs inside the parentheses minus.
That means up to this point you should have 2x minus blank times x minus blank
written on your page inside two sets of parentheses.
Believe it or not, you're actually almost done now
because all you need to do is find the two numbers to plug in inside the binomials
and you'll be done.
And what must be true about those two numbers?
Well, the product of those two numbers needs to be 12
because that's coming from the L in foil
and the 12 is the constant term in the original quadratic that we were given.
Now, how many ways can you get a 12 when you multiply two whole numbers together?
Well, now you actually have to start thinking about them in different orders.
So you might have 1, 12, you might have 2 with 6, 2 times 6 is 12,
you might have 3 with 4, you might have a 4 with 3,
you might have a 6 with a 2, or you might have a 12 with a 1.
Now, that's six different possibilities.
Now, you could just kind of try them all.
Unfortunately, that's not the best way to go
because one of these days you might have a problem where there's a whole bunch of pairs,
lots more than six.
So we're going to want to come up with a way to think about what the pair ought to be.
But for now, let's just try one of them and see if it actually works out.
Let's use a 6 with a 2.
In other words, I want to write down 2x minus 6 and an x minus a 2.
Maybe that's my factorization.
The only way I'm going to know is if I multiply everything out
and see if I get the original polynomial back.
So let's FOIL.
2x minus 6 times x minus 2 is going to be the following.
The f in FOIL is going to be 2x times x, that's fine, that's 2x squared.
The outer part is going to be the 2x with the negative 2.
Nothing wrong with that.
I just took the outer piece from the first binomial and the outer piece from the second.
That's 2x with the minus 2.
The inner piece is going to be negative 6 times the x on the inside
and the L part is going to be the negative 6 times the negative 2.
And now we just have to simplify.
You know, we did a lot of this in previous lessons.
Now you know why.
Because simplifying these expressions is very, very important.
And when you do that, you're going to have 2x squared, of course.
2x times x is 2x squared minus a 4x minus a 6x and then plus 12.
Negative 6 times negative 2 is positive 12.
And now the two middle terms will combine.
And negative 4x added to a negative 6x is the same as negative 10x.
So you have 2x squared minus 10x plus 12.
Now what were we trying to factor?
Oh, we're really close.
We were trying to factor 2x squared minus 11x plus 12.
So we're close, but close doesn't count here.
We've got to get it exactly right.
Now you have five other possibilities, but I don't want to just try them all.
So let's try one that is going to work.
Here it is. Take 2x minus 3 with an x minus 4.
Remember, I know that the 3 and the 4 are a possible pair to put at the end of each binomial
because 3 times 4 is 12, and I want 12 as my constant.
OK, let's foil out 2x minus 3 times x minus 4.
You're going to have 2x with x.
You're going to have a minus 4 with the 2x.
You'll have a minus 3 with the x.
And then you'll have a minus 3 multiplied with a minus 4.
And if you simplify all that, you're going to have 2x squared minus 8x minus 3x plus 12.
Minus 3 times minus 4 is plus 12.
The negative 8x in the middle with the negative 3x,
those two will combine to give you negative 11x because negative 8 minus 3 is negative 11.
And guess what? You now have the quadratic expression that you want to factor.
2x squared minus 11x plus 12.
Notice that that 2 in front of the x squared really didn't cause us any trouble at all.
We just had to think a little bit more about how to tweak one of the binomial pieces
by putting a 2 in front of one of the coefficients.
Well, today we've talked about basically undoing the foil method
in order to learn how to factor these new terms, these new expressions, which are quadratic expressions.
It turns out that that's really exactly what we're doing.
And so we need to be able to do the foil method well so that we can basically do it backwards.
I want you to keep in mind that some of these factoring problems can take some time
as you try to figure out exactly which pair of numbers to insert into the binomial factors.
Don't get frustrated. Your time spent on working through these factorizations is well worth it.
We're going to see this very important topic of factoring again in later lessons.
In fact, next time I'm going to talk about factoring certain special types of quadratic equations.
I'll see you then.
