In our previous lessons, we've seen a number of different quadratic expressions which could
be factored very nicely.
And that was great.
We got good practice in how to factor these quadratic expressions.
Unfortunately, I probably misled you just a bit because if I asked you to write down
a quadratic expression of the form x squared plus bx plus c, where I let you choose the
value for b and the value for c, make them any whole numbers you want, then it's probably
going to be the case that you cannot factor that quadratic expression.
There are lots of different quadratic expressions which just can't be factored.
So you and I need a more expandable approach to solving quadratic equations.
I would call it robust in the sense that I need something more general, capable of handling
more types of problems rather than just the special ones that we've already seen.
So there's one such tool that I would like to introduce to you today in this lesson.
It's known as the quadratic formula, and it allows us to solve any quadratic equation
as long as the quadratic equation has a solution.
The downside of the quadratic formula is that it can be a bit hard to remember.
It's kind of complicated looking.
I'll show it to you in a second.
And because of that complication, some folks make mistakes when they try to use it.
So what I'm going to encourage you with today is the quadratic formula is very helpful,
and it's a good tool, but we need to make sure that we remember it correctly.
So let me show you the formula now and encourage you to memorize it as much as you can as we
work through this lesson together.
Here's the formula.
If you start with the equation ax squared plus bx plus c equals zero, then the solutions
of that equation, the x values, which make that equation correct or make it true, are
the following.
x equals negative b plus the square root of b squared minus 4ac all divided by 2a, that's
one of them, and the other solution is x equals negative b minus the square root of b squared
minus 4ac all over 2a.
Now let me make a few comments.
First of all, where did the a, the b, and the c come from?
They were the coefficients of the quadratic expression in the equation ax squared plus
bx plus c equals zero.
The second comment to make is that some textbooks will actually take the two things that we've
just written down and write them into one expression that looks like x equals negative
b plus or minus square root of b squared minus 4ac all divided by 2a.
I think that that kind of notation with that extra plus minus in it causes confusion for
some students, so we will not use that notation here.
We'll separate our solutions out into two different expressions as we walk through these
examples, but I wanted you to see the sort of combined form because you might run into
it in other textbooks in other courses in algebra.
If this is your first time to see the quadratic formula, then I can imagine some of you saying
that looks really, really complicated.
I want nothing to do with it, but let me encourage you, it's actually a pretty beautiful formula
because it provides us with a pure recipe for finding the solutions of quadratic equations.
Formulation does not provide us with a recipe that works for everything, it only works for
certain kinds of expressions, so here we have a formula that works for all possible quadratic
equations.
You should definitely spend some time putting this formula to memory.
It's an excellent tool for your algebra toolbox, and whatever you do, you need to watch all
the different plus and minus signs in the formula.
Many students can struggle with this quadratic formula because they can't keep track of
where the plus signs are and where the minus signs are, they get lost where the A's, the
B's and the C's go as well.
So you'll want to be careful about the signs as well as where A goes, where B goes and
where C goes.
So let's begin solving a quadratic equation which actually doesn't need the quadratic
formula because then we can use the quadratic formula to find the answer and make sure the
we got the right answer.
So here's what I mean.
Look at the following example.
Let's solve the equation x squared minus 5x plus 4 equals 0.
Well we want to find the values of x which make the equation true, that's what it means
to find the solutions.
The first way I want us to do this is by factoring the left hand side.
x squared minus 5x plus 4 actually equals x minus 4 times x minus 1 if you use the techniques
that we learned from some previous lessons.
Now again, I'm not using the quadratic formula yet.
I'm just trying to solve the equation one way to get the answers.
Then I'm going to try it with the quadratic formula and make sure I get the same answers.
So just bear with me for a second.
If we go back to the original equation we had, we now know that we can factor the left
hand side.
So the equation becomes x minus 4 times x minus 1 equals 0.
Now there's an extremely important fact that we can say about the real numbers.
Here's what it says.
If y and z are real numbers and the product of y and z, when y is multiplied with z, if
that gives you 0 then either y must have been 0 or z must have been 0 or they both could
be 0.
The point is when you take the product of two quantities that are real numbers and you
multiply them to get 0, then one of the two, at least one of the two, must have been 0.
So if the product of the x minus 4 times x minus 1 is 0, it means that either x minus
4 must have been 0 or x minus 1 is 0.
But that means that x equals 4 or x equals 1 because 4 minus 4 is 0 and 1 minus 1 is
0.
And therefore we know that x equals 4 and x equals 1 are my two solutions.
How would you check that by the way?
You would check it by plugging 4 and 1 back into the original equation to check to see
that you get a true statement.
Not going to do that here for the sake of time, but you might want to go ahead and confirm
that 4 and 1 are the two solutions.
Now here's what I want you to do with me.
Pretend that we didn't notice that we could factor the left hand side.
Just for a second, I want to go back to the original problem and I want to use the quadratic
formula to see if we get the same solutions back.
So we start with x squared minus 5x plus 4 equals 0.
If I want to use the quadratic formula, I need to fit my equation into the form of the
quadratic formula, which was ax squared plus bx plus c equals 0.
That means for this example that a equals 1, b equals negative 5 and c equals 4.
Notice that the b has to be negative 5, not positive 5 because of the minus 5x in the
original problem.
Then the quadratic formula tells me that my solutions are x equals the negative of negative
5 plus the square root of negative 5 whole thing squared minus 4 times 1 times 4 divided
by 2 times 1.
And the other x is the negative of negative 5 minus the square root of negative 5 whole
thing squared minus 4 times 1 times 4 all over 2 times 1.
Now before we go to simplify that, remember, all I used there was the fact that x equals
negative b plus the square root of b squared minus 4ac over 2a and then x equals negative
b minus the square root of b squared minus 4ac over 2a.
You need to remember those formulas.
I know they're long.
I know they feel complicated.
But once you can remember them, you can plug in the right values for a, b, and c.
And guess what?
All we have to do now is simplify and we will find the solutions.
So let's start with the first x that we had there, that first complicated expression for
x, and let's simplify it.
The negative of the negative 5, of course, is positive 5.
So to start, I know that x equals plus 5 or positive 5 plus square root of the negative
5 whole thing squared minus 4 times 1 times 4 over 2 times 1.
Let's simplify some of those pieces pretty quickly.
Negative 5 squared is the same as negative 5 times negative 5.
That's positive 25.
The two negatives will cancel each other out.
So that part is 25.
4 times 1 times 4, 16.
So I'm looking at the square root of 25 minus 16.
25 minus 16 is 9.
So I'm looking at the square root of 9, and I know that.
That's pretty clean.
It's exactly 3.
So my numerator is 5 plus 3.
The denominator is 2 times 1, which, of course, is just 2.
So I have 5 plus 3 divided by 2, or 8 over 2, or 4.
x equals 4 is one of the solutions.
Hey, we got that solution a few moments ago by factoring.
So we're on the right track.
x equals 4 is a solution thanks to the quadratic formula.
Now let's try the other solution.
It said that x had to be the negative of negative 5 minus square root of negative 5 squared
minus 4 times 1 times 4 divided by 2 times 1.
Let's simplify a bit.
Well, the negative of negative 5 again is 5.
Because under the square root symbol is going to be 25 minus 16 again, or 9.
So what I have in the numerator is 5 minus the square root of 9, which is 5 minus 3.
Earlier in the other solution, I had 5 plus 3.
That was the only difference.
The denominator is still 2 times 1, which is 2.
So I have now x equals 5 minus 3 over 2, or x equals 2 over 2, or x equals 1.
And that's the other solution in this problem.
So in this example, we found the solutions, x equals 4 and x equals 1, using the quadratic
formula.
And they checked out just like when we used factoring.
So it's very helpful now to see, OK, the factoring looks like it was cleaner in this
example.
If I had given us different values for A, B, and C so that factoring couldn't be done,
then this quadratic formula would have given me the answer when factoring would have been
too weak to do so.
Now let's move to another example, just to see if we can see how to use this quadratic
formula and just to get the practice in using it.
I want us to solve x squared minus 8x minus 14 equals 4x minus 9.
So again, when I say I want to solve this equation, it means I want to find the x values
that I can plug into the equation for all the x's throughout the equation, so that
I get a true statement back.
All right, we first notice that there's stuff on both sides of the equation, right?
And if I want to use the quadratic formula, I need to have all of the expression on the
left equal 0.
So the first thing I've got to do is move all the terms to one side or the other.
I'm going to suggest that we move all the terms to the left so that we get things the
way they need to look for the quadratic formula.
That means I need to get the 4x minus 9 over to the left.
How am I going to do that?
Well, why don't we start by adding 9 to both sides of the equation, and if I add 9 to the
right-hand side, it will cancel with the negative 9.
If I add 9 to the left-hand side, minus 14 plus 9 will be minus 5 or negative 5.
So that's going to change a little bit on the left-hand side.
I'll now have a minus 5.
Also, subtracting 4x from both sides will, first of all, cancel the 4x on the right-hand
side, and then I'll have minus 8x minus 4x, which is minus 12x on the left-hand side.
The point is once I've moved 4x minus 9 over to the left, I will have x squared minus 12x
minus 5 equal to 0.
Now our equation looks like the way it needs to look for the quadratic formula, which is
great.
Now, if you stop for just a second and ask yourself, well, maybe this would have worked
with factoring.
You'll find very, very quickly that if you try to factor this, it will not work.
I promise you can work all day long, but you will not be able to factor this quadratic
expression that's on the left-hand side of the equation.
You can't find a value for m and a value for n so that you can write this as x plus m
times x plus n.
They just won't be there.
So I'm going to suggest that rather than trying to factor, let's just use the quadratic
formula.
And we'll actually work to our advantage to just jump right to the quadratic formula.
So we have x squared minus 12x minus 5 equals 0.
In the notation of the quadratic formula then, a is 1, there's a 1 in front of the x-squared
term, b is negative 12 and c is negative 5.
Don't get lost in the signs here, a is 1, b is negative 12, c is negative 5.
Let's just plug everything into the quadratic formula and see what we get.
Our first solution is going to be x equals the negative of negative 12 plus square root
of negative 12 whole thing squared minus 4 times 1 times negative 5 all divided by 2
times 1.
And when we start to simplify, we see that that gives us x equals positive 12, negative
of negative 12 is positive 12 plus the square root of 144 plus 20.
Now let's just pause for a second.
Negative 12 whole thing squared is negative 12 times negative 12.
That's positive 144 because the negatives cancel.
Then you have minus 4 times 1 times a negative 5.
And the minus in front of the 4 and the negative with the 5 will cancel one another out and
you'll get positive 20.
The denominator then is just 2 times 1, which is 2.
But I can't stress enough, you have to be very, very careful with your arithmetic.
And you might say, well, I don't want to mess with this then.
This is just way too much work.
But I'm telling you, this is a very helpful formula, a very helpful rule for finding these
solutions.
If you just work through it and practice, you'll be fine, okay?
So let's finish this solution.
I have x equals 12 plus the square root of 144 plus 20 all divided by 2.
144 plus 20 is 164.
So I have 12 plus square root of 164 divided by 2.
Now you might actually stop there, but you can go just a bit further.
So let's try to go a bit further in simplifying this solution.
Notice that 164 is equal to 4 times 41 and 4 is a perfect square.
You might say, how am I supposed to notice that?
Well, you have to think through how you might factor 164.
And in fact, you know that you can factor a 2 out of it because it's even.
And if you keep doing the factorization, you'll get 4 times 41.
That means the square root of 164 is the same as the square root of 4 times 41.
And when you have a square root of a product, it's the same as the product of the square
roots.
You can split it into square root of 4 times square root of 41.
But the square root of 4 is 2.
And so you actually have 2 times the square root of 41.
So the square root of 164 can be replaced with 2 times square root of 41.
And therefore, this solution equals 12 plus 2 times the square root of 41 all divided
by 2.
But you can factor out a 2 from that numerator now.
And when you do, you'll have 2 times 6 plus 1 square root of 41, or just 6 plus square
root of 41.
And the 2 that you factored out can cancel with the 2 in the denominator.
And what's the point?
X equals 6 plus the square root of 41 is one of the solutions of the original equation.
You would have never found that trying to factor.
It would have never come to you.
What's the other solution look like?
Well, go back to the quadratic formula, plug in A, B, and C. And remember, all that changes
in this second solution is that a plus sign in a certain place becomes a minus sign.
So if you can remember most of the formula, you just change that one sign from a plus
to a minus, and you'll be done.
And this solution looks like X equals the negative of negative 12 minus square root
of negative 12 whole thing squared minus 4 times 1 times negative 5 all divided by 2
times 1.
Let's start doing some of that simplification.
We've done most of it already in the previous solution.
So let's jump a bit.
The negative times negative 12 is positive 12.
We already know that under the square root symbol is going to be square root of 144 plus
20, or square root of 164.
So this solution right now looks like X equals 12 minus square root of 164 all divided by
2, and that came from the 2 times 1.
Remember, 164 allowed for a certain factorization, and we rewrote square root of 164 a moment
ago as 2 times the square root of 41.
So this solution is 12 minus 2 times the square root of 41 all divided by 2, or X equals 6
minus square root of 41.
Notice that these two solutions look almost identical.
The only thing that's different about them is that we change the plus sign in the middle
to the minus sign.
And that's why some folks like to squash the notation and just write that the solutions
are 6 plus or minus square root of 41.
Now this is actually fine to write, but it sometimes hides the fact that there are actually
two different solutions here, not just one.
And so if you want to write the solutions with this plus minus notation, you're welcome
to do that.
But just remember that there's actually two solutions hiding in there, one with a plus
sign and one with a minus sign.
Before we move to our next example, I want to quickly sketch the graph of the function
f of X equals or Y equals X squared minus 12X minus 5.
We're going to talk more in future lessons about how you would actually find this graph,
but I just want to show it to you at this point just so you can see what it looks like
because it's important to be able to translate from the information we just found with the
quadratic formula to information about the graphs.
Notice that this graph actually crosses the X axis in two different places.
And those two places, which are the X intercepts, if you will, are exactly the X values that
you and I found just a moment ago, the 6 plus the square root of 41 and the 6 minus the
square root of 41.
If you take a calculator and approximate those square roots of 41 that are in the solutions,
you'll see that 6 minus square root of 41 equals negative 0.403 and 6 plus the square
root of 41 equals 12.403.
By the way, I always think it's a good idea to think about whether your calculations on
the calculator are in the right ballpark.
So let's do that here really quickly.
How big is the square root of 41?
Well, 41 is between 36 and 49.
Why did I pick 36 and 49?
Because they're perfect squares.
And 41 lives between 36 and 49.
So the square root of 41 must be a little bit bigger than the square root of 36, which
is 6, and the square root of 41 must be a little bit smaller than the square root of
49, which is 7.
So the square root of 41 must be between 6 and 7.
And if you take out your calculator and approximate square root of 41, you'll get about 6.403.
That's in the right ballpark.
It's between 6 and 7.
So the numbers I showed you a moment ago really are good approximations.
Now x equals negative 0.403 and x equals 12.403 do look like the two x values on the graph
of our parabola where the parabola crosses the x-axis.
So I'm confident that the answers we found with the quadratic formula are good.
And notice factoring would not have been a way that we could have checked our answers.
Only the graph could do that because we couldn't factor what was happening in that problem.
OK, let's look at another example using the quadratic formula quickly.
And here's the example I want to work on.
All the equation x squared plus 2x plus 5 equals 0.
OK, I've already got the equation written in the right form because I have everything
on the left equals 0.
Here I have a equals 1, b equals 2, and c equals 5 using the notation from the quadratic
formula.
Notice here that all the signs are positive already, so I don't have to worry about any
weird signs amongst a, b, or c.
a is 1, b is 2, and c is 5.
Then according to the quadratic formula, the solutions of this equation are x equals negative
2 plus square root of 2 squared minus 4 times 1 times 5 all over 2 times 1, and x equals
negative 2 minus square root of 2 squared minus 4 times 1 times 5 all over 2 times 1.
Now let's simplify.
All we have to do is simplify now.
The quadratic formula has actually done a ton of work for us.
If we just go through the simplification, we will have our solution.
So let's do it.
In the first case, you have x equals negative 2 plus square root of 4, that's 2 squared,
minus 4 times 1 times 5, which is 20, and then the denominator here is just 2 because
2 is 2 times 1.
To simplify a bit, you see that x then is equal to negative 2 plus square root of negative
16 all divided by 2.
Now you have to stop for just a moment at this point.
I don't know if you've ever wondered about this before, but how do you find the square
root of a negative number?
Can a negative number have a square root whose answer is a real number?
The answer is no.
You cannot find a real number that you can square to get a negative 16 back.
I know that 4 times 4 is positive 16, but there is no real number that I can multiply
with itself to get negative 16.
Okay, so maybe we messed that solution up.
Let's try the other one really, really quickly.
From the quadratic formula, the second solution would be x equals negative 2 minus square
root of 2 squared minus 4 times 1 times 5 all over 2 times 1.
But if you start to do the simplification, you realize that that's the same as x equals
negative 2 minus the square root of 4 minus 20 all divided by 2 or x equals negative 2
minus the square root of negative 16 over 2.
Notice that we have the same exact problem.
The two solutions only differ by one little sign, a plus sign that got switched to a minus
sign, but both of them have a square root of negative 16.
What in the world are we supposed to do to interpret the work we've done up to this point?
Are we okay?
Did we make a mistake?
We didn't make any mistakes, I promise.
What's going on is this.
The original equation that we started with, x squared plus 2x plus 5 equals 0, it doesn't
have any solutions.
And the quadratic formula can't find them because they don't exist.
So we actually didn't do anything wrong.
But I wanted to show you this example so that you realize the following.
When you're doing the quadratic formula and you get a square root of a negative number
like that, it's a hint that there are no solutions to the original problem.
And that's a good thing to know.
There's a second way we can know that there's no solutions.
Let me just suggest it here.
If you draw the graph of x squared plus 2x plus 5, you'll have a parabola.
We'll talk later in future lessons as to how you would really do that, but if you did
it very quickly, you would see that the graph sits completely above the x-axis.
And because of that, it never crosses the x-axis.
In other words, it doesn't have any x-intercepts.
And the fact that the parabola completely misses the x-axis means that there are no
solutions to the equation.
So in fact, we've done absolutely nothing wrong.
When you see that the quadratic formula includes square roots of negative numbers, then you
know that you don't have any solutions at all.
And this can happen.
Remember, when you have a quadratic equation, you might have two different solutions, and
we've seen some examples of that today.
You might have no solutions, and we just saw an example of that.
And you could have, it's a bit rare, but you could have exactly one solution.
That might also happen as you're using the quadratic formula.
You would simply see that the two different combinations or the two different expressions
that you use with the quadratic formula actually give you the same answer back.
It's OK for that to happen as well.
It just means that your equation only has one solution.
Well, today we've looked at a number of examples using the quadratic formula.
I know that it probably feels quite messy, and you're probably a bit nervous about it.
But I want to encourage you that this really is an excellent formula.
Believe it or not, it's been around for over 800 years at the very least.
Some historians aren't sure if it's even older than that.
It's amazing to think that it's been around so long.
Some folks just don't like it because it seems complicated, but I promise if you practice
using the quadratic formula several times in order to nail down the different pieces
of it, you will really appreciate its power because it does help us find the solutions
of quadratic equations very, very straightforwardly.
It may get messy in the middle, but if you work it through, you'll be fine.
Let me encourage you to remember not to forget how the signs work out because sometimes you
have to worry about negatives here and positives there.
And also remember where the A, the B, and the C go in the equations or in the formulas.
If you practice with lots of examples, I am confident that you will become comfortable
with it as an important algebra tool.
Next time, we're going to talk about another tool for working with quadratic equations,
and that is known as completing the square.
Not only can completing the square be helpful with solving quadratic equations, but it's
also extremely helpful when we start talking about how to graph quadratic expressions,
and that'll be a subject of a future lesson.
But for now, next time we'll talk about completing the square.
I'll see you then.
