We've seen a wide variety of approaches to solving quadratic equations.
We now look at one last approach to solving such equations which is called completing
the square.
Actually, completing the square is used for more than just solving quadratic equations.
It's really a way to rewrite a quadratic function in a very special form which tells
us quite a bit about the shape of a quadratic function and the shape of the graph of the
quadratic function.
But before we go anywhere, let me pause and speak briefly about this word function which
I just used several times.
What is a function?
Well in pretty basic terms, a function is a mathematical rule or relationship that assigns
exactly one output value to each input value.
Typically, our output values are the y values and our input values are the x values.
So for example, y equals 4x plus 2 or sometimes we'd write it as f of x equals 4x plus 2 is
a function.
If we plug in an input value like 5, we get back the output value 4 times 5 plus 2 which
is 20 plus 2 or 22.
So we've assigned or paired up 5 and 22.
We could even write the ordered pair 5, 22 which should remind you of some of our earlier
work when we graphed in the Cartesian plane.
We could also write f of 5 equals 22 to use more functional notation if we want.
And that notation tells us that we plugged 5 into f and out came 22.
Let me also share a couple other vocabulary terms here quickly.
The domain of a function is the set of input values that we are allowed to plug into the
function and the range of a function is the set of output values that come from the function.
We'll talk more about domains and ranges of functions not only in this lesson but in
later lessons in the course.
So let's get back to the main topic of this lesson which is completing the square.
I'd like to look at an example to show you what we're going to be dealing with in this
lesson.
So let's get started with this example.
What is the smallest value of the quadratic function f of x equals x squared plus 6x
plus 35?
Now let's first make sure we know what I'm asking for.
The question is, what is the smallest output value of f of x?
Or if we were graphing the function f of x equals x squared plus 6x plus 35, how low
would the graph go in the y direction?
So that's what I'm really asking for.
How small is this function f of x or how low will its graph go in the y direction?
One way to get a feel for this is just to plug in a whole bunch of numbers for x and
see what the different y values are after we've plugged in those values of x.
This will not tell us exactly what the smallest value of this function is but it should give
us a hint as to what's going on.
So I'm just going to pick a number of different x values, plug those into the function and
see what happens.
So let's do that.
I'm going to choose the x values starting at negative 6 and then just growing those
x values by 1 each time.
So I'm going to plug in negative 6, negative 5, negative 4, negative 3, negative 2, negative
1, 0 and 1.
Now you might ask, where did you come up with those choices for the values of x?
Well part of the answer is I know approximately where I want to look for those values of x.
And so I would ask that you not worry too much about how to find those.
At this point I just want to plug those in.
So let's plug them in quickly.
When you plug in negative 6 for x and you then do the simplifying that you have to do,
the output value or f of x value is going to be 35.
When you plug in negative 5 for x, the y value or output value that you're going to get is
30.
When you plug in negative 4, the y value will be 27.
When you plug in negative 3, the y value will be 26.
Now let me just pause here briefly.
Notice that those y values or output values have been going down.
So remember we're trying to find the value where the function goes smallest or where
the y values are their smallest.
So we see that they've been going down.
That's a hint that we're in the right direction.
We're looking in the right place.
Now after x equals negative 3 is x equals negative 2.
And notice that when you plug in negative 2 for x, what comes out as a y value is 27.
That means the function has now started going up again, its graph has.
Or if you just think of the y values as numbers, the numbers are starting to get bigger.
When you plug in negative 1 for x, you get 30 back after you've done the arithmetic.
When you plug 0 in for x, that's pretty easy, right?
Because the 0's going in for x make all of the terms with an x in them 0, and then you
just add the 35 at the end, and the y value is 35.
Again, that's getting bigger as well.
And then when you plug in 1 for x, you actually get 42.
So it appears that the lowest y value that we're going to get is somewhere around 26,
and that happened when x was equal to negative 3.
But how can we be certain that this is the very smallest output value for this function
f of x?
The answer is the topic of this lesson, completing the square.
So here's the idea.
What if I could write the equation for f of x in a new way, in a different way, so that
we could see where the smallest value is?
Well, that would be a way to solve this problem, and that's exactly what completing the square
does.
Here's how.
Start by looking at the first part of this equation, which was the x squared plus 6x.
I'm going to hide that constant term, the number at the end, the 35, from my eyes just
for a moment.
Let's look at the x squared plus 6x.
What constant would I need to add to x squared plus 6x to get a perfect square trinomial?
In other words, what value of a would we need so that x squared plus 6x plus a is a perfect
square?
Well, in this case, a would need to be 9, because x squared plus 6x plus 9 equals x
times 3 times x plus 3, if you factor it, and of course, x plus 3 times x plus 3 is
x plus 3 squared.
Well, that's helpful.
Now let's go back to the original expression.
x squared plus 6x plus 35.
I'm now going to add in and subtract out a 9 and rewrite the expression.
Now you might say, why would you add in and subtract out 9?
Well, of course, adding 9 in and then subtracting it back out is just 0.
9 minus 9 is 0.
So I can add 0 in without changing the problem in any way.
But by adding in the 9 and then subtracting out the 9, I can group together the x squared
plus 6x with the plus 9 so that I have a perfect square in the front of the expression.
So I'm going to have x squared plus 6x plus 9 minus 9 plus 35.
That's the same as the original expression, except with a plus 9 minus 9 sort of inserted
in the middle.
I'm then going to group that plus 9 with the x squared plus 6x, and the x squared plus
6x plus 9, I'm going to rewrite as x plus 3 whole thing squared.
And that means that my function can be rewritten as x plus 3 whole thing squared minus 9 plus
35.
The minus 9 plus 35 is equal to plus 26.
And so the original function we started with is the same as x plus 3 whole thing squared
plus 26.
Now with the equation written in this form, we've actually completed the square.
And you might say, who cares?
What in the world did that do for us?
Well, here's what it did for us.
The first part of the new expression, the x plus 3 squared, is never negative.
Why?
Because it's a real number squared.
No matter what we plug in for x, x plus 3 whole thing squared is going to be at least
zero.
Even if you plug in a negative number for the x, let's say negative 7, the part on the
inside of the parentheses will be negative.
But when it gets squared, then that piece will be positive, or at least zero.
So no matter what we allow x to be, we know that the function has to be at least zero
for the front part plus 26.
And therefore, the function has to be at least greater than or equal to 26.
Therefore, I know what the smallest value this function can be is.
It's 26.
And this is a proof of what we saw in the table of numbers that we looked at earlier
in this example.
26 is the smallest this function can be.
And I know that thanks to rewriting the original function using completing the square.
So this is actually the point of this whole lesson today.
And that is, when we're given a quadratic function, can we rewrite it in the form x
plus m squared plus n, or maybe negative in front of x plus m squared plus n, where
m and n are just some numbers.
For us earlier, we were able to get m to be 3 and the n to be 26.
If I can rewrite my original quadratic equation or quadratic function in this new form, then
I can interpret the information and it'll tell me a great deal about the function that
we're studying.
So today, I want to spend several minutes talking about a number of examples where we
complete the square and then interpret what that completing the square tells us.
So let's look at the following example.
Complete the square for this expression x squared minus 10x minus 23.
Well, as with the previous example, I want to determine this coefficient that I need
to complete the square if I just grouped the x squared minus the 10x.
Here's a recipe for finding what that number is that you need to add in and then of course
subtract out.
You take the coefficient in front of the x term, not the x squared term, but the x term.
Ignore the sign that's in front of it for just a second.
That's going to be the number 10 for us in this example.
I'm going to divide that 10 by 2.
It's always dividing by 2, so just cut it in half.
And then whatever I get from there, I'm going to square that new number.
That's the recipe in every case when you want to complete the square here.
In this case, that 10 divided by 2 is 5 and if I square 5, I get 25.
And that means in order to complete the square, I need to add in a 25.
But to be fair or to be mathematically correct, I then have to subtract a 25 out as well so
that everything balances.
And that means that my new expression is going to be written as x squared minus 10x plus
the 25 minus the 25 and then minus 23.
Remember there was a minus 23 dangling on the end of the expression when we started
this example.
Remember again, adding 25 and then subtracting 25 is like adding 0 and that doesn't do anything.
Now I'm going to group the plus 25 with the x squared minus 10x.
I'm just going to put parentheses around that just so I can see that those three terms
are together and I'll have x squared minus 10x plus 25 minus 48.
The 48 comes from the minus 25 and the minus 23 being put together.
And the x squared minus 10x plus 25 is the same as x minus 5 whole thing squared.
It's a perfect square.
And that means the original expression we started with is exactly the same as x minus
5 squared minus 48.
And that means I know something about this algebraic expression.
I know that the smallest value that will be taken on by the quantity x squared minus 10x
minus 23 is exactly negative 48.
It is the smallest output value, if you will, of the function f of x equals x squared minus
10x minus 23.
So completing the square again helped me to see how low this function will go.
I can now guarantee that the function will never equal anything less than negative 48.
So it won't equal negative 50 or negative 100 or negative 200 or anything less than
negative 48.
Now let's extend the work we just did in that example to solve an equation.
Here's the equation I want us to solve.
X squared minus 10x equals 23.
Well I know that the equation x squared minus 10x equals 23 is the same as x squared minus
10x minus 23 equals 0.
All I did there was subtract the 23 over to the left hand side.
So we'll work now with this equation in that form.
But that left hand side ought to remind you of something.
That was the expression we just completed the square of in the previous example.
We determined that x squared minus 10x minus 23 could be rewritten as x minus 5 squared
minus 48.
And that means that the equation we originally started with is exactly the same as x minus
5 squared minus 48 equals 0.
Or if you add the 48 back to the right hand side, x minus 5 squared equals 48.
Now I want to get x by itself.
That's what it means to solve this equation for x.
So I'm going to take the square root of both sides to get rid of the square on the x minus
5.
When I do that I'm going to get x minus 5 equals plus or minus the square root of 48.
Now I have to pause here and I have to say something very clearly.
So let me share this.
This is very, very important.
When you take the square root of both sides of an equation, you must take into account
the plus or minus possibility.
Why?
Well, because, for example, the solutions of x squared equal 9 are x equals 3 and x
equals negative 3.
Think about it.
Negative 3, if you plugged it into x squared, would give you negative 3 squared, which is
the same as negative 3 times negative 3, which is plus 9.
So negative 3 really is a solution.
Now that doesn't mean that the square root of 9 is 3 or negative 3.
The square root of 9 is 3, period.
Don't mix up the two ideas.
Square roots of positive numbers are always just positive.
But the solutions of an equation where you take the square root of both sides could possibly
be positive or negative.
Let me go back to my equation now.
It said that I had x minus 5 equals plus or minus square root of 48.
Now I'd like to clean up that square root of 48 a bit if I could.
I'd like to simplify that.
To do that, I'm going to factor the 48 quickly.
48 definitely has a 2 in it because it's even.
So it's equal to 2 times 24.
24's still got a 2 in it because it's even.
So I now know that 48 is 2 times 2 times 12.
12 can be written as 2 times 6.
So 48 must be 2 times 2 times 2 times 6.
And 6 is still even, so it has a 2 in it, which means I can write it as 2 times 3.
And so I know 48 actually equals 2 times 2 times 2 times 2 times 3.
Or 48 is actually 16 times 3 if you just group all those 2's together.
And 16 is a perfect square.
And that's a good thing to know because it's equal to 4 squared.
So square root of 48 is the same as square root of 16 times the square root of 3.
I can rewrite the square root of 16 as just 4.
And that means the square root of 48 is the same as 4 times the square root of 3.
And so our equation now is x minus 5 equals plus or minus 4 square root of 3.
Well that plus or minus actually is a hint that we have two different equations.
We have x minus 5 equals positive 4 square roots of 3 or x minus 5 equals negative 4
times the square root of 3.
If I now just add 5 to both sides of these equations, it'll move the 5 over to the other
side and I'll have x equals 5 plus 4 times the square root of 3 or x equals 5 minus 4
times the square root of 3.
And both of these values really are solutions of the original equation we started with.
x squared minus 10x equals 23.
Now for the sake of time, I'm going to suggest that you check these numbers using a different
tool, maybe the quadratic formula for example, which we've already learned about in a previous
lesson.
But you might want to check those to make sure that they're actually correct.
Both of them really are solutions to that original equation.
I'd like to transition to a few other examples which demonstrate a few of the other things
that can happen when you're completing the square.
So the first one that I'm going to show you answers this question.
What happens if the middle term or the coefficient in front of the x term happens to be odd?
Let's look at this example.
Solve the equation x squared plus 5x minus 24 equals 0 using the method of completing
the square.
Now notice that that 5 is odd, but that's not a problem.
It might make the arithmetic a bit messier, but that shouldn't run us off.
We just have to walk through the arithmetic a little more carefully because some fractions
are going to come in.
So to determine that amount that we need to add in and subtract out like we've done before
in completing the square, we divide that 5, which is the coefficient in front of the x
term, by 2, and that gives us 5 halves.
We then square that number and have to add that amount in.
5 halves squared is the same as 25 divided by 4.
So I'm going to have to add in a 25 divided by 4 and then subtract out 25 fourths as well
so that everything balances.
And when I add that amount in and then subtract it out, here's what I have.
I have x squared plus 5x plus 25 fourths.
I'm going to group those with a set of parentheses.
Then minus 25 fourths minus the 24 that was there in the original equation equals 0.
The front part, which is inside the parentheses, is the same as x plus 5 halves whole thing
squared.
Then I have minus 25 fourths minus 24 equals 0.
I want to combine the 25 fourths and the 24, so I need to get a common denominator, which
is 4.
And that's going to give me x plus 5 halves squared minus 25 fourths minus 96 fourths
when I rewrite 24 with a denominator of 4.
And that all equals 0 as well.
And now let's combine.
I have x plus 5 halves squared minus 121 divided by 4 equals 0 when I do the subtraction, which
is actually just an addition of two negative numbers.
And now I'm going to add the 121 divided by 4 to the other side.
And I'll have x plus 5 halves squared equals 121 over 4.
Now, if you remember, I wanted to then take the square root to get rid of the square on
the left-hand side.
Before I do that, I want you to notice that 121 divided by 4 is the same as 11 divided
by 2 whole things squared because the square root of 121 is 11 and the square root of 4
is 2.
And now I see that actually both sides of this equation are perfect squares.
So I'm going to take the square root of both sides and I'm going to have x plus 5 halves
equals plus or minus 11 halves.
Remember you have to put in that plus or minus any time you take the square root of both
sides of an equation.
You're not necessarily guaranteed that both numbers will be a solution, but you have to
put in that plus or minus when you take the square root of both sides of that equation.
Now you have two possibilities.
You either have x plus 5 halves equals plus 11 halves or x plus 5 halves equals negative
11 halves.
If you subtract 5 halves from both sides of these equations, you'll have x equals 11
halves minus 5 halves or x equals negative 11 halves minus 5 halves.
Now in the first one, 11 halves minus 5 halves is 6 halves, which is 3.
So x equals 3 is one of the solutions.
In the second, you have negative 11 halves minus 5 halves, which is the same as negative
16 halves, which is negative 8.
And so actually our two solutions are really clean.
They're just x equals 3 and x equals negative 8.
No fractions, they're just good old whole numbers.
How in the world did that happen?
Well, it turns out that x squared plus 5x minus 24 actually factors.
It factors as x minus 3 times x plus 8.
Of course, we were told to do this example by completing the square, so we would have
never seen the factoring.
But I wanted to mention this to you because it's a great way to check your answer.
Of course, if we hadn't been told to complete the square, it might have been wise for us
to start the example by checking to see if factoring was going to work.
This is a very important concept I want you to keep using as a student of math.
There's often more than one way to solve a mathematical problem.
In this case, we did it with completing the square.
We could have also done it with factoring.
Now let's consider another completing the square problem with a slightly different twist.
Here it is.
Solve the equation negative x squared plus 12x equals negative 42.
Now there's a new issue.
What's that negative sign in front of the x squared term?
We didn't have that before.
What do we do?
Just quit.
Well, no, don't panic.
Just multiply both sides of the equation by negative 1.
As long as you multiply both sides of the equation by negative 1, everything is still
in balance and you can continue with the algebra.
So we started with negative x squared plus 12x equals negative 42.
If we multiply both sides by negative 1 and then distribute the negative 1 on the left
hand side, you'll have positive x squared minus 12x equals positive 42.
And now what you've done is converted the original equation into one that looks an
awful lot like one of the previous examples.
So let's just now proceed like we did in the previous examples.
I'm going to leave the 42 on the right hand side of this equation this time because in
fact it doesn't have to come over to the left hand side.
Let's just leave it on the right hand side for now.
If we need to move it later, we can.
Now what's the amount that we need to add in and subtract out in order to complete the
square if we have x squared minus 12x to start with?
Well, we divide the 12 by 2, gives us 6.
We then square that 6 to get 36.
And that means I need to add in a 36 and subtract out a 36.
When I do, I'm going to have x squared minus 12x plus 36, I'm going to put that in parentheses,
minus 36 to keep everything balanced, equals 42.
The x squared minus 12x plus 36 is the same as x minus 6, whole thing squared.
Minus 36 equals 42.
That's our new equation.
Remember, that's the point of doing this, was to get one of the terms to look like
a perfect square.
And now if I just add the 36 to the right hand side, I'm going to have x minus 6 squared
equals 42 plus 36 or equals 78.
And now if I take the square root of both sides of that equation, I'll have x minus
6 equals, plus or minus, square root of 78.
Let's split that into two equations.
That's the same as x minus 6 equals positive square root of 78 or x minus 6 equals negative
square root of 78.
And if I just add 6 to both sides of my equations, I'll have x equals 6 plus the square root
of 78 or x equals 6 minus the square root of 78.
And I'm done.
Now, you might say, does that 78 have any perfect squares sitting inside of it so that
we can simplify that square root a bit?
Well, let's factor the 78 and find out.
78 is even, so it's got a 2 in it.
If I factor that out, I'll have 2 times 39.
39 is not even, so it has no 2s, but it's got a 3 in it.
And if I factor out that 3, I'll see that 39 is 3 times 13.
And that means the factorization of 78 is 2 times 3 times 13.
Notice that there aren't any pairs or repeats of those factors inside that factorization.
You have 2, you have 3, and you have 13.
They're all different, so 78 doesn't have any square factors inside of it.
Now, let's look at another twist, which feels a bit similar to that negative coefficient
in front of the x squared term that we just saw.
Here's the example.
Solve 3x squared minus 18x minus 21 equals 0.
We want to find the values of x, which we can plug into that equation to make the equation
true.
Now, you don't want to start here by dividing the 18 by 2 and going from there.
It turns out that this example has a little extra twist that we have to take care of first
before we go anywhere else.
Now, what we'll have to do is divide through by the 3 that's sitting in front of the x
squared term.
It's very important that you basically get the x squared term by itself, or if you want
to put it a different way, that you get the coefficient in front of the x squared term
to be 1.
When I divide through by a 3 on both sides of the equation, I'm going to be left with
x squared minus 6x minus 7 equals 0.
Of course, 0 divided by 3 is still 0, so the right-hand side is still 0.
Fortunately, all the coefficients in the equation we started with were multiples of 3, so we're
still working with integers with whole numbers in this new equation.
But even if the original coefficients had not been multiples of 3, it wouldn't have
been a showstopper for us.
We would have had a little bit messier arithmetic later on, but we could have still done the
problem exactly as we've done the previous examples.
Now we have x squared minus 6x minus 7 equals 0.
What do I need to add in in order to make x squared minus 6x a square, a perfect square?
I divide the 6 by 2, that gives me 3, I square the 3, and that gives me 9, so I need to add
in a 9 and subtract out a 9.
When I do that, I'm going to have x squared minus 6x plus 9, and I'll put those in parentheses
again just for the visual effect, and then I'll have minus 9, minus 7.
And that's going to give me x minus 3 squared minus basically 16 equals 0.
The 16 comes from the 9 and the 7.
And if I move that 16 to the right-hand side, I'll have x minus 3 whole thing squared equals
16.
Square rooting both sides, if you will, taking the square root of both sides of that equation
gives me x minus 3 equals plus or minus 4.
So x minus 3 is 4, or x minus 3 is negative 4.
And if I add 3 to both sides of those equations, I'll have x is 7, or x equals negative 1.
Now you can check these solutions by simply plugging them into the original equation.
You could plug in the 7 and you could plug in the negative 1.
I'm going to leave that to you.
The arithmetic is pretty straightforward to do it, but because of time, I'm going to go
ahead and leave the checking of those solutions to you.
Plug in the 7 and plug in the negative 1, and you'll be good to go.
Well, we've seen this technique today called completing the square, and we've used it to
solve a number of different quadratic equations.
It turns out that completing the square also plays a very important role in graphing quadratic
functions, and that's going to be the subject of our next lesson.
I look forward to talking with you about those graphs in that next lesson.
