We've seen a wide variety of techniques for solving quadratic equations, factoring, completing
the square, and the quadratic formula, just to name a few.
Those lessons focus on what most people think of when they think about the algebra of quadratic
equations.
I'd like to turn to a different, more visual way to represent quadratic equations or quadratic
functions, and that would be graphing.
In the process, we're going to incorporate a number of the previous algebra tools that
we've seen, from factoring quadratic expressions to completing the square.
Before we look at a number of the examples, I want to share some introductory vocabulary
and ideas, so let's do that first.
Let's talk some about the terms that surround quadratic expressions.
The graph of a quadratic function y equals ax squared plus bx plus c is known as a parabola.
Parabolas have been the subject of mathematical study for at least 2,000 years.
All known thinkers like Euclid, Apollonius, Papus, and Archimedes studied the properties
of the parabola.
We're not going to go into all the details of their work in our course, but we are indebted
to them for their study.
They were very careful in their study of parabolas, and we now understand them much better because
of their work.
In general, a parabola is a U-shaped graph.
Some parabolas are going to open upwards, and they're sometimes referred to then as
cup-shaped, like a drinking cup, while others open downwards and are sometimes called caps
because of that, like the cap you would put on your head.
For example, the graph of y equals x squared is a cup.
In fact, it is a parabola that's going upwards or opening upwards, and it goes right through
the origin.
The graph of y equals negative 3x squared is a cap.
It also goes through the origin, but it's opening downwards, and so we call it a cap-shaped
graph.
Now, you might wonder, what's the deciding factor that makes one of those graphs a cup
and the other one a cap?
Well, that's a great question, and the answer actually is pretty simple.
It's the sign of the coefficient in front of the x squared term, and that's all.
So this is an extremely important fact to remember.
The orientation of a parabola, or whether it's a cup or a cap, is going to simply depend
on the sign of a if your function is y equals ax squared plus bx plus c.
So if a, the coefficient in front of x squared, is positive, then the graph is a cup.
If a is negative, or less than 0, then the graph is a cap.
So the cupness or cappiness has nothing to do with b or c, the coefficient of the x term
or the constant term.
It has everything to do with the sign of a, which is the coefficient in front of x squared.
So in the earlier examples I just showed you, a was equal to 1 when we talked about y equals
x squared, 1 is positive, so we had a cup-shaped parabola, and in the second example, a was
negative 3 when we were looking at y equals negative 3x squared, negative 3 of course
is negative, and so the graph opened downward and was a cap.
So what else can we say in general about the graphs of these quadratic functions, about
these parabolas?
Well, there's another bit of vocabulary that I really ought to mention.
It's that there's always either a unique lowest point if you have a cup-shaped parabola,
or a unique highest point if you have a cap-shaped parabola.
In any case, you're always going to have either a lowest point or a highest point.
That point has a special name.
It's known as the vertex of the parabola.
It's extremely important.
So finding the vertex is high priority for us as we walk through the examples in this
lesson.
Let's talk more about how we would find that vertex in our examples, but keep in mind completing
the square, which we saw in an earlier lesson.
That technique, completing the square, is going to help us identify that vertex.
Although it's probably obvious, given what I've just said to you, let me make a comment
about what I call the end behavior of the graph of a quadratic function.
Notice that both ends of the parabola go in the same direction.
Either both go up in the cup case or both go down in the other case, the cap case.
This is very different from the graph of a line where one end goes down and the other
goes up.
We saw with lines earlier that you might have one end of the line going down and the other
one going up, or one end going down on this side and the other one going up.
It's important to realize that the graph of a quadratic does nothing more than make this
U-shaped graph.
It doesn't come down later out of our view.
It doesn't make a lot of waves.
It's simply going to be a U-shaped graph, either opening upwards or opening downwards.
One other comment is appropriate at this point before we get to our examples.
With lines, we wanted to know about the intercepts of the graphs of those lines, and here we're
going to care about the intercepts as well.
There's just going to be one Y-intercept, as we had in the case of lines, as long as
the line wasn't vertical, of course, but there are going to be many different possibilities
for the X-intercepts of a parabola.
You might have no X-intercepts.
You might have exactly one X-intercept.
You might have exactly two different X-intercepts.
Now there are no other possibilities besides those three for the X-intercepts of a parabola
because of the shape of that parabola.
This is a bit different from the situation with lines, where in the case of lines, you
could only have one X-intercept at most.
Here with parabolas, we can have at most two different X-intercepts.
Having these X-intercepts, if they're easy to find, can be done with factoring techniques,
and we've talked about those techniques in previous lessons.
It's always nice to find the X-intercepts when you're plotting a graph.
They give us points to draw in and sort of connect the dots, if you will, as we're drawing
the graphs.
As we walk through these examples, we're going to want to see if the X-intercepts are pretty
easy to find.
Let's start with a straightforward example and then ramp up to more complicated examples
of drawing these parabolas.
Here's the example I want us to look at for now.
Let's sketch the graph of the quadratic Y equals X squared minus 4X plus 4.
Well, let's say several things.
First, does the graph open upwards or does it open downwards?
Well, we look at one thing, the coefficient in front of the X squared term.
In this case, it's a 1.
Now I know it's not written there, but it's implicitly a 1 and it's a plus 1.
Since that's positive, I know that my parabola is going to open upwards or going to be what
I'm calling a cup-shaped graph.
So the two ends of the graph are both going to go up.
Okay?
Is this polynomial factorable?
Can I factor it?
In fact, I can.
It turns out to be a perfect square because it factors as X minus 2 times X minus 2 or
we could write it more succinctly as just X minus 2 whole thing squared.
If I know that factorization, how do I find those X intercepts?
Well, an X intercept is a point on the X axis, which means the Y value for the point,
the Y coordinate for those points, has to be 0.
So I'm going to take my original equation and I'm going to let Y equals 0 and solve
for X. And when I do that, I'm going to have X squared minus 4X plus 4 equals 0.
I'm letting the Y value equal 0.
And we saw earlier that X squared minus 4X plus 4 is the same as X minus 2 whole thing
squared.
That means X minus 2 has to equal 0 when I take the square root of both sides of the
equation.
So I should say plus or minus 0, but of course plus or minus 0 is just 0.
So I have the equation X minus 2 equals 0, which is the same as X equals 2.
And because we found only one number there, we know that we have only one X intercept.
It's going to happen at X equals 2 and of course Y equals 0.
So at the point 2 comma 0, I'm going to have an X intercept.
Now let's next talk about our vertex.
One of the vertex here is going to be the lowest point.
Because I know the parabola is opening upwards, I know that the vertex is going to be the
lowest point.
To find that quickly, I want to rewrite the original equation using completing the square.
That was one of the points of showing completing the square to you in our previous lesson.
Notice that this equation is already almost written in the form of completion of the square.
We already have one side of a written as X minus 2 whole thing squared.
That reminds us a bit of completing the square.
But we don't see a number dangling off on the end, a constant term if you will.
I can actually write that in by just adding a plus 0.
So instead of having Y equals X minus 2 squared and nothing else, I could write Y equals X
minus 2 whole thing squared plus 0.
Now the coordinates of the vertex are actually staring right at us.
The vertex coordinates are 2 comma 0.
But where did they come from?
Well, here's the main rule for writing down or finding the vertex of a parabola.
The vertex of the parabola that has the equation Y equals X minus M squared plus N will have
coordinates M comma N.
This is very, very important.
The sign in front of the M in the equation needs to be negative so that the X coordinate
is actually positive M.
The sign in front of the N is positive in the equation so that the sign of the coordinate
N is also positive.
So there's a slight change in the signs in the equation in order to write down that vertex.
But again, the point is if the equation is of the form Y equals X minus M squared plus
N, then the coordinates of the vertex are at M comma N.
So we know our vertex is at 2 comma 0 because of the way the equation was written.
It was X minus 2 squared plus 0, and that's where the 2 and the 0 came from.
But wait a minute, that was also the X intercept that we found a few moments ago.
So what's going on?
Well, if you draw the graph quickly, you'll see that the parabola is actually making a
cup shape.
We already knew that, and it's sitting on the point 2 comma 0 right on the X axis.
So this parabola doesn't go below the X axis, it actually sits right on it, and that finishes
that example.
So we know that the parabola has the vertex at 2 comma 0 and opens upward.
Now let's look at a second example very quickly with some different characteristics in it.
Let's sketch the graph of the equation Y equals X squared plus 6X plus 5.
OK, first question that we should always ask when we're drawing one of these parabolas.
Cup or cap?
Is it going upwards or is it going downwards?
The answer is it's opening upwards because the coefficient in front of the X squared
is positive 1.
OK, what about the X intercepts?
Well, to find those, let's factor.
Let's at least check to see if we can factor.
By the way, if the factoring is not nice, then the X intercepts aren't going to be nice either.
Having the X intercepts actually is not crucial to us, but they really are nice to find.
So I like to check to see if I can find them relatively quickly.
If I can't, I just move past that onto some other part of the parabola.
In this case though, I can factor X squared plus 6X plus 5 pretty easily.
X squared plus 6X plus 5 is the same as X plus 1 times X plus 5.
So I actually have Y equals X plus 1 times X plus 5.
What does that mean for my X intercepts?
Well again, an X intercept has the Y coordinate equal to 0 because a point with a Y coordinate
equal to 0 won't get off of the X axis.
So I'm going to take Y equals X plus 1 times X plus 5 and I'm going to replace the Y by
0.
And I'll have 0 equals X plus 1 times X plus 5.
And that means X plus 1 has to equal 0 or X plus 5 has to equal 0.
And therefore, X is either equal to negative 1 or X is equal to negative 5.
So I actually have two X intercepts in this problem.
One of them happens at negative 1, 0 and one of them happens at negative 5, 0.
So if you're following along with me with a piece of graph paper and you want to start
plotting this, we actually do know two points.
They are at negative 1, 0 and negative 5, 0 on the X axis.
Keep in mind also, this parabola we already determined is going to go up.
So it's going to open upwards or make this cup shape.
Now let's stop for a minute and ask a question.
We know where the two X intercepts are.
They're both to the left of the origin and we know it opens upward.
I just mentioned that.
So here's a question.
In which quadrant will the vertex live?
Is it going to be in quadrant 1, 2, 3 or 4?
The answer is it's going to be down in quadrant 3 because the parabola has these two X intercepts
to the left of the origin and it's going to open upwards.
So it's got to get down below those in order to complete the drawing of the parabola.
And that means that that vertex has to live down in quadrant 3.
But where is the vertex?
Do you remember how we find these vertices, the vertex of each parabola?
We complete the square to find the vertex.
So let's do that here.
We go back to our original equation, Y equals X squared plus 6X plus 5 and we ask ourselves
what number would I have to add in and then subtract out in order to have this completion
of the square in order to complete the square.
I stare at the X squared plus 6X.
I take 6 and divide it by 2 to give me 3 and I square the 3 to give me 9.
And that means I know I need to add 9 to X squared plus 6X in order to get this perfect
square.
If I add 9 in, I must subtract 9 out so that everything balances.
And that means that my equation is going to be rewritten this way.
Y equals X squared plus 6X plus 9, then minus 9 plus 5.
Minus 9 comes in for the balancing effect, if you will.
The plus 5 was there to begin with.
We have to keep it.
But by keeping the X squared plus 6X plus 9 together, I now know that that's a perfect
square.
So my original equation can be rewritten as Y equals X plus 3 squared minus 9 plus 5
or Y equals X plus 3 squared minus 4.
Now that's the same as the equation we started with.
I've just rewritten it in a different way.
Now the form of the equation of a parabola that we had before was Y equals X minus M squared
plus N. And the vertex then had coordinates M comma N.
How are our signs working out now?
Well notice that I have X plus 3 squared minus 4.
And that means that the coordinates of my vertex are actually at negative 3 comma negative
4.
If you think about it for a moment, that's in quadrant 3.
So we're on the right track.
We said earlier that the vertex would have to be in quadrant 3 and we just found negative
3 comma negative 4 is the vertex and that's in quadrant 3.
Now once I take my graph paper and I plot those two X intercepts and I plot that vertex,
I can sketch the graph pretty quickly because I know what it looks like.
The vertex is the lowest point and then the parabola has to open upwards, go through those
two X intercepts and I'm done.
That would actually give me a perfectly good sketch of my parabola.
But before I move past this example, let me make a side comment.
Notice that your plot ought to have Y intercept 0 comma 5.
You know if you just start drawing this thing pretty quickly, you might not really get a
very accurate sketch.
But really we ought to check what is the Y intercept and if we can draw our parabola
through the Y intercept, we can be at least a little more accurate.
How do we find the Y intercept?
Well a Y intercept of a graph is a point where X equals 0.
Think about it, if you're on the Y axis, it means that you couldn't have moved to the
left or to the right in the X direction.
So to find a Y intercept, we go back to the original equation and we set X equal to 0.
Well Y equals X squared plus 6X plus 5 with 0's plugged in for the X's is going to give
you Y equals 0 squared plus 6 times 0 plus 5 and that's just Y equals 5 and I hope you
see that that arithmetic really is pretty easy with all those 0's thrown in.
Once you know Y equals 5 is part of that Y intercept, you know that the coordinates
are actually 0 comma 5.
So if you draw this parabola going also through the point 0 comma 5 for your Y intercept,
you'll actually have an even more accurate sketch of this parabola.
Great, so let's look at another example now.
Sketch the graph of Y equals negative X squared plus 8X.
Now I want you to notice that this graph is going to be different from the previous examples
we've looked at.
Notice that the coefficient in front of the X squared is negative 1 and that means that
this parabola is going to open downwards, it's going to be cap shaped if you will.
That's great to remember.
We want to always think about what we can as we're drawing these graphs and in this case
we'll have a downwards opening parabola.
Now the next thing we ought to do is think about the X intercepts if we can find them.
Well I need to take my original equation and let Y equals 0.
So Y equals negative X squared plus 8X becomes 0 equals negative X squared plus 8X and notice
that there's an X in common in both terms on that side of the equation.
There's an X inside of X squared, there's an X inside of 8X, so I can factor that common
term out and I'll have the equation 0 equals X times negative X plus 8.
So that means that either the X equals 0 or the negative X plus 8 equals 0.
And that's the same as saying X is 0 or X is positive 8.
So I actually have two X intercepts here.
They're either going to be at 0, 0 or 8, 0.
So one of the X intercepts is actually the origin and the other X intercept is 8 units
to its right.
Now where's the vertex?
Now remember the parabola is cap shaped this time.
We already talked about it and we know where the two X intercepts are going to be.
So the vertex now must be above the X axis and it must be sitting in quadrant one.
That's fine.
It's again good to be thinking about these as you're completing the drawing so that you
don't make a mistake along the way.
Now can we complete the square in the original equation?
Now let me suggest that we do so by rewriting it just a little bit.
I'm going to take Y equals negative X squared plus 8X and I'm going to rewrite it as Y equals
the negative of the quantity X squared minus 8X.
Now just for a moment look at what's inside the parentheses.
You have X squared minus 8X there.
What would you need to add to make that part a perfect square?
Well you divide the 8 by 2 and you get 4 and you square 4 and you get 16.
So what you should do is add in a 16 to what's inside those parentheses.
And what you'll have then is Y equals the negative of the quantity X squared minus 8X
plus 16 and then plus something else.
Remember when you add in one of these pieces you have to subtract it out as well.
But in fact what you've done to add in that 16 is actually you've brought in a negative
16.
Look at the minus sign that's out in front of that set of parentheses.
So you've actually already thrown in negative 16 into this equation.
If you want to make everything balanced you need to then add in 16 so that all of the
equation balances out.
And when you write all that down you're going to have Y equals the negative of X squared
minus 8X plus 16 plus 16 and again that's because the plus 16 inside of the parentheses
is actually a negative 16 because of the minus sign out in front.
So you always want to keep in mind those negative signs in front of those parentheses.
Distributing those is very, very important.
Now can we think about what's inside those parentheses as a perfect square?
Of course we can.
That quantity is the same as X minus 4 whole thing squared.
And so my equation becomes Y equals negative X minus 4 squared plus 16.
You've actually completed the square there with a negative out in front.
It's not the easiest thing to do but it can be done and once we've done it we actually
know the coordinates of our vertex.
If you hide that negative sign that's all the way out in front from your eyes for just
a second what's left tells you that the vertex is at 4 comma 16.
And 4 comma 16 is in the first quadrant and that's where it was supposed to be.
So that's fabulous.
You can now sketch your graph.
Remember your parabola is going to open downwards and you'll have your parabola drawn.
Now let's quickly look at one last example in this lesson.
I want us to sketch the graph of Y equals X squared plus 3.
Well the first thing I want you to notice is that this equation has no linear term.
It's missing its X to the first term.
It's not like we have X squared plus 7X plus 3 or X squared minus 5X plus 3.
We're actually missing that middle term in our quadratic.
And that's actually a very big hint that you don't want to lose out on.
It actually means that the equation we're given is, can be rewritten in the following
way to highlight that you don't need to complete the square.
You can rewrite it as Y equals X minus 0 squared plus 3, right?
X minus 0 is the same as X.
So X minus 0 squared plus 3 is the same as X squared plus 3.
And that means you know what the vertex is.
You see the 0 inside the parentheses and the 3 on the outside and it means that your vertex
is actually located at 0, 3.
Now where is 0, 3?
It's actually on the Y axis, 0 in the X direction and 3 in the Y means that the vertex is actually
sitting on the Y axis, okay?
What else do we know about this graph?
Well we know that the coefficient in front of the X squared is a positive 1.
And that means, because it's positive, that the graph is going to grow upwards rather
than downwards.
So we have a graph that has a vertex on the Y axis at 0, 3 and it's going to grow or
open upwards.
That means that you're going to have a parabola that never crosses the X axis.
So it will have absolutely no X intercepts.
And what's neat about what we've done in this lesson today is we've seen an example of a
parabola where you have exactly one X intercept.
Remember the parabola that just sat on the X axis?
We've seen a number of examples where we had two X intercepts and here we see an example
where the parabola actually has no X intercepts.
And all three of those possibilities are definitely there.
Let me make one other comment about the graph we just drew and then we'll close out our
lesson.
I want you to notice that the graph of Y equals X squared plus 3 is actually just the graph
of Y equals X squared where the vertex is at 0, 0 just shifted up the Y axis 3 units.
So we go from Y equals X squared which has a parabola going right through the origin
and opening upwards and we shift that right up the X axis 3 units and we get the graph
of Y equals X squared plus 3.
These ways of transforming the graphs are very, very helpful and as we get to later
lessons where we're graphing even more complicated functions, we'll see this idea of being able
to shift the graph either up or down or left or right can be very, very helpful to us as
we draw more complicated graphs based on the graphs of simpler functions.
Well today we've spent this lesson describing the visual aspects of quadratic functions.
I hope you've seen the number of ways that these graphs compare and contrast with the
graphs of linear equations that we studied several lessons ago.
But you might be thinking, who cares?
I mean, why would we even want to know about these graphs having this sort of U shape or
cup shape graph?
Well it turns out that there are lots of real world uses for objects which are parabolic
in shape, parabola, parabolic.
Think about satellite dishes or look at an old car headlight sometime or maybe a flashlight.
Why are those shaped in a parabolic fashion or shaped like parabolas?
Well it's because that shape allows for the beams like the light beams that are coming
out of the bulb at the end of the headlight to all be focused or concentrated in one direction.
It intensifies the beams.
This is very beneficial rather than just having all the light going in all directions in front
of your car.
You want to have all of those beams going in front of the car so that you can see as
you drive at night.
That's one of the biggest uses, most important uses of parabolas and parabolic shapes in the
real world.
We've talked about these parabolas today.
I want you to know that next time you'll probably want to have a calculator handy as we continue
discussion of quadratics in the next lesson.
I'll see you then.
