Like their linear counterparts, quadratic equations often arise in word problems and
real-world situations.
My biggest goal in this lesson is to demonstrate some of these kinds of problems to you.
So let's get right into the examples today.
Assume you're building the floor of a rectangular room in large pieces of wood using the following
design.
The total area of the room is to be 42 square feet.
I'd like for us to determine the value of x from the diagram that we need in order to
build this floor for the room.
And we're going to approximate x accurate to two places after the decimal point.
Now as we've seen in the past, we need to define some variables and think about formulas
that we already know which can help us in completing the example.
So we can define the length and the width of the room from the diagram and I'm going
to call w the width of the room and I'm going to let l be the length of the room and then
a is going to be the square footage or the area of the room.
Now from the diagram, I know that the width of the room or w is equal to x plus 1 and
the length of the room is going to be 2x plus 2.
And of course we know that the area of a rectangle is going to be the length times the width
so the area is equal to l times w.
Now that means that the area is also then equal to x plus 1 times 2x plus 2 because
the width was x plus 1 and the length was 2x plus 2.
We also know that the area is 42 square feet.
That was actually given to us in the information that was provided in the example.
And that means that we have an equation x plus 1 times 2x plus 2 equals 42.
We got that because we knew the area was equal to 42 and we knew the area was equal to x
plus 1 times 2x plus 2.
So we basically had area given to us in two different forms and we've set those two different
forms equal to one another.
We can now solve that equation.
X plus 1 times 2x plus 2 equals 42 for the variable x and that's the goal of the problem.
So let's walk right into that and see how we can solve that equation for x.
Well the first thing you might notice is that a 2 can be factored out of the term 2x plus
2.
Well I would suggest we actually factor that 2 out of the quantity 2x plus 2.
When we do that, the equation that we had is the same as 2 times x plus 1 times another
x plus 1 equals 42.
And now I see that both sides of the equation have a 2 in them.
There's obviously a 2 at the beginning of the left hand side and 42 has a factor of
2 in it as well.
So let's get rid of that 2 on the left hand side by simply dividing both sides of the
equation by 2.
When we do that we're going to have x plus 1 times x plus 1 equals 42 divided by 2 or
just 21.
So my equation really is x plus 1 quantity squared equals 21.
Now I want you to notice that that looks a bit like one of the steps we ran into when
we were handling problems with completing the square.
So what do we do at this stage?
Well we take the square root of both sides of our equation and we get x plus 1 on the
left equals plus or minus square root of 21 on the right.
Don't forget that plus or minus, remember.
When you take the square root of both sides of an equation, you must include that plus
or minus.
It has to be there.
And that means you really have two equations, right?
You have x plus 1 equals square root of 21 or x plus 1 equals the negative of the square
root of 21.
And now you want to get x by itself.
So you subtract 1 from both sides of your equations and you get x equals negative 1 plus
the square root of 21 or x equals negative 1 minus square root of 21.
Those negative 1s come from subtracting that 1 from the left hand side over to the right
hand side.
Now in earlier problems we've looked at, especially those without any sort of real world significance,
we've just moved on from here to our next problem when we've said we have two solutions
and we've been done.
But now we really do need to think a bit.
That's one of the things we always have to remember when we're dealing with word problems
or real world problems.
We have to ask ourselves whether the solutions make any sense at all.
So first off, let's use a calculator and approximate the square root of 21.
If you punch in square root of 21 into your calculator, you're going to find that it's
about the same as 4.58.
So that means that your two solutions, x equals negative 1 plus square root of 21 or x equals
negative 1 minus square root of 21 are approximately going to be x equals negative 1 plus 4.58 or
negative 1 minus 4.58.
And that means that your two values of x are close to 3.58 or negative 5.58.
And those come from doing the arithmetic that we already had.
Now do both of these answers make sense as values of x?
The answer is no way.
Remember that x is the length of one of these pieces of our floor.
So how in the world could we let x be approximately negative 5.58 feet?
In the context of this word problem, we have to throw out x equals negative 5.58.
And that means that it leaves us with only one possible answer for x.
x is approximately equal to 3.58 feet.
Now let's look at a similar kind of problem just to try to nail down some of the ideas
here.
So here's the example.
We're going to build a small rectangular box.
Actually it's already been built and it has a volume of 280 cubic centimeters.
The dimensions of the box are 4 centimeters by x centimeters by x plus 3 centimeters.
I want us to find the value of x so that this box actually does have volume 280 cubic centimeters.
You can think of this as the length of one side of the box.
Remember one of the dimensions was x centimeters.
Now I often find when I get these kinds of word problems that a sketch or a picture that's
related to the problem can be very helpful before I ever try to do any mathematics.
So the sketch doesn't have to be perfect.
It doesn't have to be a piece of artwork.
It just needs to get the general idea of the problem across.
So I need it to be drawn sort of like a box, a rectangular box.
I don't want it looking like a sphere or a cylinder or a cone or something like that.
It would help if it looks somewhat three dimensional rather than just a flat square on the paper.
But beyond that I don't need the graph or the drawing.
It's not really a graph.
I don't need the diagram or the drawing to be all that good.
So don't sit down and try to get too picky about this drawing.
Just make a sketch that you can label and understand what the problem is doing.
Once you have that drawing on the page you should label it as much as you can based on
the information that was given to you in the example.
So in this case I would draw some sort of rectangular box and I would then label the
sides.
I was told that one side had length four centimeters, another side had length x centimeters, and
another side had length x plus three centimeters.
And these were the three lengths or dimensions that were given in the problem.
So once I've got that done I'm in great shape.
Now what do I do?
Well I was also told that the volume of this box is 280 cubic centimeters.
And that's a hint that I need a formula for the volume of a box in general.
So we should stop for a moment and ask ourselves.
Do we know the volume of a rectangular box or a rectangular solid?
Well it turns out that there is a volume formula if you're working with a rectangular box
and it is volume is length times width times height where you might call the length L and
the width W and the height H. So if you want to make it look more like an algebraic equation
it would just be V equals L times W times H. Kind of reminds you a bit of the area formula
for a rectangle where the area formula is length times width.
Now with volume we then multiply again in this case by the height.
So you have length times width times the height and those three pieces multiplied together
give you volume.
So from there let's go back to our diagram.
We know that the volume is length times width times height.
What is that in this particular problem?
Well it tells us that V must be 4 times X times X plus 3 because the 4, the X and the
X plus 3 are acting like the length, the width and the height.
Now you might say well how did you know which one was which?
The answer is I don't need to know whether the 4 is the length, the width or the height.
I don't need to know if the X is acting like the length, the width or the height or the
X plus 3.
All I need to know is that if I multiply those three quantities together I will have length
times width times height and so I have the equation V equals 4 times X times X plus 3.
But remember we were also told in the problem that the volume is 280.
So I now know two different quantities which are equal to V.
One of them is 4 times X times X plus 3.
That was the first amount that was given to us for V and the other one was 280.
Those two have to be equal because they're both the volume.
So I have the equation 4X times X plus 3 equals 280.
The problem said that they wanted a value for X.
I wanted to solve this equation for X.
So let's now start solving this equation for X.
By the way, notice this is going to be a quadratic equation.
I don't see any X squareds in there but if I just multiply the X that's on the outside
of the parentheses with the X that's on the inside of the parentheses I'll have an X squared.
So this really is a quadratic equation.
It's just that it's a little bit hidden right now.
So we're solving this quadratic equation for X.
I would suggest that we start by getting rid of the 4 that's on the left hand side.
And how can we do that legally?
Well if you divide both sides of the equation by 4 you'll have just X times X plus 3 on
the left because the 4s will cancel and on the right you'll have 280 divided by 4 and
of course that's 70.
So we've now whittled our equation down just a little bit and we now have X times X plus
3 equals 70.
Now I want to solve this equation for X.
That's exactly what I was told to do.
What do I do next?
Well I might suggest that we expand the left hand side and move the 70 over to the left
hand side and see what we have.
If you expand the left hand side or multiply it out you'll have X squared plus 3X and of
course that's equal to 70.
If I subtract 70 from both sides of that equation I will then have X squared plus 3X minus 70
equals 0.
Now that equation is clearly quadratic and it is waiting for us to solve it and you've
seen a lot of ways to solve such a quadratic equation.
You could use the quadratic formula.
You could complete the square.
You could try to factor.
There are lots of ways to attack this problem.
I have to be honest with you I'm not all that excited about completing the square here.
Can you imagine why?
Well because the coefficient in front of the X term is odd.
It's a 3 and if you do completing the square here you're going to introduce some fractions
which are going to slow us down.
Don't get me wrong there's nothing bad about fractions but admittedly the arithmetic gets
a bit more involved when the fractions show up compared to whole numbers.
So if you don't mind for now I'm going to put completing the square aside as an alternate
way of doing this problem but let's try something else.
I'm going to suggest we think about factoring.
Now you might think with that 70 in there I really don't want to try factoring here.
I actually wouldn't be that worried here because think about this 70 is equal to 10 times 7.
That's probably one of the first ways you would think about writing 70 when you're factoring
it.
10 times 7.
Notice that 10 and 7 are only 3 away from one another and notice the coefficient in front
of the X term is 3.
That's a huge hint that the quadratic polynomial that you have on the left hand side of your
equation really does factor.
X squared plus 3X minus 70 factors as X plus 10 times X minus 7.
Notice I used the 10 and the 7 multiplied them together to give me 70 that's part of
the L part of foil.
If you remember how we've done that in the past and then plus 10X minus 7X is going to
give me plus 3X the middle term of my polynomial.
So this really works.
This is the factorization X plus 10 times X minus 7 and that all equals 0.
Now once you have that factorization you know that this equation becomes two equations X
plus 10 equals 0 or X minus 7 equals 0.
And those two translate to X equals negative 10 or X equals positive 7.
Now here's the question.
You always have to ask this with these real world problems.
Which of the two answers is correct?
They might both be correct, neither one might be correct or exactly one might be correct.
Well in this problem X is one of the dimensions of the box.
Can you have a negative length or a negative dimension on a box?
Of course not.
So X equals negative 10 is definitely not the correct answer in this problem.
And that means that the answer must be X equals 7 centimeters.
Now I'd like to suggest that we check that really really quickly by going back to the
equation we had and plugging in X equals 7.
Let's do that quickly.
We had the equation V equals 4X times X plus 3.
We think X equals 7 is our correct solution.
Let's plug in X equals 7 and see what we get.
V equals 4 times 7 times 7 plus 3.
Now let's multiply that out.
4 times 7 is 28.
The 7 plus 3 is going to give me 10.
So I'll have 28 times 10 which is 280.
That was the value we were supposed to have for the volume which means X equals 7 centimeters
really is the correct answer here.
So what I'd like to do then is move on to another example where we see how to use a
quadratic equation to solve a pretty real world kind of problem.
Suppose that you have a can of a certain brand of paint and it'll cover exactly 600 square
feet of area.
It doesn't matter what kind of object you're painting or what surface you're painting on
but in this case the can will cover exactly 600 square feet of area.
I want us to determine the radius of the largest circle that we can paint with three
such cans of paint.
So the first thing we should do is define some variables and think about what the problem
is asking.
So I'm going to imagine that I have a circle that I'm trying to paint as big as I can.
I'm going to mark the radius of that circle as R and I'm going to let the area of that
circle be A. Then I know a formula for the area of this circle.
The area A equals pi R squared, pi R squared.
Now for practical purposes let's just approximate pi by 3.14.
It's very important that you know that pi is not exactly equal to 3.14.
But it's a decent approximation and so I'm going to stick with using 3.14 for pi in this
problem.
Again, pi is not exactly 3.14 but it's close enough for our purposes here.
So we basically then have the equation A equals 3.14 times R squared.
Now do we know what A is supposed to be in this problem?
Let's go back to the wording of the question.
Well one can of paint was going to cover 600 square feet so three cans of paint is going
to cover 3 times 600 or 1800 square feet of area.
That means I can replace the value of A by 1800 in my formula and that's going to give
me 1800 equals 3.14 R squared.
Now we only have one variable in our equation.
That variable is R and that value of R, remember R was radius, is exactly what the question
asked us to find.
So let's solve this equation for R.
Notice that the equation is quadratic because we have R squared here so this really is solving
a quadratic equation.
The first thing you might consider doing is dividing both sides of the equation by 3.14
to isolate the R squared to get the R squared by itself on the right hand side.
I think that's actually the right idea but you might want to use your calculator at this
point to actually perform the division.
You can do it by hand and I certainly like the idea of you doing it by hand but if you
want to go through and just get a quick approximation let's use our calculator and take 1800 divided
by 3.14.
If you use your calculator you'll see that dividing 1800 by 3.14 is going to give you
the equation 573.2484 equals R squared.
Now how do you get R?
Well you take the square root of both sides as we've done in several examples in a number
of the previous lessons.
If you do that with your calculator you're going to find that R is plus or minus 23.946.
Remember when you take the square root of both sides of an equation you have to include
the plus or minus.
But of course as soon as I say that I should remind myself that the R here is the radius
of a circle and a radius has to be positive.
So I know the answer here must be R equals positive 23.9426 feet.
So I can paint a circle that has a radius of almost 24 feet and cover it with these
three cans of paint.
Now let's look at another example and again try to understand where those real world issues
come in as we think about this problem.
Let's say that we have a toy rocket and we fire it from ground level straight upwards
so we fire it vertically into the air.
The height of the rocket in feet after it's flown for T seconds is given by the formula
H equals negative 16 T squared plus 192 T. I want us to determine the time when the rocket
reaches its highest point in the air and I want to determine the maximum height that
it reaches in feet.
So I want to know when it reaches its highest point and how high it gets.
Let's start the problem by seeing if we can rewrite the expression for H, the function
for H in an alternate way so that certain facts about H become more apparent.
Notice that when you write H as negative 16 T squared plus 192 T, you can actually factor
out a negative 16 and you get H equals negative 16 times the quantity T squared minus 12 T.
Now you might say to me, wait a minute, I would have never seen a 16 coming out of 192.
That's fine.
But I bet you could have seen that you could have factored a 2 out from both 16 and 192
and then you probably would have seen you could keep factoring out 2s until you finally
end up having a 16 out in front.
I also want the negative to come out in front so that I have a positive T squared on the
inside of my parentheses.
You might even know why I'm doing that, completing the square might be a good hint.
But for now, just factor out that negative 16.
Notice that you also have a T inside both T squared and 12 T. So a T could be factored
out as well.
And you would have H equals negative 16 T times T minus 12.
Now what do I know from that way of writing my equation?
I know that when time T is 0, then the height is also 0.
When you plug in T equals 0, you'll get 0 back.
Also when you plug in T equals 12, the height will be 0 because you'll have 12 minus 12
as part of the right-hand side, of course that's 0, multiplying the rest of the equation
by 0 just gives you 0.
So it turns out that you know two points on the graph.
If you were to plot the graph with T in the x direction, if you will, or the horizontal
axis and H as the vertical axis, you'll have two T intercepts or what would be x intercepts
if we were using that variable.
One of them would be at 0, 0 and the other one would be at 12, 0.
Turns out there's a certain symmetry about this graph and it's best seen if you plot
it quickly and remember it's going to be a parabola.
So it's going to go up and then it's going to come back down.
You should notice that the highest point is exactly the halfway point in the middle of
the graph and that's going to happen when T is 6.
We could use the language that we had in our previous lessons and point out that the highest
point of the parabola is happening at the vertex.
So we could have written down the formula in a slightly different way to find that vertex.
But here the highest point happens halfway between T equals 0 and T equals 12, it happens
at T equals 6.
So it turns out then that we know that T equals 6 is the time when the rocket is actually
going to reach its highest point and it's going to then be straightforward to determine
the maximum height of the rocket if we just substitute T equals 6 into the formula H equals
negative 16T squared plus 192T.
By the way, let's not rush too quickly here, one of the parts of the problem was to find
out the time when the rocket reached its highest point.
We now have done that.
We know that T equals 6 is the time when the rocket reaches its highest point.
Now I take that T equals 6 and I plug it back into the formula for H and when I do so I'm
going to be able to find its highest point at T equals 6.
So I'll have my maximum height there as well.
So let's do that.
I know that my formula for H originally was H equals negative 16T squared plus 192T.
I plug in T equals 6 and I get H equals negative 16 times 6 squared plus 192 times 6.
6 squared of course is 36 so I have H equals negative 16 times 36 plus 1152 which comes
from multiplying 192 times 6.
Doing a little more simplification I have H equals negative 576 plus 1152.
And when I do that last set of combining I'll have H equals 576 feet.
Notice that this makes sense based on the coordinates of the vertex of that parabola.
It appears that the Y value of that vertex is somewhere between 500 and 600 if you just
look at a graph of this parabola if you had already graphed it.
And we just found that that vertex must have a height of 576.
So this rocket doesn't get any higher than 576 feet.
Of course we could talk about this in a lot of other ways and make sure that it makes
sense what we've just done.
So let me make a few comments along those lines.
One interesting follow up question is what if the rocket had not been fired initially
from ground level?
Let's say it had been fired from a platform that was 10 feet off the ground.
What kind of assumptions did we make as we just solved the earlier example which would
no longer work here?
Well one of the assumptions we made was that we had this sort of symmetry of the graph
that we had the two values that were on the t-axis or on the x-axis if you will.
And we had a certain symmetry about the graph then.
If one of the points now starts up here, if the rocket starts 10 or 20 or 50 feet off
the ground, you no longer have that symmetry.
So finding that vertex would have been a little more difficult.
We would have really had to use the completing the square technique in order to find that
vertex.
So that's one thing about the original problem that we assumed that would be lost if we started
the rocket off the ground on a platform off the top of a building, something like that.
So I'd like to consider now one more example where a quadratic equation comes into play
and let's do it right here at the end of the lesson.
So a man is climbing a tree let's say and he's 24 feet above the ground when his keys
accidentally fall out of his pocket.
The function that tells us the height of his keys in terms of time is h of t equals negative
16 t squared plus 24.
So that is telling us how high his keys are after they've come out of his pocket t seconds
later.
I want us to graph h as a function of t and determine how long his keys are actually in
the air from the time they leave his pocket to the time they hit the ground.
Okay, so let's make several comments before we really jump into the problem.
First of all, what are the appropriate values of t in this problem?
I talked about the domain of a function in an earlier lesson and now what I'm asking
is what is the domain of h of t here?
What are the appropriate values to plug in for t?
Well t equals negative 10 seconds doesn't make sense, t equals negative 5 seconds doesn't
make sense.
No negative values are going to make sense for t.
The smallest valid amount for t is going to be t equals 0 and that's exactly the time
when the keys leave his pocket.
So we're only going to look at values t greater than or equal to 0.
Secondly, in order to know how long the keys are in the air we should ask ourselves what
the value of h is when the keys are no longer in the air and the answer is when they're
on the ground, h equals 0 feet.
So we're not going to let h be negative in any of these discussions.
We only want h to be either 0 feet when the keys are on the ground or of course positive
when the keys are still in the air.
Now what does a sketch of h look like?
Well h equals negative 16t squared plus 24.
The coefficient of t squared is negative so my graph is going to be a parabola that's
opening downward or cap shaped.
What else can we say?
Well we know the y-intercept has to be 24 because when t equals 0 h is going to equal
negative 16 times 0 squared plus 24 and that's of course 0 plus 24 which is 24.
So I can actually plot this graph at least that one point.
I can plot my h-intercept or y-intercept and I then know that if we think about it for
a minute the keys will be at their highest point when the man drops them.
They're just going to keep going down from there.
So that point must serve as the vertex of my parabola.
Remember we're not looking at negative values of t so I'm not going to look at the full
cup shape here.
We still know though that 0, 24 would serve as the vertex if we were looking at the full
graph so I'm only going to be looking at part of the graph, the part where t is greater
than or equal to 0.
Actually I don't even want all of the part where t is greater than or equal to 0, I only
want the part where h is also greater than or equal to 0 and the h is acting like the
y values if you will.
So we only want that piece in quadrant one of the graph.
So that's what the graph would look like.
That takes care of part A. How about part B?
Well we know h is negative 16 t squared plus 24.
At the time the keys hit the ground h is 0.
So what we really have is 0 equals negative 16 t squared plus 24 and we want to solve
that for t.
If we swing the 16 t squared to the other side we'll have 16 t squared equals 24, dividing
by 16 gives us t squared is 3 halves.
At that point t is going to equal the square root of 3 halves and that's the same as square
root of 1.5.
If I get out of calculator very, very quickly I can calculate that t then is 1.225 seconds
approximately.
Well we've seen some real world examples today using quadratic expressions and next time
we'll continue on as we discuss the Pythagorean theorem.
