As we start today's lesson, which is all about the Pythagorean theorem, I'd like to make
sure we're on the same page with some terminology related to right triangles. So let's talk about
some of this vocabulary before we go anywhere. First, a right triangle is a triangle where
one of the angles is a right angle or a 90 degree angle. We often show these right angles
when we've drawn the triangle by placing a small L shape or a small square in the corner
of the triangle where the 90 degree angle is located. So that's a right triangle. We're going
to talk all about right triangles today. And the next thing we need to know about the right
triangle is the names of the edges or the legs, if you will. The side of the triangle which is
opposite the right angle is called the hypotenuse. I want you to notice that the hypotenuse is always
the longest leg of the three legs of a right triangle. And we're going to use that fact later
on just to make sure we're getting the right answers or thinking critically about whether our
answers are correct. Now, we normally don't think of the hypotenuse as the longest leg so much,
but I want to think of it most of the time as the leg that's across from the right angle.
So let's move forward. The other two legs are simply going to be called legs of the triangle.
And they will be shorter than, each one will be shorter than the hypotenuse. Those two legs
are actually going to be the legs that make the right angle. So we're going to have the hypotenuse
which is across from the right angle. And then we'll have the other two legs which will be the
sides that make or create the right angle. It's often the case that the lengths of these three
sides of a right triangle are going to be labeled A, B, and C. And normally what's going to happen
is C is going to be the letter that we reserve for the length of the hypotenuse and then A and B
will be the lengths of the other two legs. Now, with that notation and terminology in mind,
we can now actually state what's called the Pythagorean theorem. Now Pythagorean theorem is
a big phrase and it probably scares some of you just to hear that phrase. I'll explain exactly
what it means in just a second. But here's the statement of the Pythagorean theorem. If you
have a right triangle and you've labeled the leg lengths A, B, and C as we talked about a few
moments ago, then the sum of the squares of the lengths of the legs equals the square of the length
of the hypotenuse. Now, trying saying that five times fast, that's a long thing to say. But I can
say it easier with some algebra. With the notation I just mentioned, the Pythagorean theorem simply
says that A squared plus B squared equals C squared. Now, what does Pythagorean theorem
actually mean? Let me just break that down for you quickly. The Pythagorean part is named for the
Greek philosopher and mathematician Pythagoras, who was actually a leader of a mathematically
based religious sect. It's not known exactly when the Pythagorean theorem was first discovered or
proved, but we believe that Pythagoras was teaching in the mid-500s BC. So the Pythagorean
theorem is probably about 2,500 years old. Now, that explains the Pythagorean part of
the phrase Pythagorean theorem. What's a theorem? Let's just basically mention that quickly. A
theorem in mathematics is a proven fact. So it's a fancy way of simply saying a proven fact
that was known or proven by Pythagoras. So that's the Pythagorean theorem. A squared plus B squared
equals C squared, where A and B are the two shorter lengths of a right triangle, and C
is the length of the hypotenuse. Now, I want you to notice before we start doing any problems
together that the Pythagorean theorem is actually a quadratic equation because the A is raised to
the second power, and so is the B, and so is the C. So that's why we're talking about this material
and this lesson. We've spent several lessons talking about quadratic equations, quadratic
polynomials, and so on. And now I thought it would be nice to take a lesson where we talk about
quadratics in a very, very well-known context. I'm guessing that many of you have heard the
phrase Pythagorean theorem before. And what I'd like to do today is look at it as a quadratic
equation and study these equations with many different examples and then use the algebra
that we've learned to solve some of those problems. So let's now use the information that we know
about these right triangles and the Pythagorean theorem to solve a few mathematical problems.
Let's start with this example. Assume that the two legs, the shorter legs of a right triangle,
have lengths 6 inches and 8 inches respectively. The question is, how long is the hypotenuse?
So let's begin by saying that A equals 6 and B equals 8. I want you to think,
A could have been 8 and B could have been 6. And for some of us, that might paralyze us.
How did you know to make A6 and B equal to 8? Why didn't you do it the other way around? Well,
it wouldn't matter in this problem. The final outcome actually would not be changed if you
switched A and B in this case. So let's just make A equal to 6 and B equal to 8. Now I want to use
the Pythagorean theorem because I have a right triangle. And remember, the Pythagorean theorem
says A squared plus B squared equals C squared. If I substitute A equals 6 and B equals 8 into
that equation, I'll have 6 squared plus 8 squared equals C squared. And now I can start doing some
simplification. Remember, we learned many lessons ago that we need to do our exponentiation first
before we do the addition. That was an order of operations thing that we talked about before.
So let's do the exponentiation. 6 squared equals 36 and 8 squared equals 64. So if I take the 36
and add it to 64, I'll have 100. And my equation becomes C squared equals 100. And again, I can't
emphasize enough that is a quadratic equation. Now it has the variable C instead of the variable X,
but bottom line, it's a quadratic equation with C as its variable. Not only that, but this problem
asks us to find the length of the hypotenuse and that's C. So I now have this equation,
C squared equals 100. If I can just solve that for C, I'll have the answer to my problem.
So C squared equals 100. We've seen in previous lessons how to finish off that kind of an equation.
We simply take the square root of both sides and we're left with C equals plus or minus 10.
Don't forget that plus or minus. We need to throw it in. Of course, in this problem,
C has got to be positive. Why? Because C is measuring the length of the hypotenuse of this
triangle and it doesn't make any sense at all then for C to be negative. How in the world could we
have negative 10 inches for a length of a hypotenuse? And therefore, I know that my final answer is C
equals 10 inches. So if one of the legs is six inches long and the other leg is eight inches long
in a right triangle, then the hypotenuse is going to be 10 inches long. Now let's move on to a second
example again using the Pythagorean theorem just so we get comfortable with this quadratic equation.
Assume we have a right triangle again where the length of the hypotenuse is given to us now
as 26 and the length of the shorter leg is 10. Find the length of that longer leg. Now remember,
it's longer than the shorter leg but it has to be smaller than the hypotenuse. So let's use the
notation we've been using up to now. A is going to be 10 and C is going to be 26 because it's the
length of the hypotenuse and that means we want to find B. So let's take the Pythagorean theorem
and let's plug in the information that we have and let's do the simplification and see what we get.
A squared plus B squared equals C squared. That's the Pythagorean theorem. If A is 10
and C is 26, then we're going to have 10 squared plus B squared equals 26 squared. That's the same
as saying 100 plus B squared equals 676. 26 times 26 is 676. And by the way, I would encourage you
to actually do that multiplication on paper. 26 times 26 is very doable and here you would have
676. If you then subtract 100 from both sides of that equation, the 100 on the left hand side will
cancel and you'll be left with B squared on the left equals 676 minus 100 or 576 on the right hand
side. That means B squared equals 576. We want to find B so we now take the square root of both sides
of that equation and we know that B must be either plus or minus square root of 576. Again,
the B being a negative number makes no sense at all and so we're going to say that B must equal
square root of 576 because B is the length of one of the legs. It has to be positive. Now,
we could stop here and say that B equals the square root of 576 is our final answer. I would
suggest though that we should check whether there's some simplification that can be done
with square root of 576. Now, how would we do that? I mean, I don't have all of the squares
memorized. How would I know whether square root of 576 is going to be simpler or not? Well,
one idea would be to factor 576 and see if there are any perfect squares hiding inside of it.
So let's do that factorization. 576 definitely has a 2 in it because it's even. So I could factor
a 2 out. I could do that by long division if I wanted and I would have 576 equals 2 times 288.
288 is also even. So it must have a 2 in it. So I could factor a 2 out of 288 and I'll be left
with 144 along with the two 2's that I've now factored out. So 576 must equal 2 times 2 times
144. Now, 144 I recognize as a perfect square. It's actually equal to 12 times 12. So I'm not
going to factor down any farther than that other than to say that 576 is also the same as 2 times
2 times the 12 times the 12. Now, I can put one of the 2's with one of the 12's and I can put the
other 2 with the other 12. And I didn't know that 576 is 24 times 24 or 24 squared. And now,
look, I can see that 576 is actually a perfect square. It turns out that it's 24 times 24.
And therefore, the square root of 576 is the square root of 24 squared. Well, what's the square
root of 24 squared? It's 24. That's sort of the definition of the square root. It undoes the
squaring and so square root of 24 squared is 24. And that's B. And therefore, the length of the
longer leg here is 24. Now, before we move on, we should check our answer a little bit
with this understanding that the two legs that make up the right angle need to each be smaller
than the length of the hypotenuse. Notice that 24 is less than 26. Do you remember that 26 was
given to us as the length of the hypotenuse in this problem? And therefore, this leg having
a length of 24 actually makes good sense because 24 is less than 26. Now, let's move to a word
problem that involves the Pythagorean theorem, although it might not be so obvious at first
that it actually does involve the Pythagorean theorem. Here's the word problem. You take a
helicopter that's hovering 500 feet directly above its landing pad. That helicopter then flies
horizontally 2,000 feet to the north. The question is, what is the straight line distance between
the helicopter and the landing pad at the time that the helicopter has made that 2,000 foot
distance? I wanted to estimate the length to the nearest foot. Now, when I see a word problem like
this, I always try to draw a quick sketch of the situation and label it as best I can just to get a
visual picture of what's going on. As I've said to you before, the sketch does not have to be perfect.
Just scribble something out and see what happens. Well, one sketch I would draw would have a little
landing pad at the bottom and a vertical line going up to demonstrate the length of the distance
for the helicopter to be hovering above that pad. Then I would draw a horizontal line segment for
that 2,000 feet. Now, the question is, what is the straight line distance in the problem?
Well, what you've done is started building a right triangle. Now, if you just connect it with a
little hypotenuse, actually kind of a long hypotenuse, you'll actually have a right triangle,
the vertical leg, the horizontal leg, and the hypotenuse. It turns out that this question is
really just asking you for the length of the hypotenuse, where the vertical leg is 500 feet long
and the horizontal leg is 2,000 feet long. Really, the problem was just about the Pythagorean theorem
and finding the length of a hypotenuse. So, let's plug in the numbers now to see
if we can come up with this straight line distance from the landing pad up to the helicopter.
We start with the Pythagorean theorem, a squared plus b squared equals c squared,
and we plug in a equals 500 and b equals 2,000. Now, the numbers are going to get big here,
but let's not worry about that for now. Let's just work through the problem and see what we get.
We're going to have 500 squared plus 2,000 squared equals c squared, and that's the same as
250,000 plus 4 million equals c squared. I told you these numbers are going to get kind of big,
and that means that c squared is 4,250,000. Now, how do I get c by itself? Remember,
I want to get the hypotenuse here, the length of the hypotenuse, and that's c.
Why don't I take the square root of both sides? And I know then that c is square root of 4,250,000.
Now, that's not going to be fun to figure out. And in fact, you might just stop here and pull out
a calculator and punch in square root of 4,250,000 and be done. But I'd actually like us to work
a little farther than that before we jump to the calculator. First of all, I want you to notice that
I can factor this large number, 4,250,000, as 425 times 10,000. And that's the same as 425
times 100 times 100 or 425 times 100 squared. Notice that square, the 100 square that's
hiding inside, it's going to help us simplify the square root because now I know that the square
root of 4,250,000 is the same as square root of 425 times the square root of 100 squared.
And the square root of 100 squared is just 100 so that this large number that represents the
length of the hypotenuse is the same as 100 times square root of 425. Now, unfortunately,
square root of 425 isn't really that friendly. I have to admit. And so we should get a calculator
out to estimate that length. Let's go ahead and do so. Square root of 425 is about 20.62.
So the length of my hypotenuse then, remember that's C, is approximately equal to the 100
times square root of 425 or 100 times 20.62. And if you multiply 100 times 20.62, you'll have
2062 feet. Now, I'm claiming that's my hypotenuse length. Before we end the example, we should
really ask ourselves, does that answer make sense again? Well, one thing I can say is that 2062
is larger than the length of each of the other two legs. Notice that the length of those legs was
500 and 2000. So at least we've got a good feeling that the hypotenuse
is correct because 2062 is larger than 2000. Now, I'd like to transition a bit to some
problems related to the Pythagorean theorem where there's a little more algebra. Notice,
I really haven't done a whole lot with any variables yet in the lesson. And so what I'd like to do
is talk a bit about some problems that really involve some algebra with some variables floating
around. So before I do that, let me define a quick phrase. And that phrase is the phrase
Pythagorean triple. So here's the definition. A Pythagorean triple is a set of three numbers,
A, B, and C, such that A squared plus B squared equals C squared. In other words, the Pythagorean
triple only worries about these three whole numbers, A, B, and C. I don't necessarily need
the triangle to talk about a Pythagorean triple. So for example, 345 is a Pythagorean triple because
3 squared plus 4 squared equals 5 squared. And 51213 is also a Pythagorean triple because
5 squared plus 12 squared really equals 13 squared. I want you to notice that in both cases,
the length of the hypotenuse is exactly one more than the length of one of the legs. In the two
examples I just gave you, 345 and 51213. One question that you might ask is, does that always
have to happen? Does one of the legs have to be exactly one less than the length of the hypotenuse?
Well, of course not. But there are lots of Pythagorean triples that don't have that property.
For example, you can check that if you take 12 squared plus 35 squared, you actually get
37 squared. So 12, 35, 37 is a Pythagorean triple. But notice that you don't have the hypotenuse
being exactly one away from one of the legs. In fact, no two of the three numbers are exactly
one away from another, 12, 35, and 37. So this brings up a whole bunch of questions about Pythagorean
triples. But let me ask this one question to get us going with some algebra. Does there exist a
right triangle where the length of the hypotenuse is 29 and the two leg lengths are only one apart?
Is there a right triangle where the hypotenuse is 29 units long and the two leg lengths are only
one apart? Well, that's a great question. But how would you get started with that kind of a word
problem? Well, let's start by defining some variables and seeing if we can build an equation
that we can work with. So just to get started, let's let A be the length of the shorter leg,
the shorter leg of my triangle, and B be the length of the longer leg of the right triangle.
We know that the length of the hypotenuse is 29. Okay? Now I can use the Pythagorean theorem.
I know that A squared plus B squared must be 29 squared thanks to the Pythagorean theorem.
But do I know anything else from the problem? Well, in fact, I do. From the problem, I know that
I want the two leg lengths to only be one apart from one another. And if I let B be the leg length
that's slightly larger than A, then I know that B has to equal A plus 1. If B is going to be one
unit longer than A, then B must equal A plus 1. And therefore, I can go back to my equation,
which said that A squared plus B squared had to equal 29 squared and replace B by A plus 1.
Just doing a quick substitution. And what does that give me? It gives me A squared plus A plus
1 squared equals 29 squared. Now, what I'm telling you is we have one equation now which only has
one variable in it, and that's the letter A. So if I can now solve that equation for A,
I'll be set. Let's expand the A plus 1 squared first and then simplify the left-hand side.
A plus 1 squared is the same as A plus 1 times A plus 1, and we can foil that and it'll give us
A squared plus A plus A plus 1 or A squared plus 2A plus 1. And now I can put that in
A squared plus 2A plus 1. I can put that in for A plus 1 quantity squared. And my equation will
become A squared plus A squared plus 2A plus 1 equals 29 squared. Now let's start simplifying
that left-hand side. I see an A squared and another A squared. They can be added together,
and I'll get 2A squared plus 2A plus 1 equals 29 squared. 29 squared is 841. So I have 2A squared
plus 2A plus 1 equals 841. Subtract 841 from both sides, and I'll have 2A squared plus 2A minus 840
equals 0. I want you to notice that the coefficients on the left-hand side are all even,
which means I could factor out a 2 and then divide that 2 out on both sides. And when I do that,
I'll have A squared plus A minus 420 equals 0. Where did 420 come from? 840 divided by 2.
And now what I want you to notice is this is a quadratic equation. I've got the A squared there,
and so I know how to solve this thing. I could use factoring. I could use completing the square.
I could use the quadratic formula. I don't know which technique you might choose, but I would
actually choose to try some factoring first. Completing the square is probably going to get
messy because of the 1 that's in front of the A. If I could factor, I'd be really, really happy.
So the question I must ask myself is, is there a nice way to think about 420
as the product of two different numbers? And it turns out that 420 really can be
multiplied. Well, it can be found as the product of two numbers to make this problem simple.
Notice that 420 equals 21 times 20. And 21 times 20 is really special here because 21 and 20
are only one apart. And 1 is the coefficient of the A term. That means the factoring probably
will work. And if you write down A plus 21 times A minus 20 and foil that out, you really get what
you want. The factorization of A squared plus A minus 420 really is A plus 21 times A minus 20.
Now, before we go anywhere, you might say, oh, I would never have been able to find that.
Fine. Try something else then like the quadratic formula or maybe even completing the square,
if you'd like. You will find the same answers that I'm about to find due to this factoring.
So let's move forward. I now know that the left-hand side is A plus 21 times A minus 20.
That has to equal 0. And that means that A plus 21 is 0 or A minus 20 is 0. And what does that give
me? That gives me A equals negative 21 or A equals positive 20. Now, I've said it many times in
this lesson, which of these is the right answer? Well, the right answer cannot be negative because
A stands for the length of one of these legs. So A definitely cannot be negative 21. A has to equal
20, the positive of the two numbers. So A equals 20 is our answer. Now, we've done a lot of work
in this example. So I really think we should check this example very, very carefully. So let's
think through what we've just done. A has to equal 20. That is the length of the shorter leg.
What must the length of the other leg then be? It has to be 21 because we wanted the leg length
B to be exactly one more than A. So what I'm now claiming is that we must have a right triangle
where the shortest leg has length 20, the next largest leg has length 21, and the hypotenuse
has length 29. I think we should check this very quickly by actually plugging them into the
Pythagorean theorem and seeing if all these numbers make sense. So let's do the plug-in.
By the Pythagorean theorem, we should have 20 squared plus 21 squared equals 29 squared.
Now, let's multiply all those out. 20 squared is 400. That one's pretty straightforward.
21 squared is 21 times 21, which is 441. And the 29 squared we saw earlier, I believe, is 841.
If you hadn't had that written down somewhere, write it out longhand. 29 times 29, you'll get 841.
Notice that 400 plus 441 is 841, and we're left with the equation 841 equals 841.
That's true, and therefore it confirms that we actually did this question correctly.
Now, at one point as we were solving this, I needed to figure out how to factor 420 into
21 times 20. And I said to you, you might not have ever seen that. What would you do?
Let me just reiterate. If you don't see the factoring, then try something like that quadratic
formula. It's very, very helpful to have different techniques and different ways to attack the same
mathematical problem. That's something I want you to get very comfortable with as you're studying
mathematics. If you don't try one approach, you don't like one approach, try a different approach.
It's a very, very helpful way to solve mathematical problems. Now, let me say one other thing about
this example, and that is you might be thinking, well, he could have given us the same example
and just changed the hypotenuse length from 29 to 30, or 31, or any number, and everything would
have worked out just fine. In fact, 29 is a pretty special number. I chose it really,
really carefully because I knew that things would work out. If I would have given you a different
number other than 29, let's say the number 17, and I would have asked you for two legs that
were only one apart so that the hypotenuse length is 17, you'd actually find that you would never
be able to find whole numbers or integers which would have worked in that case. So if you replace
the hypotenuse length by 17, you could not find legs which were exactly one unit apart from one
another so that you would build that right triangle. Well, in today's lesson, we've talked about this
Pythagorean theorem, which is a really great example of a quadratic equation. I've talked about
different ways that the Pythagorean theorem can be used in solving a lot of different problems
with right triangles. And I would encourage you to watch for other ways that you might use the
Pythagorean theorem in your future mathematical studies. Now, we've talked quite a bit about
polynomials of Degree 1. Those were our linear equations or linear polynomials. And we've talked
a lot about polynomials where the highest power was 2. They had Degree 2. Those are called
quadratic polynomials. Next time, I want us to shift gears a bit and talk about polynomials of
even higher degree and talk about many of their features. I'll see you then.
