In the previous lesson, we learned about several tools that we can use to sketch the graphs
of rational functions. These tools included finding x-intercepts, finding vertical asymptotes,
and also finding horizontal asymptotes. If you've not nailed down the material in the
previous lesson yet, you may want to go back to it for more study before you continue on
to this lesson today. In this lesson, we want to bring all of those tools together to sketch
the graphs of a few rational functions from scratch. You're going to want to make sure
you have some graph paper handy so that we can make these sketches together. Let's get
started with the following example. Sketch the graph of y equals 4 divided by x plus
3. That's a pretty straightforward looking rational function, 4 divided by x plus 3.
Let's take out our tools one at a time as we begin to sketch the graph of this function.
The first thing I want us to look for are the x-intercepts. Now remember, sometimes these
graphs have x-intercepts and sometimes they don't. So let's check to see if this one indeed
does have those intercepts. Maybe it won't. We want to look at the numerator equal to
0. Remember, that's how we always look for x-intercepts. Take the numerator and set
it equal to 0. In this case, the numerator is simple. It's just 4. So we're looking at
the equation 4 equals 0. When is 4 ever equal to 0? Never. So in this case, there are no
x-intercepts for this graph. You might think, well, that doesn't tell me anything. It actually
tells you a lot because it means that the graph will never be able to cross the x-axis.
The x-axis is somehow going to act as a natural barrier for the pieces of the graph. So we're
never going to cross the x-axis. Let's make a mental note of that.
Next I want us to look for those vertical asymptotes. Now do you remember how we're
going to check for vertical asymptotes? We're going to set the denominator equal to 0 and
then solve for x. We'll go from there. In this case, the denominator is not too big.
It's just x plus 3. We're going to set that equal to 0. Once I've done that, I'm going
to solve that for x and to do so, I just subtract 3 from both sides of the equation and I'll
be left with x equals negative 3. So the line x equals negative 3, which is a vertical line,
serves as a vertical asymptote for this graph. Now if you want to start sketching the graph
now, get that piece of graph paper out, sketch your x-axis, sketch your y-axis and label
those two and now you could draw in the line x equals negative 3 in a dashed way. So remember,
this line is actually not part of the graph, but it's serving as a bit of a guide or a
wall for the pieces of the graph. So I'm going to draw it in a dashed fashion so that I remember
that it's really not there. It's just serving as an imaginary barrier or wall for the other
pieces of the graph. That vertical line, x equals negative 3, is our only x-intercept
in this case. Now once I know that that's an x-intercept, the next question I need to
ask is, what direction does the graph go on either side of that vertical asymptote? In
other words, as the x values start to get close to negative 3 from one side or the other,
the graph is going to have to either turn up or it's going to have to turn downward.
And the question is, on either side of that line, which way does the graph go? So for example,
what if I were an x value that was very, very close to negative 3, but to the right of negative
3? For example, negative 2.999. Remember, on the negative side of the x-axis, negative
2.999 would actually be to the right of negative 3. As the x's are close to that negative 3,
but to the right of it, like at negative 2.999, when I plug negative 2.999 into the function,
I'm going to see that I actually get a positive number back because the 4 in the numerator
is obviously positive, it's positive 4, and the denominator would become negative 2.999
plus 3. And if you do that arithmetic, you get positive 0.001. And so you really do have
a positive on top divided by a positive on the bottom. And so that part of the graph
is actually going to go to positive infinity as it gets really, really close to that vertical
asymptote. What if the x values get close to negative 3 from the left of negative 3? Like
I plug in negative 3.01, for example. Well, in that case, when you do the arithmetic,
the numerator will still be positive, but the denominator now will be negative because,
for example, negative 3.01 plus 3 is negative 0.01, and a positive number divided by a negative
number will be negative. So what I like to do when I'm drawing these graphs is after
I've drawn that vertical asymptote, I'm going to put a little arrow on the end somewhere
above or maybe below to remind me which time I'm going to go to positive infinity and which
time I'm going to negative infinity. Again, in this case, the values coming in from the
left are going to go to negative infinity, and the values coming in from the right are
going to go to positive infinity. And so now I know a lot about what's happening near this
vertical asymptote. I know that the pieces of the graph are going to have to behave in
that fashion when I get close to that line. Now, that's the vertical asymptote stuff. There's
another tool that's helping us draw this graph, and that's the horizontal asymptote. So remember
how you find these horizontal asymptotes? You want to consider the equation y equals the
dominant term of the top divided by the dominant term of the bottom. Well, there's only one
term on top, that's 4, so you keep it, and the dominant term on the bottom is going to
be the x. The x is going to grow much faster than the 3. And so you're looking at the equation
y equals 4 divided by x when you keep just the dominant terms. Notice that the degree
of the numerator, in this case just the 4, is smaller than the degree of the denominator.
Think of the 4 as 4 times x to the 0, then the degree of that would be 0. The degree
of the denominator is 1 because I have an x to the 1, and so the degree on top is smaller
than the degree on the bottom. We learned in the last lesson that that means the horizontal
asymptote is at y equals 0. And that is just the x-axis. Remember we said earlier we weren't
going to have any x-intercepts. It turns out coincidentally that the horizontal asymptote
in this case is y equals 0. That is the x-axis. So I'm going to have a horizontal asymptote
at y equals 0, which is going to tell me what happens at the ends of the graph. The ends
of the graph somehow must either come below that line or come from above that line and
get really, really close to it as I get ready to draw this graph.
Okay, what about the y-intercept? You know, I wouldn't hurt for us to find that point
because the y-intercept is usually, usually pretty easy to find. Well, remember that the
y-intercept is going to be the point where x equals 0. In other words, it's going to
be the point that has coordinates 0, something. So I'm going to go back to my original equation
and I'm going to let x equals 0, and I'm going to see if I can find y. Well, in the case
when x is 0, I'm going to have y equals 4 divided by 0 plus 3, which of course is just
4 thirds. So the y-intercept on this graph is going to be 0, 4 thirds. And if you've
got that graph paper and you've started drawing this graph, you can actually put that point
right into your graph, 0, 4 thirds. Now, at this point, you might be saying, yeah, but
my paper is almost blank. I've got the axes drawn. I've got this one point, the y-intercept,
and then we've got all this other information about where the graph can or cannot go based
on the asymptotes. What are we supposed to do now? It sure doesn't look like we can draw
the graph yet. Well, you do something that we've always known about graphing at this
point, and that is we just plot some points and connect the dots. So how are we going
to plot some points? We're just going to go to the function that we started with and we're
going to plug in a few values of x. We're going to draw in those points based on those
values of x and the y values that correspond to those values of x, and then we're going
to connect the dots. After all, that's what graphing is, plotting a bunch of points and
connecting the dots. So that's what I want us to do now. I want us to plot some points
on the graph and plug them in, basically. So let's do that. Let's say I plug in numbers
like negative 6 for x, negative 5, negative 4. How about negative 2, negative 1, and 0?
Notice that I skipped over negative 3. I can't plug in negative 3 because it causes division
by 0, but I can plug in some other things. So let's plug in, say, negative 6. If you plug
in negative 6, you're going to get negative 4 thirds back for your y value. That's going
to come from 4 divided by negative 3. So the point negative 6, negative 4 thirds, is on
your graph. Okay, let's plug in negative 5. If you plug in negative 5, you'll have 4 divided
by negative 5 plus 3, and that's 4 divided by negative 2, which is negative 2. So you
can now plot on your graph the point negative 5, negative 2. Plug in negative 4 for x, and
actually you get negative 4 back for y. Plug in negative 2 for x, and you'll get positive
4 back for y. And plug in negative 1 for x, let's say, and you'll have 4 divided by negative
1 plus 3, which is 4 divided by 2, which is positive 2. So you have the point on your
graph, negative 1, 2. And you already knew that if you plugged in 0 for x, you'd get
4 thirds back. And now you should have at least 6 points drawn in on your graph paper,
and you can now start to see the shape of this graph. And with those points in mind,
you can actually start to build what is your graph. Remember what happens now. As you're
coming in from the left, the graph needs to be getting very, very close to the x-axis,
that horizontal asymptote. As you move towards the right, you see that the points that you've
already drawn in start to dip a bit. And then, as they get very, very close to that vertical
asymptote, they just are going to dip down to negative infinity, basically. Then, at
the other side of that vertical asymptote, x equals negative 3, remember they were going
to be at positive infinity. And now you can start to see how you come down towards your
y-intercept, and then go through that y-intercept, and then you're going to trail off to the right,
and again get close to that horizontal asymptote. Remember what it was? It was y equals 0. And
in the process, you've drawn your graph. You have the piece on the left, which is dipping
down before that vertical asymptote. You have the piece on the right that comes next to
it, and then levels off just above the x-axis. Remember, in that case, there were no x-intercepts.
We had the one y-intercept, which you should have drawn through, and you have those asymptotes,
and you're done. Congratulations. You've now, from scratch, drawn what is probably your
first ever graph of a rational function. So, I say we move on to another one, and let's
see how we do. Let's sketch the graph of this rational function.
Y equals 5x minus 15 divided by x plus 2. Now, I want to march through the same tools
again. We want to look for x-intercepts. We want to look for asymptotes, maybe plot in
a few more points, and then connect the dots. So, here we go. X-intercepts. What do we do?
Well, after we check to see if there's any cancellation, which in this case there will
not be because there's no factors in the numerator and the denominator that are the same, we're
going to set that numerator equal to 0 and solve for x. So, that's 5x minus 15 equals
0. Add 15 to both sides, and you'll have 5x equals plus 15. Divide by 5 on both sides,
and you'll have x equals 3. So, the x-intercept in this case is at 3 comma 0. If you haven't
started yet, get out a piece of graph paper, draw your axes, and now you can draw in this
1x-intercept. The graph is going to cross, or at least touch the x-axis at the point
3 comma 0. While we're talking about intercepts, why don't we just find the y-intercept very,
very quickly? I think that wouldn't hurt. To find the y-intercept, we're just going
to plug in x equals 0 everywhere in the function. And when I do that, I'm going to have y equals
5 times 0 minus 15 divided by 0 plus 2. And that's the same as negative 15 on top divided
by 2 on the bottom, which is negative 7 and a half, or negative 7.5. So, the y-intercept
is at 0 comma negative 7.5. It's going to go down below the x-axis, and you should draw
that point in as well. So, you actually now have two points on the graph already, but
of course, this graph is going to be a lot more complicated. You're going to need more
information than just knowing those two points. Next, what's the next tool in our toolbox
for drawing the graph of a rational function? We look for vertical asymptotes. In that case,
we're going to take the denominator of the rational function and set it equal to 0. And
so I'm going to look at x plus 2 equals 0. If I subtract 2 from both sides of that equation,
I'll end up with the equation x equals negative 2. So, I have one vertical asymptote. It's
at x equals negative 2. Great. What happens when I get close to that vertical asymptote?
This again is a question we have to ask ourselves. As the x values get really, really close to
negative 2 from one side or from the other side, does the graph go up or does the graph
go down? That's a real important question. So, for a value of x that's on the right of
negative 2, like negative 1.999, the y value is going to go to negative infinity. How do
you check that? You plug in negative 1.999 for x and simplify whatever you get. You're
not as worried about what the actual number is that comes out, but you are worried about
what the sign of the number is that pops out. And in that case, you get a negative number.
So that piece of the graph is going to go to negative infinity. If you plug in a value
of x to the left of negative 2, like negative 2.00001, the y value you get after you plug
in that x value is going to be positive. In fact, it's going to be a negative over a negative.
So it's going to be positive. And that means that that side of the graph actually goes
to plus infinity as we get really, really close to that vertical asymptote. So you can
draw in that vertical asymptote. Now, if you want, draw it in as a dashed line to remind
you that it's not really part of the graph, but that it's serving as a guide for the graph
as we draw it in. And now let's go to the next tool, horizontal asymptotes. Well, to find
the horizontal asymptote, I look at the equation y equals the most dominant term on top divided
by the most dominant term on the bottom. And in that case, we're looking at the equation
y equals 5x divided by x, which is the same as 5 when you cancel the x's. So the horizontal
asymptote in this case is actually at y equals 5. Okay, now you know that that's also going
to serve as a bit of a barrier or a guide for our graph. So if you want, you could draw
in the line y equals 5 again in a dotted fashion or a dashed fashion because it's really not
part of the graph, but it is serving to help guide the graph as we draw it later on. Okay,
so what have we done? We've found the asymptotes, both the vertical and horizontal, and we've
also found the x and y intercepts. I would suggest now that we plot some more points
and draw them in. This takes a little bit of work, but finding the actual values of those
points is a great idea because it helps us to see where the pieces of the graph are actually
going to go. So let's plug in a few values of x. Again, you can choose any values of
x you want. In this case, there probably aren't a whole lot of values of x that are going
to give you really clean values for y, but let's just plug in several so that we can
see what we're doing. So I'm going to suggest we plug in x equals negative 6, negative 5,
negative 4, negative 3, maybe negative 1, 0, 1, and 2. Notice that I didn't suggest
we plug in x equals negative 2 because we can't. It would cause division by 0 otherwise.
And now if you go through and take the time to plug in these values, like negative 6,
negative 5, and so on, you'll get the following. When x is negative 6, the y value is 45 divided
by 4. So it's a little over 11. When x is negative 5, the y value actually gets even
bigger. It's now 40 divided by 3, which is 13 and one third. When x is negative 4, you're
going to get a y value of 35 over 2. Again, you'll have to do some simplifying to get
that. But the y value will be 35 over 2. That means that the point negative 4, 35 over 2
is on your graph. So each time we do this, we just now found three points together. We
should be plotting those on our piece of graph paper. They're very, very helpful to know.
When you plug in x equals negative 3, you actually get a whole number back. You get
positive 30. And now if you go over to x equals negative 1, you'll actually get negative 20.
Notice there's been a shift now in the numbers. We went from positive y values to negative
y values. When x is 0, we have negative 15 over 2. We already found that a few moments
ago, that was our y-intercept. When x is 1, y will be negative 10 divided by 3, or negative
3 and a third. And when x is 2, the y value will be negative 5 fourths, or negative 1
and 1 fourth. Now, you should have plotted all of those points. I think we mentioned
eight different points there, including the y-intercept. And now you should start to see
almost a connect the dot type picture in front of you. And if you have those dots and you
remember where the vertical asymptote is, and you remember that the horizontal asymptote
is at y equals 5, you can actually connect all those dots. And what's the graph going
to look like? Well, it's going to come in from the left, hovering above that horizontal
asymptote, y equals 5. And it's going to come up. And as it gets close to that vertical
asymptote, it's going to take off in the upwards direction towards plus infinity. On the other
side of that vertical asymptote, it's going to start down low. It's going to come across.
It's going to cross its y-intercept. Then it's going to cross its x-intercept. And then
it's going to hover just below that horizontal asymptote, y equals 5. And so we see here
a graph that's similar to the previous one. You have two pieces, again, making these sort
of bending shapes. But we have to remember that they have to get close to those asymptotes
in the process. Once we see those asymptotes as sort of barriers to where the graph goes,
it actually helps us to draw in the pieces of the graph.
Okay, we've looked at two examples. Now, I'd like to look at a third one, which has a little
more complication to it. Not a lot, but just a bit. Thankfully, all we really have to do
is go through the same tools and the same techniques again in order to complete the example. But
this one is a little bit different. So let's go ahead and look at it now. I want us to
sketch the graph of y equals x squared minus 1 over x squared minus 4. Okay, that's a slightly
more complicated rational function than the ones we've seen before. Notice, for example,
the degree on top and the degree on the bottom are both 2. That's a little bit bigger than
the degrees were in the earlier examples. The first thing I want to do is factor to see
if there are any cancellations that take place. That's very important. In this case, though,
you won't see any because the numerator factors as x minus 1 times x plus 1 and the denominator
factors as x minus 2 times x plus 2. So there's no cancellations to worry about, and that
means we can roll right into our tools and start gathering information that we can use
in order to graph this rational function. So what's the first tool? X intercepts. How
do we find the X intercepts? We're going to set the numerator equal to zero. In this case,
that means we're looking at x minus 1 times x plus 1 equal to zero. That means x minus
1 equals zero or x plus 1 equals zero, and that means that x is either 1 or x is equal
to negative 1. Hey, that means we have actually two X intercepts in this example, not just
one or zero like we had before. In this case now, two X intercepts will be 1 comma 0 and
negative 1 comma 0. So let's get out a new piece of graph paper. Let's draw our axes
and label them and then plot the points 1, 0, and negative 1, 0 because the graph has
to go through those two points. Now, as I've said before, the Y intercept, you can usually
get pretty easily. So while we're talking about intercepts, let's just see if we can
find the Y intercept. To find the Y intercept, you're going to set the x equal to zero and
then solve for the Y. In this case, I'm going to have Y equals zero squared minus 1 divided
by zero squared minus 4, which is just zero minus 1 over zero minus 4, which is negative
1 over negative 4, and the negatives cancel to give you 1 fourth. So the Y intercept is
at the point 0 comma 1 fourth. It's just barely above the origin. So let's go ahead and draw
that dot in as well. That Y intercept is very important. We now know three points on
the graph of this function. Once we know that, we should move to another tool. Let's gather
some information about the asymptotes now. So let's start with the vertical asymptotes.
Now, how do we find vertical asymptotes? Well, we take the denominator and set it equal to
zero. That's what we've done in all the other examples we've looked at. So in this case,
that's going to be x minus 2 times x plus 2 equals zero, which is the same as x minus
2 equals zero or x plus 2 equals zero, which is x equals 2 or x equals negative 2. So in
this case, I have two vertical asymptotes as well. They're going to happen at x equals
2 and x equals negative 2. So you can imagine both of these now are going to serve as walls
or guides for the pieces of the graph, which means there may be even more than two pieces
of graph in the process. We might have three of them, one on one side, one on the other
side, and one in the middle between the two vertical asymptotes we'll have to see. So you
might want to draw in those two vertical asymptotes at this point as dotted lines just to make
sure you remember that they're both there to serve as barriers for the other pieces
of the graph. Now, once we know those vertical asymptotes, we have to ask, what happens on
either side of them? Because the graphs could be doing all sorts of different things next
to those vertical asymptotes. It could be going up on one side and down on the other,
up on both sides, you never know. So let's walk through very quickly what happens with
this function near the vertical asymptotes. Well, what happens if you're near x equal
to 2? Let's say you're plugging in something like 2.1. So if x equals 2 is the vertical
line here, then x equals 2.1 is going to be just on its right. If you plug in 2.1 for
x, you'll have 2.1 squared minus 1 divided by 2.1 squared minus 4. Well, the numerator
is clearly going to be positive because it's something like 4.41 minus 1, so it's going
to be a positive number. The denominator is also positive because 2.1 squared is slightly
bigger than 4, and then when you subtract 4, you'll be slightly bigger than 0, so you'll
be positive. So when x is near 2, but on its right, you're going to have a positive divided
by a positive, and that's going to give you a positive number. That means as the graph
comes towards the x equals 2 line on the right, it's going to go up because we found a positive
number earlier. Now, if you let x get close to that positive 2 from the left, like 1.9,
let's say, if you plug that into the original function, the numerator will still be positive.
1.9 squared minus 1 is definitely going to be a positive number, but the denominator
will be negative because 1.9 squared is slightly less than 4, and when you subtract 4, then
you'll get a negative number back. So plugging in x equals 1.9 is going to give you a positive
divided by a negative for the y value, and that's going to be negative. So as the graph
gets close to x equals 2 from the left, you're going to see that it dips down. So near that
vertical asymptote, x equals 2, one side is going to go up, and the other side is going
to go down. You could do a similar sort of thing with the vertical asymptote, x equals
negative 2, and in fact, what you would see is that the side coming in from the left would
actually go up in this case, and the side coming in from the right of that vertical
asymptote would go down. So the graph is going to have to go up like this and down like this
near the x equals negative 2 vertical asymptote, and then near the x equals 2 vertical asymptote,
it's going to go down and then up. So we're going to get some very interesting shapes for
the pieces of the graph, but bottom line, as long as we can remember where they have
to end up at the end near the asymptotes, we can actually draw in all the pieces. So now
that's the vertical asymptote. Let's talk about the horizontal asymptote pretty quickly. It's
not that hard to do. In the horizontal asymptote case, we're going to take y equals dominant
term on top divided by dominant term on the bottom. That means y equals x squared divided
by x squared. Well, the x squared's cancel and you just get one. So the horizontal asymptote
here is going to be the line y equals one. And so we now know that we have two vertical
asymptotes and we have this horizontal asymptote that's going to be at y equals one. We've
got those as pieces to help us remember where the parts of the graph will go. And now we
should plot a few points. So let's do that here. Again, we need to plug in some values
of x and you can choose whichever values you want. I would plot several in this case because
apparently we have maybe even three pieces of graph. And if you start plotting your points,
let's say x equals negative six, plugging in x equals negative six is going to give you
y equals 35 divided by 32 after you simplify everything. Plugging in negative six for x
is going to give you 36 minus one, which is 35 divided by 36 minus four, which is 32.
So when x is negative six, y is 35 over 32, just barely above one basically. When x is
negative five, you're going to get eight over seven after you cancel everything out after
you simplify. So that's another point on the graph, negative five comma eight over seven.
When x is negative four, you're going to get five fourths back for your y value. So you
can plot that point as well. When x is negative three, you'll get eight fifths. I want you
to notice that a lot of these points are very, very close to one actually in their y value.
So they're all kind of close together in terms of those y values. When x is something like
three, you'll get eight fifths back. When x is four, you get five fourths for y. When
x is five, you get eight sevenths. And when x is six, you get 35 over 32 again. And now
you should have points on this graph that you can actually connect, so to speak. But
remember, don't cross the vertical asymptotes. They're acting like barriers. So you've got
all these points, but now as you connect them, you have to remember to behave, so to speak,
around those vertical asymptotes correctly. And if you start to connect those points and
so on, you're going to see the following. As the graph comes in from the left, it's going
to come in somewhat flat. It's trying to stay very close to that horizontal asymptote, remember.
And then it's going to take off in the positive infinity direction near the vertical asymptote.
That makes perfect sense. Then just after the vertical asymptote, x equals negative two,
remember it had to go down. As it's moving left to right, it's going to come up. It's
got to go through that x intercept. Don't forget it's there. It's also going to go through
the y intercept, and then it's got to come back down to get to the other x intercept,
and then it's got to behave next to the vertical asymptote. And that means that the middle part
of this graph, so to speak, is an upside-down u-shape that's staying very, very close to
the two vertical asymptotes. And then on the other side of x equals two, you're going to
have another piece going up high, and so it's going to start high near the vertical asymptote
x equals two, and then it's going to flatten out and stay right above the horizontal asymptote.
It never crosses that at the end. It just stays right above it. Now, you might say to
me, I would have never seen that u-shape in the middle. The two pieces on the outsides,
I could have seen that if I just plotted all the points that you gave me, but I don't think
I could have seen the u-shape. Let me suggest that if you ever have a part of this graph
or any graph that you're not sure about, plug in more values of x. You can always get more
points, you can always plot them, and you can just connect the dots. And in that way,
you'll be able to see what the graph actually looks like.
Well, in today's lesson, we've talked about how to actually draw the graphs of various
rational functions from scratch. And we used all kinds of tools, intercepts, x and y intercepts,
as well as vertical and horizontal asymptotes. I know it probably felt like a lot to do each
problem. And to be honest with you, some of these problems can take some time. Be patient
with them, gather all the information, and then think through what the information is
telling you as you draw the graphs. In the next lesson, we're actually going to shift
gears quite a bit, and we're going to start talking about radical expressions. I'll see
you then.
