We're now going to transition to our last couple of lessons for this course and talk
about sequences and pattern recognition.
In this lesson I want to define what we mean by the word sequence and then I want to look
at several examples of sequences.
Our ultimate goal is to learn to recognize patterns in these sequences and to build formulas
for certain types of sequences.
In the process we're going to learn in this lesson about two very special types of sequences
and those are known as geometric sequences and arithmetic sequences.
So let's begin with a formal definition of the word sequence.
I've now said it several times in the first moments here but I need to give you a definition
of what I really mean.
In a minute I'm going to give you a working definition but let's start with one that's
a little more formal.
A sequence is a function whose domain is the set of natural numbers or the set of positive
integers.
That's a formal definition for the word sequence.
Unfortunately, that definition is extremely hard to work with.
It really doesn't give us anything to use in order to help us understand the idea.
So let me try to tone it down just a bit with a second definition.
We could say that a sequence is an ordered list of objects or in our case from a more
mathematical perspective a sequence is an ordered list of numbers.
Now that's a bit better in terms of the workability but it's not exactly the most practical of
the definitions.
It's better than the first one I gave you but I'd rather work with something a little
more flexible and so let me share this as our working definition.
A sequence of numbers is simply a list which I'm going to denote as a with a subscript
1, a with a subscript 2, a with a subscript 3 and so on or said more quickly a sub 1,
a sub 2, a sub 3 and so on.
Now I'm sure you notice those subscripts that I used in my definition, the 1, the 2,
the 3.
I want you to know that those subscripts are simply acting like labels for me to help me
tell which of the numbers is which.
In other words, a sub 1 is the first in the list, a sub 2 is the second in the list, a
sub 3 is the third in the list and so on.
I should point out that a sequence can actually either be finite so that it ends at some point
or it can be infinite so that it goes on forever.
In almost everything that we're going to do in today's lesson, the sequences will be
infinite.
So for example, the positive integers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and so on, they form an infinite
sequence.
So does the list of even positive integers 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 and so on as well as the
odd positive integers 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13 and so on.
Each of those is a sequence of numbers.
Now most often I'm going to indicate the fact that a sequence is infinite by attaching a
dot dot dot to the end of the list of elements.
So when you see that dot dot dot, it's simply telling you that the list just continues its
pattern forever.
Now one other definition is important before we move on to some examples.
And that definition is the word term.
Each number in our sequence or each number in our list is going to be called a term.
So for example, if we go back to those odd positive numbers, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 and so on,
the first term is 1, the second term is 3, the third term is 5 and oh by the way, the
sixth term in that sequence would actually be the 11.
Now before we get into the mathematical meat of the lesson, we should really address the
question why do you study sequences?
I mean this really is very different material from what we've seen earlier in the course.
So why should we care?
Well there are lots of answers that I could share but let me just give you a few.
First of all, the ability to extend the sequence, that is to find its next term or to find a
formula for every term in the sequence, is an extremely important mathematical skill
in general.
If I said it more theoretically, I'd want us to be able to sharpen our inductive reasoning
skills and sequences provide an excellent opportunity for that kind of skill building.
More to the point, being able to find the pattern for a sequence or the formula for the
nth term of a sequence is an example of what we call modeling.
The skill of being able to determine a function which fits the given data is extremely useful
and it's the basis for things such as linear regression in statistics and modeling in general.
So let me say it this way, if a person walks up to you and gives you a function and they
give you the rule for the function, they call it f of n let's say, and they ask you for
f of 1, f of 2, and f of 3 so that all you have to do is plug in 1 and plug in 2 and
plug in 3 and then see what the output values are, that's really pretty easy most of the
time.
It's much more real world to expect a person to walk up to you with a list of numbers or
a sequence of numbers and then to ask you to find the rule for the function which fits
those numbers.
That's sort of the opposite problem.
They sort of give you the output values and then ask you for the function that gave them
those output values.
Building that kind of skill is part of the goal for this lesson.
One other quick comment on why these sequences are important is this.
One of the topics that we study when we study calculus is called infinite series.
Now infinite series are sums of infinitely many numbers.
An example would be taking one half plus one fourth plus one eighth plus one sixteenth
plus one thirty second plus one sixty fourth and so on and doing that infinitely far out.
It turns out that being able to figure out whether a sum like that exists or doesn't
exist is extremely important in calculus.
But you can imagine that the first thing you have to do is to find a pattern for each
of the terms that you're actually adding up.
And finding that kind of a pattern for each of the terms is actually the focus of today's
lesson.
Now I just want to make a quick side comment.
Just in case you're curious about the sum I just showed you.
One half plus one fourth plus one eighth plus one sixteenth and so on.
It turns out that that actually does equal the whole number one.
If you keep adding all those fractions that are in that pattern forever, you actually
get exactly one.
And by the way, if you take nine over ten plus nine over one hundred plus nine over
a thousand plus nine over ten thousand and you just keep doing that forever in the same
pattern, then you also get one as well.
And that's just two really cool examples in the study of infinite series.
If you'd like to study that kind of thing more, work your way to calculus because those
kinds of infinite series show up there all the time.
Okay, so let's get started with the topic of this lesson, which is to recognize patterns
in some straightforward sequence examples.
And I'm going to start hopefully with some examples that you can recognize pretty quickly.
Here's the first example.
Let's find a formula for the nth term in the sequence one three five seven nine eleven
and so on.
And again, what do I mean by the nth term?
Well, the one here is the first term and the three is the second term and the five is the
third term.
So what I want is a formula that would tell me any term later on and it's going to be
a function of n.
So I want to look for the pattern and write down that formula.
Well, I hope you recognize this sequence as the sequence of odd positive numbers.
Do you remember a formula that you might have seen in the past for the odd numbers?
Some of you might be thinking, well, I think it's something like 2n plus one or 2n minus
one.
Let's see if either the function f of n equals 2n plus one or f of n equals 2n minus one
works for us.
So here's what we would look at.
Notice that the first term in our sequence is a one.
That means whatever the rule is for this sequence, when I plug one in, I should get one back.
That's because the first term is supposed to be one.
The second term in the sequence is three.
That means f of two is three.
The two is coming from the fact that I'm looking at the second term there.
So whatever the rule is, it needs to be giving me f of one equals one and f of two equals
three.
If I used f of n equals 2n plus one as the rule, we would be saying that f of two equals
two times two plus one.
Now two times two plus one is four plus one, which is five.
But wait a minute.
We wanted our second term to actually be three.
And that means that the formula can't be f of n equals 2n plus one.
OK.
What about the other candidate we had a moment ago?
F of n equals 2n minus one.
Well, let's try plugging in some numbers for n and seeing what we get back.
F of one in that case is two times one minus one, which is two minus one, which is one.
Hey, that works because our first term is one.
So that's good.
Let's check the second term.
F of two, using two as my input value because I'm looking at the second term now, f of
two is two times two minus one, which is four minus one, which is three.
Hey, wait a minute.
That's the right term as well.
So I could check many of these.
It turns out you can check as many as you want.
But bottom line, the rule really is f of n equals 2n minus one.
That's the formula for the sequence one, three, five, seven, nine, and so on.
Now some of you might be saying, I didn't know that the pattern was going to be something
like 2n minus one or 2n plus one.
How in the world was I supposed to do that?
Well, don't worry about it.
I'm actually going to talk us through more of this in this lesson and in the next lesson
so that you can actually build these rules from scratch without having to do any guessing
as to what the rule is like we just did in that example.
OK.
Let's look at another example real quickly.
Give a formula for the nth term in the sequence one, one-half, one-third, one-fourth, one-fifth,
and so on.
Now, if you just look at those numbers for a moment, you'll see that a lot of them look
like they're following the same pattern.
You kind of see how the one-half, one-third, one-fourth, one-fifth is going.
I would say that most of us would say the only potential problem is the one that's sort
of sticking out in front.
It doesn't look like a fraction.
It's not really following the pattern very well.
Ah.
But I can rewrite that one as simply one over one, right?
One is one over one.
And so I'm going to say that my sequence is the same as one over one, one over two,
one over three, one over four, one over five, and so on.
And from here, I hope you see that the pattern is just one over n if you want the nth term.
If you wanted the seventh term, it would be one over seven.
If you wanted the 20th term, it would be one over 20.
And if you want the nth term, it would be one over n.
OK.
That was a nice example.
Let's go to another example where we're trying to see what that formula for the nth term
looks like.
So here's the example.
Give a formula for the nth term in the sequence, 3, 9, 27, 81, 243, and so on.
Now, when a pattern is not immediately obvious to you in one of these sequences, one question
you might want to ask yourself is, how do we get from one term to the next term in the
sequence?
You want to focus on whether you can see what to do to get from one term to the next.
And in this case, I hope you see, after you think about it for a moment, that what you
want to do is multiply each term by 3 to get up to the next one.
In other words, 9 is equal to 3 times 3, and 27 is equal to 9 times 3, and 81 is 27 times
3, and 243 actually is 81 times 3.
And this gives us a hint that a formula for the nth term of this sequence is going to
be related to a power of 3, because we keep multiplying by 3s every time to find the terms.
So let me suggest that we try f of n equals 3 to the nth power as our formula for the
nth term.
If it doesn't work, fine, but we can at least try it to see if it works.
So here we go.
If f of n equals 3 to the n, then f of 1 would be 3 to the 1, which would be 3.
Now, here's a question.
Is the first term equal to 3?
Yes.
So f of 1 equaling 3 is great for us.
Let's try the next term.
f of 2 in the formula would be 3 raised to the second power, 3 to the 2.
3 to the 2 is 9.
Is the second term 9 in the sequence?
Yes.
And that means we're good to go still.
Let's try one more, just to see if we get it right.
f of 3, that would be the third term, is equal to 3 to the third power, 3 to the 3.
And 3 to the 3 is equal to 27, because it's 3 times 3 times 3.
27 is the third term in our sequence.
That checks as well.
You can check a number of the terms if you want, but I'm telling you right now that the
formula for the nth term here really is 3 to the n.
And so we're good to go there as well.
Now I want to try another example that kind of has that same flavor, but it's going to
be a little bit different.
So let's see what happens.
Give a formula for the nth term in 2, 10, 50, 250, 1,250, and so on.
Now again, if the pattern is not immediately obvious, a question you want to ask is, can
I tell how to just get from one term to the next?
And does that keep happening?
In this case, it looks like we're going to multiply again by the same amount.
This time, you're going to multiply by 5, right?
Because to get from 2 to 10, you multiply 2 times 5.
2 times 5 is 10.
And then if you take the 10 and multiply by 5, you get 50, which is the next term.
And 50 times 5 is 250, which is the next term.
And 250 times 5 is 1,250.
So it gives me a hint that a formula for the nth term is probably going to be related to
a power of 5.
But the formula can't just be f of n equals 5 raised to the n, because in that case, f
of 1 would be 5 to the 1, which is 5.
But my first term is equal to 2 if you look at my sequence.
So that really fouls things up.
What are we going to do?
Well, here's what you're going to do.
That 5 to the n really ought to be there, because we keep multiplying by 5.
So why don't we try the formula f of n equals 2 times 5 to the n.
Then we'll have the 2 thrown in.
Let's try it.
f of 1, if the formula f of n is 2 times 5 to the n, f of 1 would be 2 times 5 to the
1.
And that's 2 times 5, which is 10.
But that's not right, because I want my first term to be 2.
But wait a minute.
I want you to notice something.
Go back to the sequence.
You actually see that 10 is the second term in the sequence.
So it would be f of 2, not f of 1.
And that's a hint, actually, that you and I are closer than you might think right now
to our formula.
Instead of f of n being 2 times 5 to the n, we need to try to back the formula up a little
bit so that instead of getting 10 as our first term, we get 2 as our first term.
Well, guess what we need to do then?
We need to rewrite the formula as 2 times 5 to the n minus 1.
Not 2 times 5 to the n, but 2 times 5 to the n minus 1.
And when we do, instead of landing on 10 as our first term, I hope it'll take us back
to the beginning of the sequence.
Let's try it.
Let's use f of n equals 2 times 5 to the n minus 1.
Little bit complicated, but we can handle it.
And now let's plug in 1.
By plugging in 1, we're going to try to get our first term.
f of 1 is 2 times 5 to the 1 minus 1.
That's 2 times 5 to the 0, and 5 to the 0 is just 1.
So I have 2 times 1, which is 2.
And guess what?
That's the right first term.
Let's try the second term then.
To check my second term, I'm going to plug 2 into my formula.
I'm going to look at f of 2, which is 2 times 5 raised to the 2 minus 1.
And what is that?
That's 2 times 5 to the 1.
That's 2 times 5, and that's 10.
Guess what?
10 was my second term.
I'm really on the right track.
Let's check the third term to see if I get the right number back.
f of 3 is 2 times 5 to the 3 minus 1.
I'm just plugging in 3 for n.
And that would be the same as 2 times 5 to the 2.
That's 2 times 25, and that's 50.
And guess what, folks?
We just found it.
We just checked the first three values.
Now, that's not a perfect proof, but by checking the first three
and landing on the right values every time, I'm saying good to go.
f of n equals 2 times 5 to the n minus 1 really is the formula that we want.
Now, one bit of terminology before we move forward.
Did you notice that the previous two examples both had the same kind of idea,
which was if you wanted to go from one term to the next,
you multiplied by the same number every time.
In one case, we were multiplying by 3.
In the other case, we were multiplying by 5 to get from one term to the next every time.
When you're doing that sort of thing, it turns out the sequence has a special name.
It's called a geometric sequence.
Geometric sequence.
And so you just saw two examples of geometric sequences there.
I'd like to look at one more such example before we move forward.
Here's the example.
Find a formula for the nth term of the sequence 2, negative 4, 8, negative 16, 32,
negative 64, and so on.
Now, if I ignore the alternating signs, the plus and the minus and the plus and the minus,
I'm just going to have 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, and so on.
And I hope you recognize that those are powers of 2.
2 is 2 to the 1, 4 is 2 to the 2, 8 is 2 to the 3, and so on.
So our formula for the nth term has got to be related to the formula 2 to the nth power.
But how do you get the negative signs to come in?
Well, what if instead of multiplying each term by 2, we multiplied by negative 2?
Then here's what we'd have.
If you multiply the 2 by a negative 2, you get negative 4.
If you multiply the negative 4 by negative 2, you get positive 8.
And if you multiply 8 by negative 2, you get negative 16, and so on.
And that means that our formula isn't related to 2 to the n.
It's actually related to negative 2 to the nth power.
And by putting in that negative, we can hopefully get the alternating signs back in the terms
of the sequence.
So let's try f of n equals negative 2 raised to the nth power.
And let's see if that actually gives us what we want.
Plugging in 1 for n, we would have negative 2 to the 1, which is negative 2.
Oh, that's not right exactly, because we wanted positive 2.
But let's just try a couple more input values just to see what we're getting.
If you plug in 2 into the formula, you get negative 2 squared, which is negative 2 times
negative 2, which is 4.
And if you plug in 3 for n, you'll get negative 2 cubed, which is negative 8.
I want you to notice something.
Every one of these signs is completely wrong.
Whenever I wanted a positive, I got a negative.
And whenever I wanted a negative, I got a positive.
How would I handle cleaning up those signs?
Well, the answer is to multiply the whole rule by a negative 1.
And if you do that for every one of the terms, that is, have the rule be negative times negative
2 to the n, I think we'll get the right signs.
Let's try it.
Let's let f of n equal the negative of negative 2 to the nth power.
Looks complicated, but we can get through the arithmetic.
Plug in 1 to check the first term, and you'll have negative times the negative 2 raised
to the first power.
Now negative 2 raised to the first power is negative 2.
So what you have is negative negative 2, and that's positive 2.
And guess what?
That's our first term.
It was positive 2.
We're on the right track.
Let's now plug in a 2 for n to check the second term.
I'm going to have the negative of negative 2 squared.
Remember I do the exponentiation first, order of operations.
Negative 2 squared is a positive 4, but there's a negative out in front of it to give me negative
4, and that's the right term that we want there as well.
And lastly, the third term, plug in a 3, f of 3 is the negative of negative 2 raised
to the third power.
Now negative 2 to the third by itself is negative 8.
With the extra negative out in front, you'll have negative negative 8, which is positive
8.
And guess what?
The first three terms now work, and we've now found our formula.
F of n equals the negative of negative 2 to the n.
Now there's nothing special about just checking three terms.
If you really wanted to be careful, you'd check a whole bunch more, but our time together
doesn't permit us to check many more than that.
If you want to try a few others, go ahead until you convince yourself that we really
have the right rule.
Now let me make one last comment on geometric series, and then I really want to move on
to arithmetic sequences.
Notice that in the previous three examples on geometric sequences, the final formula
for the nth term had an exponential function.
Some number was being raised to the nth power.
That will always be the case with a geometric sequence.
You always want to end up with at least part of it being a number raised to the nth power.
Now let's move to a different type of sequence as we close out our lesson today, and that
sequence is going to be called an arithmetic sequence.
I want to point out that the word looks like arithmetic, and we sometimes pronounce it
that way, but the same spelling also can be pronounced arithmetic if you emphasize a different
syllable, and this is what we call an arithmetic sequence.
It's a sequence which is built one term at a time, but not by multiplying like we did
before, but by adding the same number each time one term at a time.
Believe it or not, you've already seen examples of arithmetic sequences today.
Think about it.
The sequence of even numbers, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and so on.
That's an arithmetic sequence.
How do you get from 2 to 4, and then 4 to 6, and then 6 to 8, and 8 to 10, and 10 to 12,
and so on?
You add the same number every time, 2, 2 plus 2 is 4, 4 plus 2 is 6, 6 plus 2 is 8,
and so on.
So the even positive integers are an example of an arithmetic sequence.
The sequence of odd numbers is also arithmetic, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and so on, because there again,
all you're doing is adding the same amount to every term to get to the next term.
And remember, we had a formula for the odd positive integers earlier, and that was f
of n was equal to 2n minus 1.
Quick bit of terminology.
In that arithmetic sequence, where you're adding the same amount each time to get from
one term to the next, the amount that you add each time actually has a name.
It's called the common difference.
It's common because it's happening every time, and it's actually a difference because if
you think about it, it's the amount you get when you subtract one term from the next.
So I want to look now at arithmetic sequences and try to find a formula for the nth term
of such an arithmetic sequence.
So here's the example we'll start with.
Look at the sequence 2, 5, 8, 11, 14, 17, 20, 23, and so on.
Now first thing I want you to notice is that this is not a geometric sequence because you're
not multiplying by the same amount to get from one term to the next.
But what you are doing is adding the same amount to get from one term to the next.
Look at it.
Go from 2 to 5, you need to add 3.
To go from 5 to 8, you need to add 3.
To go from 8 to 11, you just add 3, and so on.
So this thing is definitely an arithmetic sequence, and the common difference here is the number
3.
Now if you start to look at the terms just for a second and you want to start building
this formula, here's what I'm going to suggest we look at.
Notice the following.
Now you might not have written it this way the first time, but I'm just trying to show
you where the pattern is hiding.
First of all, I can rewrite 2 as 2 plus 0 times 3.
I know it looks weird, but just stay with me as we write this down together.
The next number 5 is actually the same as 2 plus 1 times 3.
Again, if you did your order of operations, the 1 times 3 would be done first, and you
just have 3 there, and then you'd have 2 plus 3, which equals 5.
The 8 is the same as 2 plus 2 times 3, because 2 times 3 is 6.
When you add 2, you get 8.
So are you seeing a pattern here?
2 plus 0 times 3, 2 plus 1 times 3, 2 plus 2 times 3.
Look at the 11.
It's the same as 2 plus 3 times 3, and the 14 is the same as 2 plus 4 times 3, and this
leads us to a very nice formula for the arithmetic sequence here.
It is f of n equals 2 plus, did you notice however one of those things had a 2 plus in
it, and then I'm going to have n minus 1 times 3.
Did you notice how everything had a times 3 in it as well when I was writing them down?
So the only problem was to figure out what was going to go in front of the times 3, and
it turns out that it's actually just n minus 1.
So I'm going to rewrite that formula in a slightly different way as f of n equals 3 times
n minus 1 plus 2.
All I've done is rewrite some things, but it's perfectly legal what I've written there.
Notice that the 2 was the first term in the sequence, and the 3 was the common difference.
Now, first thing you ought to ask is, is that kind of formula going to happen for every
arithmetic sequence that you give me?
Well, let's try another example, and let's check.
Find a formula for the nth term of this sequence, 5, 12, 19, 26, 33, and so on.
Notice that this really is an arithmetic sequence.
The first number or the first term in the sequence is 5, and what's the common difference?
Can you tell how much you need to add to get from one term to the next every time?
The common difference here is 7, because 5 plus 7 is 12, 12 plus 7 is 19, and so on.
If the formula in this example is going to look like the formula in the earlier example,
then it needs to be f of n equals 7 times n minus 1 plus 5.
7 was the common difference, 5 was the first term.
I say we check to see if that really is the right formula.
So how do we check?
Well, the first term needs to be f of 1, because it's the first term.
So I plug 1 into that formula for n, and I have 7 times 1 minus 1 plus 5.
Well, 1 minus 1 is 0, 7 times 0 is 0, plus 5 gives me 5.
And that's right, because the first term was 5.
So we're good to go there.
Let's check the second term.
Plug in 2 to the formula, plug in 2 for n, and you'll have 7 times 2 minus 1 plus 5.
Order of operations tells me I've got to do everything in parentheses first.
2 minus 1 is 1, then I have to do the multiplication next.
7 times that 1 is 7, and then I add the 5, and I get 12.
And if you check, 12 was the second term in the sequence.
Let's do one more.
Plug in 3 for n, and you'll have 7 times 3 minus 1 plus 5, which is 7 times 2 plus 5,
which is 14 plus 5, which is 19.
And folks, that's the third term in the sequence.
That's what you wanted, because you plugged in 3, and therefore this formula really works
very, very well.
Now, in this lesson today, we've talked about sequences, lots of different types of sequences.
We've talked about definitions like what a sequence is, what a term is, and special
types of sequences, like arithmetic and geometric sequences.
I should point out that there are lots of other kinds of sequences out there.
I've only shown you really a couple types today.
One of the most famous is called the Fibonacci sequence, which isn't geometric, and it isn't
arithmetic either.
I'm hoping that in the next lesson, we can mention it, though, very, very quickly.
But in today's lesson, we've talked about sequences.
We've talked about these special families, geometric sequences, and arithmetic sequences.
And I've tried to show you some formulas for both of these types of sequences.
And in the process, we've developed some inductive reasoning skills as we've looked for these
patterns and tried to build these formulas based on those patterns.
In our next lesson, I want to use the idea of this common difference as a springboard
for a number of different types of sequences that I couldn't show you today.
That's going to lead us, believe it or not, to solving systems of linear equations that
we studied in one of our earlier lessons in this course.
I look forward to talking about that with you then.
