Today, I'm going to be talking about WebGL and what it can do for you and your users.
There are two main things that WebGL is really good at.
It's good at data visualization, and that's not very exciting, but if that's what you
need, I think you'll already know.
And the other thing it's good at is giving your users delightful experiences.
So what do I mean by delightful experience?
A delightful experience can be a game, or it can be a fancy 3D product or a marketing
site, basically anything that makes your users really happy.
Users get so bored by traditional web apps, and WebGL can make them excited.
Some of the demos I'm about to show you will convince you of that.
Before I get too much further, I just wanted to get a quick understanding.
How many people here have actually used WebGL in a published product or for your personal
use?
Okay.
Personal user is hoping to get it into real products.
What I'm going to talk about, first we'll go over frameworks that you can use today.
Some of them you might be familiar with, some of them perhaps will be new.
Obviously, there's a lot of them, so I can't cover all of them.
I'll also talk about what's in the pipeline, what's coming soon.
There's some really cool stuff, and hopefully I can get you excited about it.
And then finally, to wrap up, I'll give you some general performance tips.
And yeah, maybe those will be useful to you, but better to actually get a working app first.
A quick bit about me.
I have a games background.
I used to work at Sega.
I worked on Sega Rally Revo, which is this game, PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360.
I was on the graphics team and I did very important things like making sure the cars were shiny.
And making sure the muddy parts looked muddy.
And yeah, that was mainly what I worked on.
The cars, the water, the mud.
Exciting times.
I then went to Google and worked at YouTube.
I worked on Content ID and a bit of front-end stuff.
I also worked on the TV interface for YouTube.
And I also took a couple of years to do independent game development.
And I worked on this game, which is WebGL based, and I'll show you a quick demo in a minute.
So current status of support for WebGL.
The short version is things are looking good.
We have a broad spectrum of support, and in particular, I'd like to draw your attention to these two,
which have recently come online.
We've got Internet Explorer 11 and iOS 8 as of two weeks ago.
So this is a huge rollout for WebGL.
You can now target a lot of users with it.
The only holdouts really are things that don't matter so much.
The Android browser, for example, is being phased out in favor of Chrome for Android.
So my advice would be not to worry about it too much.
Basically, WebGL is everywhere.
You can use it whenever you want.
The engines and frameworks that I'm going to talk about are these ones.
So I've tried to kind of group them roughly.
You have frameworks that just do graphics and frameworks that do graphics plus everything else that you need for games.
So depending on your use case, if it's just adding a 3D rotating product on your site, for example,
you can use the graphics engines, or if you really want interactivity, sound, physics, that kind of thing,
then you're probably going to want to go for a game engine.
On the left, we have stuff that is really like production ready.
It's used by a lot of apps already.
And on the right, we have things that are still kind of experimental.
You can use them a bit, but it's more for the future.
So now I'm going to show you an exciting taste of the power of WebGL.
This is actually a very simple WebGL app.
And if I can click on this, I'm going to show you the source code.
So to generate this amazing, high-quality graphics, you have all of this code.
And I hope I don't need to do any further explanation, but basically this is why frameworks exist.
There's a lot of stuff you don't want to have to deal with.
So that brings me to our first framework, 3JS.
You may have heard of 3JS.
It's pretty much the de facto standard for WebGL development.
And it may not be the fastest framework, but it's very big, and it does whatever it wants to do.
Hopefully, it will also do what you want it to do.
To show you what it's capable of, I've selected a few demos.
And I know it's late. You're all tired.
So I thought maybe this would be a good way to relax a bit.
Do we have audio?
Oops.
Sorry, it's hard using the side screen.
Can we pull up the audio, maybe?
I think that's a beautiful song and a beautiful demo.
One of the best showcases for 3JS.
Another less exciting one, but very practical for people that need it.
This is an example of data visualization. These are 3D point cloud sets.
For example, you can load this up.
You can basically visualize a point cloud.
It's super fast, and it actually takes relatively little code with 3JS.
I think I'll skip this one in the interest of time, but I can't resist showing you my one.
My one, which is this racing game.
3, 2, 1, go!
This demonstrates interactivity and sound and physics and all that sort of thing.
So this is kind of the interactive extreme of what's possible.
Sorry about that.
So what's good about 3JS? It's an all-rounder. It can do a bit of everything.
It's not particularly good at anything, but it can do just about everything.
There's a huge community around it. Lots of developers.
It's not just a personal project by one person. There's a whole genuine open-source community there.
There are a great deal of samples, learning resources, places you can go to get help, that kind of thing.
There are many plugins. For example, if you want to have physics, or as he probably showed you yesterday,
like Minecraft characters from Shiro Matien, there are plugins to do that.
And of course, it's easy to extend yourself.
And once you have an app in 3JS, you quite often find that there's something missing.
So it's really nice that everything is there just under the surface,
and you can access all of the low-level primitives to do whatever you need to do.
What's not so good about it, it's big. It's really big.
As you can see, over 400 kilobytes for a JavaScript file. That's nothing to sniff at.
And of course, it only does graphics. Plugins can help solve some of that, though.
So if you bring together 3JS with a bunch of plugins, you can actually end up with a pretty fully-featured game engine.
So let's move on to another engine. Pixi.js. And this is what it looks like.
Basically, this is a 2D game engine. Well, actually, strictly speaking, it's more of a 2D graphics engine.
But it's really cute. It's really fast. And the main advantage of this one is it has a great non-webGL fallback.
3JS also has non-webGL fallbacks, but they're not quite as good. You're very limited in what you can do.
This one is really good. It has blending. It has very fast canvas operations.
If you want to do 2D, I would highly recommend it.
It only does graphics. However, you can use this engine instead, Phaser, which is a complete game engine, basically.
This is the best demo I could find. Extremely old-school gaming.
And clearly I suck. Anyway, again, the awesome power of WebGL. I'll let you play with this later.
Our next engine, PlayCanvas. PlayCanvas is a really interesting one, actually, because it has this whole kind of online tool set,
so you can collaboratively edit games with other people. It's really interesting.
And if you want to make HTML5 games, I would recommend you at least take a look at it, because there's nothing else quite like it.
It's a bit like Unity, but really web-centric.
It's also partially open-source. The game engine itself is open-source, but the tools, as far as I know, are not yet.
Let me show you a quick demo of this one.
Isn't that cute? It's a little plain with a rainbow.
In my defense, it is actually really hard to play these games at this angle.
Next up, Turbulence. Turbulence is another fairly fully-featured game engine, fully open-source, as far as I know, but with more limited tooling.
And it's actually got a bunch of fairly successful games that are already using it.
There's a studio, I think, they might be based in London, actually, called Wonderstruck, that's made a series of games with this engine.
And they're growing pretty quickly. Actually, no, I think they're in maybe Guildford or something like that.
And this is...
The kind of thing you can make with Turbulence.
Rest in the little people.
So you can see pretty fast, pretty interactive, very smooth.
Web browsers are turning into quite powerful little games.
That's it for the current, well-supported frameworks that I'm going to cover.
But what about the future?
Before I talk about the frameworks themselves, I will just quickly mention Inscripten.
Has anyone here heard of Inscripten? You probably have, right?
It's a transpiler. It compiles LLVM code, which is not quite machine code.
It's the output of GCC front-ends, and outputs a limited subset of JavaScript called ASM.js.
The result can run in any browser, but if the browser recognizes the code, it can optimize for it.
At the moment, the only browser that actually does that is Firefox, but others are considering it.
And actually, just because of the nature of ASM.js code, it already tends to be faster than handwritten JavaScript.
The first engine that is built on Inscripten that I'm going to mention is Unreal Engine.
They used to have a great demo up called Epic Citadel, but for some reason they seem to have removed that from the web now.
So instead, I'm going to show you this amazing game, Tappy Chicken.
Believe it or not, this is actually the Unreal Engine.
I think you know where this is going.
The other engine that is based on Inscripten is Unity.
Unity is like a massive system now. It's growing faster than any other engine, I think.
And there are so many people using it. It's amazing.
I couldn't find an actual live WebGL demo, but this is what they're going to have in their next major release, Unity 5.
Which is due to come out in a few months, apparently.
Lots of guns, lots of shooting. Apparently that's what gamer is like.
I think that's enough of that.
So considerations for both of these two engines. They're both based on Inscripten, they both output ASMJS and use all of the latest HTML5 standards.
They're all-in-one solutions. Basically, they have their own tooling, their own editors, their own everything.
And when you make a game using these systems, you're kind of stuck within that.
It isn't really possible as far as I know. I mean, they haven't actually launched Unity 5 yet.
But as far as I can see, it's not possible to really make a web app out of these things.
You can't easily interact with other JavaScript plugins or anything like that.
You have to basically treat the web browser as a games console. It's something you just deploy to.
However, on the plus side, both of these are very big communities and you can find a lot of stuff within their system.
So they have asset stores where you can go and buy just about anything that you want to have in your game.
You can even buy complete games and reskin them however you want.
And of course, it's easy to take what you've made and cross-publish it to mobile devices, games consoles, that kind of thing,
because they have such broad deployment bases.
Returning quickly to the data visualization thing.
If this is your deal, I suggest you check out Mathbox, which is pretty much the state-of-the-art of WebGL data visualization.
It's really nice. It's basically D3, but for WebGL.
So you just take your data, you choose a nice visualization, you bind them together, and it generates wonderful animated stuff.
I'm getting ahead of myself. There you go.
However, the reason I put it in the future category is at the moment they're on Mathbox 1,
and in a few months they're going to release a version 2, which is quite different apparently.
So more powerful, but probably not worth getting started on Mathbox 1 right now.
A quick recap. These are the frameworks that we've covered.
If you're interested in learning about more frameworks, there's a nice website here that has a list of them.
So there are others, and if you're serious about doing a WebGL app, I recommend you see what else is available.
And that's about it for frameworks. So let's move on to WebGL performance tips.
So in this very small crash course, I will try to tell you what not to do.
Here's the one slide summary. Do stuff on the GPU? Don't do it on the CPU.
Basically, GPU means what you can access with WebGL, and CPU is anything that happens in JavaScript space.
The general idea is load as much data as you can onto the GPU, i.e. give it to WebGL, and then leave it alone.
Don't touch it. If you have to change any data on the GPU, it generally means that you have to stall the whole pipeline
while you possibly download data off the GPU, change it in the JavaScript, which itself is not super fast,
and then upload it back again. And there's several layers of code between the GPU and the driver and the operating system
and the web browser, so you kind of want to avoid doing this if you can. If you have to make changes, try to make them small.
Just to give a practical example, this is coming back to the game I made and its terrain rendering system.
The terrain looks a bit like this, and in order to do this rendering, it uses these sources of data.
You have a bunch of vertex data and several big textures. Each of these textures is about four megabytes,
and that doesn't sound like a lot, but if you start trying to change four megabytes of data, not even every frame,
but even if you just do it once, you're going to see a big stutter as it re-uploads that to the GPU.
If you just change a small amount, then you might be able to get away with it.
Let me just try and show you an example of that.
If I go into the track editor here...
I think I need to copy this first, don't I?
When I move a node and it re-renders the texture, you can see this huge delay.
Actually, I didn't write this in a very efficient way, so it is in fact updating a giant four megabyte texture.
Like I said, this is all about what not to do, so don't do that.
Here's a sad panda.
This might be how you're feeling after a long day, but actually this is meant to represent your users,
and their sadness at not being given amazing WebGL toys to play with.
Their spirits have been crushed by old-school web apps,
but you have a new toy that you can give them, WebGL.
I would like to invite you to go out and delight your users with WebGL.
Thank you.
