Lecture 6 Why the Greeks Were So Beautiful, Nietzsche on Tragedy
Although Nietzsche ultimately wants to defend a philosophy which might be called the joy
of life, it is absolutely essential from his very first works that tragedy play a prominent
part. Joy of life, tragedy are opposites but rather they are mutually necessary. What we
would like to do in this lecture is to talk about the role of tragedy and the nature of
tragedy in life.
Nietzsche accomplishes really quite a lot in his first book. In a sense he lays out an
agenda that is going to continue with him throughout his entire philosophical production.
The question he asks really is what was Greek tragedy all about? He ponders the fact that
the Greeks seemed so obsessed with the kinds of stories, tragedies included, some of the
ones that Bob was talking about last time. He ends up answering the question pointing
out that the Greeks were not only attempting a type of artistic reconciliation of opposites
but actually a kind of solution to the problem of evil. The problem of evil is a traditional
religious problem, the problem of could the world be good or perhaps could the world be
the production of a good God if indeed suffering exists and we know it does. What Nietzsche
thinks the Greeks achieved in their tragedy was to provide a kind of answer that made
sense to them. Actually in raising this question he follows his mentor Schopenhauer, whom as
we have pointed out thought that the world basically wasn't good, that life was essentially
suffering. This in fact is a Buddhistic theme in Schopenhauer's thought which we will be
talking about more in the following lecture. But at any rate Schopenhauer's conviction
was that if you look at the evil around one the most obvious thing to do is to withdraw
from life. And this is what Nietzsche thinks the Greeks were grappling with too. They too
recognized that much about life really on the surface of it seems rather unacceptable.
They had a particular myth that Nietzsche draws attention to early in the birth of tragedy.
The story of a demigod named Silenus who was captured and told to answer a question and
he said that he would and the question was what is the best thing for man? At this Silenus
laughed and said the best thing for man after all is not to be born at all but the second
best is to die soon. Nietzsche thought that this was in a sense a counterpart to the sort
of philosophy that Schopenhauer had been teaching. That you really can't win in this world.
The best thing to do is to be as calm as possible and live through it. And what Nietzsche sees
the Greeks is doing is dealing with this question in Greek tragedy but not drawing the Schopenhauer
in conclusion. Rather than concluding that what we ought to do is withdraw, tune out
from life as much as we possibly can, the Greek tragedy actually showed a way of celebrating
life even despite the fact that suffering was an essential part of it. The two principles
that Bob mentioned in the previous lecture, the Dionysian and the Apollonian, as Nietzsche
initially discusses them, turn out to be two artistic principles. Nietzsche considers two
different kinds of art forms, both very popular in his own time, the Romantic Era. One art
form, that of the visual arts and as he sees it particularly the art of sculpture, shows
the world in a beautified form. It idealizes the appearances of things. It makes things
look more beautiful than they are. But it tries to represent the world very clearly,
with clear boundaries, with separate individuals, separate entities, that we can appreciate
contemplatively. In this he follows both Schopenhauer and Kant in seeing beautiful images
in art as a kind of way for human beings to focus on something in their world and merely
enjoy them, merely enjoy contemplating them, not relating to them practically. If you enjoy
an artwork that depicts something artistically, it's not a question of seeing something in
the picture that you'd like to own or being motivated, for instance, if it's a still life,
to want to get some food that looks as delicious as that on the painting. But instead, ideally,
when you view it as art, what you're trying to do is simply contemplate the beauty of
the form. By contrast, the Dionysian art that Nietzsche talks about is the art of music,
and there the natural response is something quite different. Rather than simply contemplating,
music incites you to be part of something. Nietzsche points out in one of his later works,
Twilight of the Idols, that it's actually been quite an achievement for human beings
to learn to sit still in concert halls, because music urges us to move, to use our whole bodies
as a kind of symbolic response to this inciting element of music. So when the Greeks merge
the two, as Nietzsche claims they do in tragedy, they're in a sense merging two very different
ways of looking at the external world. One, the Apollonian way of seeing beauty, idealizing
what one sees, and contemplating it, taking satisfaction in it, just being what it is,
and viewing it from a detached point of view, and by contrast the more musical side of things,
the Dionysian, which urges you to respond in as lively a way as the music itself exists.
So how do these work together in Greek tragedy? Nietzsche notes the rather interesting historical
fact that the Greek tragedy actually began with the chorus alone. For most of modern
audiences, I think this comes as a bit of a surprise, since it seems that oftentimes
in productions of Greek tragedy, the chorus comes on and comments on what's been going
on in the play, but almost seems dispensable. We tend to be following the plot, and they
kind of hamper the plots moving forward, though they comment on it, sort of urging us, maybe
baiting us to want the plot to go forward. Nietzsche explains that in origin tragedy
had a very, very different structure. Originally, all there was was the chorus. The chorus was
essentially a group of supposed half-men, half-beasts, satyrs, who would come on stage
and create a kind of musical stir. They'd stir themselves into a kind of frenzied state,
and ideally what would happen is that the audience would also get into this musical
situation. In a sense, it was almost comparable to a rock concert, a very successful rock
concert in which the whole audience eventually feels like standing up and moving around,
hopefully not too violently in response to music that's just captivated them. Originally,
the Greek tragic performances were simply this. The satyrs would come on stage, their poetry,
and particularly their musical rendition of the poetry, would stir the audiences so much
that they were in a position to actually think about the Greek myth. And in a sense, the
whole idea of a plot stemmed from already being in a state of mind where one could concentrate
on the myth. Originally, an actor appeared on stage as a representative of the god,
the god Dionysus. And when the actor appeared on stage, assuming that people actually had
been captivated by the chorus, the audience didn't seem simply an actor with a mask on.
Instead, they saw the god himself. Nietzsche's explanation of further elaboration of Greek
tragedy was simply further elaboration of stories that were consistent with the ideal
of Dionysus. And we should go back again to explain exactly what this ideal was. It's
a kind of sense of frenzied involvement in life. As Nietzsche describes it, particularly
as its way of answering the problem of evil, it's the sense that participating in life
is intrinsically pleasurable and powerful, that it simply is joyous to be alive, and
that that's a much more fundamental insight than any awareness of evil, any awareness
of the vulnerability we all face as individuals. So it already, as the audience approached
the arrival of the hero when there were actors on stage, it was already captivated by this
musical state of mind. It was ready for a kind of transformation. In fact, it had already
been transformed. People walk into the theater and Nietzsche says, in their usual roles,
judges are judges, workmen are workmen, and so on. But as soon as they become part of
the audience and part of this Dionysian captivated crowd, all of these roles fall aside. They're
simply part of this joyous frenzied throng that's now capable of the true vision of
the tragedy, the arrival of the God on stage. Why Dionysus represents a kind of God that's
in opposition to individuality stems from a detail of the myth, at least in one of the
tellings. And this story is the story of how Dionysus was ripped to pieces by the Titans,
and that his worshipers were always looking for a regeneration of Dionysus, his recomposition
from the parts that had been torn asunder. And in a sense, this was a kind of symbolic
vision of what humanity was like, that human individuals seemed so separate from each other,
that this was really ultimately illusory. And that despite our rather natural tendency
to think of our private egos as real, the real solution to this was recognition of our
oneness, our oneness through Dionysus. So what the Greek tragic play did was allow people
an insight into something about themselves. Certainly the reason that the kinds of plots
that became common, fair in Greek tragedy were so interesting was because they are plots
about individual vulnerability. But by raising these very cases, it raised the need in the
audience to somehow resolve that. And the resolution was something they were in a state
of mind to be prepared for, because the chorus had made them feel a kind of vitality, a vitality
with the whole environment and with everyone around them. At that point, they could turn
to this Dionysian resolution, namely the arrival of the God on stage, the reminder that the
separation, this vulnerability only sees the individuated aspect of us and doesn't recognize
that in a sense, at our death, when life goes on, we go on with it.
If the earlier Greeks did accept suffering as an inevitable part of life, in fact as
an essential aspect of life, the later Greeks, and in particular Socrates, Plato and Aristotle,
did not. I've already talked briefly about Socrates and Plato and how in their formulation
of the idea of an eternal soul, of a world that's more perfect than this one, they rationalize
tragedy by saying in effect, this suffering, this life, don't worry about it because there's
something better to come, something which clearly anticipates Christianity.
But the third member of that triad is someone I haven't talked about and someone who in
this context is actually extremely interesting. In fact, Aristotle has the well-deserved reputation
as the theorist of tragedy. He didn't, as far as we know, write any tragedies, but he
certainly wrote the definitive book of ancient world, the poetics in which he discusses what
tragedy is, what's a good tragedy, what makes it work, and essentially lays out a whole
system of rules which explain to potential playwrights the form that they should follow.
What's interesting philosophically about Aristotle in this context is, first of all, that Aristotle
unlike Socrates and Plato, who was his teacher after all, Aristotle did not accept the idea
of another world. In fact, you may know very famous painting in the Vatican by Raphael called
the School of Athens, and inside the central arch is a depiction of Plato and Aristotle,
and Plato, the older man, has his finger raised towards the heavens, and Aristotle in a very
distinctive gesture is pushing downward, emphasizing this world. So Aristotle, in one sense, is
very interestingly on Nietzsche's side. In fact, one can hypothesize why Nietzsche doesn't
talk more about Aristotle, who is also very similar to him in ethics, and one hypothesis
is because Aristotle was still associated very much with Aquinas and Catholicism. But
Aristotle himself, in addition to being very this worldly as Nietzsche was, also thought
about tragedy in a very specific and now well-established way. And let me use Oedipus as an example.
One of Aristotle's theses, or by no means the major one, is that in tragedy, although
we're dealing with a noble character, a king, a queen, someone of extremely high status
typically, nevertheless, the character has a tragic flaw. And the tragic flaw theory
has been embellished in many different ways over the years. Of course Christianity picks
it up and runs with it. Original sin is one way of talking about it for everyone, but
also the very notion that sins committed while you are alive can jeopardize your chance
for immortal happiness. That's very much part of the same kind of thesis. In Aristotle,
it's more modest, but nevertheless, it's very significant. Take Oedipus. Oedipus, as
I suggested in all your lecture, was a good man. If you think about the criteria for virtue,
for integrity, he had it. He answered the riddle of the Sphinx and he saved the city.
He went on to become king. We know that he heard the myth, the rumor, about himself and
ran away from home, essentially, to avoid harming his parents. Nevertheless, fate caught
up with him and he did so. It is Oedipus who drives the play. The play, in fact, is set
during a period of pestilence in which Oedipus is trying to figure out its cause. And even
though Thereseus, the seer of the sage, warns him in no uncertain but still subtle terms
that he shouldn't pursue this line of questioning, Oedipus proceeds and insists until finally,
of course, he discovers what the cause of the pestilence is, namely himself and his own
actions. With this, it is often interpreted that Oedipus, in fact, is flawed. He's proud,
he's arrogant, he's stubborn. Against this, one can say very quickly, he's king. Of course,
that's the way kings are. As for stubbornness, isn't this just another name for what we
call integrity? Now, the interesting question is, why is it so important to find this tragic
flaw? And I think the answer is very revealing. Because insofar as we can watch a tragedy
and we can, at a distance, a safe distance, empathize with the hero and say how terrible
and feel the kind of fear and anguish that Aristotle describes, we also feel it's not
going to happen to us. Because Oedipus is different. He's king, he's in a situation
that we won't be in, he's facing a dilemma that we won't have to face, and he's flawed.
You may have noticed yourself, I find myself doing this all the time and I hate it and
I can imagine Nietzsche having the same reaction, but there's an earthquake or a flood or some
terrible tragedy somewhere in the world and my rationalization, before I have a chance
to think about it, is, well, it's not me and it wouldn't be me because I'm not, I'm not
Chinese, I'm not living in the Middle East, I'm not living over the San Andreas Fault,
I'm not living in a flood plain, or closer to home. Well, the flight was delta, I fly
American, but there's always the sense it's not me, I'm not in the class of tragic figures.
So there's a sense in which Aristotle, in a much more subtle way, allows us to rationalize
tragedy and he does it by saying, insofar as we can find something that's significantly
different about the tragic figure, that's enough for us to distance ourselves and to
fool ourselves into thinking that's not going to happen to me. What we do is we seek a safe
respite in Socrates and Plato, in another world, in Aristotle, in a much more sophisticated
motive rationalization. Nevertheless, the upshot of this, of course, is to try to explain
tragedy, to rationalize it away, and nowhere is this more concrete and, for Nietzsche,
more prone to attack than in Christianity itself.
Of course, for Nietzsche, Christianity is, in a sense, following the model of Plato,
and in fact at one point he calls it Platonism for the masses. And what he has in mind here
is the idea that what you do to explain what seems inexplicable in this world is make reference
to another. So if some tragedy befalls someone, especially someone that we don't see as particularly
guilty, one of the common responses in the Christian tradition is God has a plan, God
sees things we don't, therefore somehow it's rationalizable. It's something we don't have
to worry about. This is God's business. Not I think that this always cheers people up,
though it's supposed to. But I think what Nietzsche sees in it is something that's even
more dubious than something that fails as encouragement, namely the fact that if you're
really looking for something that rationalizes terrible things that happen to people, in
a sense you're not taking the tragic feature of it seriously. It's almost as if God is
pictured as a kind of super-accountant who has some kind of equation in which the correct
solution comes out happening, that somehow it's worth the expense of all these people
suffering in order to bring about some greater good in the end. I think Nietzsche's reaction
to that is that it's appalling to think anyone would find this cheering. Indeed, this is
a rather monstrous way of interpreting God's intentions, that God doesn't care about a lot
of people, factors them in as part of his ultimate plan, and in a sense that makes their sufferings
not really so important. They're only part of this world. They're not, in a sense, in
the fundamental picture all that significant. Nietzsche thinks the Greeks, in a sense, were
facing reality more than at least much of Christian thought in resolving the problem of evil,
precisely because they didn't try to whitewash or eliminate the significance of real human
suffering. There was a kind of willingness to just stare suffering in the face. He thought
the Greeks quite reasonably thought it was important to look at what was beautiful around
one as well, so one didn't dwell on the tragic all the time. But nevertheless, to acknowledge
that tragedy exists, that there are some things that aren't rational and are not even rationalizable,
that happen to people, is simply to accept some of the conditions of life. The Greek
resolution wasn't to say, in some other plane, this will all make sense, at least not the
Greeks that Nietzsche viewed as heroes. Socrates and Plato, maybe from that point of view,
are not the Greeks that Nietzsche loved. But to view this as something that can be rationalized
by turning to another plane is exactly what the ancient Greeks, the pre-Socratic Greeks,
didn't do. What they did instead was to say, this is real, this is something we all face,
and nevertheless, life is so fundamentally good that we find this all worthwhile. This
is well worth the price of admission for each of us. We can't make this make sense. Nevertheless,
we live on and we live joyously.
It's important not to think about tragedy just as theater, although clearly that's part
of what Nietzsche is talking about. And it's important not to think about tragedy and life
as just bad things happening to good people, that that happens is obvious enough. But that's
really not what this discussion is about. Tragedy is a certain kind of perspective,
for Nietzsche it carries within a certain sense of nobility. Not necessarily that one
is a king or a queen or royalty in any sense, but there's a kind of noble attitude towards
life and a noble kind of acceptance. In fact, several ways of thinking about this and all
of it is a certain kind of perspective which has to be distinguished from the various Christian
and rationalistic perspectives that we've been talking about.
One figure who plays a major role here, although Nietzsche talks surprisingly little about
him, I think one has to surmise that Nietzsche really didn't know that much about him and
also he was under the spell of a shadow. The figure is Hegel, who is somebody I've mentioned
before, an early, very important 19th century philosopher, who had really a theory of the
universe. And it's one of those grand philosophical perspectives that would be worth 24 lectures
all by itself. But the main point is that Hegel saw tragedy, not as the sort of payment
for a flaw, much less as something which could be overseen by appeal to another world. Hegel,
although he was being interpreted at the time, and this is why Nietzsche didn't pay much
attention to him, as a religious thinker, Hegel in fact was a very this worldly thinker
for whom spirituality was of this worldly phenomenon and for whom God, insofar as one
wanted to talk about God in this context at all, was not separate and different from creation.
Hegel's theory of tragedy, consequently, is, like the early Greeks, a kind of super personal
view that we can view ourselves as individuals. But to do so, Hegel says, is kind of a looser
is. Not that he rejects it. It's an important part of modern civil society. It's an important
part of our way of understanding ourselves. Nevertheless, ultimately, we are all one.
It's a view that Hegel certainly shares with the ancient Buddhists and Hindus, although
he explicitly rejects them because he wants to appear as a Christian. It's something
he shares with Schopenhauer, which is something we'll talk about next time. But the view
that we're all ultimately one goes straight back to the Dionysian myth and the idea that
although we think of ourselves as separate pieces, separate individuals, the truth is
that we only make sense as a unity. Nevertheless, within that unity, there are very different
forces. It's Hegel who makes famous the notion of dialectic. Of course, it's a Greek notion.
Basically it means conversation of back and forth, and one finds it most notably in Plato's
dialogues with Socrates. But for Hegel, dialectic is a kind of historical movement. And what
defines human consciousness, what defines history, what defines the history of religion,
the history of philosophy is a kind of struggle back and forth. In other words, Nietzsche's
notion of the Greek agonistic society. For Hegel, history consists of such warring forces,
which he says, with progress, with the evolution of what he calls spirit, will eventually resolve
themselves into a sense of mutual, all-embracing understanding. Within that picture, the way
to understand tragedy is not as Aristotle said, to look for the tragic flaw in the tragic
hero. But the way to understand tragedy is rather to see that people get caught, that
individuals can sometimes be caught in these movements, these conflicting forces. And the
result is tragedy for them, but in a way a step forward for humanity. Hegel's favorite
tragedy, accordingly, is, not adipus so much as, Antigone. Because Antigone is the classic
play which presents a young woman who is caught and has to make a terrible choice. On the
one hand, there is the whole of what Hegel refers to as the divine law, the law of the
family and family obligation. And to obey that law, she has to bury her brother, because
Greek religion is very clear that if you're unburied, essentially you're damned. On the
other hand, the civil leader tells her, you cannot bury your brother. He is not to be
given that kind of religious sanction. And she has a horrible choice. If she obeys the
laws of the state, the laws of civil society, then she betrays her brother. If she obeys
the family law and buries her brother, she betrays the state. And of course, in the end,
she has to die. But the important point is that tragedy is not because Antigone has
a flaw. Tragedy is because she's caught at a very critical moment in human history.
The time when families and tribes were developing the larger units, what we now call societies,
in which the rule was not of the father, but rather the rule was of law. And so tragedy
gets explained by appeal to something larger than the individual. But it's not something
otherworldly.
One thing that's a bit ironic is that Hegel has the notion that we're all one, and that's
part of the resolution of what seems to be a tension or a mystery about why tragedy would
appeal and be so important to the Greeks. And that's something that Nietzsche refers
to as well. Similarly, Schopenhauer, another person whose theory of tragedy Nietzsche is
playing off here, is someone who thinks that fundamentally we're all one. And indeed, in
the birth of tragedy, Nietzsche acknowledges a debt to Schopenhauer, but nevertheless still
wants to move past Schopenhauer's theory.
And Schopenhauer's theory, which we'll talk about in greater detail next time, is a theory
that basically sees tragedy as allowing its insight into the importance of compassion,
of recognizing that other people are really in the same boat. So although a pessimist
thinking that inevitably there will be conflict, he sees tragedy as something that will bring
us to moral insight.
Nietzsche thinks, again, to bring someone to moral insight is really to try to make tragedy
seem in some ways less tragic, a means to an end. He wants to draw attention to the way
the Greeks saw tragedy as something that has to be encountered and can't be simply explained.
And with Nietzsche, of course, ultimately the message is to love life despite suffering.
It may be true that tragedy is unavoidable, but nevertheless tragedy, the very meaning
of the word as we're using it here, requires a certain kind of nobility, which means, to
a certain extent, a kind of selflessness. This runs in a funny way against the rumor
that Nietzsche was a defender of selfishness, but nevertheless as we'll see, these two things
actually go hand in hand in a very nice way, because much of what we call selfishness,
in fact, isn't selfish at all. And much of what we call selflessness isn't selfless at
all. But the basic picture which Nietzsche derives from the Greeks and the Dionysian
is that we have to see ourselves not just as individuals, but as part of a larger world.
And Nietzsche consequently believes in something that hasn't been talked about that much in
the last several hundred years, and that's fate. We are all fated, and that is going
to define an awful lot of the rest of Nietzsche's philosophy.
