In this lecture, we'd like to talk about Schopenhauer, one of Nietzsche's definitive
influences. But more generally, we'd like to broach the question of pessimism, that view
that the world and life really is no good. Pessimism, by one consideration, might be thought
of as a kind of quantitative measure. The question, is your life more pleasure or more
pain? And of course, most of my 20-year-old students argue without a hesitation that it's
much more pleasure. And I remind them that it's not over yet, and I tell them some of
the things that might happen to them, and some of the things that certainly will happen
to them as they get older. And of course, in the end, we're all dead. And so, they get
disturbed by this, but they're still perfectly willing to assert, or at least hope, that
the balance will be in favor of pleasure. Schopenhauer doesn't believe that. Schopenhauer
seems to feel that life is basically suffering, and that the amount of pleasure, well, take
it, enjoy it, but it really isn't what life is all about. This quantitative idea that
life is more pain than pleasure is, of course, subject to many different objections. For
one thing, just the notion of quantification is itself rather difficult. How do we know
what we're quantifying when we quantify pleasure and pain? But Nietzsche would want to say
more to the point that pleasure and pain aren't really what life is about. But there's a different
kind of way of thinking about pessimism, which is far more philosophical. The more philosophical
way of thinking about pessimism is that life doesn't have a purpose, or life doesn't have
a meaning. Now, there's several different ways that this might be argued. One, and perhaps
the most common, particularly in the 19th century and now the 20th, is that what gives
meaning and purpose to the world is God. Schopenhauer is an atheist. In fact, Nietzsche
says in praise of Schopenhauer, he is the first honest German atheist. If there's no
God, one might argue, then the world doesn't have a purpose. There's nothing to guide us,
no ultimate goals that are given to us, and the world itself has no meaning. And if you
look at the world as a naturalist, and in particular, if you look at the world as both
Schopenhauer and Nietzsche tend to do, through the eyes of a biologist, then you can sort
of see the point. What Schopenhauer argues in exquisite detail, because he really knew
a lot about the life sciences of his day, is that if you look at how creatures live,
there's basically just one continuous cycle to it, and to talk about it having an ultimate
meaning or purpose really doesn't make much sense. He uses an example, one of those many
insects that developed over a long larval stage, emerge in some cases for a single day,
in their full maturity to mate, after which they quickly die, and they're offspring
after spending some time in the larval stage, emerge fully grown, mate and die. And this
cycle goes on, in many cases, for millions of years, but of course, what does that add
up to? It's just a cycle of life and death, but it doesn't add up to anything. It has
no ultimate purpose, it has no ultimate meaning. If you watch your dog through his or her daily
life, weekly life, monthly life, yearly life, we watch our dogs whom we adore, now at age
11. And there's a sense in which they're now slow puppies. There's a sense in which what
they want out of life is pretty much what they wanted out of life when they were 10
weeks old. There's a sense in which they have no anticipation of what is going to happen
to them, not too soon, I hope. There's a sense in which what they do is they live for what
they want to do that day. In fact, we sometimes joke when a dog, and especially when a puppy
wakes up in the morning, it's not just a brand new day, it's a brand new life. And there's
this sense, dogs can have a wonderful life, I often envy it, but the truth is, what does
a dog's life add up to? That I presume is what's meant by the phrase, a dog's life,
because most dogs don't live badly at all. Nevertheless, it doesn't add up to anything,
it doesn't have a purpose, it doesn't have a meaning. And that, quite frankly, doesn't
have all that much to do with whether or not dogs believe in God. The idea of life, simply
going on, fulfilling itself, repeating itself, is really the heart of a certain kind of pessimism.
I remember a cartoon that was popular just a couple of months ago, and it was essentially
one of these cartoons about evolution. The first frame was a little creature crawling
out of the water, and in its little bubble mind, it was thinking, eat, survive, reproduce.
Then it had another creature that was clearly a land creature, and in this little bubble
of a mind said, eat, survive, reproduce, eat, survive, reproduce. And then it had something
that looked like a primitive primate who was thinking, eat, survive, reproduce. And the
final frame was a human being who was scratching his head and saying, what's it all mean? And
it seems to characterize very well. On the one hand, we're just another step in evolution,
although I should point out that Schopenhauer is writing before Darwin. We're just another
step in evolution. We are animals. But nevertheless, the idea that we are somehow special, that
we are in a position to discover the meaning of life, is an illusion. Now why is that?
Because Schopenhauer had a view, and in fact, it's remarkably similar to his arch-rival,
Hegel, who was at one point teaching in the same university, Berlin, at the same time.
And that is the view that the world is one, that it's a unity, that there is really one
reality underlying all things. Schopenhauer, however, takes this view not from Hegel, whom
he despised, nor does he even take it directly from the ancient Greeks, who sometimes held
similar views. But much to his credit, Schopenhauer was the first philosopher to take seriously
the philosophy of the Far East, Indian philosophy in particular, and he knew Buddhism, he knew
a good deal about Hinduism, and the philosophy of Brahman that I mentioned before, the philosophy
that the world is really one reality, was a philosophy that he embraced. But that one
reality had a peculiar characteristic. It was in the terms that were widely used at
the time. It was will. Now, the important thing for Schopenhauer is to understand what that
means. The notion of will was used very centrally by the great German philosopher Hooperstein.
He preceded him, and he was certainly Schopenhauer's model, Immanuel Kant. For Kant, will was
first of all something that each of us exercised, and will was necessarily rational. That doesn't
mean that everything we do is rational, but it meant that to have a will, and to have reason,
and to have morality, or at least have the understanding of morality, these were all
of a package. In Schopenhauer, the will is no longer individual. The will is, in fact,
the one reality, and we know the will through ourselves, but nevertheless, what we know
through ourselves is reality as such. But of course, there's something else we know
too, and to put it very simply, it's the world. In Kant, that old picture that comes from
the Greeks, Plato and Aristotle in particular, the picture that comes through the history
of Christianity of two worlds, one a kind of immediate secular world, and the other
of a more perfect world, takes the very sophisticated variation, that on one hand, there's a very
different world, there's the world of our experience, what Kant calls the phenomenal
world. And then on the other hand, there's the world as it is in itself, that is, as
the world would be if we did not perceive it through all of our senses. Now that's an
impossible notion, and Kant realizes that's an empty notion for us, but nevertheless,
God sees the world, or knows the world, in a way that's very different from the way we
know the world. And so that notion of the world in itself is something that Kant distinguishes
from the world of our experience. What's more, that world as it is in itself has a function.
It is, perhaps first and foremost, the realm of God. It is the other worldly. It is also,
however, the realm of human freedom and human action, and what we experience in ourselves,
in fact, is the freedom to act, which is something different from seeing ourselves as just participants
in the world. So with this dichotomy, Schopenhauer then says the following, and this is a combination
of Kant and Buddhism. The world is phenomenon, the world of experience is to a large extent
a world of illusion. On the other hand, the world that we experience inside, the world
of the will, that's the real world. And what's more, it's not individual will, but all wills
are ultimately one. But most importantly, this will is not rational. This will doesn't
have an ultimate purpose, as Kant certainly thinks it does. The will is really, I always
think of it as something like a tornado. It's something that sort of swirls around and
strives inside of us and throws us from one place to the other. It's always presenting
us with goals and demands, desires, but it doesn't stop. It can't be satisfied.
Perhaps the most illustrative example, one that Schopenhauer actually uses quite often,
that all this can relate to is sexual desire. Think, for example, when you were a teenager
and just discovering this. The experience was that here is this enormous force speaking
to you from inside of you. And at the time, you had no idea where it was coming from,
where it was going, what you were supposed to do with it, what you recognized, what you
could not but recognize was its power and its force. Well, you got more sophisticated.
You realize there are ways of answering this desire, but are there ways of satisfying it?
And the answer is no. Gerdt in Faust says at one point, from desire, of course, I rushed
the satisfaction, but from satisfaction, I leap to desire. The truth is that satisfaction
is always followed by desire. Sexual satisfaction is very brief, and the desire comes back.
And this cycle continues throughout life. In fact, one can ask the following question.
What is it you desire when you have sexual desire? Now, of course, in immediate personal
terms, it might just be I want to make love to this person that I love, or it might just
be I want an evening entertainment, or it might be I want to prove I'm a man, or I
want to prove I'm a beautiful woman. But all that's beside the point. The truth is, it's
the will speaking from within us, the will as the demand for the continuation of the
species. But there, we're right back to where the dogs and the insects that mate one day
of their lives, and lower creatures as well. It is simply life insisting on reproducing
itself. The species insisting on going on. But the question is why? There's no answer
to that. We are simply buffeted by the will, and that's the end of it.
Now, that's a pretty bleak picture. The story of the universe that Schopenhauer tells doesn't
give us much consolation. The one, perhaps, potentially consoling thing is that Schopenhauer
claims that along with our general sense of satisfying our individual desires, something
he claims is an illusion, he also thinks that it's really an illusion to concern ourselves
with our individual existence. Ultimately, we're all one thing, and although for many
of us, overwhelming preoccupation is a concern with the fact that we're mortal, Schopenhauer
claims that this is really a kind of illusory problem. If we're all this fundamental one
force that expresses itself in nature, our individual death really doesn't mean much
of anything. In effect, what goes on, nature, is really all that we were originally. So
we might take comfort in the thought that what's really real in us, what's important
in us, continues despite our individual demise. Nevertheless, not too many people find that,
all that reassuring, and Schopenhauer is well aware of it. The generally pessimistic tone
of his writing has a lot to do with the fact that he thinks most of us aren't going to
take any solace in that and aren't going to draw the appropriate conclusions. He does,
however, mention a couple of ways that many of us at least avoid dwelling on what's unpleasant
for us. He thinks that there is a kind of respite from willing and either getting satisfied
and briefly bored or willing, getting satisfied and immediately willing again. The main way
in which people take a kind of break from all this is through aesthetic experience.
Indeed, I think it's noteworthy that while Schopenhauer paints a very pessimistic and
disturbing picture of the world as a whole, his specific examples indicate, just in the
way he writes about them, a kind of aesthetic appreciation. He takes joy in learning about
biological examples. And even though the upshot is often exactly what Bob described, a kind
of sense that this is a continuing saga that ultimately signifies nothing, nevertheless
one gets the impression that he really takes great delight in observing and recognizing
the ways in which nature works. Schopenhauer's own theory acknowledges that this is the main
way that a lot of us find at least temporary meaning in our lives. He talks about aesthetic
experience as a kind of Sabbath from the penal servitude of willing. His conception of aesthetic
experience draws on yet another of his philosophical heroes besides the Buddha and Kant, namely
Plato. He draws from Plato's notion of the forms or ideas, prototypes for the particular
individual things that we observe in the phenomenal world. According to Plato, for example, when
we see something beautiful, we're seeing an instance that has many, many different illustrations,
an instance of something that participates in a fundamental pattern, absolute beauty.
And in a sense when we recognize beauty in the here and now, in a particular thing, we're
actually turning our minds towards something that's more fundamental, universal and eternal,
namely beauty itself. Schopenhauer's way of dealing with this notion of forms is to say
that most artists depict things, depict particular things, but in a way that makes us mindful
of these universal prototypes or patterns. So a sculptor that, for instance, sculpts
a wolf will in a sense have in mind the basic prototype or pattern of a wolf, and it will
be the universal notion of wolfness, you might say, that comes through in what the artist
does to the extent the artist really is in control of his or her art. What this does
for us in terms of willing is it allows us an occasion to simply rest content with contemplating.
Once again, the kind of contemplation we discussed in an earlier lecture becomes a very significant
and important component of life. As Schopenhauer sees it, when we can just contemplate the
basic patterns of the world, we no longer have our usual disposition, which is to gaze
around us and itemize things in terms of things that I want, things I don't want, things
that help me get what I want, or things that obstruct me. All of those kind of relations
we have to things tend to put us in a rather aggressive antagonistic and ultimately frustrated
state of mind toward the rest of reality. When we observe something in an aesthetic light,
however, and Schopenhauer here would include beautiful nature along with art, what we do
is transport our gaze away from particular objects of desire for me, the individual,
to the universal beauty of this type of thing. Similarly, when I do that, I'm no longer relating
to myself as an individual that either does or does not get what I desire. Instead, I
think of myself as a kind of universal being as well. If I gaze at the universal form of
something through a particular in art or beautiful nature, at the same time I'm making myself
a kind of universal case of a human being contemplating. Schopenhauer calls this the
pure willless subject of knowledge. I'm willless because I'm not relating to myself as a private
person with desires, perhaps with greed, but instead thinking of myself as the mind, the
mind of the human being. And with that, I at least take a break from willing, trying to
get what I want. For the time being, I don't even think about desire. Unfortunately, this
blessed state of mind doesn't last very long. For the most part, we go to an art gallery
and perhaps experience beauty, but eventually get hungry and turn our minds back to desire.
If we're particularly unfortunate, we might even start thinking about desiring art itself,
wanting to own rather than simply contemplate. So Schopenhauer, I think sooner or later,
inevitably desire catches up with us again. There is however one other aesthetic kind
of appreciation that he discusses and that needs to draws upon, actually, the aesthetic
appreciation we have of music. Now Schopenhauer, being a 19th century thinker, does not have
in mind the kind of abstract visual arts that are very common fare today. He tends to think
of all the visual arts as presenting depictions or representations. On the other hand, he
thinks of music as something that is much more formal. Music doesn't seem to be mimicking
anything in particular in the world, although we feel that it has a very intimate connection
with our world. Schopenhauer's way of understanding this, again, a theme that Nietzsche picks
up on, is that in music what we have is something like a representation of the will itself,
the way in which the will moves through nature, the kind of inner conflict of the will which
we might see in musical dissonance and its resolution in stages of relative consonance,
for example. Schopenhauer is convinced that the reason we find music so moving is it bypasses
representing things in the external world and we feel more that it's intimately in connection
with this inner stirring, the will as it acts in ourselves. So musical condition is particularly
important for us because, again, it draws our attention to what's universal within us,
the very phenomena of the will manifesting itself through us, and by doing that it makes
us, again, mindful of our real existence, ourselves as members of a species, manifestations
of a will which fundamentally make us all one. However, like the visual arts, music
usually doesn't sustain us through a lifetime. Even though we might be transported by the
occasional concert, most likely we spend much of our life willing, getting frustrated, willing,
getting satisfied and bored, and then willing again. The only ultimate solution for human
beings is really to somehow move one's sense of self away from personal private aims, the
kind of everyday willing that we all engage in, to shift from that sense of who we are
to a totally universalized concept. And that, he thinks, is something that the saints of
various traditions have achieved. Schopenhauer's conception of life being full of frustration
and desire draws a lot from the Buddhist notion of life being suffering. And Schopenhauer
also follows the Buddha in suggesting that the only real solution to this is to get over
this kind of continual craving. So if we can manage to start to see ourselves as really
the same self as everyone else, competing with them for particular good things that we
want, seems rather pointless. If we really register this, if we really come to take this
to heart, then the whole project of willing, trying to get what we individually desire,
starts to seem more and more pointless. And if we really do maintain this kind of insight,
then what will happen naturally is we'll simply stop. We'll come to a state of what Schopenhauer
describes as resignation. We'll resign from willing.
Now how does all this relate to Nietzsche? Nietzsche tends to follow Schopenhauer a long
way in this account. Nietzsche, as we discussed in earlier lectures, was quite convinced that
life does entail a certain amount of frustration, downright suffering, and ultimate death. So
he thinks Schopenhauer is certainly pursuing the right track to try to encourage us to
think about this, to recognize the truth of this, and not whitewash it. On the other hand,
Nietzsche thinks that Schopenhauer perhaps gives aesthetic experience a little bit too
short-shift. As Nietzsche sees it, there is a kind of aesthetic way of dealing with the
whole problem of individual frustration, suffering, and death. He comments in The Birth
of Tragedy, only as an aesthetic phenomenon is life eternally justified. In other words,
Nietzsche is suggesting that there is a kind of answer to the problem of evil that aesthetics
art can provide. And this particular answer is an answer that has to do with seeing the
world, in a sense, from this point of view of ourselves as universal. Instead of thinking
of ourselves as just one more phenomenon, fighting it out with the rest, as we observe
the world as an aesthetic phenomenon, we think of the way all of these things go together.
Nietzsche thinks that if we really do this, it doesn't really matter to us as much that
we're in the competition, in the general fray, and sometimes get frustrated during the course
of it. That's simply what participating in life involves or entails. And that, he thinks,
is something that we can come to grips with and actually appreciate so long as we maintain
awareness that that's our individual participation in this much bigger thing, in a sense, more
real thing, life as a whole. One might compare the way that Schopenhauer and Nietzsche think
differently on these issues by noting that Schopenhauer really thinks that ultimate
satisfaction is what we really want. And we're going to be frustrated unless we get to a
state where we're completely content. Nietzsche thinks that that really doesn't have much
to do with life as it's lived, and if we think about it, isn't really what we want. The nature
of life is to be in a state of continual change, a state of movement, a state, if you want
to call it this, of frustration, but that this frustration is actually something we
can appreciate itself, something along the lines of our appreciation of musical dissonance,
which is a state, a particular moment in music where you certainly have the sense that you
need to move from that, but that moving itself is what life consists of. Strangely, although
Schopenhauer shares many of the presuppositions that Nietzsche does, Nietzsche thinks Schopenhauer
is really looking for a kind of stasis, a state of perfect contentment where you don't
need to strive anymore, you're finally fully satisfied, and Nietzsche thinks what we ought
to throw out is not our desires, but the sense that a kind of position of perfect satisfaction
is either attainable or desirable. So Nietzsche does, in a sense, take a more optimistic view
than Schopenhauer. He buys the pessimistic premises that start Schopenhauer's own philosophy,
the premise that indeed individuals are inevitably subject to suffering and death, but nevertheless
he thinks that we need not look at this as a kind of argument against the value of life.
Taking a kind of source of sustenance from being part of life, from being part of the
motion or the dynamic of life, rather than looking for a peaceful state in which to live
out your days, is what we ought to do. Despite this relative optimism, however,
Nietzsche is not favoring a kind of cheap whitewashing of reality. So he tends to think
that too much focus on optimism, as some people who look at the Greeks and say, oh, how cheerful
they were, he thinks that's not really a good thing either, that we should recognize that
life involves these various negative components, but nevertheless approach the world with what
he calls strong pessimism, a sense that we can really deal with this and even take joy
in it.
Nietzsche's role of optimism, or what he often calls cheerfulness, I find not always convincing.
You get the sense that here is a man who desperately wants to feel good about life and cheerful,
but nevertheless there's a sense that throughout his entire life he's really saddled with Schopenhauer's
pessimism or a version of it, and is trying to convince himself that life is really worthwhile
despite all of the suffering. But this leads to another way of looking at pessimism and
looking at the meaning of life. Schopenhauer ultimately seems to think that meaning, purpose,
is to be found in a kind of rationality. That's what Kant thought. Nevertheless, what Nietzsche
points out, and I think very powerfully, is that the meaning of life is to be found not
in reason, not in rationality, not in some calculation, much less in theology, but the
meaning of life is to be found in the passions. That it's creativity, it's being devoted to
causes, it's being dedicated to something, another person, a project, an art, that's
what gives life meaning, and so pessimism has overcome as an aesthetic phenomenon, not as
a reason, not as a rational enterprise, but rather by something you really care about,
something you feel deeply passionate about.
