Lecture 8, Nietzsche, Jesus, Zarathustra
In this lecture I'm going to talk about one of Nietzsche's works that in a sense is an
aberration from the way he often writes. This is actually the book that he thinks is his
most important or claims to at times, thus books Zarathustra. Most of Nietzsche's works
as we've discussed are either in essay form or very commonly aphoristic form. But thus
books Zarathustra is the only work in which he makes a sort of sustained stab at fiction,
although a highly philosophical kind of fiction. So what I'm going to be discussing are perhaps
some of his bases for choosing this form in the first place and some of the very interesting
ideas that come out in the book. One way of getting a sense of why Nietzsche might have
chosen to write about a Persian prophet and one that wasn't all that well known in Europe
was that Nietzsche saw in Zarathustra a kind of counterpart to some of the heroes, indeed
his own heroes from his own tradition. Nietzsche has in mind his heroes, despite the kind of
obvious sense in which they aren't heroes, Jesus and Socrates as having been the beginners
of a tradition that he thought basically went downhill. Strangely enough, although Jesus
and Socrates would seem to be representatives of exactly what Nietzsche disliked about his
tradition, he seems to think that for all of what he sees as faults in their tradition,
these men were some of the most important people in world history and also in a certain
sense his philosophical rivals. For example, he tends to think of both of them as something
like the Hebrew prophets, people who are critical of the excesses of their times and people
who had ideas about how to reform the world in what they thought was a better way. Nietzsche
himself certainly thinks that that typical kind of project is something he wants to
do for his own time, so in that he thought that Jesus and Socrates were both in a sense
similar or kindred spirits. Also more specifically, there were ideas that Jesus and Socrates had
that he tended to think well of. For example, in Socrates' case, Socrates suggested the
idea of the philosopher king that the rule by a king should not be something that's a
matter simply of parting politics, but instead people should choose leaders on the basis
of their wisdom and institutions should be arranged in that kind of way. These are ideas
that Nietzsche is quite sympathetic to. Similarly, in the case of Jesus, Jesus himself was a
great critic of people in his own religious tradition as well as some of the excesses
of behavior in the Roman Empire and Nietzsche similarly felt that that was a very reasonable
kind of approach to their life and times. Interestingly though, in the case of both
Jesus and Socrates, the way that history has come to know these figures is not through
their own writings, but through the writings of others. In the case of Jesus, this is the
four evangelists, and in the case of Socrates, it's Plato's dialogues. In a sense, what
Nietzsche is trying to do in Zarathustra is to write something comparable to the New Testament
or to the Platonic dialogues and focusing on a different hero, but a hero in the sense
of the same kind of stature as Jesus and Socrates, namely, in a sense, the West's earliest
philosopher, Zarathustra. Zarathustra, as many of you may know, was a famous Persian
prophet, indeed the first religious hero that we tend to hear about in that part of the
Middle East. What Nietzsche found interesting about Zarathustra, I think, was that Zarathustra,
in a sense, was one of the earliest religious spokespeople, the founder of a new religion,
and a new religion that tended to have its consequence for later religious traditions
in the West. To say a bit about the historical Zarathustra, he lived in a time when things
were starting to change in his own location. India and Persia had both largely been part
of the same religious tradition up until this point. And the political situation had started
to change when some people settled down in stable communities, whereas other people remained
nomadic, as had been the general practice in the region. And Zarathustra's appearance
on the scene came at a time when there was a lot of concern about the fact that those
who settled were constantly being victimized by raiders who would come in on horseback
and take food, take whatever they wanted to, basically. And not surprisingly, in a case
where there was a lot of pain going on, there was a tendency to think of this in terms of
religion. So, for instance, many of Zarathustra's contemporaries tended to think that if these
invaders were actually succeeding in taking things from their community, their gods must
be stronger. What Zarathustra did was, in a sense, to separate the Persian religion
from the Indian tradition of which it had been a part. Zarathustra insisted that some
of the deities that had been worshiped in the past, namely the devas, the very deities
that we tend to learn about in the Hindu pantheon to this day, should not be worshiped. If people
in the settled communities of Persia were worshiping them, in a sense, they were adding
to their power. And this power seemed to be what was actually allowing their enemies to
come in and take things out of their city. So, instead, what they should do is stop all
of that worship and instead focus on the worship of a different kind of deity, the Ahura, and
particularly a supreme Ahura, Ahura Mazda, the supreme god. In this sense, Zarathustra
was the founder of Western monotheism. It's a qualified monotheism, to be sure. The idea
of worshiping a supreme god didn't equate, in Zarathustra's mind, to the idea that there
was only one god. There were other gods, other deities. It's just that they weren't as powerful
and shouldn't be encouraged, in some cases. But nevertheless, there was a kind of move
in the direction that later Judaism, Christianity, and Islam all followed. The idea of a single
god to whom worship should be focused. More interestingly, and away from Nietzsche's point
of view, Zarathustra's main religious innovation, besides this claim that the single supreme
god should be the focus of worship, was the idea that good and evil should be distinguished.
This is particularly interesting in Nietzsche's case, because Nietzsche actually takes issue
with the way good and evil have been understood in his own tradition. So the fact that he's
chosen as his spokesperson, in a way, a person who founded the idea of taking this as a very
serious dichotomy, is something that, in a way, needs to be explained. Strangely enough,
I think the tendency, oftentimes, in reading Nietzsche's book Zarathustra, is not to notice
that he's placing so much emphasis on the original, simply because his Zarathustra talks
about modern problems and so on. Nevertheless, it's very clear Nietzsche did have the historical
Zarathustra in part in mind when he wrote the opening. The way he concluded the book
that he had finished right before Zarathustra was to present a kind of arrival of Zarathustra
on the scene, and he basically takes this same section as the opening for the book Zarathustra,
so I'll read this passage in full and then comment.
When Zarathustra was 30 years old, he left his home in Lake Ermi and went into the mountains.
There he enjoyed his spirit and his solitude, and for 10 years did not tire of that. But
at last his heart changed, and one morning he rose with the dawn, stepped before the sun,
and spoke to it thus. You great star, what would your happiness be if you did not have
those for whom you shine? For 10 years you have climbed up to my cave. You would have
become weary of your light and of the journey, had it not been for me and my eagle and my
serpent. But we waited for you every morning, took your overflow from you, and blessed you
for it. Behold, I am sick of my wisdom, like a bee that has gathered too much honey. I need
hands outstretched to receive it. I want to give away and distribute until the wise among
men enjoy their folly once again, and the poor their riches. For that I must descend
to the depths as you do in the evening when you go behind the sea and still bring light
to the underworld, you overriched star. Like you I must go under, as men put it to whom
I wish to descend. Bless me, then, your calm eye that can look without envy, even upon
an all too great happiness. Bless the cup that wants to overflow in order that the water
may flow from it, golden and carry the reflection of your rapture everywhere. Behold, this cup
wants to become empty again, and Zarathustra wants to become man again. Thus Zarathustra
began to go under. Now a number of features of that opening I think are extremely interesting.
One of which is that it is quasi-biblical in style. We have an invocation, a kind of
hymn to a God, in effect, as Zarathustra begins this journey. And those Zarathustra in Nietzsche's
story is going to be, in a sense, a spokesperson for his atheistic view of the world. Nevertheless,
there is this opening in which Zarathustra certainly is positioned as a kind of religious
prophet. I think there is a very clear indication that Nietzsche has a historical Zarathustra
in mind. He also mentions explicitly Lake Ermi, which is the vicinity of the area that
the original Zarathustra lived in. And apparently the story goes that Zarathustra did live in
a mountain cave. Another thing that comes through in this kind of quasi-biblical invocation
is the way in which Zarathustra is being presented as a kind of counterpart to Jesus and also
to Socrates. To Jesus in the sense that he begins his mission at the age of 30, or at
least we hear mention of him at the age of 30, in a sense stopping and reflecting, going
into retirement before beginning a mission to humanity. Immediately he is unlike Christ,
who went briefly into the desert 40 days, was tempted there, and immediately launched
into his mission to humanity. Zarathustra, by contrast, stayed in solitude for 10 years
and only descends to humanity later on. But when he does descend to humanity, there is
a kind of reference to a very famous story in the Platonic Dialogue. Plato's Republic
includes Socrates' story, The Myth of the Cave, in which he speaks of people who have
spent their whole lives chained in a cave and basically see only shadows cast against
a wall by things moving around between a fire in back of them and the screen and effect
of the wall. And therefore their whole world, their whole sense of what's out there is just
these shadows. The story goes that one of them was able to escape the cave, to go out
into the world, to see the sun, to see all the kinds of things in the world, and suddenly
see what the real situation is. This person, according to Socrates, would be overwhelmingly
full of desire to go down to his fellows in the cave and tell them what he discovered.
Unfortunately, people who lived in the cave would not believe this. They knew their world
and this was not it. In addition, by changing from the very bright light of the external
world to the cave again, the person returning to the cave actually seems to have lost his
eyesight and therefore can be dismissed as well. And the sense then, Zarathustra is taking
on that position of the philosopher who is returning to humanity, though strangely enough
it was the cave in which he gained his wisdom, not of spending time out in the open world
of the valley. So there's a kind of attempt to turn some details of the traditional stories
on their heads. And indeed that's what Zarathustra does. He, in a sense, is addressing the same
kinds of important religious questions that he thought that Socrates and Jesus both did,
but at the same time in somewhat novel ways. And that's one of the structural features
that I think is quite important about the book. There are all kinds of allusions to
Plato and the New Testament, which indicate that Nietzsche is concerned that Zarathustra
addressed some of the same issues, but sometimes in ways that deviate considerably. One of
the very important features of the historical Zarathustra that I think is relevant here
is that the historical Zarathustra was not so interested in another world. There seems
to have been a kind of political motivation in the first place for his talking about gods,
talking about good and evil, aligning yourself with the right force and maintaining a kind
of stance of firm enmity against the other. All of this had a certain kind of earthly
basis, namely the situation of his community and his time. Zarathustra is also quite adamant
that people who worshiped Ahura Mazda should be agrarian. They should help to raise cattle
particularly and also to farm. And that this is part of their obligation as people that were
members of the religion. So again, there's a kind of emphasis on this world as opposed to
focusing all attention to another world. And that I think Nietzsche would be extremely pleased
about. In fact, one of the first things he has Zarathustra do as soon as he descends from the
mountain is arrive in a community and claim, I teach you the meaning of the earth. It's the
meaning of the earth that's going to be important to Nietzsche's Zarathustra, not so much seeking
the meaning of the earth in something completely other. Zarathustra begins his general mission
after a kind of speech about teaching the meaning of the earth with a story that is a parable
and a parable that isn't really located anywhere in time and place. In this respect, it resembles
Hegel's famous master and slave dialectic, where we have a master and slave interact,
but we don't know where they are in time and space, presumably because this is a kind of model that
fits lots of situations. The stories are, Zarathustra tells is not so much about the interaction of
two different individuals, but more the interaction of one individual with a whole tradition.
And he tells of three stages that such an individual faces, at least if this individual evolves
ideally. First of all, a spiritual person is going to adopt the stage of what Zarathustra
calls the camel, the camel who would bear much. And what he has in mind here is someone who takes
on the burden of the tradition, learns it thoroughly, is willing to carry it, who spends a
livelihood in a sense, carrying on things that have been learned from the tradition.
As Nietzsche sees it, this is certainly the starting point for any kind of spiritual development.
And I think this is a quite interesting contrast with the way Nietzsche is often perceived.
Nietzsche has often been viewed as someone who basically turned aside his tradition and wanted
to do something completely different. I think this story suggests otherwise that indeed the move
that Nietzsche made in saying no to certain things about his tradition are already based on
having absorbed the tradition and treated it with a great deal of reverence. It's only at stage two
that one starts to question some of it. And this is a stage that Zarathustra describes as the lion
stage. In the stage of the lion, the soul stops simply following what the tradition has suggested
and starts to evaluate and to say no to assert individuality by questioning, challenging some
of the things that have simply been handed on as the truth. And it's in this stage that perhaps we
see the image of Nietzsche fitting most precisely, the idea that having learned the tradition, suddenly
a certain maturity is reached at which point questions can be asked. So no longer simply
serving the tradition, but saying no to parts of it becomes the important thing.
However, this is not the final stage. And again, this counters the common image of Nietzsche.
The final stage moves beyond this no saying stage where the soul is simply rejecting
to a new kind of affirmation. And this final stage is characterized metaphorically as the
stage of the child. The child at this point has a kind of boundless energy for what's new,
for experimentation. In one of Nietzsche's other works, he talks about how man's maturity is
returning to the kind of seriousness had at play by children. And if you think about children at
play, there is a kind of seriousness in all the games involved, but none of them are viewed as
the fundamental matter of things. You finish a game and start another one. There's a kind of
willingness to, in a sense, regenerate one's activities, not to be caught either in simply
obeying or simply defying, but having a kind of new creative energy that comes out of oneself.
So the image of the child for Nietzsche is an image of full creative response and full vitality
that one sees in children at play discovering the world for the first time.
It's a kind of image of a new innocence. So despite the fact that already this kind of evolution
of the soul has involved learning the whole tradition, rejecting some of it, only now are
you in a stage to really become a child, to start over and deal with the world in your own way.
And that's what Zarathustra holds up as an ideal. Another way of capturing the notion of the ideal
for Zarathustra is this famous expression, the ubermensch, the overman or superman. And indeed
this term does come up very early in the book, in Zarathustra's first speech, after all, to his
humanity that he finds gathered before him. He starts talking about teaching the overman,
and the overman or ubermensch being the meaning of the earth. And as we've mentioned in earlier
lectures, it's not so much that Nietzsche is talking about an evolutionary goal of a straightforward
but I think that perhaps the best way of making some sense of the image is to think of it in
terms of this image of the child. The ubermensch is someone who is like humanity in a lot of ways,
but more capable, having transcended a lot of human limitations. In a sense, this kind of boundless
vitality of the child is something that is being presented here as a kind of ideal,
a way of approaching reality. And the ubermensch, as Zarathustra characterizes it,
is a way of being that involves risk taking, not concerning yourself so much with simply going
about your everyday routine, but always thinking of new ways of approaching things and not being
unwilling to take risks in order to bring something better about. The idea of having certain kinds
of aspirations and being willing to stake your life on them, in a sense, is what Zarathustra
thinks is really urgent. The whole idea of passion and passionate involvement, even if of course
you end up risking life and limb, of course you're spending your energy, which is finite,
and your lifespan, which is finite, on some particular quest, nevertheless he thinks that's
the kind of nobility that we ought to view as ideal. We ought to become heroes, but not heroes
of a tradition that we haven't had a part in, instead heroes of new ways of thinking things
through, new ideas that we've developed ourselves after having been nurtured by the tradition.
The ubermensch is presented as this kind of image of an ideal way to be, and I think maybe one
consider it also a kind of general placeholder for one's notion of greatness. Exactly what it
amounts to, to be great or to do something great, is going to depend very much on who you are,
what time you're living in, what your circumstances are, and so on. But the idea of the ubermensch
is we can always do something better. We shouldn't just view humanity and the arrival of humanity
on the scene as the be all, end all of nature. Let's see if we can transcend the human all to
human. Maybe people have tended to have these weaknesses, but let's see if we can move beyond
that. In his opening speech, Zarathustra contrasts the ubermensch with another image, which he fears
might be the actual outcome of further evolution, or actually devolution, namely what he calls the
last man. The last man is a kind of caricature of really the opposite of the ubermensch, someone who
will take no risks whatsoever, someone who has no ambitions whatsoever, and affect the ultimate
couch potato, who really basically wants to be comfortable. In a way, this image is a kind of
lampoon against the utilitarians who talk about trying to bring about a state where pain is
minimized. Nietzsche frequently suggests that you can minimize pain by making yourself completely numb
and avoiding any situation in which you exert yourself, but what kind of a life is that? And
indeed, that's how he presents the last man. The last man is very much convinced that this way of
being is great because it is calm and comforting. There's a sense in which the last man has,
as Zarathustra puts it, invented happiness, but it's a very kind of feeble happiness,
and a happiness that doesn't see beyond the present moment. This kind of not seeing beyond
the present moment makes the last man the last man. The last man, in a sense, would be the end of the
road, the end of this kind of continual cycle of regeneration of which earth and human life
participates. So by comparison with Schopenhauer's story of the insect that over and over again
tries to find a mate, mate, and then immediately dies, only to start the cycle up again, that's
a much more meaningful way of existing than the last man who basically doesn't even have the desire
to move beyond the couch. The uberminch, by contrast, is, in a sense, the descendant of us,
if we really decide to take ourselves seriously enough to make goals for ourselves,
to attempt things, to attempt things that might cause us to perish in the process.
An interesting aspect of the little passage I read you, where Zarathustra appears,
is that Zarathustra is said to have decided to go under. And this is actually a play on words in
German. Untergehn, go under, is on the one hand a word that's used to describe the sun's setting
at the end of the day, with the idea that although setting happens, so does regeneration when the
morning comes. Also, Untergehn has the notion of dying, perishing. So there's a sense in which
what Zarathustra decides to do is to commit himself fully to the task of extending his wisdom to
others, even if it kills him in the process. And any kind of work one chooses to do, in a sense,
does use up your life. There is a sense in which whatever you undertake is, in a way, a route
to death. And Zarathustra sees that too. But he's made a decision at this point that what he's going
to commit himself to, the work he's going to undertake in his life, is going to be this effort
to return to humanity and to go under, literally, to perish in the process. Nietzsche, through
Zarathustra, suggests that that's in a sense the only way to be, to decide on a project that, of
course, you know, is finite, in the sense that your lifespan is finite, but nevertheless to make
something of it, to make something that you can visualize as great, and to keep trying, even
if it isn't a completely successful experiment. Interestingly enough, Zarathustra's own efforts
aren't entirely successful. When he makes this speech, for example, he finds that a crowd has
gathered for a circus. And when he's talking about the last man, they think, well, this is
probably a performer. Bring the performer out, they tell him. Zarathustra's been mistaken in
effect for a circus barker. And there are lots of really perverse things that happen through
the story, I mean, in a sense, the novel, in which Zarathustra is completely misunderstood.
Much of the dynamic, I would say, of the novel has to do with failures to make himself understood
on Zarathustra's part and efforts he comes up with in order to overcome that. So he wants to
present a story in which, even presenting an individual's work, the work of Zarathustra,
even though he's presenting this as a kind of ideal in that he's really committed himself,
it's not a completely risk-free proposition. It has all kinds of risks involved in it,
and Zarathustra often feels like a complete failure. And it's this kind of regenerating
commitment to his task that tells the story of much of the novel. In this respect, I think he's
drawing on what actually is another reason that Nietzsche chooses Zarathustra as a kind of spokesperson.
Nietzsche himself, in talking about Zarathustra later on in his autobiography,
points out that people haven't found his choice of Zarathustra nearly as interesting as he thinks
it is. And he comments, I have not been asked, as I should have been asked, what the name of
Zarathustra means in my mouth, the mouth of the first immoralist. For what constitutes the
tremendous historical uniqueness of that Persian is just the opposite of this. Zarathustra was
the first to consider the fight of good and evil, the very wheel in the machinery of things.
The transposition of morality into the metaphysical realm as a force, cause, and end in itself is
his work. But this question itself is at bottom its own answer. Zarathustra created this most
calamitous error, morality. Consequently, he must also be the first to recognize it. Not only has he
had more experience in this matter for a longer time than any other thinker, after all a whole
of history is a reputation by experiment of the principle of the so-called moral world order.
What is more important is that Zarathustra is more truthful than any other thinker.
His doctrine and his alone posits truthfulness as the highest virtue. This means the opposite of
the cowardice of the idealist who flees from reality. Zarathustra has more intestinal fortitude
than all other thinkers taken together. To speak the truth and to shoot well with arrows,
that is Persian virtue. Am I understood? The self overcoming of morality out of truthfulness.
The self overcoming of the moralist into his opposite, into me. That is what the name Zarathustra
means in my mouth. I think this is really a shocking statement because he's in effect saying that
Zarathustra, even by distinguishing good and evil, was already starting the path that led
forward to Nietzsche, who puts good and evil aside. And what he's suggesting here is that what
Zarathustra really did was create a kind of basic distinction where distinctions weren't being made.
And rather than follow through by making more refined distinctions, the tradition just stuck
with that first one. So it treats good and evil as two, in a sense, pales which you can place
every human action in. It's good or evil, nothing more subtle need be done. And Nietzsche's view is
Zarathustra, being a very truthful person, would never have seen this as the best outcome for
what he attempted. What he attempted was to become more refined in one's understanding.
Similarly, the fact that Zarathustra is committed to truthfulness,
Nietzsche's Zarathustra, and allies Nietzsche himself with his project, because what in effect
happens here is that its truthfulness, Nietzsche would claim, that has led him to question the
existence of the Christian God, or to question a good and evil. And this is precisely too what
his Zarathustra attempts to show. Zarathustra attempts to preach this kind of new vision of
reality without the Christian God. And indeed, much of the story involves his attempt to learn
how to live in a meaningful way without the Christian God. He too sees a kind of sadness
in the wake of what he views as God's death. But with this sadness, he attempts instead to
bring about a kind of way in which meaning can be understood. In that way, he thinks that
he actually is continuing the work of Zarathustra, that Zarathustra has evolved into him. Thank you.
