Lecture 10 Nietzsche's Style and the Problem of Truth
In this lecture we are going to talk about Nietzsche's various literary styles
and the implications these have for his quest for truth, or in general the quest for truth.
Nietzsche was an experimentalist with regard to style, and this makes interpreting him a very difficult matter.
For example, I've already talked to a great extent about Zarathustra as a character,
but I haven't mentioned the fact that other characters sometimes appear in the book about Zarathustra,
sometimes those kind of walk-on parts that are never seen again.
One I'll mention because it's of particular interest is a character called the ugliest man.
Zarathustra encounters a pretty miserable character who really doesn't want to be seen at all,
known as the ugliest man, and eventually gets the ugliest man to confess that he actually is the killer of God.
Hard to know what to make of that, especially when you reflect on the fact that after all Socrates is well known for being ugly.
Is Socrates the ugliest man?
One might say that Socrates' tradition, in a way, doesn't ally as easily as many people have thought with the Christian tradition.
After all, Socrates encourages rational investigation, and that, as Nietzsche sees it,
is exactly one of the things that has led to the demise of faith in the Christian God.
On the other hand, one of the comments the ugliest man the character makes is that he couldn't stand it anymore.
God was watching him constantly, and being ugly, it was just something that became intolerable, hence his motivation.
That sounds sort of playful, but again, this resonates with the way Nietzsche thinks the death of God has actually come about.
More and more, in his opinion, people came to see themselves as fundamentally flawed, fundamentally ugly, fundamentally sinful,
and pushing that to its extreme point, it becomes intolerable to imagine a divine being viewing all of that, hence the death of God.
A lot of these rather playful images actually do tell stories or make points that Nietzsche wants to assert,
but he doesn't present them as simple assertions, simple statements of the facts of the matter. Instead, they're provocative.
In general, I would say one of his general tendencies, or basically what he's trying to do, is give us an experience of thought,
not so much the general idea that he concluded. Many philosophers make arguments defending a certain point,
and there's no effort to explain how it is they came to the conclusion.
In fact, truth be told, as Nietzsche sees it, oftentimes philosophers come to their conclusions before constructing the arguments,
and then only after the fact manufacture arguments that might lead to this conclusion.
In a sense, Nietzsche does the opposite. He starts forays of thought that allow the reader to come to conclusions themselves.
Sometimes he pursues them for only a paragraph or a few sentences, sometimes for several pages,
and in the aphoristic works at least, oftentimes after pursuing a line of thought, he drops it.
Maybe he'll pick it up again in a later passage, maybe not.
Maybe what he pursues after that seems to be a thought in a very different direction.
And again, I think what he's trying to do is demonstrate something like the process of thinking,
that when one has a kind of insight or intuition, one does pursue a certain train of thought for a way,
but then put it down sometimes, maybe never to return to it.
Another aspect of the process of thinking that Nietzsche is concerned with is something that he categorizes as musical.
He prides himself on exploring different kinds of tempo or tempi in writing, much as a musician might do in music.
So he suggests that he's arranged many of his books with a kind of sense of pace in mind.
Sometimes he'll have a rather plodding pace attempting to reach a conclusion only very slowly but methodically.
Other times he allows a kind of gallop to happen, so that one is almost breathless by the end of one of his running passages.
Again, there's a kind of sense that this is much the way people actually do think.
And he isn't so concerned that we draw exactly the conclusions he does, is that we share the experience with him to a certain point.
One of the particular stylistic features that we've talked a bit about, but I'd like to go into a bit further here,
is this use of the aphorism.
What are called aphorisms in Nietzsche's works, as we've mentioned, sometimes extend for several pages,
but the quintessential aphorism is essentially a simple line.
And Nietzsche has a lot to say about his reliance on the aphorism.
He describes it as something like stepping from mountaintop to mountaintop.
And he makes it very clear that he doesn't think the reader is going to get the whole story simply by reading the aphorism.
What the aphorism has to do with is Nietzsche's desire for an active readership,
not people who passively go along with what he says and simply draw the same conclusions that he does,
but instead fellow companions in thought who engage the same kind of train of thought to an extent,
but then are free to pursue it any way they like.
Indeed, Nietzsche wants companions in this respect, not simple followers.
I'm going to take an example of one of Nietzsche's aphorisms and suggest the many ways in which one might continue the line of thought,
just to point out how variably one might take it.
And this is probably one of his most famous aphorisms, actually even heard in such popular culture venues as Conan the Barbarian.
The particular line being, what doesn't kill me makes me stronger.
Actually this line, although quoted oftentimes out of context without attribution, is not simply that line as quoted,
but it has a preface as Nietzsche states it.
The preface is, out of life school of war, out of life school of war, what doesn't kill me makes me stronger.
I think with the preface, we're given certain suggestions as to how we might take it,
but very, very different directions might emerge.
For example, you might see this as a suggestion that life is rough.
It is a bit like a school of war.
And in a sense, what doesn't kill me makes me stronger.
You almost have to think that if you're going to get through it alive.
On the other hand, maybe it's simply the reversal that Nietzsche's getting at.
Out of life school of war, what doesn't kill me makes me stronger.
Well, in a certain straightforward way, thinking about military thought,
there is a sense in which defeats actually do take a toll.
What doesn't kill you might, in fact, make you a lot more vulnerable toward the future.
So we get a reversal of what's expected here.
What could that possibly mean?
Well, perhaps another way of looking at it is to say,
what doesn't kill me makes me stronger,
in that I've learned from experience in military thinking
or in any kind of strategic thinking in life.
Having certain kinds of experiences makes you more prepared
for what you might come across in the future,
even though it probably won't be identical.
So you're stronger in that you're more prepared, you're ready.
But what are you ready for?
Perhaps this isn't just a kind of whistling in the dark
of someone who realizes that they might be risking their life in this case.
What doesn't kill me makes me stronger in the sense that
I'm not going to let it get me down.
Then there's a psychological impact,
and this, I think, makes particularly good sense
if you think about this in the context of an actual war.
What doesn't kill me makes me stronger.
Suppose I haven't been killed despite all kinds of situations
that might have threatened me.
In that case, what's the enemy going to think?
It's going to be a lot like a team playing a team
that's undefeated for the season.
They haven't been killed yet.
What makes me, the opponent team, think I can do anything.
We get the impression that it's a psychological advantage
to have been through a lot and still manage to face battle in the future.
This is a great psychological advantage
by comparison to someone who perhaps is untested.
It's always terrifying to face as an opponent
someone who's thought very highly of, who's viewed as strong.
Or perhaps what Nietzsche's getting at is
we end up developing a kind of suit of armor
by virtue of our experiences.
We become hardened in a sense.
We aren't the vulnerable individual that we start out being,
but instead, through life's school of war,
we've learned to, in effect, become our own armor
or make a kind of armor out of our skin.
That makes us less sensitive,
but on the other hand, we're certainly stronger.
I point to all these possible ways of reading the line
in order to draw attention to the fact that
Nietzsche doesn't tell us which, if any of them,
he has in mind himself.
He simply drops this as a line for our further thinking.
And in general, I think many of his stylistic experiments
attempt to do the same.
One of his strategies that often occurs in the aphoristic works
is that he juxtaposes things.
In Daybreak, or Dawn, for instance,
he has a series of passages that open the work
that talk a lot about custom,
how certain habits for society
simply become customary after a point.
And when he talks about this,
you get the impression that he's perhaps
going to launch a kind of anthropological investigation.
Suddenly, he, in a sense, shifts topics
by talking about morality.
And it seems that he's sort of opened up a totally new line of thought.
I think suddenly what he's trying to suggest is
this really isn't a totally new line of thought.
That if you think about customs and habits,
and then think about morality,
are they really entirely different things?
He would say that our moralities are really entrenched customs.
Customs that our societies take to be particularly important,
perhaps, but really exactly the same thing,
having the same status.
Certain ways of being that people have found useful
or merely traditional and stuck by
and felt to be important really for no fundamentally other reason
than the fact that others have done it before them.
Frequently, I think what he's trying to do
is allow these kind of connections to emerge in our own minds.
So while he does want active readership
that is going to move forward in thought
and take things further,
and indeed he often says he doesn't necessarily want to be followed,
but nevertheless read and grappled with,
still he does sometimes manipulate.
So it would be rather surprising
if after all this discussion of habit and custom,
one didn't end up thinking,
isn't he possibly suggesting that this is a habit too,
that our morays are really simply traditions,
habits, and I think the big point, changeable?
Reading Nietzsche, it becomes obvious
that he doesn't follow what now is considered
the standard philosophical mode,
and Kathy's account of aphoristic thinking in particular
makes the why of this very clear.
The dominant mode, at least since Descartes,
with the rise of science in the West,
has been that philosophy is essentially an argument,
and in particular it's a kind of deduction.
Now there are philosophers who deviate from this,
for example they would say it's partly an inductive argument,
an argument based on experience,
but nevertheless this notion of an argument,
something that proceeds from evidence or premise
to conclusion methodically,
is something which has dominated the western tradition
for the last 300 years.
The most famous example here, of course, is Descartes,
who quite explicitly modeled his philosophical method
on geometry.
Perhaps slightly less known, but equally luminary
in the early modern philosophy,
is the Dutch philosopher Spinoza,
who said, in effect,
that truth must be expressed
in a geometrical, deductive style,
and to read Spinoza's view on ethics,
which in fact is a very sensitive, personal book
talking about things like fate and feeling and faith.
The truth is you open it up and it looks like a geometry textbook
with propositions and theorems and corollaries and QEDs,
and even people like Kant,
he calls one of the primary chapters in his greatest book,
a deduction,
and some of the romanics and some of the philosophers
of the early 19th century,
who are clearly not in the strictly Enlightenment camp,
also refer to what they're doing as deduction.
And of course the English all the way through,
notably John Stuart Mill, is first of all a logician,
that's what his philosophy is centered on,
and contemporary American English philosophy, as we all know,
is very centered on formal logical arguments,
not Nietzsche.
In fact, one might say that by this criterion,
the criterion that philosophy consists of an argument,
a kind of deduction,
that all of Nietzsche really consists of a sequence of fallacies,
that basically it's all a matter of not doing philosophy right,
or as many people would put it, not doing philosophy at all,
but rather doing some sort of literature,
some sort of rhetoric,
some sort of art form,
but not philosophy.
We've already discussed in some detail,
the sense in which Nietzsche, for example,
employs ad hominem arguments,
in which he attacks the person,
rather than the thesis or the argument.
The purpose behind this is essentially to give us a larger picture.
It's not just the argument,
it's not just the inference,
and it's not just the conclusion,
but rather it's the whole package of the philosopher
and his or her philosophy,
and, of course, his or her world,
the circumstances which give rise to it.
And as we've suggested,
this is fair turn about to turn on Nietzsche
and say, Nietzsche has to be considered,
not just in terms of his ideas and his conclusions,
but also in terms of his life,
and in particular his incredible solitude,
his continuous illness,
the brevity of his life.
It's an ad hominem argument,
but Nietzsche would say it's only such ad hominem arguments,
which allow us to get the full picture
of what's going on in philosophy.
And so, too,
we suggested that Nietzsche,
contrary to the reigning philosophical style,
going back to Socrates in this case,
Nietzsche often appeals to emotion,
and he makes no bones about it.
He makes it very clear,
added Kierkegaard before him,
that what he's doing is trying to stimulate
what Cathy referred to as
our experience,
and in particular our emotional experience,
to make us disgusted
often with ourselves,
to make us curious about the world,
to make us see beauty,
where perhaps we didn't see it before.
And in Kierkegaard's case, of course,
is to prod us into faith,
where before we had perhaps been
too timid to try it.
But appeals to emotion for Nietzsche,
and for Kierkegaard,
are the absolute essence of philosophy.
And one might say
that for Nietzsche trying to prod us
into these emotional experiences,
philosophy becomes,
in the dichotomy that's been around since Plato,
a matter of rhetoric,
not a matter of logic and argument.
Now, I mentioned in a previous lecture that Socrates,
although he himself
distinguished his work from
those of his rivals, the Sophists,
and Plato certainly makes this very clear,
I suggested that, in fact, Socrates really
is one of the Sophists.
In fact, he's one of the best of them.
The truth is that
Sophistry, as we now use that term,
isn't just a matter of argument,
but it's also appeal to emotion.
And it is to put it in
terms that Nietzsche would certainly approve,
an art form.
Argument, after all, is an art form.
Philosophers, I think,
when they use strict logical form,
convince no one.
Take, for example, some of the famous arguments
which prove God's existence,
which Kierkegaard makes fun of
at great length.
I won't go into the details here,
but the idea that, for example,
if you can have a thought of an infinite being,
then it follows through
some fairly fancy logical footwork
that such a being must exist.
I'm willing to bet that there is not a single individual
in the history of religion
who has ever been converted
on the basis of such an argument.
St. Anselm, the most famous Christian thinker
who invented one version of that
complicated argument,
in fact, embeds it within
a statement of devout faith
and makes it very clear
that the point of the argument is not conversion,
convincing the unbeliever,
but rather for someone who already believes
this is a kind of rational structure
to put on top of the belief.
In general,
philosophy is not logic.
Philosophy is
a kind of rhetoric,
and of course Socrates himself
was a great rhetorician.
Many of his arguments,
every classic scholar will agree,
many of his arguments are terrible.
And the kind of argument that we would allow
in a freshman undergraduate.
Nevertheless, they're very powerful
and they're powerful because of Socrates' personality.
They're powerful because of
the mode of presentation.
They're powerful because he knows how to deal
with other people.
And so too with Nietzsche.
One is not doing him a disservice
when one says, as a good many
of the postmodernists recently have said,
that what he's doing is rhetoric,
not logic.
I think a better way to put it
is that what Nietzsche is doing
is art, not science.
But that's in a way
unfair because Nietzsche often says
he's doing science,
which raises a very important question.
I would put it this way.
If what Nietzsche is doing
is rhetorical,
it's convincing us,
appealing to our emotions,
then what happens to truth?
Because famously,
rhetoric allows us to convince people
of many matters that are not
true
and logic
doesn't give us any protection.
As I said, a logical argument
standing against a powerful,
emotional appeal
usually doesn't stand a chance.
Only perhaps with a handful
of philosophers.
So what happens to the truth?
One of Nietzsche's answers
is that it
gets lost away.
And we've already seen
some of the reasons why he says this
and want to come back to it
in the next lecture and talk about
Nietzsche's theories of truth
in much more detail.
But the dominant view that he presents
throughout his philosophy looks like this.
There is no truth.
There are only interpretations.
Now, that sounds
very much like a rejection of
truth altogether.
But then one thinks about
something Kathy said in the last lecture
about Nietzsche and the importance of
truthfulness.
Nietzsche was a philosopher
who prided himself
and praised Zarathustra
and Jesus and Socrates.
For their truthfulness,
their willingness to speak the truth
even against popular opposition
and current tradition.
But what sense does it make
to talk about truthfulness,
if you don't have
truth somewhere to go along
with it?
Well, one way to answer that question
and one way of mixing up the categories
that I've just been using
is to say that all Nietzsche clearly sees
philosophy as an art form
and his writings clearly prove of that.
It's not antagonistic
with science.
But rather Nietzsche, like most of the other thinkers
at the end of the 19th century,
was fascinated by science, took science
very seriously,
read what I guess these days would be
the German equivalent of Scientific American,
knew what was going on
and found it fascinating.
But science isn't
a singular enterprise either.
And just as I did with rationality
I think it's important to understand
that when Nietzsche
and other philosophers talk about science
as when they talk about rationality
they're often referring to different things
and consequently have very different attitudes
towards them.
Now, early in his career
particularly in the atheristic
period of human-alto-human
daybreak and gay science
Nietzsche prized
science, often referred to as work as scientific
for one reason
above all else.
And that is because it was experimental.
As Kathy said in the last lecture
Nietzsche's style is through and through
experimental. He's trying to have
different effects. He's trying
different ways of having the desired effect.
Science
is also experimental.
It tries things.
And one of Nietzsche's
greatest
phrases of praise
says,
I'm willing to admire any hypothesis
which allows
let's try it.
And of course this is as with some of the
philosophers the Enlightenment, Voltaire for example.
A very keen slap in the face
against metaphysics
and against theology.
Because after all, there is no evidence
that will demonstrate a metaphysical proposition.
There is no evidence
that will demonstrate
the truth of Christianity
or any other religion.
This is a matter of faith.
It's a matter of metaphysics.
Perhaps you might say it's a matter of
pure reason.
But in any case, it's not something
that you can experiment with.
It's not something you can look for evidence for.
And so Nietzsche wants to say,
as Hume did before him,
let's just dismiss it.
Now, there's another way of thinking about this of course.
You can experiment with
religious beliefs.
But what you're experimenting with then
is not the evidence
for the proof of God's existence
or the trinity or anything of the sort.
What you're experimenting with,
and William James about the same time
was writing this out quite explicitly,
what you're experimenting with is
the effect of the belief on the believer.
And of course, that's very much in line
with what Nietzsche wants to say.
But the idea of experimenting with ideas,
experimenting with
philosophical viewpoints,
that's something that he thought
was very much a kindred
point of view between himself
and his philosophy and science.
He also saw science
as something purely naturalistic.
And to say that science is naturalistic
is first of all to say that it's
not supernatural or supernaturalistic.
Explanations
accounts
whether they're of the behavior of nature
or the behavior of human beings
must be couched
in the language of science.
And that means
we have to look for causes and effects.
That means we have to look for explanations
on the order of biology
or chemistry or physics
or psychology.
It means that it's not good
enough to say
God created it this way.
And you can't get an adequate account
of the human mind or psyche
by talking about God-given
human faculties as many philosophers
and psychologists before him were
prone to do.
He also admires science because it's
non-dogmatic.
Science always leaves itself open
and one of the points that Nietzsche
is fond of making, as the great
philosophers today are.
If you look back over the history of
science and beliefs about the world
more generally,
the most obvious thing is
that most of the beliefs,
certainly most of the general theories
that people have held about the world
have turned out to be false.
The earth is
not flat.
The earth is not stationary.
Species are not
permanent in nature.
Our beliefs about science,
our current theories,
are now true, the arrogance
of contemporary popular
science. But no scientist
worthy of his or her title
really accepts that.
Every scientist knows
theories are always tentative.
Our so-called knowledge
of the world is in place
for as long as the evidence holds out
and until some anomaly
or a counter set of evidence
outweighs it.
So science is dogmatic in a very important sense.
The same sense which Nietzsche wants to insist
that philosophy should be dogmatic.
It is always open
to alternatives. It's open to new possibilities.
It is open
to the idea of plural truths
something we'll talk about next time.
Sometimes, however,
Nietzsche opposes science
and it's a fascinating
question in itself to trace
throughout his various writings
how these attitudes
shift and change.
For example, in his very early work
when he is still a classic scholar
fundamentally,
there appears to be a kind of opposition
with science from an aesthetic point of view.
In other words, one might
think of the world in terms
of nature, science, cause
and effect. But on the other
hand, one might think of
nature in purely aesthetic terms.
Here's an example.
Many years ago,
I was sitting with a friend
who happens to be a rather
accomplished poet
in a coffee shop
in Austin
and there was a flower on the table.
It was a moderately fancy coffee shop
and the flower was
perking up through
the vase
and my friend said
if I remember
more or less correctly
the flower was spreading its
petals and reaching up
towards the sun, celebrating
the beautiful day.
I'm an old biologist
and I always remember
back to college and all those
lessons I learned about
turgor and cell metabolism
and tropisms and the like
but I wisely get my mouth shut
because I realized that
my explanation of why the flower was
stretching its way upward
was so much less elegant than his.
There's a sense in which
the scientific view of the world
can be dry
and in some of his latest works
Twilight of the Idols in particular
Nietzsche actually takes apart
some of the talk about cause
and effect. Not just in philosophy
but even in science more
generally. Asking whether these
concepts are really as specific
and as valid as philosophers
and scientists assume they are.
The aesthetic point of view on the other hand
often invokes images
metaphors
different kinds of ways of
seeing which are distinctively
unscientific
and insofar as Nietzsche opposes
science and the aesthetic point of view
then it's going to turn out that
aesthetics gets the upper hand
but I want to emphasize that this is
not usually the case and often
Nietzsche like a great many contemporary
scientists want to note
the aesthetic value of science itself
there is something beautiful about
seeing how the world works.
There is something beautiful, elegant
about the right kind of mathematical
theory and one should say
that for Nietzsche the notion of science
is much broader than our notion of science
today. That what he was
referring to as where all
of the prior German philosophers that we've talked
about was Wissenschaft
where I think the more proper
way of understanding it might be
something like wisdom or
discipline but it's certainly
not restricted to the very narrow
confines of physical
science which is often the case today.
He liked science throughout
his career insofar
as science is debunking.
He himself
and this is an appeal to his
Arathustra and Jesus as well
saw what was important as
bucking tradition
sort of popping balloons
exploding old superstitions
and traditions
and insofar as science is particularly
good at doing that, insofar
as science is skeptical
it obviously won Nietzsche's approval
but in his very late
works he also turns against science in a different
way. Partly he says
science is not always
undogmatic but sometimes
it becomes dogmatic
at that point it loses its
virtue and perhaps more
important he asked the
ad hominem question which I haven't
raised so far in this discussion
but the ad hominem question about the
scientist him or herself
and this applies in this
Wissenschaft sense not just to
the natural scientist
but to the scholar as well.
Why would people spend their lives
often passing up many more
pleasurable opportunities
just to get the truth
and with this truth itself
becomes a serious problem
which we'll pick up the next lecture.
