Lecture 23 The Will to Power and the Ubermench
One of the phrases most commonly associated with Nietzsche, in fact the phrase most commonly
associated with Nietzsche, is the phrase will to power. It is in fact a piece of jargon,
it's a philosopher's coinage, and on examination means actually much less than it seems to.
We've brought up the search for power, the craving for power, many times during the preceding lectures,
but we haven't really focused much on the will to power, and in fact we do not in our writings
about Nietzsche. This is somewhat at odds with some of the very recent work on Nietzsche.
Most notably the now famous German philosopher Martin Heidegger, who is very much in vogue,
has the four volume work in Nietzsche in which he talks about the will to power as the philosophy
of Nietzsche, as Nietzsche's central metaphysical idea. In the analytic tradition too, books are
coming out as we speak, talking about the will to power as the core of Nietzsche's philosophical
system. Our contention is, however, that it is not anything like that, that Nietzsche does
talk about the will to power, but it doesn't deserve such a central place. Nevertheless,
it's obviously an important concept and we'd like to examine it in this lecture.
One of the reasons I think that it's been taken to be such an important idea is that
Nietzsche describes himself with some enthusiasm as having discovered the will to power. In
a way this is correct, but in another way it doesn't acknowledge his predecessors. And
I think Nietzsche has two different sets of precursors in his discovery, the most obvious
being the philosopher Schopenhauer. We've already discussed Schopenhauer at some length
and spoken of how Schopenhauer believed that all of life, everything living, strives to
keep itself going and beyond itself to keep its species going. Schopenhauer at times describes
the fundamental impulse of the will as manifest in our world, the phenomenal world, as being
a will to life, basically understood as a will to self-preservation and reproduction.
In some passages where Nietzsche mentions will to power, he directly opposes will to
power to the Schopenhauerian notion of will to life. One of his claims is that it's very
obvious if you just look around in nature that there is something that creatures desire
even more than life since they'll risk their lives. What they desire is power, vitality,
or perhaps creative self-expression. They see themselves as only barely succeeding if
they maintain themselves in existence. There's a desire to enhance themselves, even if that
involves risking their lives. On the one hand, this appears when you counter Schopenhauer
to be something like a biological drive. We should keep in mind that for Schopenhauer
too, the entirety of the phenomenal world, including inanimate matter or inanimate material
objects, as well as biological entities, are all expressions of will. That's one of the
reasons why will to power seems to be a kind of metaphysical vision on Nietzsche's part.
Another basis for this kind of metaphysical reading, where will to power is a fundamental
reality in general, comes from Nietzsche's notes, one that's particularly famous, especially
so after Oliver Stone gave Jim Morrison this line, reading Nietzsche, this world a monster
of energy, without beginning, without end. The world is the will to power, and nothing
besides. It's very dramatic, particularly in Oliver Stone's The Doors. However, it's
not very clear what that means. I think this traces to Nietzsche's other set of influences
here, the scientific worldview of his time. Although in general, much science preceding
his era had involved models on the basis of mechanics, where inanimate matter intersected
with inanimate matter in order to create certain kinds of collisions and have certain kinds
of chemical results at times. Nietzsche was particularly enthusiastic about a kind of
growing movement in physics that suggested that the basic stuff of the universe wasn't
inert, but instead a matter of points of power. Little unclear, I think, in terms of trying
to spell out what exactly these would be like. But I think this translates in our way of
looking at things as something like dynamic energy. The vision that matter and energy
might at times be the same thing, or might be converted to one another, a much more common
idea in 20th century science, I think travels along the same direction that Nietzsche wanted
to go. He was quite elated with the idea that one might view a kind of basic scientific
system as dealing with dynamism rather than basic stuff that somehow has to be motivated
and moved. To view movement as primary rather than stasis was something that he saw as very
much in keeping with his own way of looking at things. And so passages like this, which
is in one of Nietzsche's notebooks, not in something he published, lend support to the
idea that Nietzsche was basically trying to come up with a kind of fundamental cosmology
or vision of the basic stuff of the universe. And I think to a certain extent that's true.
In his published writings, however, he doesn't talk about will to power so much in this light.
In fact, in his published writings, he very rarely makes any assertions about will to power
at all. He very famously makes it clear in one of the most famous passages where he mentions
will to power that this is a kind of thought experiment or as my theory has it. In other
words, he doesn't present this as absolutely true, but instead something that he's speculated
about, something he thinks worth considering and indeed something worth trying on as a
thought experiment in general. If one does take this view of reality, not surprisingly,
the psychological reality is going to follow suit. And as we've already discussed, Nietzsche
does see the desire for power, sometimes in a very straightforward way, to be a fundamental
human psychological motivation. Nevertheless, it's important to make clear that Nietzsche
does not think that the power that human beings want is necessarily the kind of obnoxious,
assertive, domineering kind that he associates with the ancient practitioners of master
morality. For example, in a passage in gay science, he makes very clear that benefiting
and hurting others are ways of exercising one's power upon others. That is all one desires
in such cases. While one can usually see that hurting others does exhibit one's power,
it may seem less obvious why benefiting others is a kind of expression of power. And I think
the fact that Nietzsche often sees opposite kinds of human expression to be motivated
by the same thing, something that's pretty fundamental to his psychology, what this shows
is that his sense of power is really quite open and, in a sense, unspecified. It only
gets specification in particular cases, in particular human situations. And it might
be something viewed as much as a, it might most often be viewed as a virtue, not necessarily
primarily as a vice. Certainly the primary way in which history has moved in his opinion
has always been motivated by someone or some group's desire to express their power, but
not necessarily politically or militarily. Indeed, there are many ways of expressing
power. It changes from time to time. And, as Kathy says, it's not always military or
by straightforward aggression. In one of his earliest books, the book Daybreak, Nietzsche
writes, the means of the craving for power have changed, but the same volcano is still
glowing. What one formerly did for God's sake, one now does for the sake of money, which
now gives the highest feeling of power. It's important to notice that power is not one
thing. Power takes many different forms, many different manifestations, and the energy,
the metaphor that Kathy just suggested, gives us a clue that energy takes many different
forms, has many different manifestations. And while physicists might talk about energy,
the truth is that almost everything interesting that they say is about some particular kind
of energy or some particular manifestation of energy. So too, with power, we should distinguish
well. Nietzsche is very clear that we all do what we want to do, and what we want to
do is to increase our power. But of course, some people, the masters of master morality,
are in a position to do this very easily. And also, they're in a position to do it very
subtly. They can impose upon themselves all sorts of interesting restrictions and challenges,
such that, for example, you create artwork out of minimal materials or given a certain
very strict set of rules, as we discussed earlier. And this is not an external imposition, but
an internal imposition, and it's another way of proving one's power. At the same time,
people who are not in a position of doing what they want, people who are not in a position
of straightforward exercise in their power, are capable of doing almost anything. He says
in the same book, once you distinguish well, whoever still wants to gain the consciousness
of power will use any means. He, whoever who has it, becomes very choosy and noble in his
tastes. There's a sense in which the very phrase, the will to power, is, I think, systematically
misleading. And I often say to my students, for example, that really what nature means is
neither will nor power. And I sometimes add, nor does he mean the, nor does he mean to. Let me
explain that. The notion of the will, as Kathy mentioned, comes more or less directly from
Schopenhauer, and he takes it more or less directly from Kant. Now, there's a huge difference
between the two. For Kant, the will is something individual. Each of us has a will, and will is
basically what lies behind our actions. We choose our actions. We will our actions. For
Schopenhauer, the will is emphatically not individual. It is one will, which is in some sense
inside of or behind all of us. And the individual will is, as we mentioned earlier, something of a
problem. The whole question of agency is open to question. Nevertheless, Nietzsche rejects both
notions. He what maintains with Kant the idea that what we're talking about is the individual. But
to talk about the will, that he says is a fiction. The idea that there is some agent, that there is
some special, I don't know what to call it, a force behind our actions, which is somehow cut off from
insulated from the causes and effects of the natural world, including the workings of our brain.
That can only be a philosopher's fantasy. It has nothing to do with how we actually work. So to talk
about will in the Kantian sense is nonsense, except for the fact that Kant is right in, in some sense,
focusing in on the individual. With Schopenhauer, the problem is the opposite. Because it's one will,
this metaphysical entity. Nietzsche, who throughout his philosophy, quite contrary to Heidegger and
some current theorists, really pushes away and rejects metaphysics. This idea of a metaphysical will is
something that he wants to reject, even if, as in Schopenhauer, it is something which we personally
experience in our own case. So what he's talking about should not be conceived of as a will. One
might talk about the motive to power or something like that. But by power, of course, we also open up
a whole door of possible misunderstandings. Most importantly, there's the idea that power means
military or political power. Now the Germans actually distinguish this by talking about
right for political power. And the word that Nietzsche uses is mocked. But to think of mocked,
I think as power lends itself to a misunderstanding. Perhaps a better translation would be something
like strength, although there's another word for that, or even self-expression, although that can't
be a literal translation. So I think what Nietzsche is referring to by the will to power might better
be thought of as the will to be oneself, the will to show oneself for what one is, the will to feel
alive and feel vital and creative. Now what about the and to? Well, the very simply indicates that
there is some singular thing. If we're talking about Schopenhauer, talking about the will makes
perfectly good sense. But we're not talking about Schopenhauer. And for Nietzsche, it's the many
manifestations and the many differences that are of importance. And two, well, two very simply
indicates a kind of goal orientation, something Kathy will talk about in a second. But the idea
that what we want is to achieve a certain goal, to increase power, to get power, and so on,
I think is very misleading for Nietzsche, because what he's talking about is something different.
Indeed, I think that there is a kind of tendency to think of will to power as wanting some desirable
state. As Nietzsche understands will to power, in fact, one of the things he thinks is desirable
about the expression, it's always on the way toward. So there is no sense in which one completes the
project of being will to power. You can't get enough power, at least in the sense that Nietzsche
means it. Certainly many of the kinds of goals that people set for themselves are quintessential
and very clear manifestations of will to power. Someone who does run for high office is seeking
power in a straightforward way, someone who seeks wealth another way, but also someone who seeks
knowledge or truth. Nietzsche is very clear about the fact that will to truth is a manifestation
of will to power. He comments or has Zarathustra comment, will to truth you call it, a will to
the thinkability of all being, this I call your will, all being you want to make thinkable,
for you doubt with well-founded suspicion whether it is thinkable, yet it shall yield and bend for
you. That is your entire will, a will to power, also when you speak of good and evil and valuations.
So many of the more spiritual kinds of projects that have been very fundamental to not only western
society but to human civilization in general, Nietzsche would also view as matters of will to
power. In fact, they are very subtle but very broadly based. He claims that one wants reality to
bend to one, to make reality form itself in accordance with one's own mind. That has to be
viewed as a very, very basic sense of the drive for power. What Nietzsche I think has in mind that
ends up spilling over into an idea we will talk about in the next lecture,
internal recurrence, is also that it is essential that will to power be understood as something
driving the present. It is in a sense an engine that motivates the person in the present tense.
Even if one achieves high office wealth, a certain modicum of truth, that does not satisfy will
to power. It is where you are in the present. It is like one of those goals that you have
put behind you, perhaps set a trophy on your shelf, but one moves on. And so will to power is never
extinguished in that life itself is never extinguished in Nietzsche's terminology. The
individual might die eventually but until that last moment of consciousness throughout, there is
always a sense of trying to gain further power. So no particular individual goal will satisfy it
and there is no particular individual manifestation of it that is more will to power than any other.
What Nietzsche does see and what he does to Schopenhauer's notion of will is to give the
will in a sense more specification in individual cases. So actually any human motivation,
he will end up seeing as a kind of motivation toward power. And sometimes his analyses that
show us this, including this analysis I just read about will to truth, some of these are very subtle
and don't seem perhaps from the outside to be manifestations of will to power at all. But
Nietzsche does think that in each particular psyche, however the balance may turn out, there's always
this drive to enhance one's vitality, to fully express oneself. And it's only when one is feeling
relatively sick or relatively tired that one tends to recede and even then it's only
to regain one's strength for further expression. So in a sense the way the will to power functions
is not something Nietzsche is going to predict in advance. It isn't something that he limits to
metaphysical accounts or cosmological accounts or accounts of the basic stuff of the world.
Indeed he would say every single goal of anything in the universe perhaps, but certainly human beings
and probably most mammals, any particular goal is a manifestation of will to power.
And the particular goal is something that will to power finds before itself at a given point.
And when that goal is met, another one takes its place. In this sense Nietzsche has very much picked
up the whole shape of Schopenhauer's analysis but given it a different and he thinks much more
positive spin. One of the more popular seminars in current day American life for business people,
but for people in general, is something that's typically called goal setting or achieving your
goals. It's often coupled with another seminar equally popular called time management. I think
from a Nietzschean perspective it's worthwhile to reflect on what these are all about. Setting
goals. What is that? Well you sort of say here's what I'd like to be in a certain amount of time
and here's how I'd like to get there and here's the most efficient way of doing that.
A lot of our students who are pressured by their parents, by their advisors, by their peers,
and of course by television and so on to say what they're going to do with the rest of their lives,
which is very different from the childhood question what do you want to be when you grow up?
Because it's got a sense of urgency and it has a sense of practicability that children don't have
to cope with and what they do is they sort of say here's what I should be and they set a goal.
I'd like to be a millionaire by the time I'm 30 or I would like to be a vice president of a big
corporation by the time I'm 35. Something like that. But what gets left out? Well what gets left out
is any conception of interest or any conception that this is the right thing for you to do.
Even in some sense any conception of one's own talents and abilities. There was a very good
book that came out, well now there was a very good title that came out a several years ago,
I apologize to the author because I don't remember who it is, but the title is just so
wonderful and I use it to all my students. The title was Do What You Love The Money Will Follow
and it makes a very important point. Joseph Campbell made the same point in his mythology
series when he talked about following your bliss. Basically the idea is that life consists of doing
what you love and what you love is not something you are told to do from the outside, what you love
if it's true love is something you discover in yourself through experimentation, through trial
and error and doing what you do because you love it is not a guarantee but it's probably the best
possible advice on how to succeed in doing what you do. Now the problem with goal setting and the
problem with thinking about the will to power as a kind of goal is that if you set it as a goal
whether it's power itself or any particular manifestation of power you make it all the
less likely you're going to get there. One of my friends pointed out that in corporate life
it's the corporations that say we've got to meet this financial projection, this bottom line.
Those are the ones that in the long run are more likely to fail because it's the companies that
pay attention to what they do and do well, pay attention to their customers, pay attention
to their product. They're the ones that succeed. Aristotle argued many years ago that a person
says I want to be happy. Well there's something self-defeating about that. Of course you want to
be happy but how do you do it by being the most excellent person you can be given your own virtues.
Now what Nietzsche is saying about will to power I think can be put in the following way.
Life is a process. Life is ongoing and life is consists of the passions with which we throw
ourselves into what we're doing. When Kathy referred to the energy concept that Nietzsche borrowed
from physics I think that has a very personal manifestation too. The idea of one's life as
energetic contrasts this with a very traditional philosophical notion. One finds it both in the
east and in the west but it has to do with the ultimate end of philosophy and the ultimate end
of life and the point of many religions which might be characterized as a kind of tranquility
or peace of mind or in some cases even a kind of apothea a kind of apathy a kind of
freedom from the perturbance of emotions. Well one can see that Nietzsche would find
all such views very much like the last man he describes in Zarathustra somebody who's kind of
dead to the world who might in some banal sense be happy but really has nothing to offer either
him or herself or anyone else. The image that Nietzsche wants to project is that life is exciting.
Life is taking risks. Life is essentially dangerous and when we think about life we should think in
terms of how to maximize this energy this vitality and that's what life is all about. Now here again
he comes into the orbit of Darwin and very much in conflict with Darwin. We talked earlier about
how Nietzsche disagrees with the notion of natural selection and survival of the fittest
because in fact it's probably not the best that will survive and very often it's going to be the
most banal or the most ordinary but here there's a very different kind of spin we can put on the
same argument that what Darwin talks about is the survival of the fittest and as Kathy said a
minute ago it's not survival that counts but if you look at nature but in particular if you look
at most human beings what they do isn't about survival in fact when someone tells us that their
main goal in life is to live to be a hundred we right away think there's something wrong with this
person that's not the kind of goal that people should have what you want is to be a great this
or a great that and if long life comes with it so much the better but the idea of thinking of life
not a survival but rather a self-expression as the exercise of excellence that's a very
different matter and one of his most brutal comments he quite clearly goes up against
Darwin this comes from the book Beyond Good and Evil he says here we must be aware of superficiality
and get to the bottom of the matter resisting all sentimental weakness life itself is essentially
appropriation injury overpowering of what is alien and weaker suppression hardness
imposition of one's own forms incorporation and at least at its mildest exploitation but why should
one always use those words in which a slanderous intent has been imprinted for ages that's a
particular particularly brutal quote but i think the idea is clear enough life is cruel
and that's the way it is if you watch any of the many nature documentaries for example on
television what becomes evident as you watch the coyotes slaughtering the rabbit or the hyenas
attacking the baby warthog what you see is nature read in tooth and claw and that's the way it is
and that's the way we are not that we can't sublimate and civilize ourselves but if we're
talking about basic motivations if we're talking about what is deep inside of us and what drives us
then we can't ignore the fact that we are part of that animal kingdom and in fact as human beings
with our extra intelligence with what philosophers delight in calling reason it only becomes more
complicated and in a way more cruel or more subtle and cruel because the truth is that the world of
power as nature puts it isn't just a matter of trying to keep afloat trying to survive but it
really is a trial a sense of trying to excel and in a competitive world which is certainly what this
is that means at the same time trying to make the best of what one is even at the expense of other
people now this deep psychological notion this idea of the will to power or more accurately the
will to making oneself everything that one can be is what nature uses as a counter as we pointed
out in an earlier lecture for example to mills utilitarianism and it's rather banal and agreeable
sense that what we really strive for is pleasure and the avoidance of pain in a way this kind of
formulation simply ignores our relationship to other people more important that ignores our
relationship to ourselves one can be full of pleasure and be completely vacuous one thinks
of someone for example on drugs one can be in pain or a great deal of suffering but at the
same time being living life to its fullest and of course Nietzsche's always example is the artist
who very often subjects him or herself to a lifetime of struggle and dissatisfaction and here
what what kathy had to say makes perfectly good sense when you think about the life of creativity
in any form that there is no point of satisfaction and this isn't a matter of greed and it's not a
matter of Schopenhauerian pessimism but the very nature of being creative is you can't long be
satisfied with what you've done before you move on to your next project Nietzsche for example
finished one book The Twilight of the Idols one morning and that afternoon started the book The
Antichrist and many of the writers I know it's the same project what they do is they finish one
and they can't wait to start the other as Berta put it from desire I rushed the satisfaction from
satisfaction I leap to desire the truth is that we are desiring creatures to think of life in terms
of complacency or contentment to think of life in terms of tranquility or peace of mind is really
to die to deny the kinds of creatures we are so going back to master morality and the sorts of
things that Nietzsche actually advocates it's not just a matter of being in control but rather it's
a matter of self-expression the word aristocracy as we mentioned doesn't just mean rule by the elite
it means quite literally rule by the best and the important thing is to make yourself the best
if we consider the features of will to power that we've been discussing
Nietzsche's conception of the ubermensch makes a lot more sense I think we pointed out that
ubermensch isn't to be viewed as an evolutionary goal in a straightforward sense nevertheless
Nietzsche does talk about the ubermensch as something to seek for humanity in the future
to be able to live up to it's an ideal and an ideal of continual creativity and self-expression
that we can look to in our own lives even if we can't entirely exemplify I think he doesn't really
expect for later generations to be able to be continually creative too presumably they'll
also need sleep but the ubermensch is intended to be something like a further descendant of ours
in fact you might say that what Nietzsche is trying to do is move the direction of evolution
away from the notion of the descent of man to something like the ascent of man what kind of
future child or descendant of our children could we hope to bring about by the way we live now
and that's a kind of expression of will to power that reaches even into further generations thanks
you
