Hey again.
So this video is about the criticism I have of Paulo Grady's book on relativism.
So at very least a previous video with a summary of that book would be absolutely necessary
if you haven't watched the whole series.
And I know it may have already implied this, but seriously, once criticism is likely to
have actual weight, at least weight enough to even bother replying to, only if one has
actually done the reading, or in this case, actually watches the video properly that indicates
there was an entire series.
I really don't know what it is with the hubris of some of us to jump into like the 6th chapter
of a discussion and wonder why certain things are being spoken about or in a certain way
and why other things seem to be left out as if they hadn't been spoken about in great
depth in previous parts, or even ignoring how they were mentioned in that video itself
if it's watched well enough.
I mean, it's certainly one thing not to know that there were previous parts if nobody mentioned
it, but if I'm going through the trouble of mentioning the previous videos which I pretty
much always do and even often give full recap of each video and I don't know what to say
about that.
In any case, either way, this video is not going to be a great place for you to respond
to his arguments if I even bother mentioning them, it's just going to explain what actually
happened in his book Taken at Face Value.
So my criticism today is about how he presents himself versus what the book actually says,
in particular how open he presents himself to ontological relativism.
That is, relativism about the world, the properties or the furniture of reality, the account of
the world that we have.
He presents himself as very open, and I think he knows that if anyone attacks him, it would
be about ontology.
I say this because he kind of predicts that one might say that his principles are said
to be universal, so don't they constitute an exception to ontological relativity?
But he clearly answers that these principles are abstractions, codifications of a practice
that we do, they aren't entities themselves, they don't have an ontological status of
being universally existing in all ontologies, so no, it's not an exception.
Also by the way, they are abstracted principles, so it's not like they are written rules that
we observe and then follow.
No such things are written down anywhere, that doesn't exist as an entity or anything
like he was saying.
He is not even claiming that they are, it's just rather they articulate the nature of
that practice, which was the practice of being rational and deliberation, when we are thinking
about something, discussing it and judging, for example.
So if you're thinking he's wrong about rationality because there aren't written rules
somewhere that are then followed, well that would be misunderstanding about what's going
on here.
But more importantly, that's not what my issue is about at all.
To understand my criticism, let's look at what he says about the structure of his book.
At the very beginning of his book, he said, so the position staked out in this book is
one that denies relativism about truth, accepts a great deal of ontological relativity, and
a lesser amount of logical relativity resists radical epistemological relativity, and denies
relativism about reason.
So that's this kind of image that I made based on what he claimed, and I pretty much
showed an almost beginning of each of my videos.
But then after going thoroughly through his book and seeing how the various areas connect,
we actually end up with a very different picture.
This picture.
And there is no greater difference among these two pictures than how he presents himself
in one as accepting a great deal of relativism in ontology, or defending it, or even argued
for relativism about ontology.
Matter of fact, there's really only one place if I can recall where he uses a qualifier
of it being moderate.
But for the vast majority of cases, it's just open to ontological relativity, without
a distinction like moderate or limited or restricted or anything, distinctions that
he makes in other areas like logic or epistemology, but not in ontology.
I mean after having gone through the book when we clearly look at the book, it's actually
his core rationality providing at very least a minimum restraint against extreme relativism
in every section.
Yeah, in truth it provides a place where it's completely denied, but that's given
the precondition described in the truth video if you do want to check it out.
Either way, everywhere else, it's a minimum condition anyway.
Not like complete universal absolutism in some places and complete relativism in other places.
No, in fact, even in rationality itself, if you look at the rationality chapter, it's
just a minimum core that is universal anyway.
So he's actually open to relativism in all of these areas in a much greater sense than
the naivety of the traditional philosophers prior to him perhaps, but there is still a
minimum restriction in all of them and it's coming from his core rationality to everywhere
and as a result that makes him say it denies relativism, resisting radical relativism,
or that it only allows relativism in a very mitigated sense.
Then providing restriction and here's the contrast when it comes to ontology.
In the ontology chapter, not wanting to be charged as holding to Promethean anti-realism
and just making up whatever world we want as we go along, no restriction, but the ontological
relativist wants to hold that there are certain constraints on our thinking, we don't just
invent reality.
The realist is saying the constraint comes from the outside as in reality, that reality
constrains the theory of the world that we have at least to some degree, but the ontological
relativist for them, the discipline is an internal issue, not something imposed from
the outside.
Discipline and thought comes from proper methodology, from something such as a theory
of rational constraint, which is universal.
And that's his core figuring out here that he offers, in a way through epistemology.
In any case, it's pretty clear that there are restraints on ontology, certainly a variety
we are ruling out then is one that is the Promethean anti-realism, where we have no
restraint on our account of the world and we can just make up as we go along.
Someone might say though that that is the reason, because the restriction is internal
and not from a mind independent reality, that's why it's okay to just call it ontological
relativity and not mention any kind of qualifiers like limited or moderate or mitigated or anything
else.
But let's be clear about a few things first.
Firstly, there can be different levels of relativism within ontology, even if the extreme
one already has a name of Promethean anti-realism.
An example could be how we contrast the Strassonian limitation of cognitive capacities that we
have with Quine's seeming fluidity, or even actually contrasting the fluidity of Quine
with his later preference for a certain ontology, i.e. physics.
That was after all one of the tensions O'Grady points out in Quine's work.
So while they are of different strengths, they were all nevertheless internal restraints.
So a different degree of internal restraint does exist.
I mean, I think it's pretty clear if we are taking the ontological relativists at their
word and sourcing, or maybe outsourcing the restraint to epistemology, then there seems
to be a limitation depending on how much limitation there is in epistemology.
And there is certainly a limitation in epistemology according to O'Grady there, of different
degrees of how much relativism we could have in epistemology that we would select.
So why not by that nature say there are different degrees of limitation in ontology as well?
Certainly it wasn't complete relativism in epistemology.
There was a minimum restraint, that's why we called it moderate.
So then that should be worth noting that it means there is a restraint in ontology as
well.
It's precisely the reason why we mentioned it in truth, and in logic, and even in epistemology
where the restraint came from rationality.
That restraints do come in different strengths and are coming from another area still implies
that this area is restrained to different degrees, and that was a good enough reason
to still call it restraint against extreme relativism in other places like epistemology,
but he didn't do that for ontology.
Okay, so let's ask what does it mean to say that there is restraint if we did say it?
Well, one, for Ogrady it is possible that we may sometimes hold two sets of ontology
in tandem.
Two, Ogrady is open to the idea that worldviews can contradict.
After all, in the rationality chapter, when in discussion of how there can be different
empirically adequate metaphysical systems, he says, insofar as they, and he means chi
or the hopi metaphysical systems that he called absolutely developed worldviews, but
anyway, insofar as they are empirically adequate, they do not contradict empirical evidence.
However, they do cut against the materialistic or physicalistic metaphysics.
There is therefore an argument possible between two metaphysical systems.
So one, we can have two ontologies, two, they can contradict.
But also, three, one of them may be considered false.
They may be false.
So we can resolve this contradiction by considering one false.
So yeah, maybe it's not because of any metaphysical commitment to reality, but because of our
rational constraint that impacts what commitments we have to different ontologies.
Certainly he appears to admit that his core or his principles does govern our different
ontologies, as he says in his final chapter.
Whatever theory or ontology we deploy in interpreting and understanding reality is put together
under the governance of these principles.
So a certain kind of practice is regarded as universal, the practice of reasoning and
arguing.
This doesn't conflict with ontological relativism.
So here it is again, that he is saying in this line that it doesn't contradict with
ontological relativism because those principles aren't entities.
This line is after all taken from that exact same section earlier that I was quoting from
in the beginning, where he anticipated that kind of criticism, but at the same time he
is admitting here that our ontologies, and we can hold multiple, are governed by the principles
of core rationality.
But it's the same thing then as it was in logic or epistemology for example.
There is a core rationality that is governing there, and it was the basis by which we would
restrict against extreme relativism, carefully saying for logic that relativism would be
allowed but only in a mitigated sense, or in epistemology where it's by that restriction
just moderate epistemological relativism that is allowed.
So why is ontology being treated differently?
I mean it does mean something to mention that by rationality, even if not an appeal to external
mind-independent reality or anything, that we do rule against having contradictory ontologies,
or self-contradictory ontologies via our coherentist systems.
As such, valuing some, those with less contradiction, has greater than those with more contradictions,
so they're not equally viable.
As we examine them in our conscious deliberation, therefore not holding them as having equally
valuable status.
Perhaps some are more and some are less contradictory with other ontologies that we hold in tandem,
or within its own subsystem.
There is work being done here by rationality or the principles to limit ontologies, and
such is admitted and explicated in different places, for example in the epistemology chapter
when talking about different coherentist system, how it is restricting against the proliferation
of infinite number of coherentist systems that we may hold.
Or in another part of epistemology, the end where rationality being the means by which
we judge different A priori frameworks, that was explicitly explained as well.
So it is explicated, but not exactly in the way I just did now before.
The thing is, I'm just doing a little bit of hypothetical syllogism, you know, putting
things together to show and explicate the constraint that is an ontology based on his
work.
I mean, it's his work that suggests that this is the case, that that's what we do
with ontologies, but he doesn't spell it out for us like this.
For some reason I have to do that here.
I mean, I agree with it, but it's coming from my explication here, not his, even if
it is based directly on his work.
So what I disagree with, and what would have become very obvious had he explicated what
I just did, is how there is no distinction being given in ontology like there is in other
places for limited ontological relativism, or mitigated ontological relativism, versus
extreme or radical or stronger ontological relativism by Ogrady, in the most of the cases
that he presents himself.
So there is enough in this book from the structure itself, what it purports to say, what is happening
between these various areas and how they function together to see that what is described as
happening in other areas is also happening in a similar fashion in ontology, but in ontology
being described in a different way.
Why?
Hmm?
Some manipulative reason perhaps?
Hmmmm.
So the second part of my criticism is this kind of trick that seems to be happening.
I described it previously in the previous video how there's sort of different kind of relativists,
Which is in part what Ogrady is saying, we don't want to be a certain kind that is self-defeating.
But I suggested there's another kind which is one that doesn't know that stepping in
or pulling terms to avoid self-defeat still ends up in a place where they end up preventing
themselves from engagement.
As I mentioned, maybe in the previous video, this is what happened and this is the move
that was made against Barnes and Bloor, when they pulled terms using Mary Hess, I think,
with their balance of argument.
What you see the thing is, when Barnes and Bloor use terms like balance of argument or
empirical evidence, when they claim these things favor them and not the opposition, then they
obviously do mean them in a general sense outside of their position, or else there would
have been no efficacy in saying that they favored them in the first place.
And if not, there might be versions of balance of argument or empirical evidence that actually
weigh against them anyway, so there's no point in bringing up that theirs favor them.
And that's the reason why O'Grady says it seems clear that these terms are in fact intended
in a universal sense.
And it's not the only place where the effect of silence or lack of engagement is pointed
out when you pull terms like this, it happened in truth as well.
But it's being pointed out for O'Grady still is a reason to rule against relativism in
such places because of the effect of silence, since relativists do in fact want to engage
according to O'Grady.
So this technique didn't cut it for O'Grady in other places like truth or rationality.
But as I mentioned in the previous video, speaking in the ontology chapter itself about
one of the main ontological relativists discussed there, O'Grady says of Putnam, his argument
against extreme relativism is simply that it is self-refuting.
If one claims that each perspective is equally valid, then that very view is one among many
perspectives and it has no purchase on anyone else's position and may be safely ignored.
So the technique is mentioned there and why it doesn't work in ontology.
But to this, O'Grady just says that he will refer to other chapters and come back to what
epistemological or rational constraints can coexist with ontological relativism.
But first and foremost, he already did speak about the discipline coming from rationality
within this chapter, not really later.
But anyway, more importantly, it doesn't seem to even properly connect as a response
to what is said.
Why isn't the self-defeat or failure to engage rather nevertheless still pressed in response
to a relativist pulling terms in ontology like it is in other cases?
And they absolutely did do that in ontology.
The world, reality, ontology, properties, existence, all of it is pulled.
That was one of the main things that was done there in a way reducing ontology into epistemology.
It isn't clear why the restraint that is implied is only coexistence in ontology but
restriction in others.
So to make this clear about what I'm saying, just as I explained what restraint would mean
if it were explained in ontology, let me explain what would have happened if he didn't allow
this technique to work in ontology.
Ontology is relative.
Is itself a specific ontological view?
To say that we create our worldviews relative to our conceptual scheme is itself a worldview.
And it is being said as if in a non-relative sense.
It is being said as if in a general sense that is at least in a way that would oppose
other ontologies such as one that says, for example, our account of the world is taken
directly from the properties of the world itself.
That's being opposed here.
To say our account of the world is exclusively relative to our internal working since there
is no meaning in speaking of an external influence is itself a claim about what is the case with
the accounts.
So we see this kind of counter in other areas but it's not being utilized here, biogradie,
and described as preventing extreme or radical ontological relativism.
If I may use some example, we pressed self-defeat in epistemology.
Each epoch judges itself.
One problem for philosophers who hold this position is that in their own practice they
seem to be making claims that transcend particular cultures so it's taken as self-defeating.
One way to say this is that they want to deny that there's necessarily anything shared
among all of them, that one cannot judge among them, but in doing so they are speaking about
all of them in some general sense as if that is something that they all have in common
and so they are judging them to be in such a way in this general sense so they're doing
what they claim shouldn't be possible.
Or to defend Kuhn from being interpreted as using global K.I.
But Kuhn's own work itself shows that it is not global M.I. or K.I., or also would
have undermined his own work.
We saw this with Wartian Stitch and B.M.B.
Kuhn's work is describing different paradigms, as if from the outside of them.
If the claim is that terms cannot be understood outside the paradigm in which they are used,
then one cannot compare paradigms in the way Kuhn has done, or even used against McIntyre.
He says a significant challenge to universalism about rationality comes from McIntyre, who
espouses that there are different traditions of thought that embody their own criteria
of rationality and no neutral ground to evaluate them.
First off, the self-defeat, like we have seen many times now.
A quick response is to wonder which tradition McIntyre inhabits and how he manages to discuss
and evaluate the ideas of so many people from other apparently incommensurable traditions.
There are various areas where we notice the relativists are doing what they say they cannot
do, in order for them to take a position on matters where they are saying you can't take
a position.
But it isn't being used here in ontology to catch or prevent an extreme ontological
relativist in the ways that O'Grady suggests could happen in other places.
So why is he doing this?
Is he actually being tricked here or making a mistake, goofing up?
Well, I'm not capable of pointing out such an error, surely.
I am after all just a shadowy internet character after all.
But if I am right, then perhaps this was done on purpose.
Perhaps he is simply allowing for such a technique to work here and purposely portraying himself
as being more open than other areas to ontological relativism.
But why?
Why would he do that?
Why is ontological relativism getting such special treatment?
Well now, I made, if I think of it possibly, even a distasteful charge against O'Grady
at the end of the ontology video.
So I'm sorry that it is that way.
Again, it's probably my lack of understanding.
You know, my error here.
Surely it must be that.
But I think O'Grady absolutely does have enough tools in his arsenal within his book
to actually and has actually defended against ontological relativism of an extreme variety
in three different ways.
I have only presented two so far and the third one will come after this conclusion.
But instead he is purposely portraying himself as open to relativism in ontology just to
placate relativists.
By having an area they feel they are on good footing, a way of funneling relativists to
ontology away from other areas.
I'm actually prompted by him to see this as his motivation because of his insistence
that this is the best way to accommodate relativists.
About ontological relativism, he says at the very end of the ontological chapter, it appears
to be one of the best ways those attracted to the relativistic ideas can accommodate
that relativism.
And near the end of the book he says, much of what motivates people to accept relativism
can be accommodated by ontological relativism.
So in a way it appears that he's actually just placating relativists by not talking
about how he has actually restricted against ontological relativism in a number of ways.
So to be clear, I'm not disagreeing with him about the funneling, I agree with him
that many arguments for relativism, let's say in rationality for example, are only ever
really about conceptual or ontological relativity anyway when you actually analyze them.
And many relativists don't seem to recognize this because they're not very clear on which
relativism they're even talking about especially when they're presenting arguments.
And that's pointed out both by O'Grady and Philips, they talk about this kind of thing
but that's another thing anyway.
My issue here or claim is that while funneling into ontological relativism, he won't actually
mention that even in that area it is also just moderate relativism or restricted or
mitigated relativism.
Instead he portrays it as if his book is just openly accepting ontological relativism period
or just tentatively because he's not ruling against one way or another.
So I'm saying I think he does this on purpose to make the funneling just seem more acceptable
for the relativist, more appealing to do so, in a way purposely hiding the restrictions
that are in that area as well.
But you know, holding back attacks or defenses, just to make victories of yours in other areas
seem more acceptable to your opponents, which is a very maybe kind thing to do, I don't
know about emotions, but it does seem more like a psychological trick, a manipulative
technique played on the relativist than honest philosophic work.
Wow, are you saying O'Grady is being dishonest somehow?
That's not cool man, why would you say that?
Look, yeah I know, I know, okay listen, I don't know how else to feel about it though.
You know I very much love this book, it's very rich in texture, it goes through many
different philosophical discussions and discusses relativism in a very impactful way and that's
why I think there are such good lessons we can take from this book.
Even though I think there's a lot missing too.
But my issue would be that his stance ultimately leaves the work of discussing the role of
reality out and maybe we can talk about that more with Philips, but even that is a different
issue from what I'm actually criticizing here, based on his book, if we take it at face value.
And really my criticism isn't that massive in terms of his philosophy, which is largely
something I agree with, even if it is excluding or leaving open the discussion of reality playing
an important role in what we count as or think of as true or knowledge or facts.
In comparison to that, this is really a rather small criticism perhaps of just representing
oneself differently than one's work actually seems to be, so it could be an error in me
which is fine, I hope it is, but if it isn't then it's either some kind of error in his
work or purposely done.
It can't strictly be an error though because my criticism is about the way he's portraying
himself and I just find it misleading.
There is enough in his work to make movements against ontological relativism despite what
he says.
So again, my assessment is that O'Grady presents himself as much more relativistic than he
actually is based on the structure of his book, techniques of relativists that failed
in other areas but seem to work here, as well as one more reason that I'm going to cover.
I would agree with him that the middle ground is what this book is and I agree that the
middle ground between the extremes is a result of a more philosophically aware path and a
path of the future in philosophy.
And while this book is a little more favorably open to anti-realist philosophy than my position
would be, it's where he claims he lands on the middle path that does not seem to me to
be where the book itself actually is saying it is.
But now let's look at the most important component of my criticism that speaks about
ontology anyway and it will lead us into a discussion about what is left out in this
book.
You see this whole book, it's best case for the universal hinges on non-contradiction
and I doubt saying that is controversial at all.
And now we're going to see a little funny thing that can happen in philosophy, much
like it happened to Coon with just a few lines from his work leading to radical interpretation
as we have seen in the rationality video.
Well in this case it's a few words that O'Grady says when explaining assertion that
impacts a truth deeper than he discussed.
You see the argument for the principle of non-contradiction actually goes like this.
The basic problem is that the notion of contradiction is essentially connected to the notion of
assertion and negation.
When one makes an assertion, one first of all expresses a content, and then endorses
it as true.
This content holds that something in the world is in such a way.
Assertion also rules out various other things, namely the negation of that assertion.
So assertion implies the rejection of the negation of the assertion.
But a contradiction makes an assertion and simultaneously asserts the negation of that
first assertion.
Because of this, a contradiction undermines the very process of making an assertion.
To accept a contradiction means to render empty the very act of asserting.
Hence, contradictions must be avoided.
So the principle of non-contradiction is itself being defended in order to preserve the very
act of assertion, also negation.
So again despite what I am saying next, this defense is not about esoteric objective assumptions
or whatever have you assumptions about an ignorant or naive realist, that would be after
all a derogatory description and a philosophic failure to grasp the argument that's happening
here that Ogrady is offering.
The defense is actually based on what it even means to say anything meaningfully.
But that means it is actually the nature of assertion first that is really doing the work.
And thus why we cannot have contradiction, because it would undermine the very process
of assertion according to him.
So let's focus on assertion and ask again, what does assertion even mean according to
Ogrady?
How do we cash out this concept of assertion?
So I am going to read it again but slowly so we can really figure out what I am trying
to say here.
When one makes an assertion, one first of all expresses a content and endorses it as true.
Now the word true here, I am just going to leave alone.
I don't even think he needed to bring that up because it may introduce some questions
that he may not have wanted at that point in time.
But anyway that's not what I am doing.
I wonder what is expresses a content?
What is this content?
Well he says this content holds that something in the world is in such a way.
This line itself describes that assertion as fundamentally making an ontological claim,
a claim about the world.
The very act of assertion is actually inherently tied into issues of ontology to say that the
world is a certain way, in such a way.
That is the nature of all assertion and it may take some philosophic reflection to realize
it that there is an implicit claim about how things are and when we bother to say how things
are however qualified it is, there is some connection to a certain way in the general
sense.
We couple this with his explication of how we cannot escape the notion of general truth.
In all claims of speaking, even when you are talking about yourself, your sense, your feelings,
is an attempt to state reality as being in such a way.
However fallible and unjustified, this attempt to do so is a necessary component.
All claims involve content that is conversationally intended to be about the world being a certain
way, stating what is the case in such a way that rules out the opposite of what one is
saying.
This is the philosophic eye, the recognition of what it even means to take a position,
to make an assertion, to speak of anything in any field.
That's why I sometimes call it metaphysical.
I'm not saying the eye exists as an entity somewhere ontologically, there's no magical
spiritual superpowers I'm talking about here.
I'm just theatrically presenting this philosophic awareness as an eye, an eye for its recognition
that philosophers recognize certain necessities in order to take a position at all.
And so this eye would activate or just notice and recognize that one is trying to take a
position that would undermine doing so.
Let's look at some of that activation.
No one can say anything at all.
Then how did you say that?
No one should be denied at all.
So aren't you denying those who would deny?
We can only speak about ourselves.
Then how are you speaking about others now?
I disagree with the idea that disagreement is possible.
Then how are you disagreeing?
No one can speak in the general sense.
Then why is that in the general sense?
No one can objectively evaluate.
Then how did you make that evaluation?
We should no longer take any philosophic positions.
That is itself a philosophic position.
Philosophy is garbage and pointless.
Is itself your philosophic position?
Philosophy is garbage and science is the best.
That itself is philosophy, philosophy of science.
Talking with any authority is not possible.
And what's your authority behind saying that?
Whether it's based on reason or evidence, empirical structures, logic, whatever it is,
however which way we feel the need then or ability to participate in the battlefield,
that becomes something that shouldn't also at the same time be at risk when we are there,
at very least, by us.
So do not be tricked by the extreme relativists to shoulder the burden of providing something
impossible in objective language or in objective observation or absolute anything.
They are powerful enough to attack anything that comes across them in a certain way and
that's the way that they're going to continue to emphasize and always see.
And so they will claim that everything is relative ignoring the assumptions made in
their own claim.
There is a necessary assumption that something of what I bothered to say when I make an assertion
about how things are, whether currently or forever inexplicable or not, conveys something
about reality beyond the individual speaking and taking a stance in order to engage.
That even if a proposition is completely relative, in that the proposition is relative to many
factors.
Sure, but there is an assumption that one of those things that it is relative to is
a shared reality as a medium to whomever I am speaking with.
That there is something of my assertion that has to do with how the world is in a certain
way, beyond that which is created by my mind alone and thus ruling out the opposite way
at the same time.
This section of this video, the philosophic eye, I would like you to couple with my video,
the my move video which is a part of the Kirk series so you may have to watch the Kirk series
to really appreciate it.
But if you connect the my move video from that series with this part of this video, I would
really appreciate it, please maybe rewatch that one or check it out or something, but
you will see how there is a deep, socially ethical aspect of this as well.
And there certainly is these kind of social and ethical aspects which O'Grady doesn't
do too much a discussion of, but we will get to next.
But as a preview, the more powerful relativists often discussed here in O'Grady's version
use philosophies to talk about how things are relative to a society, to a community.
But in such a view, the existence of a society or the community is implicit in such a philosophy
and so it is not in question.
And in a way that definitely would contradict the individualist based extreme relativists.
Even though they don't really account for that, I've encountered some people who would
immediately agree with, as I say, any kind of relativism, so they would immediately agree
with extreme individualistic based relativism even though that relativism may be in contradiction
with community based relativisms which are the more powerful varieties, seemingly ones
that are based on actual philosophers' writings in history and so on.
Anyway, the move to more powerful relativism then definitely makes it even more favorable,
the kind of point I was making there, that it will connect important ways to the point
I made about the conversational standards of behaving as if committed to a metaphysical
reality of another's existence and the independent agency of others outside of you and your own
personal perception.
Now of course relativists may say, oh, okay, so it's just a necessary assumption for conversations.
So what?
That doesn't really mean there is a mind-independent reality, let alone any argument for the ability
for our language to convey non-relative reality.
So really, reality is still relative.
Well, welcome back relativists to the realist world where conversational standards don't
hold light against our concern for what really is the case.
That's actually a deep cut if you get what was done in ontology, so I hope you get the
joke because, you know, they were trying to pull terms in an important way and try to
make things more about the conversational standards rather than a discussion of metaphysical
reality beyond them, but that move really didn't help them and that's part of basically
the reason why I think this book is so good, because it connected the principle of non-contradiction
to the nature of assertion, the nature of communicating with others rather than what
is typically assumed, you know, metaphysical commitments, philosophers, traditional stuff.
Anyway, it's still rather important to note that many of the elements aren't made by
O'Grady or myself, they have been around for a while as I mentioned self-defeat and
incoherence of certain forms of relativism have been known for thousands of years, even
to many well-known relativists themselves and even this connection of the defense based
on assertion rather than a transcendental structure building you could actually see
in the positivist's writing, which O'Grady was probably heavily influenced by given he
wrote a whole book about him, but it's how O'Grady wrote it and put it all together
in the various fields that I really liked and yet for maybe that exact same reason of
the positivist's influence he didn't really draw out or address the ontological implications
and so that may be the tension of his own work for claiming to be open to ontological
relativism a great deal.
Let me give you some of my closing remarks now.
There are more criticisms I could have of O'Grady of course and I do have, but those
are mainly about what is left out and that being a discussion at least of Wittgenstein
in a more general sense that was mostly absent if not soft in this book.
This book was more kind of quine heavy and ironically I think it could have explicated
a more middle ground or more nuanced position if we could have actually taken a closer look
at Wittgenstein.
It really does highlight the difference between someone who thinks Wittgenstein's philosophy
leads to some radical relativism and someone who understands how that isn't so at all
as Patrick Phillips may say does violence to the spirit of Wittgenstein.
Phillips specifically looks closely at Wittgenstein and uproots misinterpretations of him from
relativistic thinkers, but hey O'Grady said he was on the one hand trying to be general
and cover a more broad range of things and a more surfaced way even though this is definitely
far too textured for somebody new to philosophy.
Anyway, it's still rather clear that if you were trying to give a full treatment of relativism
everywhere then this book would be way freaking massive, so I'm glad it's not.
Anyway, so that's my criticism and the explanation of the power that I promised you.
You may agree with O'Grady or disagree in ways that I have about what is necessary in
order to take a position at all.
But the power is at very least to recognize that there is something necessary and therefore
not relative in order to take a position at all or at least is necessary for those who
are in combat or in conversation or sharing among each other in a shared way.
And your philosophic eye will hopefully now activate whenever you hear someone or some
other warrior saying or doing something on the basis of what they are attacking.
So we're going to Phillips next and I have spoken a lot about him already, you know without
perfect citations, so forgive me for that, I'll get to it when I do cover him.
But when we do get to it, we are going to be forced into talking about some politics
and there's some politically related stuff in this philosophy.
But please understand that a far more nuanced understanding elevates a conversation philosophically
from kind of typical tribalistic political talk is definitely more complicated than the
reductive simplicity that would aid tribalism a lot in any case.
I will be clear about what I'm saying later if it hasn't already been made to some of
us, I know there are a number of places where I've given like clues.
Join us, good warrior, for we travel now to see the insights of Patrick J.J. Phillips.
Then finally, after all this time, return to the battlefield of fellow sigh, philosophy
of science, and explain how these science wars are impacting the world to this very
day.
Oh, and I'm sorry I never actually properly covered Davidson, Davidson versus Ogrady is
something that I said I would do and something that Ogrady talked about in this book and
so I never really covered it.
I'm actually very attracted to some of Davidson's arguments, so maybe one day I can cover specifically
Ogrady versus Davidson after I take a closer look at Davidson directly instead of just
relying on what Ogrady says, because right now I can't recall from Davidson what Ogrady
says and what he was referring to.
But you know, there's also so much I promise to do, I pop anyway.
