Relativism. It is one of the most powerful modern philosophic weapons. Its power is immense,
however it can become dangerous if wielded to extreme degrees, by those with insufficient
philosophic understanding. While it can be traced back to ancient times, it is philosophies from
five different great philosophers that are noted to have been imbued into this weapon,
empowering it into the modern philosophic warfare. Relativism is most useful in carving out the
layers of presumed objectivity and the naivety of our old ways. We use relativism now as more
a clear path to being skeptical about all sorts of claims, not just who makes the best pizza,
or even what is right and wrong, but now, even what we may have previously called facts.
And so this weapon becomes incredibly crucial for any good philosophic warrior to appreciate its
power, but equally important, also its limits. And ignoring those limits can create dangerous and
frustrating enemies for us on the battlefield. We must learn to wield relativism to become
good philosophers, to question, to be skeptical of all sorts of claims to objectivity. We must use
it whenever it can be used, but we must also be cautious and not be impatient in our journey to
investigate cases where perhaps it cannot. The limits of its use. So today we're gonna explain
those two things, the power and limits of this tremendous philosophic weapon called relativism.
Which is why we came here to the battlefield of metaphysics in the first place, so we can dismantle
it and see more than merely a blur of all it can destroy, to see that it indeed does have limits
and indeed does become volatile when those limits are crossed. Limits that we will later point out,
if it should be crossed by those on the battlefield of the philosophy of science in particular,
when we get back to the battlefield science, if we ever get back. Anyway, we'll be looking at
the power and limits as explained and set out in this green book, Relativism by Paul O'Grady.
In the last episode we looked at a battle in this red book, Relativism and Reality by Robert Kirk,
because I wanted to make a social point. You see, as it is clearly outlined in all three books I may
want to cover on relativism, including this blue book, The Challenge of Relativism by Patrick J.J.
most find relativism alluring for social reasons. Because we want to be open and tolerant to people
of different perspectives, different viewpoints, and understanding from different political spheres,
different cultures, races, genders, and so on. But if we jump into it, guns ablazing as the
phrase goes, without sufficient philosophical understanding first, one might hastily end up
wielding relativism to an unlimited degree such that one takes the position that everything is
relative. Even truth, yep, knowledge, truth, reality, everything. And that's what we might call
an extreme relativist. So while I personally find those in the pursuit of tolerance, not just noble
but necessary, I present extreme relativism as a terrible strategy in that pursuit. Now it might
sound kind of ridiculous right now, like who would think that say oh I don't know that literal
scientific facts are relative. It does happen though, it did happen, and probably it still will
happen. But we will explain in this video how this weapon appears to become even that powerful
as wielded by sophisticated relativists, with seemingly good reasons. In any case, Robert Kirk
in a section of that red book that I have here took an unsophisticated version of that extreme
relativist that's known as the true for me relativist, or if you're fancy the protagorean
relativist. Anyway for that version of the extreme relativist, there is no truth, there is just whatever
is true for me or true for you. So what counts as truth depends on the personal perspective of the
speaker. Though at first it may have seemed kind of funny, but we actually encounter people who
hold this kind of belief at all levels of society, not just in the philosophy classrooms,
people use this to express their truths about politics, religion, and even about
literal states of the world, facts, and so on. From the newsroom to the bar conversation,
arguing over global warming, alternative medicine, or even if the dragon eater sports team should have
won the golden cup. True for me is often used to speak without trying to offend others or tell
others that they are wrong for having a different position, or perhaps just to hold on to what you
believe despite evidence shown otherwise. And I go over a few different reasons why people do this
in that Robert Kirk video series, episode 6. Now back in that last episode though, episode 6,
in that battle Kirk shows that this position of saying everything is just true for me or true for
you actually can't support the idea that everything is relative, but also that in trying to defend
against Kirk's attacks, the extreme relativist also becomes further committed to a path that leads
them to becoming a solipsist. What is a solipsist? It's thinking that you're the only one that exists,
that there are no other minds, just one mind, just you. Everything else is just a presentation around
you. Please check out that last episode if you like to see how TFM, true for me,
relativism leads to solipsism. But from there Kirk does show that that too,
solipsism, is a position that doesn't support this assertion, and I thought that was a pretty cool
philosophic move to do. But then I made my own move to re-explain why true for me or TFM leads to
solipsism in my own way. And then that a solipsist's position isn't actually open and tolerant,
that actually, while you may have started out as a relativist for those good noble reasons of
tolerance and openness that I agree with, that if you stay committed to TFM and become a solipsist,
it's actually close-minded, selfish, intolerant position that denies the agency of others,
and even defies the grasp of the very concept of otherness. Instead of bringing understanding
from different perspectives together, they actually become a segregationist of sorts,
preventing any real engagement with otherness, thus becoming exactly what they hate, opposing the
very heart or organs of why they wanted to be a relativist in the first place. Again, if you think
that's kind of interesting, and would like to see how all that happened, you can check out that
series of videos here. I'll put the links below in the description. And if you were or will be
influenced by my move made in that video, well, you know, even though this is a YouTube video and
not an academic source, you know, I'm just a shadowy nobody here, but please still credit that
video in some way, at least in the footnotes. It's about intellectual honesty, you know? Also,
that way, if I say anything wrong and you're influenced by it, others will know why, and blame
can also fall on my shoulders. And hopefully that might bring some other philosophers to come battle
me over it. And surely one of us will learn something from that battle. Anyway, that version of the
relativist isn't actually the more powerful version that philosophers battle against. So,
I ended up promising that we would go and move on to bigger, badder relativists,
ones who are actually empowered by arguments from philosophers themselves.
Those five that I mentioned earlier are the ones that Paul O'Grady specifically notes. For him,
it's actually one of three tendencies that showed up in the different areas of philosophy,
pushing out this more modernized weapon. So, here we are today looking at the imbuing of this power,
the three tendencies that includes ideas from these five philosophers.
Briefly, in Paul O'Grady's book, he has a general outline that looks like this. Here,
we will find the philosophies that helped embolden these relativists and empower that
relativist weapon. This is what this video will cover now, the power. Here and here, O'Grady draws
the limits of relativism, at truth and rationality. Now, on logic, relativism is sort of allowed in
the sense that it is allowed on a lower order, but I will explain that later. Relativism, however,
for O'Grady, is allowed in ontology. I find this much has to do with the basis of conceptual
relativity, but we won't be covering it for our purposes right now. Also, some relativization
is allowed in epistemology, but limited by the amount set out in chapter 5, limits on
relativism about rationality. Today though, we'll go over some of that power, as I promised. It may
seem kind of quick though, because O'Grady seems more about wanting to point out the sources of
this power than actually getting into with examples what those sources really are that gave it the
power. So hopefully at times I can assist there. Also, don't worry if it's a bit fast. In each
place, each battle, later on that we cover, the philosophic arguments from the actual
philosophic thought is often addressed anyway, and sometimes the philosophers are other than these
five. But one in particular, I will be doing myself, in an additional video, to help explain
so that people really understand why simply thinking literalism, or scientific physical
descriptions, is not actually strong enough to oppose this relativist, whose weapon has been
empowered by these five philosophers. After that, we'll move on to talk about each of the chapters
that include the limits of relativism, and the battles therein. So this part, power, may not
have much battle itself, but it is a look at that weapon that will be in play in the battles here
after. Finally, after all this, I will give my overall evaluation of the book, and maybe then
I'll touch on some of the chapters that I left out. So let's get to it.
Philosophy battle. The most entertaining presentation of philosophy you'll ever find on the internet,
probably. Now entering the battlefield of metaphysics.
Oh, light switch.
Oh, uh, I'm gonna keep this on.
Hmm, whoa.
That's better. Here is Paul O'Grady. That's not really him. That's just an image I made.
Support me on Patreon, or make a direct contribution to me on PayPal.
Who will give us a little history lesson that will lead us to explaining the powers of this
weapon. And to be clear, as he says it in his preface, he is more going to cover this topic
in an analytic tradition than a continental one. And also, he's not going to be covering Einstein,
which doesn't really have to do with what we're talking about here. Anyway, let's begin.
Long ago in the land before time. Oh, okay, wait. That was just me, not him. Listen, whenever I'm
speaking for O'Grady, it will be sited down to the line on the bottom of the screen. Unless I say
otherwise. That way, you know I make up nothing. And if I misinterpreted anything, you know exactly
which line I didn't do justice. Also, you will know that when I do say something from my own opinion
or my own information offered here, you won't misinterpret it as if he were saying it,
because then the citation will just disappear when it's me talking. Okay? That's how we roll in
philosophy battle. Citation down to the line. But on the other hand, while I am siding everything
down to the line, it will be my interpretation or my paraphrasing of what is being said, unless of
course I actually put it up in quotes on the screen. And it might be shifted just a tiny bit
in order to make sense for this video. Anyway, in the 20th century, there was the linguistic
turn in philosophy. Oh, wait. So this happened in large part because of a guy named Fraga,
who kind of tried to make a more scientific or math-like perfect language to do philosophy in.
It kind of looked like this. And hopefully we can talk about Fraga at length later. But anyway,
crudely crunched down for you guys now. Basically, traditional discussions about what is knowledge
turned into what can we say is true. And from that to how can sentences about the world,
i.e. propositions, be true. And how do they relate to each other? What even counts as a proposition?
Doesn't all information need to be in some sort of language? And if the world is made up of
information, is there an inherent language of reality? Or on the other hand, isn't language
a tool of communicating among different people? And so this linguistic turn led to a social turn
because language brings into the account of the social context that the language is created in.
And because there are different societies, previously stable philosophical concepts about
truth, meaning, ontology, knowledge, they became unstable. To be clear, I'm dealing
not with moral relativism, what's right and wrong, good or bad. I'm interested in cognitive
relativism. Relativism about things like truth, reality, and knowledge. Everything that isn't
aesthetics, like tastes or beauty and art, or morals, ethics, right and wrong. So in my terminology,
the opposite of relativism is absolutism. So, ferrogradi relativism is the opposite of absolutism,
just as the subjective would be opposite to objective. Just keep that in mind in case an
imperfect philosopher uses the term objective as opposite relative instead, as is my preference,
I tend to do this. But anyway, saying something is relative is saying that it comes from or is
determined or dependent on something else. For example, saying something is big, big relative
to what? To me or to an ant or to the planet Uranus. Big is a relative term that depends on
something else here. Something absolute is independent and doesn't require a relationship
to anything else. Ogrady then describes three traditions that in the beginning seemed more
unified, that later split with little contact in between them. He describes them as the English
based tradition of Russell, Wittgenstein, Ryle, and Austin, the American based tradition of James,
Lewis, Quine, and Putnam, and while they had little contact with each other, they pretty much
practically completely left alone the Husserl, Heidegger, Sacher, Derrida tradition, which Ogrady
doesn't call that tradition by any particular geographical name, but I would guess on that
basis he would call it the continental tradition therefore. Yet some tendencies began to emerge
among all sides and aided in the rise of cognitive relativism. Relativism about even those things.
Here are three of those tendencies that started emerging independently from different places.
Rejecting the theory practice dichotomy, rejecting the fact value dichotomy,
and framework ideas, which come from those five philosophers. So first let's deal with
rejecting the theory practice dichotomy.
In ancient times, morals, morality was just as much a part of the world in how the world is.
With technological and scientific advancement studying nature though, it left behind questions
of behavior and human conduct. The investigation of nature actually pulled apart from that of
morality. The discussions of nature became disconnected to that of morals. A split appeared
in the kinds of knowledge we had. On the one hand we had the objective reliable nature,
on the other hand we had the subjective moral society and religion. So there was a realm of the
world that existed independent of us, that science investigated, and the human world that was dependent
on us. Philosophical conceptions developing from this reflected that split between a world
independent of human input, as reality, and a world dependent on human beings like morals,
ethics, and behavior. And he says what I suppose as it was taken at the time, that genuine knowledge
is knowledge of that which is there independent of our knowing of it, knowledge of what was there
anyway. Human knowledge is an effort to adequately capture or represent this reality. Philosophers
working within this built the conception of primary and secondary qualities. This is going to sound
a lot like the legendary John Locke now. Primary qualities were aspects of reality that were
independent of human cognition, like shape, motion, and mass. Things that are taken to be there as they
are even if no minds were around to perceive them. And then there were secondary qualities,
like color, sounds, and so on. Things that are dependent on our awareness of them. So like vibrations
in the air hitting my eardrum technically doesn't need to invoke consciousness, but actually hearing
sound does. To this day these appear to many as fundamentally different things. Like the difference
between the mind actually seeing the color red is thought to be fundamentally different, koalia,
than the mere detection of say 430 terahertz on the wavelength of the electromagnetic spectrum.
So one set of phenomena was part of the furniture of the world itself, and the other are products of
products. And the other are products of human receptivity and dependent on human cognition.
Now it was taken to be that investigations of nature while helpful to make technology that
can be used for certain purposes by our society that the actual investigation of nature itself
was still nevertheless pure for the sake of truth itself. So you know they felt it was still
objective. That sure we made technology and make use of knowledge for different things depending
on our society based on the particular parts of the world we're in or in different periods of
history with certain levels of technology and advancement let's say. But at least practicing
the method of gaining knowledge of nature itself, practicing science, was still objective. But then
this came under attack from different areas in the 20th century. Scientists are members of society too,
like anyone else. Influenced by fashion, economics, politics, social status, etc. And also science
itself doesn't actually turn out to be so clear a systemic progression in its study with rules and
methods as it turns out. History in fact shows us that it's actually full of chance and lucky
screw-ups. But so what? One may say that despite still living in a messy human world, scientists
are still able to pull out the goods, unpolluted absolute conception of reality. As in the sentiments
yeah maybe how and why we get the knowledge is relative to the time and society we're in but
still like the knowledge itself was still objective right? Well to that Paulo Grady says
there's still a bigger challenge, a massive skeptical challenge. The sentiments that if such a
pure dehumanized picture of reality is the goal of inquiry, how can we ever reach it?
Surely we would inevitably infect it with human subjectivity in our efforts to grasp it. Imagine
knowledge is like a snowball or something super soft and we live in a blind world. To know it we
would have to grab it but by grabbing it we change sort of what it is. We forced our impression onto
it. We can't really know what it is on grasp. It's always going to be affected not just in
order to observe it but by observing it, by conceptualizing it, by knowing it. Things can't
be observed without a perspective from which we perceive so how could anything be known in ways
beyond a particular perspective? One might feel well we will never really have knowledge then of
reality itself. It will always be infected by us therefore. Now there's also a different conception
of objectivity which is inter subjectivity. That is the objective is just that which the
reasonable people agree upon. Well I'm not going to touch this for now but I just want to note
there's much to say about this to think of later on but anyway still even with this conception it
involves that for them while we do get in touch with a reality independent of human thought
but mediated via human thought. Now what this has to do with relativism is that reality can be
mediated in different ways. Representations of the same objective reality can be different
depending on the concepts we use to think about it. Different features of reality come to the
fore as we deploy different sets of concepts to deal with it. Quoting here, philosophers from
different traditions such as Wittgenstein, Heidegger and William James came to hold versions of this
view which are framework ideas but O'Grady will talk about them later more closely. In any case
this all goes against the idea that our practice or doing science or anything is somehow not altered
by our theories or our concepts which are relative to the type of creatures we are. How much we already
know, what we are still ignorant of, what time and place our society is based in etc and therefore
from different societies it would mean differences in our practice and concepts but I think this
issue is being kind of muddled with the next failing dichotomy so let's look at that now. Rejecting the fact value dichotomy.
The idea of facts is connected to the idea of an absolute conception of reality
as if they are independent, objective, solid, reliable and is contrasted with the subjective
unreliable things like feelings and desires. One of the big changes is the idea of value
no longer being inherently in certain things like gold but instead something we project
onto certain things. A way human beings have been coloring the facts so we could split language into
a descriptive vocabulary that just says what the facts are and an evaluative vocabulary that reports
how we feel about those facts. This is a fact value split. Facts are supposed to exist as if
independently of the mind but in order for a human to know a fact it has to be conceptualized by the
human mind. We dress the world in concepts in order to think of it. The world doesn't automatically
conceptualize itself. Throughout our own history we've created concepts to help describe the world
and the concepts we create pick out the things we are interested in. For example we use concepts
related to our senses. Take color. We had color concepts only for the part of the visual spectrum
that we can see before learning about light and how much bigger the spectrum is. There were no
concepts to discriminate the spectrum beyond what we saw. So before we may have only thought about
you know red, green and blue, yellow etc. We didn't even have the concepts to differentiate between
say infrared and ultraviolet for example until after we learned more about light. With this
we can still say that there are facts that are either true or false but what counts as a fact
also depends in part on us both in whether we have concepts to describe it but also if it even fits
with everything else that we already know. We can decide if something counts as a fact or not
if it fits with everything else we already know about the world. Our decision on saying
something as a fact is therefore based on a number of considerations that are actually
value laden. Value laden which means something like soaked in our values. If soaked or endowed
with our interests. Interests like whether or not it makes our theories more simple,
coheres with the facts, allows for greater generalizations etc. Things that will help
us make further predictions. These things aren't in the facts themselves, they're values where
human interests enter the picture. Now this alone doesn't make a fact subjective, just what counts
as an objective fact isn't independent of the subjective mind. So there's actually two pictures
here, an old picture where the world exists totally independent of the human mind constructing
anything and the mind merely mirrors that. And now a more recent picture where the mind is in
some way to some degree constructing the world that we live in. So this more recent picture
allows for describing the world in multiple ways since people could have different values,
thus their accounts of the facts will differ. Now anti-relativists will want to say it can't
be varied all that much, there's a limit to how different they can be, and we can work towards
unifying a picture of reality. But the relativists focus more on the differences themselves, that
they can't unify different versions of the world. And one of the ways that they do this is by using
the idea that the world is mediated through a structure that yields different accounts of
reality to us relative to that structure. And different terms are used by the relativists
for this structure such as conceptual scheme, paradigm, linguistic framework, and language
games. Oh sorry, I didn't mean to make that sound too spooky. I'm actually laughing with joy
because paradigms and language games are two that I feel reasonably comfortable talking about.
And the latter is often spooky because of its misunderstanding and again which I feel I can
contribute to getting rid of that misunderstanding and misconstruing. But don't worry now,
O'Grady is going to explain how these other philosophers, framework ideas, oh okay oh well
I guess we're going straight to the slide this time. So now O'Grady is going to quickly cover
some philosophers because he's more so trying to show the similarity in what he calls framework ideas
in all of them rather than actually go into depth explaining and giving details of their
philosophies. Some of it may then therefore seem unclear to you right now but just focus on what a
framework idea is generally even if you're unclear about a specific philosopher's version.
In any case, I'm here for y'all to help fill in some of what might be missing. And hopefully a
faithful way anyway. Let's start. C.I. Lewis American philosopher C.I. Lewis was influenced
by Immanuel Kant's idea that there was a division of knowledge between the given and that which
processes the given. To be understood by us I guess. Whoa wait a minute maybe we should stop early.
I realize Kant seems very much to be the backdrop behind a lot of this so I'm going to give a sort
of one of my visualizations of this kind of philosophic picture here. In this picture the
unprocessed reality outside what is currently grasped by the mind would be the sort of indistinct
undifferentiated gray mush but really I can't even say it's gray or I can't even say it's mush.
I can't say anything about it. I can only say things about what I do perceive and this stuff is
beyond perception but whatever it be if it be at all it then be processed by our minds through
these things called categories of understanding to produce the familiar perceptions that we do have.
So there's a difference between reality or the pure world in itself you could say or maybe we
would just make up a new word for it like numina and then there's our perception of the world as
we perceive it. That reality is processed filtered and shaped by our categories of understanding
aspects of our mind. We cut up things to understand the world as the kind of creatures we are
that results in our perceptions what we might call phenomena and I talk more about how this
relates to relativists in my bonus episode for episode six where I first introduced this kind
of image. So it would be lovely if you do check that out in fact you might get to appreciate
the powers of this philosophic weapon and the sophisticated relativist position to some degree
just from that bonus video alone. So again please do check out episode six I know it has a lot of
parts to it but hey it's a fun journey so anyway the basic idea for our purposes here
is that there is an input from outside our mind and then some processing of the mind
happens of whatever that outside input is in order to even perceive what we do and those
perceptions are what we would call observation. In this sense we don't actually directly observe
reality it's like we have spectacles on. So O'Grady is saying that Lewis was influenced by
this sort of picture which I made sort of loosely generally based on Immanuel Kant.
But Lewis was also influenced by pragmatists emphasizing the relation of thoughts to action
you know actually doing things. Ah good old pragmatics that things have value only if they're
useful to us to actually do things or survive. It's the spice of American style philosophy.
He fused both of these into a position that also denies the theory practice dichotomy and the fact
value dichotomy. He thought of philosophy as investigating these categories that we use to
think about the world. Denying that the world conceptualizes itself. Instead the way we think
about reality is socially and historically shaped. Concepts the meanings that are shared by human
beings are a product of human interaction with the world. Theory is infected by practice and facts
are shaped by values. Concepts structure our experience and reflect our interests attitudes
and needs. Think about that talk about light going from colors we normally see to now even
including ultraviolet. Violent. Ultraviolet and infrared. Or even and if you're big into history
you might get a kick out of this but blue was not recognized as a unique color concept until
practical societal reasons came about. More often in our cross-cultural history we find the color
concept that combines what we now consider green and blue. But as it seems to me the most popular
theory goes that we only began to use the color concept of blue uniquely after we became capable
of making blue pigment in ancient Egypt. A color which was otherwise very rare in nature itself
and perhaps it's just that blue did not require being uniquely identified prior to that.
Anyway back to Lewis though. The categories we use aren't from reality itself but reflect
enduring human interests. In that way reality is relative to a system of concepts. The world as
we know it is shaped by the concepts we use to interpret it. Experience though governs which
system of concepts we use and respect to which ones are successful. Faulty and useless concepts
lead to bad predictions and unsuccessful courses of action. It's come to my attention that I may
want to make something clear here even though I have already said it but I'm gonna say it again
but I'm not saying this gray mush is what's actually there. That reality is actually gray mush.
Really I don't know if it's gray and I don't know if it's mush. It's just that I can't say or
talk about it at all. And Kant's categories make it even difficult to even say that it is.
So there are different ways to interpret this that we will talk about later especially if we
cover chapter three on ontology. And I don't really know Lewis directly actually. I only know
what O'Grady says about him here but he does say much later on in a different chapter that Lewis
nevertheless does take the given as data of the senses upon which we build knowledge. So this is
just what it seems to me right now but it's more simply the eyes do very much still pick up this
visual light input let's say but whatever this light reflections mean to us in order for it to
mean anything in order for it to even be information in a sense at all it has to do with our concepts.
So this is as it appears or is given but then it's still the concepts that cut it up meaningfully.
So really there is all this then we have say a concept of saying something is edible and that
cuts this out and of course therefore I guess a concept of the non edible and maybe we have the
concept of things from nature and also things that are constructed from and for humans and then
we have concepts to identify colors. So it's really that concepts are cutting up all this
information that there is from the given and for Lewis those concepts themselves are a social
product certainly children are taught to recognize the type of things that are edible and not and
certainly children go through a process of recognizing the type of things that are just
there in nature and the kind of things that humans must have made these concepts came into
being and survived among any number of concepts because they help us survive or accomplish goals
ourselves. So that's my example of what's going on here I bring this up just to be clear that with
both of these the given or input doesn't necessarily mean that there isn't something if anything
scientifically it is nigh infinite information in a sense if there even is such a thing as
information at that stage and it isn't simply just gray mush I'm just visualizing it like that
that whatever is presented to the mind cannot be thought of or talked about or even recognized
without concepts to cut it up out of the rest of everything else that's just one interpretation of
what's going on but don't worry about it too much right now we're just trying to grasp this idea
that we're actually contributing to what we observe anyway so the framework idea for lewis
are systems of categories by which we mediate reality to ourselves for lewis these categories
are almost as much as social product shaped by our society as language itself is this is kind of
different from earlier contos categories appeared to be an attempt at more of a universal description
of how the human mind must conceptualize reality in order to understand it but from lewis these
categories are socially constructed from our social environment that you are in while lewis
really didn't talk much about how this would mean that there could be different sets of categories
therefore he has acknowledged the possibility on occasion and we can see that different categories
would mean that the world as it appears to us would be different in a sense according to different
societies if a different society can lead to different categories that leads to different
ways the world appears to us as at least what we can say about what we observe peaking out or even
recognizing only certain things we have the concepts our society has provided to pick out or
recognize but anyway there is no unmediated access to reality itself and the only curbs on the system
of categories would be pragmatic ones for lewis so possibly having different sets of socially
constructed categories that's what ogready calls lewis's framework idea a presentation of the world
comes with it a certain set of categories from which it was processed a framework now let's move to
rudolf karnab
sharing a lot of the same sources with lewis german philosopher rudolf karnab articulated
his framework idea of linguistic frameworks that was super relativistic he was also influenced
by kant thinking that our knowledge is a result of some kind of processing and shared the idea of
pragmatic value of applying one's knowledge but he was also influenced much by science as that
which constitute actual knowledge and as a force therefore to get rid of metaphysical and theological
fake knowledge this is a kind of deflationist view of philosophy where instead of talking about
things like truth and reality philosophies suggest clarify meanings for scientists doing that too
may have seemed itself another discussion of philosophical truths but when it came to certain
things in philosophy like what is really real these kind of questions seemed unanswerable
in a way that questions and science could be answered so instead philosophers should just
focus on investigating and creating these models which are like languages and systems where one
can calculate and identify things with clear meanings logical implications and criteria for
confirmation so that scientists can then go on and actually do the research using these models
this was to deflate philosophical questions into merely practical choices of which model
scientists wanted to use so central to karnab's project is this notion of frameworks frameworks
for karnab outline all the rules using the terms and relations between the terms so number terms
can be introduced and have a relationship or rules based on that relationship within the
framework of math let's say so for example in my interpretation of this it means that five seven
and two within the framework of math five has a relationship to seven being a difference of two
you can add two to five and get seven or subtract two from seven and get five those terms have a
relationship and they are clear in the framework of math relative to that framework questions about
numbers are easy these kind of questions about the relationships like what is nine plus eight
they are internal questions questions that presuppose the existence of such a framework
to get an answer relative to the framework internal questions are uncontroversially
answerable and there are different frameworks to discuss different kinds of things physical objects
properties or spatial temporal objects do numbers really exist do properties really exist
karnab calls these external questions because they are outside the context of a linguistic
framework such questions are improper because the choice of framework is pragmatically decided on
if it is useful to speak of numbers then such a framework will be used if it is useful to speak
of properties then that framework will be used the only appropriate external questions are ones
about the expediency of using a framework or not so pretty much within this linguistic frameworks
questions are answered easily within the structure of that framework but to try to step outside of
framework and discuss it itself the only meaningful question here is if that framework is useful us
to use right now or not but still this can lead to a huge number of frameworks so karnab points to
a kind of natural selection akin to biology to how we come to use particular ones reducing how
varied they can be but even with natural selection there's still a lot open here for relativists
but let's leave that there for now karnab will come up again in the battle and we will cover
again sort of what the idea is so anyway that's what ogready calls karnab's framework idea and now
for lw Ludwig Wittgenstein
he's probably the most important developer of framework ideas of the 20th century and is well
known for making two influential philosophies whoa wait a minute uh so to be honest with you
i do not think this section is very good at explaining what Wittgenstein's framework idea
is even less so than any of the other philosophers the framework idea of language games has less
time devoted to it than the other things and yet it's very important to grasp this idea in particular
especially considering ogready himself thinks he's the most important contributor to it but also it
could be very helpful for us in the future as well so i want to make clear it's not that
paul ogready has gotten wittgenstein wrong in this section or that ogready cannot do a better job at
explaining him or isn't so much smarter than me but that this particular section doesn't really
explain what a language game really is and how it leads to the other points that ogready brings up
so i will do that myself explain it in a separate video a video that's just off the cuff you know
not cited from the top of my head just me trying to explain with examples what language games are
and how it connects to the points that ogready is going to be bringing up for the purposes of
just getting the idea out there to move on but hey maybe it could also be a great standalone video
if you've kind of forgotten what wittgenstein's language games were kind of about at least until
i do make a proper video since we definitely will get into wittgenstein properly one day and i promise
to give away all my secret stash of important citation everything cited down to the line like
i normally do you know even back to his blue and brown books where we will find a cheat code
okay but for now let's see what ogready does say anyway ogready tells us that wittgenstein had two
influential philosophies one presented in his tractatis logical philosophicus that articulates
what essentially language is you know its essence and the picturing relation between language and
reality now ogready doesn't say what he thinks wittgenstein said is the essence of language
but i think it's simply that it has this picturing relationship that language is that
which corresponds to reality like a picture does with words and a proposition having the
same relationship to each other as the objects that they pick out or stand for in the world
the other philosophy later in life his latter philosophy is presented in his philosophical
investigations and it actually critiques a lot of what was said in that first account
rejecting the idea that language has a particular essence and that philosophy shouldn't focus on
advancing theses but be a kind of therapy to help clarify language instead of having a single
determinant language language is comprised of many language games now i'm just gonna read like six
lines and tell you what i think of them a language game is a complex whole of verbal usage and
associated activities words simply don't label or stand for objects but relate to each other and
the world in highly complex ways words are like tools there are many different kinds performing
many different kinds of activities therefore there are many different language games and many
different associated forms of life the kinds of activities associated with the language game
the language games are governed by grammatical rules rules of grammar prescribe the modes of
representation by which the world is represented to us oh super clear isn't it no look i don't
think old grady is wrong but only because i actually studied vikenshine but also i haven't
forgotten what's wrong with talking about vikenshine like this in part because i haven't forgotten
what it was like as a young philosopher that was unfamiliar i think this could to someone less
familiar make vikenshine seem complicated or even mystical in some sense neither of which is true
the last lines in particular could seem to imply something radical like what you say changes the
world itself that reality as commonly taken is literally changing when you change what you say
that's kind of extreme if you think about that kind of picture and not at all what vikenshine's
about though it's hard to say but also to deny what vikenshine's actual metaphysical position
really is because he himself won't do that since his philosophy aims to stop speaking metaphysically
in such a manner in the first place but if you insist to be unfaithful to his philosophy there
is still a cheat code in the blue and brown books like i said that i can give you later so subscribe
in any case i can imagine someone reading this and just feeling like oh whatever just another
philosopher using a bunch of words together to obfuscate their position to appear deep and
complicated but it's just vague nonsense jargon so this is why i believe my video becomes necessary
for anyone who hasn't studied vikenshine's language games already because you're not going to get a
good sense of it from ogready despite what it may seem like other actual philosophers say
for someone new and not familiar with the kind of concepts that philosophers use all the time
this really isn't easy text and i definitely think kirks book was probably much more palatable to
somebody new in any case there are a couple of more things that ogready does point out about
language games vikenshine's framework idea that are important so let's cover them ogready points
out three things and two of them are that vikenshine emphasized that it was important
not to conflate one language game with another or to think that there are super language games
that govern all others ogready also points out that there is a quite popular use of vikenshine's
idea was to try to defend religious belief against rationalistic critique by claiming that religion
is its own language game and that it is illicit to use criteria from another language game usually
science to challenge it but as it is always really important to point out this is not to say that
vikenshine himself espoused such views again as i said that he didn't mean and likely didn't want
his philosophy to be used by extreme relativists especially considering how he was trying to be
anti-philosophy in his own way but his views lent themselves to such use ogready then talks about
how in uncertainty vikenshine's latest writings that vikenshine does seem to have this image of
a riverbed with a bedrock below to kind of represent even how in a language game there are
beliefs that we are willing to change more easily and fluidly and some more deeply entrenched which
are likely bedrock at the bottom of a river but that even those can change just at a much slower
rate ogready brings us up to kind of say how it's this bedrock beliefs that are the framework upon
which the fluid beliefs depend and that this for ogready is also used to say the framework may alter
and indeed there may be alternative frameworks but really he didn't need to bring that up at all i
think the fact that there are different language games is enough to see how vikenshine's philosophy
empowers the relativists in fact as far as i have seen the issue of whether the bedrock can change
from within a language game isn't a discussion that the relativists using this weapon even bother
with it's seemingly to me always a discussion about how there are differing language games but
maybe i'm missing something as to why he felt this was important to bring up i mean i guess there's
another argument to how there can be different frameworks but really the language game argument
not the bedrocks can change argument is ultimately what's taken to be the power that is imbued into
this weapon from vikenshine now i do wish ogready would have done don't think look more which is
give more examples for us to actually look at in many places in his book but as i said in the
beginning of the video paul ogready does seem to be more concerned with pointing out the sources of
the powers of this weapon rather than actually explaining what the sources are which is why i
said i would try to hopefully fill that gap and bear that responsibility myself so again please
do go check out that video that i will be making i will definitely be more clearly explaining what
the idea of a language game is and i will explain why we would be against the idea of a super language
game and why we shouldn't mix language games as well as how these kind of vikenshinean philosophers
may be in a tight spot sometimes if one is trying to stay faithful to his philosophy while explaining
anyway please check out that video so now i'm going to give things back to ogready who will
talk about w v quine w v quine was one of the earliest to popularize the phrase conceptual
scheme the conceptual scheme is revisable but there is no neutral position to talk about the
world is to apply some conceptual scheme to it from childhood growing up we learn the conceptual
scheme and as we learn more the conceptual scheme gets refined and right now science is the best
as the most inclusive scheme that covers everything that exists it is the best to understand the world
and predict changes in it but borrowing the term language game from vikenshine quine says that there
are other kinds of language use for poetry or fiction for example and they are used to see the
world in a different way imaginary worlds so of course they'd have different conceptual schemes
which is fine but what if it's the same world like the real world can we nevertheless have
different conceptual schemes well it seems there's enough in quine to say yeah for sure
for example he believes that all beliefs can in fact be changed that none are unchangeable
and absolute that there are no a priori beliefs for quine but what that even means could use some
further detail but it's in a different chapter that again i'm not sure if i'm gonna cover
but also he did believe in under determination of theory by fact which is to say that any set
amount of evidence could support more than one theory so with my famous example i used in the
map of philosophy of science video check it out if you have time there i used an example of dots
on a graph that i give with the dots representing observations or even what counts as evidence
for any certain amount of dots can support more than one theory of what the shape the dots are
making and in fact no amount of dots will ever fully guarantee only one shape or theory that
could fit it so it would be like quine does believe that even in dealing with the real world
people could nevertheless have different conceptual schemes these two things that all our beliefs
can change so our conceptual scheme can change and that we can have different theories based off the
same observation thus different conceptual schemes while based in the real world would make quine
fertile ground for relativists but we'll talk later in chapter three whether that's actually
his position or not chapter three chapter three whoa okay so we can stop with that look i don't
know we're really gonna be covering that what okay fine we'll see anyway ogready is calling quine's
conceptual scheme which is like our best theory of the world that we use to make sense of the world
which can change and can be different quine's framework idea now finally drop that coon hold on
a philosopher and historian uh science ts coon helped relativists in a big way his notion of paradigms
not paradigms became influential well beyond philosophy of science a paradigm is a context
within which scientific inquiry proceeds like assumptions training methods standards goals
methods of experimentation again ogready doesn't provide examples even in places where they would
be super helpful but i would just say maybe it would be helpful to imagine a newtonian paradigm
let's say versus an einsteinian paradigm you know a paradigm of relativity or now say a quantum
physics paradigm they characterize a scientific community at a stable period but a crisis can
happen that lead to a new paradigm the paradigms themselves though are supposedly incommensurable
paradigms create their own context within which it rationally operates so one can't rationally
judge or decide between them here's where i think there's some leftover blood soaked soil of the
positivists that have us thinking of it like that which i mentioned in that map episode but yeah
think of it as in that evidence is interpreted through a paradigm so then it isn't evidence
that's actually deciding between paradigms we can't evaluate the evidence without a paradigm first
so each paradigm judges itself and one cannot judge a paradigm from another based on evidence
itself now i have actually created two videos on coon already one video is coon's response in his
own words to those that contrast him with his predecessor the great champion carl popper so
it gives i think a decent outline of what coon's position is but also i made a video explaining
in much more detail how it is specifically his philosophy that allowed these relativists therefore
to enter onto the battlefield of the philosophy of science using his philosophy of paradigm shifts
and crises if you're interested please check them out the second video can be a bit spooky it's
called the gates of hell but uh i'm just being dramatic don't worry hell isn't really involved
in any case it's these philosophers that are the big names of whose philosophies are similar
enough in terms of a framework idea to be pressed into a single weapon and a nearly supremely
powerful position the relativist takes wielding this great weapon framework ideas from them
developed from very different places of the world and was one of the three big trends that brought
this weapon into the modern philosophic battle according to a gradient but i think he is missing
a couple of other things namely that there's also a lot of scientific discoveries that led
to similar beliefs about how what we perceive isn't objective reality that it is shaped by the type of
creatures that we are with the faculties that we have brain science shows all the ways we filter
out non-essential information and what counts as essential again has to do with our evolved histories
as human beings again such as what kind of colors we can see in the light spectrum and even many
people's beliefs and interpretation of what quantum physics supposedly shows us evidence for
that our act of observing itself affects the observed not that i believe that interpretation
but it is one that many more people have been taking on because of quantum physics of course
though ogready is talking about philosophy but i do think philosophical conversation is obviously
being influenced by discoveries and technological advancement in science in modern times as much
as it was in his own little history lesson given to us here describing the separation of nature and
morals the battle so we may find ourselves up against an enemy wielding this weapon in an extreme
let's say because we are endorsing the use of science to decide on the role of vaccines the
reality of global warming or the age of the earth we can actually believe that this position of
wielding this weapon to an extreme degree of thinking everything is relative was created not
because they are evil and want to attack science we may believe that they are actually sincere in
their honest virtuous morals of pursuing tolerance and open-mindedness of people of different perspectives
and a weary of western imperialist thinking of having used claims of rationality and logic and
scientific advancement as a reason to oppress and invalidate others of non-western belief systems
but of course it's that same extreme position that can be used to defend attacks from science
against the intolerant abusive tyrannical belief systems that will say science is just relative
so it cannot be used to attack their abusive beliefs that aren't grounded in reality but dogma
and deep rooted insecurities like misogyny or homophobia so taking this weapon as if it were
infinitely powerful isn't in the best interest of even those who are primordially interested in a
more tolerant social world and there is real-world evidence cases about this but we'll talk about
them later in any case we as good warriors on the philosophic battlefield should wonder how
if i do come up against an enemy wielding this weapon to an extreme degree enough to attack
science claims to truth or rationality let's say then how am i supposed to beat them when i want
to say something is science when i want to say something is the truth when i want to say something
makes rational sense so think about it against this enemy i cannot just take something out of my
pocket and say see this is the objective thing here it's not relative because everything i say
is merely relative to a language game i can't show any evidence either because evidence is relative
to a paradigm and i can't even show any observation of anything because all observations are structured
relative to our conceptual scheme there isn't anything i can produce anything i can offer
that cannot be attacked by this enemy so it's difficult to figure out how can i beat this
enemy when they can attack anything i show them if i say objects or reality they can even say
that those are just in fact words relative to a language game even if i try to be very clear that
i mean mind independent reality they can still attack that and say whatever mind independent
reality even means is structured by a conceptual scheme tied to particular social groups that
make use of such conceptual structures thus hastily concluding that reality is relative
so yes it is incredibly frustrating trying to deal with this kind of enemy who will continually
attack constantly so i want you to remember this situation facing an enemy that will always attack
no matter what is shown how can you win think of it for yourself first do you see a way we could
deal with this kind of enemy can you come up with a cool move or a counter think about it
before we get to the next video where we'll cover what paul o'grady does on the battlefield
choosing specific areas to defend against charges of relativism this weapon however made by philosophers
is being wielded to attack science not by philosophers themselves but by sociologists
who used kuhn to enter onto the battlefield of the philosophy of science in order to attack it
and these sociologists do not understand this weapon well enough to grasp the dangers if it is
used as if unlimited they only know its power to attack the attempt to speak with authority
not the limits which we unlike them will learn in the next videos once we learn that this weapon
does in fact have limits and the dangers that happens when those limits are crossed we will
then return back to the battlefield of the philosophy of science where they had these
science wars the battlefield from where i came in this journey and then we will take on this
particular group of sociologists that are attacking science are those influenced by them called the ssk
who started the science wars so if you would like an account of what led to the science wars and who
are these ssk please watch my video voodoo sociology as paulo grady now prepares for battle
himself against this extreme relativist presented in the next video one that attempts to make a
few attacks on objectivity by proclaiming that even truth is relative
