Welcome back, today on Philosophy Battle we are covering one of the greatest battles
that has ever influenced me, and namely it's actually the setup for the battle that will
finally allow us to gain the philosophic powers of this metaphysical eye that I've been promising.
The setup will lay the groundwork for the eternal traction in the slippery, perilous
battlefields of philosophy.
The awesome battle that we'll be covering though is from this green book, the second
of three books that I may cover on relativism.
A book simply titled, Relativism, by Paul O'Grady, a philosophy lecturer at Trinity
College in Dublin.
While there are a number of different battles in this green book, the one we'll be covering
today involves Paul O'Grady defending truth against the attacks of the extreme relativist.
That is, the relativist who believes everything is relative.
Not just matters of taste or beauty, or even what counts as right and wrong, but for them
even things like knowledge, truth, logic, and reality are relative.
For them, everything is relative.
Nothing is objective, nothing is absolute.
And that is what we would call the extreme relativist.
It may sound a little bit out there, but we're dealing with a sophisticated relativist whose
weapon has been empowered by three trends and namely five philosophers that Paul O'Grady
himself noted for us in his introductory chapter, where he helped explain the powers of this
wickedly awesome weapon and how it came into being, especially in modern philosophic warfare.
So if you'd like to see how it is possible that even a reasonable person may come to
feel that even things like truth or knowledge or facts are relative, please check out the
previous video, The Powers of Relativism.
Why are we considering the concerns of these relativists that make the charges that even
facts truth or logic is relative?
It's important for a good philosopher to understand that one cannot simply defeat an
enemy like this, an extreme relativist, who wishes to use relativism everywhere, not just
because they say so, but as empowered by actual philosophic writing, namely those five philosophers,
by simply proclaiming, hey, there's no problem, we could just literally objectively describe
things how they are and we have scientific facts and so on, you know, facts and logic.
So they aren't relative, well you may actually have to deal with them rather than try to
offhand dismiss them.
Because if science doesn't maintain its legitimacy and authority, you may have religious fanatics
teaching extreme spiritual beliefs in science class, you may have corporations or politicians
disregard scientific findings, and many other terrible things that happen sometimes simply
to spite scientific evidence.
And the arguments of the SSK, a particular group of sociologists that studied science
that used these powerful philosophic weapons to attack the authority and legitimacy of
science or arguments of their academic descendants can be used to do such things, even perhaps
pull funding away from the sciences.
Thinking all of this isn't really a problem because we could just describe reality objectively
with literalism and so that's not relative, against this extreme relativist with this
sophisticated weaponry is a very rudimentary attack that will be blown out of the water
by this powerful enemy.
Again to understand the main staples of how they could even do that, we covered that in
our last video covering the power of relativism.
So please check that out if you'd like to see how exactly this weapon can be so powerful.
Or check this out if you would like more detail on who these SSK are and what happened in what
was called the science wars.
But if you're more interested in the battle against this enemy, how we can defeat them,
that's what we got for you today.
That will show the limits of this weapon.
Well actually Paul Grady first makes a wonderful setup from which he is able to then go and
defend against charges of relativism on two fronts, the two limits, here and here.
As I said this setup will be used for me to explain the powers of the philosophic eye,
or at least what I mean by that in my own theatric way of describing things.
In any case, he defends truth and rationality from charges of relativism.
Those are the battles we are going to cover, but as I said for today, we'll just be covering
both that setup and the first battle, defending truth.
Now in this chapter on truth, he also discusses whether logic can be relative, so we will
look at logic as well in this video if not an additional one if this one gets too long.
By the way, O'Grady does accept relativism in ontology, of which ontology is a topic about
what there is, what kind of things there are in the world.
And he also accepts it sort of to a certain degree in epistemology, which is the study
of knowledge.
Here however, it is limited by how much relativism there can be in rationality, because rationality
plays an important role in knowledge.
Again though, he actually still defends rationality against the charges of relativism by the
extreme relativists, which is the other awesome battle in this book which we will definitely
eventually cover in a different video, in the next one hopefully.
After we cover both these battles though, perhaps I may make a video of an overall assessment
of the book talking about some of the other chapters maybe, you know, if you subscribe.
Hehe.
But enough about me, let's listen to Paul O'Grady to get that first important setup.
But let me point out whenever I am speaking for O'Grady, which will actually still be
my interpretation of paraphrasing of what he said, I will still cite it down through
the line in the corner of the screen, and when I speak more for myself, the citation
will disappear.
And that way you'll know what's from him sort of, and what's from me.
Also you can then check if I misinterpreted any of his lines and identify exactly where
I have failed, and that I always credit others in honesty if I'm covering their work.
And though I may just be a shadowy nobody on the internet here, please still mention
me, not as an academic source, but in a footnote or something if any of my videos have given
you formulation to your own thought.
You should do the same even if it's a conversation you've had with your professor and received
a clear idea from another person or something.
Be as honest and credit as much as possible.
Academic honesty and citation work hand in hand in improving your battle stance and philosophy,
helping to shelter you and support you by diverting attacks to others that you have
cited if certain attacks are inbound, but also allowing others to help correct your
stance if they can spot the sources of misunderstanding.
Wow, now that sounded like a big ethics lecture.
But anyway, so for today our battle is gonna focus specifically on Paul O'Grady's setup
and then ultimately his defense of truth against the charges of relativism by the
Allithic Relativist, Allithic meaning about truth, and Relative being that which is dependent
on something else.
He says, Allithic Relativism has often been invoked as a way of avoiding contradiction.
So his first section is going to be about how Allithic Relativism is motivated by wanting
to avoid contradiction, then all the different ways to relativize truth, all of which will
be rejected.
In the second section we'll look at different theories of truth that might defend and relativize
version of truth, though actually that for the most part counts against those theories
not for it.
In any case, the third section is going to be about logic, whether it is relative and
whether there can be alternative logics.
So it's true, people have different beliefs on politics, morals, religion, music, etc.
One of the motivations is to accommodate this diversity.
So as if to say that though there are different views, they can all be true.
Think about this, remember we have already attacked their organs in a previous episode
and videos for you are here if you followed my journey.
So let's hope they know that we're coming from a good place ourselves as well.
Anyway, because of this, they reject both positions of a non-relativist.
Those positions are first, dogmatism, that one view can be true and the rest must be
false, denying diversity, and the other of non-cognitivism, that no one has the truth
because what they're saying can't even be said to be true or false.
For this, because truth isn't at issue, diversity can easily exist.
It's kind of like saying some things can be true or false like in science, but these
things, values, moral views, religious views, etc, they aren't the type of things that
can even be true or false, and diversity can flourish when truth isn't in the picture.
So truth relativists, illithic relativists, hold that some competing views can both be
legitimate candidates for truth and competing views as legit candidates can both be true
despite them being opposing.
To accept opposing positions as both being true simultaneously is on the face of it to
accept contradiction, and to do such a thing is unacceptable.
So I said in a previous video while dealing with Robert Kirk, to forgive me for not showing
how Kirk explained how contradictions are bad and just to trust me that he actually
did show us that.
I didn't show it because I really wanted to get to and show how O'Grady does it.
And this is that important setup that I wanted to show, which will work for him to defend
in different places against the relativists, but also may be ultimately the basis for one
of the coolest things that it will ever show on the show, that metaphysical eye.
It has a number of implications, but starting it out it may seem super simple.
So if it's simple for you and obvious, still be patient with it.
Only later will we really begin to use what he sets up here in battle, then we will truly
see how awesome it is.
But for now, let's just take a look.
Let's see why contradictions are bad.
This is going to be awesome.
Contradiction is the assertion of a statement or proposition and the negation of that same
assertion or proposition at the same time in the same understanding.
And this is an important point.
Because it's like changing your mind over time, that really isn't a contradiction.
People may say I believe something then and I don't believe it now because now I know
it's wrong.
So there's a now versus then distinction, showing that it's not a legitimate contradiction.
And for what we're talking about, it has to be a legitimate contradiction, p and not
p.
Oh, so p is a proposition, which is a statement about what is or not, the state of affairs
as they are or not.
And a proposition doesn't have to be represented or presented with the letter p, it could be
represented with q or r or s, it's just a kind of variable like in math how we can use
x or y or z to represent consistent numerical variables.
Also for your sake, this symbol is the negation symbol in logic.
It means not, or the negative of what is expressed after it.
But I'll try to keep it simple for you and try to write it like this whenever I can at
first.
But anyway, so about being a genuine contradiction.
Everyone saying this is black and this is white isn't a legitimate or genuine contradiction.
Something can be black and white.
A legit contradiction would be more like to say this is black and this is not black.
Well, I kinda don't like this example too much because in normal everyday language,
if we are saying about say a soccer ball, we wouldn't actually just say it's black,
we would say it's black and white.
Just because we know it's kind of misleading to say just it's black.
And our general way of speaking would allow us to assume that it's not also white because
you would have said black and white if it were also white.
It would be kind of unusual to leave out white if your point was to say what color is the
ball is, you know?
But anyway, his point here is that there should be no sneaky way of showing that it's not
really a contradiction.
So it's black and it is not black is a very clear case of a contradiction.
And that's what he's trying to get at.
But to be a true relativist, they have to be willing to accept even these legitimate contradictions.
And what's the problem with accepting genuine cases of contradictions as possible?
The basic problem is that the notion of contradiction is essentially connected to the notion of
assertion and negation.
This, this point here is one of the two main reasons I'm talking about O'Grady.
If you can grasp the essential nature of all assertion, you will have developed what I
call a metaphysical eye, a deeper philosophic understanding that allows you to catch enemies
who lack that understanding and end up committed to devastating and crippling positions.
So what comes next may on the one hand seem super obvious, but its implication we will
show later as being incredibly important.
You see, to make an assertion, you are expressing some content that something is the case.
Something is a certain way.
In doing that, you are at the same time denying its negation.
For example, the sun is shining at a certain time or place.
This rules out or denies the sun is not shining at that exact time or place or understanding
that is meant in the first proposition.
This is also a logical move called double negation here.
To say p is also equivalent to say not not p.
Now that's more of a formal logic way of expressing this rational principle.
Many of us learn in studying math say we're multiplying two negatives make a positive
or simply in English when we use the double negatives.
For example, someone that says it isn't true that we're not here means that it is true
that we are.
Or for example, it's not true that it's not raining means that it is true that it is raining.
So you see, double negatives make a positive.
But also a positive can be a double negative.
And that means a positive is like negating a negative.
Assertion implies the rejection of the negation of that assertion.
This is going to sound funny so for those of you who are listening to this and not
watching this, it might make more sense to watch this at the same time.
But asserting p, which is logically equal to not not p, shows it is not not p.
P denies not p.
This is really simple logic that we're familiar with.
But again, to be talking about it like this can feel a bit weird to someone new in philosophy.
So I hope I'm not actually confusing anyone by talking about something super basic but
in more formal logical ways.
But anyway, when it comes to contradiction, it is to assert and endorse both the assertion
and its negation.
P and not p.
This is kind of like cutting off its own legs maybe, that's the way of saying it, because
p should imply not not p.
Which denies not p.
And yet not p also denies p.
So a contradiction undermines the very process of asserting.
To accept a contradiction means to render empty the very act of asserting.
Two sides attacking each other in the same unit is nothing.
Like one part negative and one part positive cancelling each other out in math or perhaps
in physics let's say.
Since some basic math is plenty easier to grasp for many people I believe than maybe
my earlier logical stuff, let's look at it like this.
So it's like you might as well say nothing.
It's equal to saying you have no knowledge, no claim to anything at all.
Also then a positive assertion like a plus one is equal to denying a negative or you
know minus a negative one.
Saying plus one minus one is to say nothing at all.
And then I would wonder why did you waste my time telling me something that yields nothing,
no claim, no stance, no belief, no anything.
To assert anything of substance that has a purpose meaning a stance requires that it
also denies the opposite of what is being asserted, lest it be rendered meaningless or
even false.
So this is a law of non-contradiction, a law against contradiction.
The law of non-contradiction is so basic and necessary that one cannot even argue for or
against it on the basis of anything more fundamental.
Because it's so fundamental, in fact it is the very basis of how we do argumentation
in the first place.
This makes it an insurmountable problem for anyone that tries to deny non-contradiction.
Even denying the principle, in so far as denying has any meaning whatsoever, must have
a determinate content that is not undermined by simultaneously affirming the principle.
So that is why contradictions must be avoided.
This is it.
If you get anything from this video, I hope it is this and it is tied to the very nature
of making any assertion.
With it you will see clearly what many have already begun to see in the previous Kirk
video series and what I spoke about as a crippling problem, which O'Grady now calls insurmountable.
Let me explain it like this.
It is self-defeat.
You see, this principle that contradictions are bad, let's say, it is actually the very
basis of arguing against something.
So to argue against this principle assumes this principle, that the principle works,
thus cutting off one's own legs in a way.
Even so we don't miss it, arguing for or asserting anything, no matter what, has a meaning
in so far as you are denying the opposite of what you are saying, as we stated earlier.
So an argument against this principle also requires it, in order for that argument to
have any meaning.
How can one contradict that contradictions happen?
It's an insurmountable problem for them who deny it.
And we saw this actually already in the Kirk video as I pointed it out for us.
And we'll talk about this again in my final talk about relativism before I'm done with
this whole topic.
But let me give it some more timeless, some very easy things that we may have encountered
in our lives that highlight this.
If one tries to deny that denial is possible, then how are you denying?
That is incoherent.
The TFM true for me relativist in the Kirk videos disagreed that disagreement happens.
How can you disagree that disagreement happens?
That's self-defeating.
If you try to say no one can say anything with any authority, then how did you say that?
In fact how can you say with authority, or even just substantively, what your own position
is unless it means to deny the opposite of that position?
I mean trying to say no one can talk is self-defeating and that you've just proven by what you're
doing that you are wrong.
One cannot deny that denial exists or claim that no one can make a claim nor say that
they know that there is no knowledge.
One should not be able to tell everyone to shut up that no one has the right to talk
because then that person too should have kept quiet.
If that were true.
While I always say philosophers keep battling, philosophers do battle about anything they
can but it takes short time for a philosopher to realize certain positions are terrible
either because they have more arguments against them than can have defending them but also
because it may be a self-defeating position and those must be avoided at all costs.
So Immanuel Kant once said and I quoted metaphysics is a dark ocean without shores or a lighthouse
strewn with many a philosophic wreck.
Man eff that ship let me tell you this is from me not O'Grady not anyone else but metaphysics
epistemology philosophy of mind anywhere you are there is a lighthouse there is always
a lighthouse and it stands on the pillar of non-contribution a pillar of rationality
and connecting to another pillar the nature of assertion and thus the necessity of truth
this will be our lighthouse and I will talk more about this lighthouse in the future and
what my organs are perhaps but there is enough to understand to really see with what I theatrically
call your metaphysical eye when self-defeat is happening this is the philosophic eye that
will allow you to defeat your philosophic enemies from working within their own system but there
is a commitment here further that O'Grady will talk about later when he defends rationality
when he defends rationality itself against attack in the next battle but also something
metaphysical that I feel is actually left out from O'Grady's discussion that perhaps
I will address at the end but how exactly then does this seeming obvious point become
very useful on the battlefield how does this really help us in a way to conduct our lives
or our society and how deep does it impact philosophy or the world well this star allows
me to speak enough but maybe not enough to elaborate or visualize my metaphors here
if you subscribe though maybe I will gain more power to speak myself but we are here
not for some shadowy nobody like me but for a real human being Paulo Grady so let's
get back to him so you can't actually argue for or against non-contradiction for doing
that would assume it so to avoid contradiction because now we know contradictions are bad
the relativist denies that there is a real contradiction because truth itself is just
relative something is either true for you or true for me for some of them that's their
distinction like now and then except they're not using now and then they're using for me
or for you so it's opposing views but not in the same sense thus it's not a real contradiction
for them and this is what we covered in the last episode episode six we saw Robert Kirk
battle this kind of relativist the true for me relativist the tfm relativist in the last episode
but O'Grady makes kind of quicker work of them than Kirk did O'Grady however asks a bunch of
questions that we all would of someone that claims truth is relative but I guess I'd only
highlight this question in particular if all truth is relative is that itself relatively true
or absolutely true pointing to the incoherence of relativists once again in a way can you see it
but anyway leaving that for now O'Grady then says something that is more true in our common
lives which is why I spent so much time emphasizing it in the previous episode with Kirk he says that
at the crudest level saying something is like true for me is just a way of being polite and
non-confrontational like saying God exists is true for me but this doesn't actually stop us from
judging whether something is true or false just that we're no longer judging the true or false
whether God exists instead it is changed to merely if it is true or false whether or not you actually
do believe one way or another this is common but is not actually a way of relativizing truth
so it's a non-starter whoa actually I really love this this is a great point that makes quick work
of the tfm relativists many relativists believe they are not making objective statements about
how things are if they put in qualifiers like to person x y is true well okay y is true is now
relative to person x but it's still a proposition that reports the truth of to person x y is true
now is this non-relatively true perhaps here's where we covered another cool thing that I think
Kirk did about how there could be an infinite regress with this but to be clear simply saying
I think science is good doesn't mean you're not making an objective claim just that your objective
claim now isn't about science it is about the truth of what you think and so we could ask about
the objective truth of whether you actually think that about science or not and it would ascertain
the truth of your statement in a way that is for us and for everyone and not just for you simply
saying to me or for me or in my opinion or I believe doesn't mean one isn't making an objective
claim actually all it's doing is just reducing or preserving the space to where we feel more
entitled to be objective where we are less likely to be opposed or questioned to speak about what I
think or how I feel one is more entitled to objectively take a stance on what is the case
with these qualifiers again think about how every assertion still nevertheless needs to be substantive
to say something and thus to oppose its opposite anyway so as O'Grady says there's got to be a
better way to philosophically relativize truth because this actually is a non-starter well
I'm gonna talk about three ways these are going to be the three better more philosophically
empower ways to try and relativize truth that the relativist may choose other than just stating that
everything is simply true for me or true for you we're going to call these at least three attacks
the first attack is going to be artificial languages associated with Tarski and Carnep
that truth is relative to a language or a system and there can be many languages so truth is actually
just relative to the pragmatic reasons we have to which system we decide upon the second attack
is going to be about how true and false aren't the only options associated with Joseph Margolis
the third attack is an account that is given by Chris Sawyer but one that shifts the relativization
away from being about truth really so this is the battle so this is the battle
O'Grady versus the Alithic well attack one artificial languages
since ordinary natural language were vague and imprecise for scientific use and could
lead to philosophic problems Gottlieb Frege championed the construction of special languages for
philosophy called Burgerschrift okay so I can't pronounce it despite having read it thousands
of times in many different places but hey I don't really have German philosophy friends to you know
have a quick talk about for this video you know so I could have learned how to pronounce it properly
I also don't have German friends to ask I also don't have friends anyway the idea was that if you
made language clear and precise enough like math you could clear away many philosophical problems
just by being clear about what is said to be and what is therefore implied by it and philosophers
could make these languages for scientists use we sort of already have been talking about this in
the last video when we discussed Carnap again check it out if you like but one of frega's students
Rudolph Carnap as I just mentioned took up the project various philosophic issues there in
ordinary language could actually be solved in these specially constructed precise languages
things like the analytic synthetic distinction logical consequence and even truth could be
clearly defined in such artificially constructed languages which language was chosen to be used
and therefore which definition of truth it entailed was a matter of pragmatic choice for the scientists
that philosophers would make these languages for you see Carnap at the time felt in normal
language the notion of truth is a sloppy concept that just ends up in unnecessary philosophical
debate about correspondence between appearance and reality in the new languages however truth
could be given clear and strict definitions but only holds within that language now when Polish
American Alfred Tarski made his celebrated account of truth he followed Carnap in dealing with only
artificial languages and his account of truth didn't work in natural language so the general
universal notions of truth began to be replaced with the notion of true in L where L is the
artificial language keep in mind that from the philosophic point of view the traditional
philosophic discussions about say what is the nature of truth were thought of as pseudo debates
arising from the confusion over language so really it became more preferable that truth
was thought of as merely a term with a clear definition that depends on which language you
choose in this way truth becomes relativized to each artificial language and in fact contradiction
can happen within a language but each language gets to set out its own criteria of what counts
as a contradiction too and so contradiction only happens within a particular language not across
different languages so the relativist employs the Tarski-Carnap argument that truth is just whatever
is true in L and different languages can actually be set so something doesn't count as a contradiction
within it and discussions of truth generally beyond what is true in L is just confusions
truth thus relativized well now Paulo Grady defends against this attack
firstly he points out what's the real relevance of artificial languages and definitions concerning
real beliefs genuine disputes between people about beliefs can't be sidestep because of the
employment of artificial languages that seems kind of like a common sense philosophy here but
Paulo Grady has an even more philosophic response to this issue check it out as he points out
remember choice between artificial language is a pragmatic issue which shouldn't itself
be a discussion of truth it's just a matter of whether one versus another is more useful or not
right but even to say even to make the judgment that this language is useful requires the notion
of truth that it's true that that language is useful this judgment of truth that a language is
indeed useful or not stands outside the particular artificial language themselves not relativized
and it's that notion of the truth in a general theoretical sense that this artificial languages
attack tried to remove well see it didn't such use seems unavoidable wow what a move that was
awesome Paulo Grady did something awesome here like uh i love this because it challenges that
naive notion that pragmatics somehow dissolves philosophic issues in all cases such as discussions
of truth and knowledge now you uh maybe perhaps don't do philosophy in academia but there's no
field of knowledge whether medicine sport science law or business analyst or something like that
where the discussion of how do we know something in that field isn't important or in this case
it helps to show that if you have a concern about is it true that trying to replace it with
its pragmatic that or its practical that doesn't actually really remove the philosophic concern
because someone with that concern would just move on to concerns of well is it true that it is
pragmatic and such and such this is a kind of similar move though isn't it to something we've
already seen saying true for me didn't stop our concern of objective claims nor does saying oh
it's pragmatic that stop our concerns with is it true that in a similar fashion do you see it
trying to say hey discussions about truth can be made to not count down here across languages
at the artificial level doesn't remove how they do happen up here because the notion of truth
can't be avoided so long as any judgment is happening from a kind of above position
above position i say hopefully my visuals are helping here and we will continue to use them
to show how in a sense we go high or above to speak about things anything when we are stating how
things are in a capital t truth way even when we qualify our statements with to me or to them or
in science or its practical that or its pragmatic that and hopefully by the end of this video
you will come to realize the necessity of this and it will actually build the power of this
philosophic eye that i promised so maybe it's worth rewatching this video twice uh to get what
i'm kind of saying here if it sounds a little confusing but don't worry about it like it will
really become much more clear once we covered both these battles in any case attack one has failed
but the wicked elithic relativist isn't done yet another far more spooky attack comes about
attack two multiple truth values conflicting views produce a contradiction in a classical logic
in which there are two truth values either the truth value of true or false two now relativists
are accused of self-refutation this is the self-defeat that we saw earlier with that circle
also sometimes called incoherence but to avoid that problem some say there's more than just
two truth values that there could be three or more which means they drop the classical logic law
of the excluded middle a law that states that there's only truth and false no third value
so just to re-explain this sort of sorry if this is repetitive but it's important to be
clear about what the strategy is here if you remember the relativists wanted to use something
the principle of non-contradiction because they needed in order to express a content
but the content that they wanted to express was to deny that principle p and not p that itself
is a contradiction both of these cannot be true or perhaps another way to look at it is p cannot
be both true and false but anyway looking at the example of p and not p because both cannot be true
then if one is true the other must be false this relied on the principle of non-contradiction as we
saw before if this is true then this has to be false but also the other way around if one is false
the other must be true easy enough right so choosing one of the two options forces the
opposite proposition to be the other option but this isn't just because of non-contradiction
it's also because there isn't a third option here and that's called the law of the excluded middle
things are either true or false no middle no new option but if we drop that law and we had like a
third option then saying this is false doesn't necessarily mean that this one has to be true
it could also possibly be this other thing whatever it is so dropping the excluded middle
law may save the relativist from self-defeat in this way that way they can deny p the principle of
non-contradiction while not necessarily asserting p as true it would be this new thing what would that
third value even look like well some say indeterminate so like t f and question mark maybe or others say
like mostly mainly or half truth and mostly mainly false well that's like seven different values there
but if you think of it if you can do something like that you can even do it using more numbers
for probability like between 0 and 1 0.1 true or 0.56 true doing this kind of thing instead of just
t and f doesn't necessarily make your relativist but it can be helpful to relativists in defusing
what could have been a contradiction if we had only a two-valued system p may be very probable
or 0.96 true while not p could be half or 0.5 true and so it is claimed a classical contradiction is
avoided joseph margulis makes a detailed relativist position that demands the rejection of the principle
of excluded middle rejecting the two values only systems because using a two value only system
could lead to a contradiction for relativists if they try to use this classical logic to defend
ontological relativism or incommensurability incommensurability is another thing that happens
to appear to promote relativism as it means there's no shared value or shared position from which you
can measure two different things so they can't be compared so to avoid contradiction they move to a
multi-valued logic instead but that might be the motivation behind why the relativists want to drop
the law of the excluded middle but margulis also had reasons presented in that he links his rejection
to what he calls cognitive intraintra what intrapah to what he calls cognitive intrapah shoot he links
his rejection to what he calls cognitive intransparency we don't really know the world in itself the
world is always mediated to us in historical and context laden ways
so how does polo grady deal with this multiple truth values attack it seems pretty radical
out there to say that there's more than just truth and falsehood well first off is it really a new
third value we're talking about here like look at this one like just because you don't know what the
value is and maybe you never can thus calling it indeterminate that doesn't mean it's a new value
it just means that you recognize that you don't know that it's a truth gap and they've already
been systems that developed with this truth gap in mind and they don't act like this is some kind
of new value somehow secondly just because you add modifiers like most or sometimes or 0.33 to
a classic two-value system hardly means that you actually made new values one obviously can see that
these things as merely saying probability of something but it isn't actually a new kind of
fundamental truth value being introduced here seems to be an epistemic issue that is an issue
about knowledge of how likely something is to be true rather than importing a new conception of truth
thirdly just like with the case with artificial languages is it really helpful to our cases of
contradiction it could be after all merely still relying on a two-valued system anyway
thus the second attack attack two while it seemed pretty radical still nevertheless
failed now ogredy just makes a quick point for himself he says look one of the main reasons
for ontological relativity is to avoid contradiction in ontology anyway what he's saying is that
relativists want to avoid contradiction even as they espouse the way the world is can be different
and relative but ogredy says we can have that without having to alter our conception of the
truth there are alternatives to get to ontological relativism without having to come up with new
truth values and presumably he will explain what those ways are in his chapter on ontology
where he himself allows for relativism and so as a larger strategy trying to go at it like this
and figure new ways to make new truth values is not necessary and paul ogredy then advocates for
what quine calls a policy of minimum mutilation this is like ogredy saying that if you want
relativism in ontology we can figure out a way to do that without having to do this massive change
when it's completely unnecessary to do so we should do the minimum amount of changing so i
guess the question then remains how how do we get that and wait what exactly is ontological
relativity because really i mean i really really didn't in detail explain it in this video yet
but neither did he so i guess we kind of have to wait to check out his chapter in ontology
to really see what's going on there and how we can get ontological relativity without massive
changes to truth but for now let's move on to the third attack attack three strong and weak
distinction chris soyer also investigated relativism while charging most arguments against
relativism as unfairly assuming absolutism in the first place he ultimately at least
this argument defends against a kind of alithic relativism as we shall see even while accepting
a few of their premises in any case he says the typical version of alithic relativism
employs a notion of frameworks as we have seen in the previous video about the power of relativism
similarly with terms like paradigm framework language games conceptual scheme while all can
come from different places they function in much the same way as to the arguments employed by
relativists and against i guess objectivists who think that there is some kind of director
unmediated access or observation or descriptive ability of reality itself relative truth is truth
that is relative to some framework this framework may be of different kinds historical cultural
linguistic or biological for example so like everything that so like everything that makes
up how you interpret or mediate the world so the issue is something that is true in one framework
but false in a different framework because it's relativized to different frameworks it avoids
the contradiction that would have happened if it was the same framework a grady points out as we
can tell it's basically the same thing as true and l where l was for an artificial language but
now it's just replaced with the notion of frameworks a grady then goes on to use an example
of the hopi indian tribe now the hopi indian tribe is one of the most widely cited examples by
relativists you know along with the azandei i guess and relativists of many stripes pushing
relativism into whichever field of investigation they desire the hopi indian do appear to have
different worldview and we'll talk about what that is in the next battle but a grady will argue that
that means they have different ontology not therefore different everything which some extreme
relativists might insist that they do have also different logic therefore and different rationality
and different truths even that is for the relativists their language is proof of relativism about
truth anyway this little note of mine here is kind of spilling the beans behind what o grady
will say as he puts it in brackets on a paragraph 13 line 67 a source of confusion here is that the
hopi do in fact have a different ontology soyer is exploring the possibility about relativism
about truth but it seems better to explain the difference in the hopi and the standard scientific
view with relativized ontology but keeping an absolute conception of truth soyer makes a distinction
between strong and weak relativism wherein strong relativism the same sentence can be true in one
framework but false in another so like spirits live in trees true in the hopi framework but false
translated to normal english and then there is weak relativism where one sentence cannot even be
expressed in another framework where translation is not possible soyer decides he's gonna focus on
the strong one because he says that's where most relativists are at anyway thinking that translation
is possible but the way he sees it is that there are two premises the world as experienced is
partially constituted by frameworks and translation is possible between frameworks and somehow this
is supposed to conclude to truth is relative in the strong sense but soyer doesn't think three
follows two is questionable especially if the statement becomes contradictory false in one and
true in another how could they have anything in common if the worlds the frameworks are so different
then what sense can the sentence even mean the same thing in what sense are they the same sentence
or equivalence if the ontology is different between the frameworks that is if the world is
different expressed by the two different frameworks then it seems that the meaning of the sentence
must be different as soyer pithley puts it and pithley means a brief or sharp or forcefully
like straight up soyer straight up says it like a change of world entails a change of meaning
so to encapsulate that saying that something can be false in another framework it shows that it's
not really the same thing then if you're really trying to say that the other framework can be so
radically different that can lead it to being false because of this attack three strong failed
so if you didn't get that strong relativism won't work or at least it seems if the worlds are so
different that the same sentence can be false in one yet true in another the sentence doesn't
really mean the same thing then the meaning of the sentence is changing if the worlds are so
radically different that we could even consider one thing false while true in another and our focus
as per ogready has been much more to do with seeing how the idea of worlds can be different
doesn't necessarily need to include that truth is relative okay so the strong attack failed but
what about the weak attack weak alithic relativism where a sentence is inexpressible in another
framework remember we kind of had that condition earlier about how legitimate relativism about
truth would allow for contradiction in a different context different sentences become
candidates for truth and false like a context of math taxonomy or genetic history etc in a
different context a sentence may not even appear so to make that easier to explain i guess while
playing basketball the truth of whether light is really the universal speed limit would not even show
it wouldn't even be a candidate for truth or false while playing basketball is it two hundred
and ninety nine million seven hundred ninety two thousand four hundred fifty eight meters per second
like i can't even ask such a question in basketball type of language so whether that's true or false
doesn't even register in basketball language let's say and therefore the truth of that sentence
is relative to languages where they would be even a candidate for truth and false
but already says that ain't really relativism about truth though for relativism we need something
to be true and false in different contexts but just cuz something isn't expressible in another
language doesn't mean there's a threat of contradiction it seems like these different
contexts or different styles of reasoning here whatever you'd like to call it can still nevertheless
be perfectly compatible different things are being discussed which can be lumped together in a larger
account with no contradiction so relativism about truth isn't defensible in that way either
attack three week failed
so
well that was an awesome battle wasn't it well oh grady did some good work there i think but
there's still more room more attack left in the relativist for those that believe that
different theories of truth can allow for more openness to a relativized version of truth so
now oh grady has a section where he talks about correspondence theory of truth epistemic theory
of truth and a deflationist theory of truth the former two being what he calls substantive he
discusses how depending on which theory you use it has different impacts for relativism in other
places but because i'm currently not thinking i'm necessarily going to be covering his entire book
or at least not sure to what depth i'm going to be doing that i'm just going to cover it quickly
with this kind of graph and then we'll go on to the second battle basically the ones that are
substantive are saying that truth is substantively important that it's a kind of property of some
sentences or belief that makes it explanatorily important the deflationist ones are where truth
is insignificant and just a kind of grammatical thing we say he talks about alfred he gives an
example using a tarski here but i'm just going to skip that part anyway of the substantive ones
he discusses too the first one being correspondence theory where truth is when propositions correspond
to reality he brings up a few reasons why this is actually untenable like how the best ones really
still entail how larger propositions rely on the truth of basic elements but there aren't basic
propositions in the natural language and how it's not actually well explained how there's a structure
in a proposition that is the same one in reality how they can both share that same structure
anyway if you like a detailed discussion of this kind of criticism of correspondence theory just
let me know in the comments below but the point is that correspondence theory doesn't leave room
open for relativism on ontology nor in epistemology or at least technically it can still be connected
to ontological relativism you know relativism about what there is or what kind of things there are
in the world but that would kind of defeat the whole purpose of being a correspondence
theorist in the first place because it makes correspondence theory not all that substantive
if language could connect to multiple realities then he talks about how there's an epistemological
theory of truth where truth is just the best of what we know this kind of has a problem of well
you know we can be wrong about things so truth seems to change as we adjust and the answer back
to that concern is usually like cool whatever truth is an ideal anyway like a goal that we
just never reach because we never truly finish investigating everything but we always will
try and the best of our trying is what we'll just call truth it makes it kind of grammatical I guess
in that sense responding to that however critics are often like you're just conflating issues with
knowledge and how or if we can have certainty with what the truth is but they respond back well
that's not much of a criticism you're just inherently assuming or stipulating that truth
is something other than what we propose here in any case this one though does leave the doors open
for relativism in ontology and in epistemology the study of knowledge but just because it leaves
doors open for relativism in ontology and in epistemology well does that really mean that it
can leave doors open for relativizing truth as well well O'Grady will argue that the amount of
relativism in the epistemology is actually limited by rationality which is another place he battles
to defend against relativism and the result of that kind of has a trickleback effect I guess you
could say to ensure that ultimately there is one absolute truth and that's what we're gonna see
next so let's see now how he defends against charges of relativism in rationality oh wait
before we do that we should look at logic logic in some sense already seems to be much of the
discussion in defending against relativism for O'Grady it's a part of his whole setup anyway
also it's often the go-to move for people to push back against claims of something being relative
they just say hey it's logic anyway so let's check that out the link for the next video will
be below I think you deserve a break but if you don't need a break and you're ready to go ready
get that next thing on then let's go now and see logic versus relativism by the way thank you for
watching this video give it a like and a comment too the comments I have received over the years
actually as well as my patreon supporter slick pockets are ultimately the greatest motivating
thing I see comments of support mentally really help me and honestly there are things that I find
in those comments that are sometimes so touching even though I don't reply like I really do read
all of them and I know I'm doing something good things here and maybe even with my life because
of those comments you know I don't even know if I've mentioned before but writing the script for
this episode episode seven like I literally heard gunshots out of my window while writing philosophy
it's it's caught me really questioning sometimes why I'm doing this so they help so if you can
please socially or financially help me you can support me on patreon or if you have paypal you
can send me money and a one-time direct donation and I understand that may not be easy for many so
if not those uh let's try to just get me to a thousand subs maybe then perhaps my creator will
grant me a neck finally also remember philosophers keep battling
