coming virtually. Let me share my screen.
Is that visible? Good. Okay. So today, I'm going to tell you
about some of our efforts to explore spatial aspects of
bioelectrical signaling. And I think this is a topic that is
going to be very familiar to many of you. And so please feel
free to interrupt with questions or if anything is
unclear. So the traditional way of recording electrical
activity in cells is to take a patch by pet and poke it into a
cell and to record the voltage as a function of time. And here
I put a graphical representation of this. And I hope this comes
through on zoom. So here in the middle is a little pixel, which
shows the voltage at a point in a sample as a function of time.
And I hope you can see that there's some oscillation there,
some dynamics. And if you have a single pipette, this might be
all you see. If you can map the voltage, then you can see that
this is actually the underlying dynamics, and that there are
quite complex spatial temporal patterns of electrical
signaling, which would be invisible from single point
measurements. And so most of what I'll tell you about today is
first I'll tell you a little bit about some tools on the
voltage imaging front. And then I'll tell you about our efforts
to try to learn something about the rules which govern
bioelectrical pattern coordination. So about a decade
ago, a little bit more, my lab became interested in imaging
bioelectrical signals. And our adventure in this area starts
here. This is the Dead Sea. And in the Dead Sea, there are some
microorganisms, which have transmembrane proteins called
microbial adoptions, which absorb sunlight and generate a
proton mode of force, which these creatures use to power their
metabolism. Sort of by dumb luck, my lab discovered that these
proteins are a little bit fluorescent. And the fluorescence
is sensitive to membrane voltage. So you can run these
proteins either as bioelectrical actuators, or as
reporters. And you can introduce mutations which block the
pumping capability, so that but still preserve the reporting
capability. These proteins are excited by red light, and they
emit in the near infrared part of the spectrum. And the
fluorescence is very sensitive to the protonation of a functional
group in the core of the protein. And since protons are
charged, you can, if you change the voltage that changes the
fluorescence of the protein. Here's an example of a heck cell
where we're using a patch pipette to ramp the voltage up and
down. And you can see as the voltage goes up, the fluorescence
gets brighter, and then it goes down, the fluorescence gets
dimmer. And the response is roughly linear over the
physiological range. Now, one of the limitations of these
proteins is that they're very dim. And so we introduced a way
to make the signals brighter by adding a threat fluorescence
donor to these proteins. The absorption spectrum of the
option changes depending upon the memory voltage. And that
affects the efficiency of non radiative energy transfer from
this attached fluorophore to the opposite. And so as the
voltage goes up and down, the fluorescence of this fluorescent
protein also goes up and down, oppositely to the fluorescence
of the opposite itself. Here's a simultaneous dual view image
where you can see these two fluorescent signals going in
opposite directions. On the right is quantification. And you
can see that the indirect measure of the threat donor is a
little bit less sensitive than the direct fluorescence of the
option, because it's an indirect measure. But these fluorescent
donors are orders of magnitude brighter. And so the hit and
sensitivity is more than compensated by an increase in
brightness. And after our initial work in this area, other
people have developed vastly improved versions of these
fret based voltage indicators using a halo tag dyes as the
threat donor. And some of what I'll show you today is from
those fluorescent voltage indicators. So over the last
decade or so, we've been on a little bit of a romp through
biology, exploring bioelectrical signaling in different
contexts, different levels of biological organization, ranging
from single bacteria and studies of individual ion channels
through experiments in live behaving mice. Right now, we're
mostly focused on whole animal or live animal imaging
experiments, looking at different parts of the nervous
system. And also we have an effort now looking at bioelectrical
signaling in the uterus, which I'll be happy to tell you about
some other time. Okay, so most people who study bioelectricity
are focused on the nervous system. But as I think you know,
probably better than anybody else in the world, bioelectrical
signaling can be found throughout the body and not just in
people, but throughout basically every life form that has a
memory. And so we're interested in the question of what's the
relation between the ion channel parts list, and the various
complex bioelectrical patterns that emerge. And this turns out
to be a not simple relation. There's an interesting analogy
you can make to chemistry. I sit here in the chemistry
department. And in the lobby of our building, we have a periodic
table. And the properties of these elements are all
reasonably well understood. But nonetheless, you can combine them
in relatively simple mixtures, and come up with new materials,
whose properties are entirely different from the properties of
the constituent atoms. And these emergent properties can be
things like superconductivity or fluorescence. And in these
collective ensembles of atoms, the properties also depend often
on the geometry, because there's long range coupling between the
atoms. For instance, in semiconductor nanocrystals, the
geometry affects the fluorescence. And there's a similar
situation which pertains in electrophysiology. So our
periodic table are the ion channels. Here's a few of them. And
you can put these into cells, and you can put those cells into
tissues. And the emergent properties of the tissue can be
very different from the ingredients that came in. And
so we've been taking a sort of synthetic chemistry approach,
if you like, of cooking up different combinations of ion
channels, and exploring what happens to the collective
ensembles. The conceptual framework for how we think about
this is governed by an interesting analogy between chemical
reaction diffusion systems and bioelectrical systems. So in a
very famous paper from 1952, Alan Turing showed that if you
have an unsteered chemical reaction, where you have some set
of reactants, Q, and they can react with each other, and they
can diffuse, under some conditions, that reaction can
break spontaneous, spontaneously break symmetry from a
homogeneous state to states where you have peaks and valleys in
the concentration of different reactants. And if you simulate
these models, you get patterns which look like leopard spots
and tiger stripes. And this kind of reaction diffusion model has
been a paradigm for how people think about morphological
patterning in development for many decades now. Now, in a
remarkable historical coincidence, in the same week in 1952,
Hodgkin and Huxley, who are also working in England at the time,
but I think independently of Turing, proposed a biophysical
model of bioelectrical signaling. And these Hodgkin-Huxley
equations, it's basically a distributed version of Ohm's
law, where you have the voltage on the membrane can change by
charging the memory capacitor and through current through ion
channels. And if you have gap junctions between the cells, then
the voltage can also diffuse from one cell to the other. Now, if
you sort of squint at these two equations, you'll see that they
actually have exactly the same mathematical structure. So there's
one derivative with effective time on the left hand side, there's
a nonlinear reaction like term, and then there's a diffusion
term. And so, at least mathematically, any kind of
dynamics that you can get out of reaction diffusion systems, you
can, in principle, get out of bioelectrical systems. And so
then this raises the question of what aspects of patterning that
we see in life can be accounted for by bioelectricity. And this
isn't, I presented this as an either or, but of course, it's
not a clean dichotomy because biochemistry affects ion channels
and affects bioelectricity. And of course, bioelectrical
signaling also affects biochemistry. And so it's probably
more complex mix of these two kinds of dynamics in any real
system. One can classify the types of solutions to either of
these sets of equations by whether they vary in time and
whether they vary in space. And so the more boring solutions are
things that are just stable, they just sit there. You can have
things that oscillate like pacemakers, you can have things
that propagate like action potentials. And one of the
questions we've really been interested in is, can you get
systems where you get spontaneous pattern formation where
the patterns are at least metastable in time? So they're
not oscillating, they're just static patterns of voltage
analogous to the leopard spots and tiger stripes. And as you
might imagine, this kind of pattern historically would be
very difficult to detect with a patchpad pet because if you go
and you poke cells one at a time, okay, you'll see that the
voltage is different in different places, but you might
just assume that it's noisy, and you really need imaging to
map these spatial structures. And so we've been on a hunt to try
to find situations where we can clearly get spontaneous
bioelectrical pattern formation. Jumping to the end, I'll
tell you, we have not solved this problem, we have not done
this yet, but I'll tell you about some of the things that we've
learned along the way. Okay, so as a warm up exercise, we're
going to take some tech cells. So these are bioelectrically
pretty inert on their own, you can take them in just a memory
in a bag. And we can introduce different ion channels into these
cells, and imbue them with different bioelectrical
properties. So if we express a voltage gated sodium channel,
and an inward rectifier potassium channel, the potassium
channel will hyperpolarize the resting potential. And then the
sodium channel will make these cells excitable. We'll then
express a channel adoption, so that we can trigger the cells
with light to have an optical access to them, and a voltage
indicator so that we can image their bioelectrical responses.
And with these four ingredients, we can then deliver flashes of
blue light to the cell of successfully greater intensity.
The small flashes evoke proportional electrical responses. But
once the light intensity crosses a threshold, it triggers
it crosses the sodium channel activation threshold, and this
triggers a regenerative action potential. The sodium channels
then inactivate and the potassium channels take over and the
voltage recovers. And so you can get the very stereotyped action
potential, you can think of this sort of like, you know, the
world's simplest minimal excitable cell. And just as a
side note, these turn out to be useful for exploring the
electrophysiology of ion channels. So for example, we've
made cells which express NAV 1.7, which is one of the sodium
channels involved in pain sensation, as well as NAV 1.8
and 1.9, which are also involved in somatosensation. And then by
flashing them with light, and then looking at the effects of
different drugs, we can explore drugs which might have use in as
pain therapeutics. And at a company that I started, they've
screened more than 200,000 compounds against NAV 1.7 and
found a bunch of interesting hits, which are going forward
into preclinical development. But here we're going to focus
more on the sort of biophysics of these cells. To map the
bioelectrical responses, we've developed a relatively simple
instrument, which has a gigantic objective lens. It's about
the size of a soda can. It's a 2x NA.5 lens. So it can image a
huge field of view with very high light collection efficiency.
We couple into it, basically a video projector with blue and
yellow light. And then we send those to where the light off of
a digital micro mirror device so that we can pattern the
illumination to tickle the cells in any pattern of space and
time that we want. We also use illumination with red light to
image the voltage responses. And then we collect the fluorescence
on a high speed camera. So with these spiking hex cells, one day
we were doing a patch clamp experiment, and we observed that
the cells were autonomously firing. And this was a
surprise to us because I explained how the sodium
channels could drive the voltage up and the potassium
channels could bring it back down. But we didn't understand
what would trigger them to start again. And so in order to
explore this, we then mapped the voltage in this culture. And
this is the video that I showed you on the first slide. This is a
big field of view about six millimeters on a side. So there's
about 100,000 cells in the culture here. And what we
observed is that there are these regenerative waves which
propagate through the culture. And if the culture is big enough,
you can get these spiral patterns, which can lead to
periodic dynamics at any point in space. When the hex cells get
dense enough, they couple to their neighbors through gap
functions. And that is what enables these cultures to
produce these collective waves. Now with these spiking hex
cells, we can pattern their growth in various ways. Here's an
example where we pattern them into some islands and a
serpentine pattern. And then we'll optogenetically stimulate
them just at the top here using flashes of blue light. And you
can see that we get these waves which propagate. It turns out
there are interesting dynamics about how these waves
propagate in the one dimensional system. As the pacing
frequency increases, the response of the this snake goes
from one spike per stimulus to a period doubling bifurcation
where every other stimulus evokes a spike to eventually
chaos, where the pattern of voltage out of the distal end is
an irregular chaotic pattern, even when the proximal end is
being stimulated periodically. Now, again, I'm going to digress
for a minute. When we did these experiments, I wasn't sure why
we were doing them. I just thought it was an amusing thing
to do. Subsequently, more recently, we've been exploring
electrical back propagation in the dendrites of neurons in the
brain, which are also long, approximately one dimensional
channels. And we observed exactly the same dynamics. So in the
dendrite, if the cell body spikes slowly, you get one to one
mapping of those action potentials down the dendrite. As the
cell body goes faster, you get a period doubling bifurcation
where every other spike triggers a back propagating event. And if
the soma goes too fast, then the back propagation becomes chaotic.
There's a very similar progression of dynamics in the
heart, where under regular pacing in the heart is periodic
one to one with your pacemaker. Under some pathological
conditions, or if the pacemaker goes too fast, you get
alternands, which is this period doubling bifurcation. And then
if it goes way too fast, the heart becomes chaotic, you get
an arrhythmia. And so I think this series of bifurcations is a
probably widespread, if not universal feature of these
excitable, bioelectrical chains.
Here's another example where we've, again, made a serpentine
pattern that these tracks connect outside the field of view. We
can also pattern the cells into annual light. And then we
developed a stimulus protocol to launch directional waves. We do
that by first putting on one bar of light, which triggers a
wave, but then if we leave that bar on the sodium channels
underneath that bar inactivate. So we leave a real
region, which is not excitable. Then we give another flash of
light offset a little bit to the side. And that launches a wave.
The wave can't propagate back towards the region we inactivated.
So it only goes in the other direction. And then by the time
it comes all the way around, the region we inactivated has
recovered. And so then you can get a circular stimulus. So here's
an example of that. So that's our first pulse. And then we get
the second pulse. And now you can see we have these waves
going around in the inner ring, the wave caught up with itself
and it ate its tail and died. But in the outer rings, these
waves go around and around, and they can go around 10,000
times or more. And you can have it clockwise or counterclockwise,
you can think of this like a single bit of a bioelectrical
memory. And I sort of half jokingly call these are cellular
cyclotrons, because they go around so long, you can measure
the frequency very precisely, and you can detect very subtle
bioelectrical effects on the propagation. Now, because we can
use the blue light to inactivate the sodium channels, we can print
patterns of excitable and non excitable tissue, just using
pattern blue light, even on a homogeneous sheet of cells. And
so here's an example of that, where this is a homogeneous
sheet of these cells, we're going to drop continuous spots of
blue light in the center and in the surround to make a synthetic
toroidal track for bioelectrical excitation. And then we'll use
the same directional excitation protocol to launch a ring around
this track. And then as that ring propagates, we can dynamically
reconfigure the shape of the track to control the path length,
which then controls the frequency of these oscillations. And
so here's an example. So that's turning on the track. And then
there's going to be the first initialization pulse there. And
then we're going to launch our wave. Just a moment, there it
goes. And now this wave is going around in the optically defined
track. And now we're going to gradually crunch down the top and
the bottom of the track. And you'll see the wave will start to
go faster and faster. And then at a certain point, we'll turn off
the confining boundaries, and the way we'll then just propagate
off to infinity.
Okay. And so you can really make whatever patterns of excitable
tissues you want with this technique. Okay. So so far, what
I've been telling you about is homogeneous tissues. And we've
seen how you can pattern them and you can get these waves to
propagate. More recently, we've started to wonder about the
between tissues. So in many areas of chemistry and physics, when
you have an interface between two media, the properties of the
interface can be dramatically different from the properties of
the bulk on either side. For example, with, you know, at a
water air interface, you have surface tension. And in condensed
matter physics, there's been a lot of interest in what are
called topological excitations. So there are materials, which
are insulators in the bulk, but electrical conductors at the
surface. Now, we were inspired by these phenomena to ask whether
there are bioelectrical phenomena that arise at
interfaces, which don't have bulk homologs or different from the
bulk. And so the question is, if you take two different
materials, and you stick them together and make an interface,
what happens at the interface? And the simplest hypothesis is
that you get some simple linear interpolation between material
A and material B. And that may be the boring answer. But one
could also imagine, because the underlying Hodgkin-Huxley
equations are so nonlinear, that you might end up with
excitability at the interface or spontaneous activity, or a
variety of other dynamics. And so we cooked up some situations
where the interfaces are interesting and different. And so
here's how we did it. In the examples I showed you before, we
had cells co-expressing cure 2.1 and nav 1.x, where x is 3, 4,
5, 7, or 9. And now we're going to separate the potassium
channel-expressing tissue from the sodium channel-expressing
tissue. And we're going to have a channel adoption in bulk. Neither
of these tissues is excitable on its own. The potassium channel
-expressing tissue just sits at the potassium reversal
potential. The sodium channel-expressing tissue is
depolarized, and so the sodium channels are all inactivated,
and so that tissue is not excitable. At the interface,
these tissues couple by gap junctions, and the cure-expressing
tissues pull down the voltage of the nav-expressing tissue until
the voltage looks sort of like this across the interface. That
creates a zone where the sodium channels have recovered, and
these cells, we hypothesized, might share voltage across this
interface, or share current across the interface, excuse me. And
together, become excitable just at the interface. And so,
Hillel Ori, who led this work in my lab, did some numerical
simulations of this situation. And at least in the computer, he
was able to generate action potentials which could propagate
just at the interface. And then he set up the experiment. And it's
a quite simple experiment. He took cells expressing now 1.5
and GFP, and so I was expressing cure 2.1 and TD tomato. He
took a little piece of plastic and stuck it in the dish to
subdivide the dish into two halves, and he plated each kind
of cell on its respective half. And so here's what the dish
looks like. And then he removed the plastic and waited a day or
two for the cells to fill the gap to form gap junctions across
the interface. And here's a picture of this interface. You
can see the line here, the nav cells are on the top, the cure
cells are on the bottom. And I'll show you a movie where he
delivered a flash of light that spanned the interface, and then
we map the voltage. Okay, and I hope you can see that there are
these topological action potentials which live only at
the interface between the two non excitable tissues and can
propagate along the interface. Okay. Just for fun, Hillel then
took a drinking straw and plated the nav cells on the inside of
the straw and the cure cells on the outside of the straw. So now
again, we have a torus as I showed you before. But this
torus is not a ring of cells that are excitable, but rather it's
just an interface between two non excitable populations.
Nonetheless, with this interface, he can use a similar
protocol to launch a directional wave, which will then go around
and around in these interfaces. And it does this sort of
indefinitely. Okay. And so you can make so this is sort of a
doubly topological action potential. It's topological in
the interface sense, and then it becomes spontaneous, indefinitely
stable because it's going around in a circle. Okay, so then we
started to explore the excitability properties of
these topological materials. And it turns out it's actually
pretty interesting. So if you have a homogeneous excitable
material, with just a nav channel and a cure channel, you
have to have the right balance of those two channels in order to
maintain excitability. If you have too much of either one, you
either get locked in the deep polarized state or locked in the
hyper polarized state. And so here's a phase diagram, where
we've looked at the conductance of the potassium channel and
the conductance of the sodium channel, both on log scales, and
in a homogeneous tissue, if you want excitability, according to
our simulations, that happens inside of this purple region.
Okay. If you make the interface between the potassium and the
sodium tissues, then you get a completely different shape for
your phase diagram. The region where it is excitable becomes
much larger. In fact, it extends across all possible values of
the potassium conductance. Why is this? What's the intuition
for this? The intuition is that when you create the
interface, as you move transverse to that interface, you
basically get all possible mixtures of the sodium current
and the potassium current. On one side, it's like 100% potassium
and 0% sodium if you go far enough in that direction. If you
go far enough in this direction, it's 100% sodium and 0%
potassium. And in between, just by continuity, you have to
explore all intermediate values. And somewhere in there, it's
going to be excitable. And so this interfacial phenomenon gives
you much more robust excitability than you would get from any
homogeneous mixture of these channels. Furthermore, at the
interface, we sometimes, at least according to the
simulations, will observe things which you would never even
see with this particular combination of ion channels in
a homogeneous mixture. The interfaces are predicted to
become spontaneously active in a pretty big region of this
parameter space, whereas the homogeneous mixture in that same
region of parameter space is excitable, but not autonomous,
not a pacemaker. Okay. And so that's sort of the simulations.
And then we made a very, very simple core screen model based
on the Fitzhuna-Gumo equations, which is a simple model of a
biorelectic oscillator, and that basically reproduced these
phenomena. And so I think this raises an interesting question,
which is the reductionist approach to studying bioelectricity
and tissues, or in life, is typically you chop up your sample
to try to find a homogeneous tissue, you know, you're looking
for particular kinds of cells or tissues, and you want to study
their excitability. It's entirely possible that at the
interfaces between tissues, if you have gap junctional
coupling, things can be very different. And you can imagine
of a rock. So here we picked two particular ion channels, but
you can imagine a variety of different things that might
happen. For example, here, the action potentials were limited
constrained just to the interface. There could be a
situation where you have a tissue, maybe which is excitable, but
not autonomous, but then you touch it to another tissue, and
the interface becomes a pacemaker, which then starts to launch
waves into the excitable tissue. Or you could have, you know,
or good launch waves in both directions. And this is a pure
speculation, but I sort of wonder whether where this might
happen in real life. One possibility, and this is just
speculation, is in atrial fibrillation, it's known that
many of the foci for these arrhythmias are at the
interface of the blood vessels and the cardiac atrium. And I
sort of wonder whether it's because that's an interface,
which is what makes it into a pacemaker, which can then launch
these waves into the cardiac tissue. And then, you know, who
knows where else these things might show up. But I think it's
an interesting thing to be aware of, and to keep an eye out for
and biorelectrical exploration. Okay, any questions about this?
I'm going to go on to a slightly different topic. No. Okay, so
the next topic will address something which I think should
be a very familiar topic to all of you here that this is a
chart borrowed from one of Michael's papers, various versions
of this have showed up in many different places. And so it's a
chart which shows the resting potential across a wide range of
cells in the body. And one of the questions which I really
became fascinated by, and this is something that Michael and I
have discussed over quite a few years now, is this question of
whether, or under what circumstances, if you have cells
with different resting potentials, and you have an interface
between them, you can get electrophoretic redistribution of
charged molecules between these two cell populations. You could
easily imagine that if you have something which is charged and
which can go through gap junctions, and you have two cells
with different resting potentials, that charged stuff should
electrophoresis between the cells and establish concentration
gradient. And you know, this makes physical sense. And so I
wanted to establish a simple system where we could test these
ideas, and really explore to what extent biorelectrical
gradients drive small molecule redistribution. And this is the
work of Rebecca Frank Hayward, who's a grad student in my
lab. And so we thought we would use, we could use
optogenetics to create voltage patterns. And so here's an
example, this is a field of hex cells expressing just cure 2.1
and a channel adoption. So they're not excitable. They just
sit at a negative resting potential because of this
potassium channel. And then we'll stain them with a far red
voltage sensitive dye, and we'll illuminate them with a little
square of light. And when we do that, you can see the cells
depolarize, and that biorelectrical signal diffuses out
through the gap junctions between the cells. And here's a and
we turn off the light, the voltage goes away, here's the
cross section through that profile. And so we can create
gradients in voltage with the light here, you can see the
voltage varies as a function of position. And so then we wanted
to explore if we did this at steady state, would things
redistribute across these along these grades. And so we had to
pick a molecule or an ion to study. And so we decided,
perhaps unwisely, well, it'll turn out to have been
unwisely, but we didn't have time to try to study protons. And
the reason we picked protons is that they're very mobile. And
so we figured that since they have such high mobility, that we
should see relatively rapid redistribution of protons
across these interfaces. And at pH seven, seven and a half, the
proton concentration is very low. And so we thought we should
be relatively sensitive to small changes in pH, in proton
concentration, because they would need to changes in pH,
which we could monitor with a fluorescent pH indicator, which
was spectrally orthogonal to our channel. So you can set up the
Poisson-Nernst equations to model the proton flux. And let me
just mention the terms here. So we want to know the rate of
change of protons in each cell as a function of time. There's a
diffusion term. So you look at this, this is one dimensional. So
you look at the second derivative of proton concentration, and
it can diffuse through the gap junctions. And then there's two
ways that you can also get an electrophoretic change in the
proton concentration. If you have a gradient in the proton
concentration and a gradient in voltage, then protons are going
to flow from regions of higher concentration to lower just by
electrophoresis, and that'll change your concentration. Or if
you have a second derivative in your voltage, then the protons
will flow towards the region of where their electrostatic
potential is most stable. Okay, and we didn't make up these
equations. These have been known for 150 years. And so we can
simulate this though. And so we first simulated the voltage
profile for a top hat illumination profile protocol. And
that's what's shown in orange here. So the voltage sort of
diffuses out and you get this Gaussian like profile. And then
in blue is the simulation of the steady state proton concentration
profile. And so let's walk through this. We expect the cells to
depolarize where we shine the blue light. And so that we would
expect so the voltage is more positive. So that should repel
the protons. So we get a lower proton concentration, which
means a higher pH. There's a couple of sign changes here. So
you have to keep track of that. Now as you squirt the protons
out of this depolarized region, they're going to accumulate in
the neighboring cells. And so you have a higher proton
concentration in the neighboring cells. Do you expect those to
become a little bit acidic and have a lower pH? Okay. So that's
our prediction. Now let's do the experiment. And so for the
experiment, we're going to alternate blue and yellow
illumination on a timescale fast compared to the proton
redistribution. And so we will have on average over time, a
voltage profile, which is sort of the diffusion that would come
from this square. And then I showed you what proton
concentration profile we want. So here's the voltage profile. So
you can see again, when we apply the square, you get this nice
voltage profile. And now here I'll show you the pH profile. And
here we're using a pH indicator, which gets dark under acidic
pH and bright under basic pH. And you can see what we observed
is the opposite of what we hoped to see. So the cells under the
tonic blue light stimulation become acidic, not basic. And the
protocol shows a relatively sharp profile, basically mapping
the illumination and seems to not have much to do with the
voltage. Okay, so this was confusing to us. What's going on?
Well, we realized after a sort of circuit, a set of experiments,
that the channel adoption is actually permeable to protons. And
so when you turn on the channel adoption, in the presence of the
Kear channel, the potassium channel creates a very strong
driving force for inward flux of protons through the channel
adoption. And so you get this rush of protons coming through
the channel adoption, which directly acidifies the illuminated
cells. And so when we incorporated that effect, and then
calculated the predicted pH changes, now in purple is the
predicted pH change involving diffusion plus electrophoresis
plus the channel adoption. And in blue is the predicted pH
change without the electrophoretic effect. And you
can see we're going to be very hard pressed to distinguish
these two profiles. Given the various noise in the experiment,
we're probably not going to be able to distinguish these two
things. So that was sort of a bump. Okay. And so then the
question became how do we explore other, okay, what do we do?
And we consider two ways to try to get around this. One is to
explore channel adoptions that don't pass a proton current. The
other is to pick some other analyte, something that's
charged, that's not pH, and that is not sensitive to pH, so that
we can see other things redistributed. And I'll tell you
about the second approach. So we did develop some channel
adoptions which are not permeable, or relatively
impermeable to protons. And I think those might actually be
quite useful, particularly for therapeutic applications of
optogenetics, because if you're going to do long term
stimulation of cells, you don't really want to acidify them. And
so these channel adoptions are a solution for that. But they
still pass a little bit of a proton current. And so we
decided to focus on approach number two. And so we picked
something non biological, calcium dye, which we know can pass
through gap junctions. And it has a nice strong charge of minus
four. It's not sensitive to pH, it's not buffered inside of
cells, which was another concern for us with the proton
currents. And we can just direct the image it. And it comes in an
AM ester form so you can load it into the cells, the AM ester
gets cleaved off by endogenous esterases, and then it hangs out
in the cells. And so the charge on the calcium is negative, so
expect the calcium to accumulate in depolarized regions of the
cells. And so here's a simulation just like the one I showed
you for protons showing the predicted calcium concentration
profile at steady state. So then again, we did these
experiments, we were worried about photo bleaching of the
calcium by the blue light as a possible artifact. So to address
that, we developed a what we call a zebra stripe, illumination
pattern for the channel. And so you can see here, these little
stripes. And the idea here is that we're going to illuminate
only some regions of the tissue, but the voltage can diffuse
quite far actually between the cells. And so from a voltage
perspective, it's almost as though this is a continuous
vertical strut. And so then we can look in the regions that
don't directly get the blue light transverse to the
illumination product profile. And we'll still have voltage
gradients there. And so then we can see if we can see calcium
redistribution in regions that have a voltage gradient, but
never saw blue light. That was the aspiration. Okay, so here's
our measures of calcium fluorescence. So you can see you
get some photo bleaching in the regions that are directly
illuminated. But then we can look in the regions between them.
And so then we took all of these little bricks of blue
illumination, and we aligned them with each other and averaged
them all together in order to improve our signal to noise
ratio. And this is the average response to the calcium. And we
were hoping to see a fluorescent buildup in this region here and
a decrease in the regions at the edges. Here's the cross
section. And, oops, and basically we didn't see it. And so
that was a little bit, well, it was a frustration. I'm not
sure why we didn't see it. And so finally, to try to understand
what was going on, we asked how well does the calcium actually
move between the cells. And so to look at to explore that we
just looked at pairs of cells loaded with calcium. And then we
photo bleached one cell in the pair, and then looked at the
recovery as the calcium diffused across the gap junction
from that side, from the non bleached side to the other side.
And from this, we could extract an effective diffusion
coefficient of the calcium in these cells and try to have the
constant has a quite slow diffusion coefficient, so it
doesn't go through the gap junctions all that well. And
perhaps that was what was limiting the redistribution. So
basically, the our sort of take home from these efforts is that
these were the voltage diffuses very well through the tissue
because it goes through the gap junctions quite effectively. And
so the gradients in voltage that we get are not that steep. And
then because the calcium diffuses very slowly, it would take
an inordinately long time to redistribute along these
gradients, which are over relatively large numbers of
cells. And so this is perhaps a not very satisfying conclusion
to this, but I wanted to talk to you all about this, because
this is something that's been largely inspired and motivated
by work from your lab. We have not yet detected these predicted
electrophoretic transport gradients through through gap
junctions. And we're still trying to figure out what's going
on here. You know, it's sort of a mystery to me. There are a lot
of ions in cells, and many things what can distribute through
gap junctions, you know, not just sodium and potassium and
protons, but all of the amino acids, all of the nucleic
acids, cyclic AMP, ATP, you know, most of the small molecules
that live in cells can distribute through gap junctions. And if
you had steep voltage gradients, you can imagine sort of
catastrophic things happening, because you know, you would have
pH gradients of multiple pH steps between cells on one side of
the tissue and the other. And so I'm not really sure how to
reconcile, you know, that sort of basic my physical
understanding with the underlying stability of tissues and the
fact that we don't know these effects seem to be more subtle
than we had initially expected. And we haven't been able to
observe them yet. One possibility is, you know, this might be
related to the fact that gap junctions close if the voltage
gradient is too steep. And that could act sort of as a safety
valve to prevent analytes from just sloshing into the, you
know, into the thermodynamic equilibrium. And, you know, maybe
voltage gradients in vivo are to that steep. I really don't know.
And so this is something that we're still exploring. And I'd
really be curious to hear if any of you have thoughts about
both analytes or systems where one might try to detect
bioelectrical gradients and electrophoretic redistribution
of small molecules.
So so Adam. So yes, I've looked a lot into gap junction
permeability. And we have a variety of different gap
junctions with different, you know, permeability. But it's
absolutely true that depending on what the voltage is of either
coupled cell, that those gap junctions can completely close. So
if you do have those steep gradients, they can completely
close. So there's some papers out there that have done like just
beautiful electrophysiology work where they modify either side
of, you know, one cell or the other cell, they set a certain
resting membrane potential, and they look at whether or not
like Lucifer yellow can pass through those those gap junctions
and they've figured that all out. So that that work is already
out there. And so what you could do is you could pick the gap
junctions that still are open when you have those steep
gradients, and you can use those and you can just make
transgenic cells expressing those particular gap junctions to
see what's going on with what what you're trying to look at.
Yeah, thank you. That's an excellent point. So in the
cells that we were using, we were using the endogenous gap
junction, which in hex cells are connection 43 or connection 45.
But as you say, there are other gap junctions which have
different gating properties. And so the question, which I'm
sort of curious about is, if the gap junctions, if the voltage
gradient is too shallow, these effects are going to be small,
because internal homeostatic mechanisms in the cells will be
able to outcompete the electrophoretic redistribution. If
the gradients are too steep, then the gap junctions might close,
and then you won't see the transport. And so the question is,
is there some Goldilocks regime or a combination of gap
junctions and analytes in the middle where these effects do
occur? And I would expect the answer is yes. But at least in
experiments we've done, we have not found it yet. But as you say,
we haven't explored varying the gap junctions, which might be the
key to doing that.
Yeah, or you know, using some of the optogenetic channels that
don't have super strong currents so that you know, you create a
much more shallow gradient.
Yeah. Well, you know, it's not hard to make the gradient more
shallow, because we can always turn down our blue light or
excite just a small subset of the cells. And the issue is if the
gradient gets very shallow, then the electrophoretic forces
become weak. And so in some sense, we're competing the fact
that voltage spreads very easily and really has a sort of strong
tendency to spread out and homogenize. But yet we want
gradients in voltage in order to drive electrophoresis. So it's
interesting, you know, we've had lots of debates back and forth
in the lab, whether we should be trying to make these gradients
more shallow or more steep. And I'm not sure. I think our best
bet might be to try to make go back to tissue interfaces, where
you have different cells expressing different iron
channels, you have very steep gradients, and then to try to
find gap junctions, which remain open under relatively large
voltage gradients.
You know, there's also old data from I think the 90s and then
and then our data following that, looking at the behavior of
various fluorescent tracers in early embryos, let's say frog
embryos, and some of that, right. And some of that data showed
very interesting unidirectional effects, which which in our case,
I think was voltage mediated, because we could turn it off by
disabling the pumps and so on. But in the original, I think
Guthrie's paper, if I recall correctly, it, you know, they
were arguing that it's an intrinsic property of the
gap junction that tends to let things that you know, sort of a
trapdoor kind of thing that you know, and it was always people
would argue, right, whether that's the, you know, positive
because in the long term, that's a that's a perpetual motion,
right, like you can't, you know, hold on to that for a long
time. But in the short term, you could write in the kind of
non steady state. So yeah, I think I think, I think, you know,
kind of one it is right is that depending on I think you could
play a lot of games and by and also they've identified pairs of
junctions that are preferential unidirectional, right? I think
it's like 32 and 43 or something where you can do it, you
know, this way or this way. And we did some of that in the
Frog embryo too. So there may well be these kind of, you know,
these junctions may be more complex than we think as far as
what they let through in and what direction so so maybe playing
with those different pairs might might explain it.
Yeah, yeah, I mean, we've taken a lot of inspiration in this for
I mean, almost all the inspiration is from the work of your
lab and we had looked at some of this work on serotonin
redistribution in early embryos. And so one of the things
we were contemplating was whether we could try to detect that
what one of the factors which goes into picking an analyte is
we want something where we have a good fluorescent reporter of
it at a wavelength which is different from the general
adoption wavelength so we can do these all optical experiments.
You know, one of the things which I think is makes it
challenging is one would expect if you have voltage gradients
and open gap junctions that there might be pH
gradients as well. And then, you know, almost everything is
sensitive to pH. So you have to then worry about whether your
fluorescent reporters are also being confounded by pH changes.
And so that's why I thought calcium was a nice example
because it's something which is intrinsically fluorescent and
not very sensitive. But yeah, it's, you know, I think I would
love to continue this search because I think it's a really
interesting sort of mystery still try to try to understand the
biophysics of this.
You know, and one last thing which I think we never, we never
ended up publishing this but we had data from a long time ago
that on the ventral side of the early frog embryo, looking at
it, you know, left, left to right, if you do, if you inject
43 and 32 versus 43 and 32, right, you get you get different
effects. So yeah, so the one randomized, and of course, now
I don't remember which one is which but but one of them
randomized the left right axis meaning it would the way I
interpreted is that it screws up the transport and the other
one did not. So so you know, we did have evidence of these
like, you know, asymmetric effects with pairs of junctions.
So just something to think about too.
Well, Adam, I just put a link on the chat. And that's a paper
that we have been looking at a lot. We've done some of the
experiments. It's basically a trilaminar microfluidic device
that you can go ahead and you can put a dye in the middle
stream. And then you can see how far that dye diffuses out. And
it's dependent on, you know, whether or not your gap junction
coupled. So they tested, I think three different dyes. And so
you can take a look at the different dyes that they used
and what their diffusion rates are through the cells. So that
might help you for like determining what dye to use to
trace the gap junction coupling.
Oh, great. Thank you, Juanita. This is not a paper I knew
about. So I'll take a look at this.
Great. Thank you.
Hi, Adam. Yes.
Separate question. Have you have you looked at the equations or
the models for the Belisav Zabotinsky reaction? Which is
yeah, okay, so is there is there a mapping between the
equations that you showed for these kinds of terrain Hodgkin
Huxley model and the Belisav Zabotinsky reaction?
Sure, good question. So let me go back to the equations. Forgive
me. So the BZ reaction is a specific instance of a set of
equations of this form. And so in principle, there could be
similar dynamics in voltage. I just want to say there is one
way in which these two equations are or can be a little bit
different, which is to get things like waves or BZ
dynamics, or even the spontaneous step sort of
metastable pattern formation, you need a system with at least
two dimensions here, meaning two different variables. Usually
people talk about like an activator and an inhibitor. And in
the BZ reaction, of course, there's many reagents. Voltage is a
scalar quantity. And so with voltage alone, you actually
cannot get patterns like this using using these equations. In
order to rescue it, you either need to introduce electrophoresis,
which is what our friend Michael who we talked to a couple of
years ago, whose name I've now forgotten. He was out in LA, had
done. Gosh, I'm forgetting his name now. So you either need to
introduce electrophoresis, or you need to introduce another
variable like calcium. So you're mapping it through ion
concentrations rather than voltage? Yeah, so you have ion
concentration, that's another variable which can undergo
dynamics like this or like this. And so that can give you sort of
a high enough dimensional space to get solutions like this.
Thank you. Yeah.
Can I ask a quick question again, changing stories a little bit?
No, specifically in reference to the issue tissue interaction
story, which I think is super stunning. Do you think that
narrates would be sufficient to drive that? You know, in the
stories that you have, you have two kind of big fields of
tissues juxtaposed to each other. But I'm wondering, basically,
if you have something that's penetrating, that's invading
into another tissue, either a neurite or some kind of
migratory cell, do you think that that could be sufficient to
trigger waves so that sort of as the neurites are crawling
around, they're sending out waves into the surrounding
tissue as they go?
It's entirely possible. You know, it depends on the ion
channel expression levels and the gap junction coupling
strength. But yeah, in general, interfaces between two cell
types are not the same as the other cell type on itself.
Well, one example is sort of along those lines is in the
context of doing these experiments, one other
experiment we did is we took nav expressing cells and here
expressing cells and we just mixed them together. And of
course, that interface becomes or that's not an interface
anyway, but that mixture becomes excitable because you
share the currents through gap junctions.
Thanks, that's great.
Well, Adam had a question about your line oscillation
experiments, the interface experiments. So where does the
directionality come from? So why do the waves go clockwise or
anti clockwise and both ways? Maybe it's not explained.
Yeah, yeah, that's a good question. And I blew through
that a little bit fast. It's in the excitation protocol. So if
you look here, we first come with one, we first come with
first come with one boat and then you see we move the stripe
a little bit to the right here. And that's what launches the
wave going in this case clockwise. If we give a pulse
here and then move to the left, you can launch it going counter
clockwise. So it depends on the initial conditions.
Don't take it.
Hey, Adam, I threw you out two other papers there about gap
junction permeability to die.
Thank you. Yes, I clicked on those.
Thanks, Juanita.
Adam, are you familiar with Zvonimir Dojic's work at
UCSB?
I know, but I'm not sure which work you're referring to.
Oh, his nonlinear coherent flows kind of. So I'm just
wondering about the time scales for these voltage
circulations, if they're sort of on the same time scale as
these kinds of coherent flows that he sees in these cytoskeletal
emulsions that, you know, if he puts them in a, you know, a
dish that's large enough, right, like a, like a racetrack,
very similar to kind of the racetracks you show. But I
don't know the time scale for these fluid flows that he's
seeing. And if they track with your voltage flows as well.
I don't, I don't know. I don't know that specific work. I
would expect that, I mean, the underlying physics might be
similar, but the time scales are probably different because
they're set by different physical parameters.
Right, right. Yeah.
Yeah.
So finally, I just want to thank the people who did the
work. So this work was started by Harry McNamara, who's now at
Princeton, and then Rebecca Frank, who, who's a grad student in
my lab, and Halel Ori, who was a postdoc in my lab and just
finished up. And thank you.
