do that. So we're going to talk about electric circuits this week and next week. So we'll start
out with batteries, circuits and current. We'll talk about resistance and then a good example of that
is an electric heater. We'll talk about the electric power, how to calculate power. Then we'll talk about
switches and how they play into circuits as well. We'll talk about series and parallel circuits
and there's some math there. So we'll do a little bit of math and calculations in this.
Then practically we'll talk about fuses and circuit breakers. That's where it starts to give a little
bit practical. And then finally talk about current and power. And then we'll try to do a few more
complicated circuits just to push it a little bit. Actually there's a really cool one, but
I don't think we'll have the, there's some really cool test problems, but I don't think we'll have
the, this chapter, this book doesn't go into it in enough detail to actually solve those problems.
Okay, so electrical circuits, electric circuits. So previously we've been talking about
individual charges, the forces between charges, and then we climb this ladder talking about
electric fields. Then we talked about electric potentials and we found out that you can go from
knowing a formula, a math formula for the electric potential to get back to the electric field.
And then we talked about,
let's see, electric potential. And then we talked about the energy balance, the kinetic versus the
potential energy in an electrical charge system. And we could figure out,
for example, if a charge is moving in a direction, but it's under the influence of another charge,
whether it continues moving in that direction or whether it stops in terms of around and comes back.
And so we did quite a bit of, and all that was tied to, so the acceleration and stopping and all
that was kind of tied to what we had done previously with mechanical things like springs and so
So remembering all those equations of motion and stuff was kind of important.
But now we're going to talk about, we're going to not let these charges just be around on our
desktop or anything. We're going to take these charges and restrict them from moving just anywhere
in space. We're going to confine these charges, these moving charges to a conductor, so a little
piece of wire. So we're not going to think about charges just sitting there in space or
nailed to the tabletop. We'll be talking about wires, conductors. And these wires, they act as
pipes. It's certainly legitimate to think about it as the wires being like a conduit or a hose,
water hose. Do y'all call them hose pipes? I always call them water hoses when I was a kid,
but those Louisiana folks, they call them hose pipes. Really? That's weird. Yeah, I know. I've
never heard of those. I was dating my wife. I don't know if we were engaged at that point,
but we were dating. And I started, I visited her family and her uncle, he was a hoot. He was down
in Louisiana. He's from South Mississippi, but he's a Louisiana boy. And he sure talked to,
he was so fun to be around. He just, he was fun to listen to, but he was safe and stuff. And
I think the first time I met him, it was summertime and it was hot. We were sitting around doing
nothing. And oh, he told my son, he said, Micah, go get that hose pipe. And I looked at him and I
thought, you want my son to go pick up like a piece of lead pipe or steel pipe or copper pipe?
What are you talking about? And he said hose pipe again. So we figured out he was talking about the
water hose. That's weird. It's funny. Oh, you're really? Okay. So say I'd never heard of it either,
and I was an old man almost by that time. So anyway, hose pipes. So, but these wires and
these circuits that we're going to talk about, it's certainly legitimate to think about. And you can
think about the current that we're going to talk about as the water flowing inside of a hose.
In fact, I actually use that mental image a lot when I'm looking at circuits and trying to figure
out where electricity goes and things. So and then the analogy is that these pipes, they have some
pressure forcing the water through the pipe. So that's the potential. So last week, when we were
talking about electric potential, that's why we were talking about it, because that's the force that
causes the force that makes charge move through a wire. And we'll change our language on that a
little bit. So and the reason this is important is because these charges move and under this
potential, so they can convert the potential energy of the potential to kinetic energy,
and that kinetic energy then can do work. So you can generate heat, you can turn a motor,
or you know, all kinds of things that you can do, you can send information from one spot to another.
And so that's why it's so important to us to start to understand these circuits.
So what we're going to do is instead of using fixed charges,
like on a piece of paper, we're going to provide a potential. We're going to use a battery.
Now you guys haven't had chemistry, I know, but and we don't actually go into it too much
in chemistry, because it is actually really a complicated issue. But a battery contains
chemicals, and that the chemicals that you choose to put into the battery are ones where one chemical
wants to give away electrons, and the other one wants to receive electrons. And when I say wants to,
I don't mean it thinks about it, it's just the nature of it is, is that this part of the reaction
is going to free up some electrons, and they can, and we range it so that the only way they can
share electrons between these two chemicals is through a wire that leaves the battery and goes
out and comes back. So that wire is the external path where these electrons can travel. And so
the battery is a chemical reaction, and there's more than one chemical reaction. So for example,
probably the battery in your car is a lead acid battery. So if you took it open, which I wouldn't
suggest that you do, there's a plate of metal in there, and that metal is lead, and it's sitting
in a bath of sulfuric acid. And that's how that chemical reaction occurs to provide electricity
for your car. Other batteries like little flashlight batteries like double A's, triple A's, C's, D's,
even those big kind of square lantern batteries, those have different chemical reactions going on
in them. And some of them are like, so your computer, your phone, and stuff, they probably
have a lithium, what they call a lithium ion battery in there. So that's a different type
of chemistry that goes on. And so there's a huge science behind how to make a good battery.
And we're not going to cover that because that's really more in the realm of chemistry. But
in these days of electronics, I mean, if you buy a new computer, you want that battery to
let your computer, your laptop run for 10 or 12 hours, you don't want to have to charge it up
every two or three hours. Like my laptop, which you can see, where is it? It's on the bed behind me.
That laptop is, how old is that? That's 11 years old. So it's battery, when it's fully charged,
it'll only run that computer for about two or three hours. Whereas if I went and bought a new
laptop today, it would have a lithium ion battery in there that I would expect to run 10 to 12 hours.
And so it's a lot of difference in the technology. And so companies and researchers are always
looking for better ways to store energy and batteries and to get it out. So you rate a battery,
you talk about a battery by talking about its voltage. Primarily it's voltage. That's what
we're going to be interested in. But you also rate it by how much charge and it'll hold. So
the newer batteries have a much higher charge density. So that's why they can run your computer
for five or 10 hours. Whereas an old computer like mine, it's a whole different story.
And you remember last week, we talked about a capacitor and how it can store charge.
And we can actually calculate how much charge is in that capacitor. Well, that's kind of like
a battery as well. So you could charge up a capacitor, you could put charge on positive
charge on one plate and negative charge on the other and carry that around for a while
and use that as a battery. Typically, they don't hold charge for very long. Oh, did y'all do that
experiment yet? We haven't done 14.1. Okay, I think that's
yeah, I was going to get you to turn that one in. Oh, let me go back to your schedule too. If you
look at, I made a mistake in here. I think I only wanted you to turn in experiment 14.1. If you
look on May 7th date, it says turn in 14.1 and 15.2. But let's just drop the 15.2. I made all those
experiments in chapter 15 and 16 optional. Yes. That's why we're doing the Khan Academy
is filling a little bit there. So yeah, 14.1 will be due May 7th. But
scratch out the 15.2 being due. Sorry about that. All right. So your capacitors that you're
building, one of the ideas, one of the part, the second part of that is how long will it hold charge?
So you put charge on that capacitor and then come back an hour later and see if there's still
charge there. So basically the battery works. Charge leaves one terminal of the battery
and then it returns somehow to a separate terminal on the battery. So batteries always have a plus and
a minus terminal and y'all are pretty familiar with that. If you get your battery backwards in your
device, sometimes the device, sometimes the device will be destroyed if you get the battery
backwards. So it's a big deal. You want to make sure that you get your look for the plus sign on the
battery and make sure that touches the plus terminal in your device. Most devices protect you in case
you accidentally put the battery in backwards. But I've had some stuff that I've ruined and I
forget what it is. I had something that I really like, I don't know what it was, but I put the
battery in backwards and that was it and I had to go buy a new one. So anyway, so there's two
terminals on the battery and we usually just call them plus and minus. So the path that these charges
follow is called a circuit and you could think about, you know, they call the racetrack for cars
a circuit as well because it's a continual loop and you can think about our circuit as that kind
of a loop as well. For the charge to flow, the circuit must form a closed path from one terminal
to the other. So sometimes like if something stops working, the first thing you think of is did the
circuit get broken? So, you know, you've got all these, like here's a table for me to charge my
phone at my computer desk here. And if that stops working, my first thought is, oh, I must have
broken the path and so that wire is broken and the circuit won't work anymore. And so when the
circuit's broken, charge can't move and so the charge moves through the circuit and the way we
talk about this is we could look at one point on that wire. So here's a wire and if that's part of
a circuit, I could put, well, what I said on the screen was I can monitor the charge at a point and
see. Well, I can't see the electrons moving so I'd have to put like a meter or something in there,
okay? And so that's what I mean when I say we can pick a spot and we can monitor the charge as it
flows past. And that's important because the amount that flows past a certain point is called
the current. And if you, and this actually, I believe, comes from module eight where we talked
about current as well. And that's the amount of charge. So delta Q is the amount of charge
that flows past this point in an amount of time delta T. So current is charged per unit time.
Or coulombs per second is one way to say it, charge per second. And that's such a common
unit and such an important unit that it's got a special name and the full name is ampere. That's
the name of the man who was playing around back in the 1800s, I guess, and started defining,
sorry, started defining how strong of a current was. So today, we usually don't say amper,
we'll just say amp. So, you know, that battery needs to put out 10 amps or something like that is
what I would say. But when I say amp, what I mean is ampere, which means this much one coulomb
in one second is one ampere. All right, so that's a new unit. Okay, so the simplest circuit we could
make would include a battery and a wire. And look, it's just not a good idea. If you look at
experiment 15.1, you can do it, but you might burn yourself because it's just a bad idea. I don't know
why. You know, maybe the guy, maybe these Mr. Wiley is just mad at me and he wants you to burn
yourself. But it's never a good idea to take a wire and put it across a battery. Now a little
bitty battery like a AA battery, you're not going to probably you're not going to set the house on
fire by doing that. If you do it with a car battery, you're asking for big trouble. So don't, and that's
why if you're having someone jump start their car, which is a very nice thing to do. And maybe
you'll have to have somebody help you jump start your car because your batteries did. It's a very
good way to help somebody. But so my son, my youngest, no, I guess it was my oldest son, he was,
we used to go to school, but he was taking some courses at the community college when he was
in school. So we had this beater car. Actually, all three of my sons drove this car because it was
it was a piece of work. Anyway, he was driving. So he got to school one day and I think it was
cloudy and he left his lights on. So his battery ran down. Well, so he goes out to get in this car
because he's got to get to his work. He has a job and car won't start. So he stands there and this
guy comes along and says, Oh, I'll help you jump your car. Great. Thank you. Appreciate that. I don't
have to call the tow company. So the guy goes and he pulls his car around and they get him where the
batteries are close enough. And my son, who I had told him this, I said, I told him, don't ever let
somebody else who you don't know, who might be well intentioned, but they may not be the brightest
lamp on the lampstand. Okay, don't let them connect jumper cables to your car. I'm teaching you to do it
so that you'll know how to do it and you'll save their car engine and you'll save your car.
So don't ever, you know, say thank you, you know, borrow the jumper cables. And if you watch people
who are older like me, who've had this experience, and we're jumping like I'm helping him jump his
car, or he's helping me jump my car, I'm watching him like a hawk. And because the guy who was
helping him put the jumper cables on backwards. So now the guy's car was running. And so now
sometimes when you do it, it'll just kill the running car. And he's got big troubles at that
point. But what happens is it'll blow a fuse in your car. So if the fuse blows quick enough,
nothing super serious happens. But it turns out that that big fuse that main fuse for your car
is always very difficult to swap out. Because it's one they never expect you to have to swap out.
Anyway, so he blew the fuse. And he calls me. I'm at work. I'm gonna be late to work. I'm gonna get
fired. And so I had to go up there and we got his car running and he got to work somehow. But
then we had to replace that fuse. And oh my goodness, that was horrible on that particular car. And
it's happened to two of my sons. It's happened to two of them on different cars. I can tell you. So
if y'all don't know right now how to jump start a car, I want y'all to learn before. Do you know
John? Yes, sir, I do. Okay, tell me. I'm gonna test you man. All right, here's one though. You have
to connect the right color. Like the is it red and green, I think. It can be green.
You got to connect the right colors to the color.
Okay, you're not telling me specifically. What color do I connect?
Which color? Okay, which color what? Which so you've got say you're you've got a you have two car
batteries there and each battery has a red terminal and a black terminal or plus and a minus.
Right. What do you connect to what?
Don't you connect the red cable to the plus and then you connect the
black cable to the negative or black box. Okay, so you're almost telling me what I want to hear.
Caroline, do you know how to jump start a car?
I don't. Okay, that's fine. Well, see this is going to be the whole price of admission here.
All right, Caroline, you might be stranded someday and hopefully somebody nice will
come up and try to help you start your car. But again, there's nice and there's people who will
in a nice way make your car where it won't start at all. Okay, you want to connect.
You got two batteries. Each one has a plus terminal and each one has a minus terminal.
Now, sometimes that's hard to tell. So you've got to look hard and identify the plus terminal
on both batteries. So your jumper cable, this big heavy cable that you've got in your hand,
and you connect plus to plus. All right, now, and you connect minus to minus.
So that's the fundamental thing is you want the plus to plus minus to minus. It's never
anything else. Okay, so if you can always, if you just remember plus to plus minus to minus,
then you'll be good. And one way to remember that is that say your jumper table set,
they'll have a red wire usually, and it's red from end to end. All right, because the plus,
if you use the red for plus, then you're going to connect the red to red. You're going to have
the same wire connecting the same terminal on both batteries. All right, now there's also a problem
or a thing if you say that you need to jump your car because you've been cranking your car,
trying to get it started, and you cranked it down. Well, one of the products of most batteries is
hydrogen gas, and that's very explosive. So typically, if you read the instructions,
they'll tell you to try to avoid sparks. And so one way to do that is to
well, first of all, you don't want to let like a one end of the jumper cables, you'll have two,
two clamps. All right, these are the clamps. You don't want to let them spark together. All right,
making. So one time, and I really learned it this time, it got Seaman at home to me, a guy was
helping me jump my car. And so he put the cables on my battery, he put the red one on the plus and
the black one on the minus. And I thought he was just going to walk over and connect it to his
battery. So I was watching to make sure that he got the plus on the plus and the minus on the minus.
But right before he connected the battery, here's what he did, he went spark spark. All right,
so he short circuited my battery. And that's a really bad thing that can make a battery explode.
Especially if it's like you like I say, you've been trying to crank your engine, and the battery's
been working hard, but it doesn't have enough oomph to really make the engine start. It may have
generated a little cloud of hydrogen. And when you go spark spark, that can cause an explosion.
So don't ever. So when you're handling these cables and you've got one battery connected,
usually you want to be very careful and not let the other things
spark together. If we see each other before the end of the year, if they let us make I'm going to
bring my jumper cables, I'm going to show you guys how to do this. But anyway, you know,
let the wires let touch it off. I got to keep them on separate. No, people do it, but it's
it's like Russian roulette. Okay, because a 12 volt car battery, even if it's not strong enough
to start your engine, it still has a whole lot of energy in there. All right. So when you're,
if you've got it connected on one end, and then you take the other end and you just go spark spark
or touch them, number one, they'll weld together. There's so much current flowing. So those two
things might as soon as you touch them, they might stick together. And then the whole thing is going
to get red hot and you're going to burn your hands. And plus your battery may explode. So just
man, you don't want sparks in that situation. Plus you're over, you know, if you're over your engine
and there's some gas fumes or something and you're making sparks, you know, you don't want any
explosions there either. So, so here's what I typically do. So I'll connect, say on the car
that's running that has a good battery and is running, I connect both terminals. So red wire
I'll put on plus and the black wire I'll put on minus. And I walk over to the car that needs to be
jumped and I'll connect the red wire to plus. Okay, right. And somehow I'm standing there with one
wire. I still got to make one more connection. What I do is I don't put it on the battery because
it'll start a little bit when you put it on the negative terminal probably make a little spark.
Okay. But what you do is you look for another place on the engine. There's usually a
like a engine lift. There's a little metal part that comes up where if they ever had to take your
engine out, they would hook there and lift it out. That's usually a good place to get a ground
connection. And I make my final connection there. And that's usually a couple of feet away from your
battery. So any hydrogen gas that happened to be there is is further away from where the spark
will occur. Right. So anyway, just one of those life things. My two of my sons have learned that
lesson. And because I yelled so much, my third son was smart enough to get it right.
And he's a smart one. So he hated for me to yell at any of them. I was, I'm not a good dad. I wasn't
a good dad. But you know, so I'd raise my, I would say I'm just raising my voice, but I was human
man when I had that, you know, because I had told my son, I said, never, I've trained you,
you know how to jumpstart a car. Don't ever let someone else do that for you, especially if they're
your age and they've never done it before. They're trying to help. But you know, what he ended up
doing instead of getting a jumpstart is he was stranded and he missed work and he didn't get
fired. But mighty God, it was a life lesson. Well, I'd be pretty upset too, if I was you.
I'm sorry. I said, I said, I had that. I've been once where my battery ran out of my car.
And then the adult that I knew helped me start it back up. Okay.
Yeah. Because of that again. Yeah. So your car works once it gets going, it doesn't need the
battery. And so, you know, like, if you're bad, if you think your battery is dead,
and you get it started, usually I would go to AutoZone or some parts store and you're just
going to buy a battery, you know. So anyway, it's not a life and death thing usually, although
and I've never seen a battery blow up. But I've read the warnings and I've seen the warnings
and I know that I don't want something that's full of acid blowing up next to me in my car that I
love and want to drive and, you know, maybe setting things on fire or burning, getting acid on my face,
my pretty little face. So anyway, it's a good young adult thing to know how to do. And especially
you Caroline, you know, you're going to have a dead battery one day and some guy's going to be,
you know, he's going to be so nervous watching, you know, trying to impress you. I'm sorry.
He has the best of intentions because he wants your attention, right?
But if he's dumb and he doesn't know how to do this, he might blow up your car or his car,
you know. So you're the mature woman in the situation, you're going to have to say,
let me do that or something, you know, or just watching. You can say, no, don't do that, you
know, when you see him. You're not doing that, right? Yeah, you know, and he'll turn red and test
and, you know, be embarrassed and all that. But anyway, see, I love this stuff. And here I go
off on this thing. Okay, so don't, you don't really want to ever do what they say to do an
experiment 15 one, which is put a, what I would say, that's a dead short. You don't want a dead
short, meaning a wire going from the positive terminal to the negative terminal. That's,
that's almost all the ways to be avoided. All right, so here's how we draw a picture of a battery.
The book had a photograph of a battery, but in a circuit, you never see that. You see this little
symbol. All right, so there's a, let me get my pointer. Okay, so there's a wire coming out this
end and a wire coming out this end. And this represents, actually, it kind of does represent
like what's going on in the battery. So there would be a one type of metal, it's a plate,
then some kind of electrolyte in between, and then another plate. And we don't really show the
electrolyte. But so there's two plates of metal here. Now, one of them is purposefully drawn
longer than the other one. And the convention is that we call this longer plate, the positive
terminal, and the shorter plate, the negative. And that's easy for, this is one that's visually
easy for me. So the little dash here, the short dash goes with the shorter plate. Okay. So whenever
you need to draw a battery in your circuit, and you want to get the polarity right,
just, now sometimes, and in fact, he says that the one figure where he has this, he says that's
the only place I'm ever going to show this is give you a plus and a minus on here. All right,
so that's a battery. And it's got some voltage. Sometimes you would say, you'd write out here
on the side D equals 1.5 volts or something like that. All right. And then here is a completed
circuit. So we've drawn this black path here that represents wires. That's the conductors.
And he's connected the positive terminal all the way around to the negative terminal. So that's a
circuit. This is a bad circuit because all the electricity, all the energy in this battery is
going to start flowing around this circuit. And if nothing else, the battery will discharge.
What happens in a battery is there's this chemical imbalance. And once the current has flown enough,
they're going to, the chemicals will stop letting electrons flow. So the battery's dead.
Some of them you can charge and others you can't. So that's a circuit.
And then there's this thing talking about the current. So
there's a nice little story in there about before they knew much about what electricity was.
Ben Franklin drew a battery and he thought, or drew a circuit and he thought that the current
should flow from the positive terminal to the negative terminal. And so that's what this purple
line represents. That's what I'm seeing in my mind is electricity's flowing out of this positive
terminal and flowing back into the negative. And it's just going around and around. Okay. So that's
called the conventional circuit. And outside of a physics book, anytime someone shows a current,
that's what they're talking about. That's really what they're talking about. Now really what's going
on is electrons are coming out of the negative terminal and they actually travel
the opposite direction. And so that's the electron flow is opposite the conventional current. So
except for a physics test or a physics type problem, you don't have to worry about this.
Just always when you draw a circuit and you want to think about the current,
just draw the current leaving the positive terminal of a battery and flowing through the
circuit in that way. All right. So we'll draw some more complicated circuits soon with some
other circuit elements. We're going to talk about resistors in particular. And those circuits,
usually what we mean is the wires have no resistance. So they don't resist the flow of
electricity. They're perfect conductors. And we ignore the, except for knowing that this path is
important, we ignore any resistance or resistance to flow in those wires. And that's an approximation.
And so for example, if you connect your car jumper cables up wrong, okay, those wires become a very
important part of the circuit and they'll start getting hot and they'll melt and then you'll have
a real mess on your hand. And so there are times when the wires actually do become important.
But for the most part, we're going to just assume that they are perfect wires. So a real conductor
impedes the flow of electricity and that's called its resistance. And really what's happening
is these electrons are flowing through that wire. They're actually hitting other atoms in the wire.
So here's a copper atom. Where am I? Copper atom. Here comes an electron. And the electron just
wants to go past it, but it actually hits the electron. It kind of scatters and it has to get
going again in the other direction. So that's what causes resistance. And we're not going to really
talk too much about that. So resistance is the ability of a substance to impede the flow of charge
when there's a potential difference that would make the charge move.
So the amount of current that flows through a resistance, and this is one of the primary equations
we'll be using, is given by this. The amount of current flowing through a resistance
is given by the voltage divided by the resistance.
So let's think about this real quick. So one way to get more current flowing through
a device, through a wire, is to increase the voltage. So the higher the voltage, the more
current. That makes some sense. Another way to get more current flowing through a wire would be to
decrease the resistance. Now that's hard because we don't normally have things where we can turn
the resistance down. But that's one way to think about it. The other way to think about
resistance, and this equation we can rearrange it. This is one of our, it's a ratio equation. So we
can use shortcut algebra. So what I can do when I see an equation like this is I can swap these two
things here. So I did that. So now I see that the resistance of something is equal to the voltage
across it divided by the current that flows. And then rearranging it again, I can see, and this is
the equation that the book uses, it says that the voltage across a resistor is equal to the current
through the resistor times the resistance itself. And we'll do some examples. So the unit of resistance,
you can see the unit here in this equation. It's volts per amp, volts per ampere. And that's a
special unit that now has the name ohms. So someone will say, I need a 1000 ohm resistor. And that's
what they're talking about. And it's usually the symbol capital omega is the symbol we use for that.
All right, so let's talk about an electric heater as an example of a circuit with a resistance in it.
Usually the heating element is like a coil of wire wound tightly. Sometimes it's special wire that has
a lot of resistance. So it'll glow red hot when you apply the voltage. And here's the circuit
diagram for that. So here's a battery. And then I have wires connecting to one this wire from the
positive terminal of the battery connects to one side of my resistor. And this little squiggly line
is a resistor. And then I have another wire going from that resistor back to the other terminal of
the battery. And so here's my voltage. And here's my resistance in this circuit diagram.
Okay, so this is actually a very simple circuit. And this is the one that I wish he had drawn
first, because now people, kids will be connecting wires from the positive to the negative terminal
of the battery. That would be good. And that's just not good. We don't like those sparks. We don't
like that burning smell. And we don't like burn fingers or houses burn down. So sometimes that's
what happens. It's such a big deal that like, we're Christmas lights, usually Christmas lights,
if it's Christmas time, if people have Christmas lights up, what will happen is a bulb will get
broken. All right. And instead of having a heating, instead of having this resistance there,
which is the light, they just because the bulb broke, now there's a connection straight across
here. And so that wire then will get glowing red hot. And of course, it's laying on the carpet
underneath the tree and the gifts and boom, everything's on fire. So so this voltage source
will cause a current to flow. And I didn't draw it on here, but I'm drawing a path with my mouse.
So the current, we would think of it flowing in this direction. All right. And then the resistor
flows, the current flows through the resistor causing that resistor to heat up. And if it heats
up enough, then we have heat keeping our house warm. So let's do an example. So here's a an
electric heater. This battery is a 240 volt battery. Now we're not talking about, so at this
point, this batteries, batteries produce what's called direct current. The current does not
alternate in time. When you get voltage out of your wall, it's alternating current. And we'll
talk a little bit about that later on. But let's say we've got a 240 volt battery. And those do exist,
by the way, they're kind of rare. You'd have them in your submarine or something like that
or are in a big uninterruptible power supply. And then here's a resistor over here. The heating
element is has a resistance of 20 ohms. So what is the current that flows in this circuit?
All right, so we're going to go back to our equation. This is the basic equation that V
is equal to IR. So we're going to use this formula in various forms. So there's really only one formula
to remember. V is equal to IR. But we want to know the current, so we're going to solve this for
I. And so I is equal to voltage divided by the resistance. All right, so here in this circuit,
the voltage across this resistor or out of the battery, oops, is 240 volts. And the resistance
is 20 ohms. And so I've got the right units in there. So volts per ohm is going to be the current.
And 240 divided by 20 is just a number. So that's equal to 12 volts per ohm or 12 amps. So in this
circuit, this battery is going to supply 12 amps to this heating element. So the reason this thing
is useful is it takes the energy that's in the battery, and it delivers it at a certain rate.
So we'd be talking about power to the environment, and that heat will warm us up. So we're interested
in how much power gets delivered by the electrical circuit components. And the electrical power in
a resistor is this. The power is equal to the current times the voltage. So if you want to know
how much power a resistor is putting out, you find the current that's flowing through it in amps,
and the voltage in volts, and multiply those together, and the answer will be in watts.
Okay. So in the heater circuit we just designed, we would have that the power is equal to i times b.
So that's, we saw that the current was 12 amps, and it's 240 volts. And we do this 12 times 240.
And we find that the power is 2880 volt amps, or 2880 watts. So 2880 watts. So that's a fair bit
of power, but that, like if you have a, oh shoot, it's 11 o'clock. So if you have a
hairdryer, they usually are a thousand or 2,000 watts. This is almost a 3,000 watt
hairdryer, so you might catch your hair on fire. So it's probably would be an okay room heater,
but it wouldn't be a good hairdryer. So okay, so what we'll do, I guess we'll stop,
isn't it time to stop? Yeah, it's time to stop. So we'll pick up there. There's other forms of
this power equation that we'll talk about, and we'll talk about that next time. Here's where we are
today. And then we're going to look at other forms of the power equation, which might be easier to use
in other circumstances. So there's our basic equation. Power, the power dissipated by a resistor
is equal to the current flowing through that resistor times our voltage across the resistor.
You can also use it to calculate the power put out by a battery. So if you, like say you've got a
one and a half volt lantern battery, or D cell or something like that, so you know the voltage
there. And then if you make a circuit with that battery and put a current meter in there, you
can measure the current. And so you can see how much power that battery would be putting out
just by multiplying the current. So current in amps times voltage in volts is equal to watts.
All right, okay. Now, another equation that we have is that for a resistor, the voltage drop
across the resistor is equal to the current times the resistance. So current in amps
times resistance in ohms. When you multiply amps times ohms, you get volts. And we could go back
to basic units, meters, kilometers per second, and all that. But you very seldom do that at
this point when you're doing circuit analysis. So what we can do then is put this expression
for V into this equation. So P is equal to I times I times R. And so an alternative equation for the
power through any device that has a resistance is power is equal to the current squared times the
resistance. All right, so for our problem, we figured out for that heater, we found out that 12
amps were flowing through the heater through that resistor. The resistor was 20 ohms. So 12
squared is 144 times 20 ohms. And so it's amps squared ohms. And so you multiply these two and
you get 2,880 watts. So you get the same answer. All right, so that's just so in other problems
where we say, what is the power? This might be the equation that's easier and more direct to use. We
may already know the current and we may already know the resistance. But we may not know the voltage
across the resistor. Okay, or here's another one. So here's our basic equation. Power is equal to
current times voltage. But for a resistor, we can also calculate I is equal to V over R.
So I'm going to put this equate representation for I into here. And so then I find that the power
is equal to the V squared over R. Okay, so again, this might be, and I did it with,
so we had 240 volts squared divided by 20 ohms. And you do that math and you also get 2880 watts.
So these two, so there's, so we have three forms of the power equation. P is equal to I V, or it's
equal to P is equal to I squared R, or P is equal to V squared over R. So usually if someone asks you
how much power does that resistor consume or dissipate, usually one of these two equations,
you're either going to know the current through that resistor or you're going to know the voltage
across it. These are the two that you'd probably come up with if someone asks you a question like
that because you know the resistance already. So anyway, just keep these three in mind. So
actually, these are important enough that if you're going to do any electrical work,
you just need to know these and have these memorized. So all right, so let's, so our basic
circuit contains it is a closed path that lets current flow from the battery. So current flows
out of the battery and around through some stuff, a resistor or two or three or five,
and then back to the battery. So that's a circuit, that loop.
And so one of the things we want to do is to stop that flow of current. So we use a switch and
here's the way we would dump that. So here's our basic circuit. We got a voltage, a battery,
and a resistor. And now the book doesn't use these dots for the switch, but it's kind of helpful.
And so I probably would prefer to draw a circuit with these dots. So what this says is that
there's two plates. So this dot could have another wire going off of it. And it doesn't. So
it really, I could probably lose this dot, but the example, the next example in the book
shows the switch when it's closed. So this is an open switch or an open circuit. And so current
can't flow. Electrons have to have a path. And you see this gap here keeps the path from being
complete. Now there are some circuits where, and usually it has to do with like those big
transformers that you see the electric company has at these power stations and stuff. And those
switches are really mechanically very special because what will happen is there's a rule that
says that the current that's flowing. So let's say, let me get my close. So here's the closed
circuit. And actually the advantage having a dot here is you can draw this line up a little bit.
And so you can, even if you don't have this dot, you can still tell there's a switch there. And
if you look at the equivalent picture in the book, it's just a straight line across there. You can't
even tell there's a switch there. So that's why I like at least two dots. But so in a high voltage
situation, if your boss says go open that switch, well, there's current flowing and a lot of current.
There's a lot of reasons why you may start to open the switch, but all of a sudden you've got an arc
going there. And so in high voltage situations, the switches are designed to keep that arc from
killing you, first of all, and second of all, to make it get interrupted as quickly as possible.
So sometimes, so most of the switches that you have on your computer and stuff, this doesn't
happen. But there are some high power circuits that require you to have. Well, so you've seen
the movie Jurassic Park, right? So the lady goes in there and she has to pump up.
Throw the switch. Okay, that's an example of a high power switch where the whole purpose that
is it's not just to make it easy to throw, but it's where this arcing is under control.
And so like if they're going to have that would turn on motors and so forth. So there's
motors and lights and everything. If you don't close that quickly, in that case, they would
close it quickly so that as that piece of metal comes down, it doesn't start arcing.
It needs to just close and then the current flow. So anyway,
so when you're describing a switch, this part of the switch is called the pole. And then these
things are called the throws. So this switch is actually a single pole, single throw switch. So
if you start reading about if you want to build a project or something, maybe they'll tell you
you need a SPST switch, single pole, single throw switch. If on this circuit, if this other
point up here went to another circuit, maybe it turns on a light bulb or something,
when it's switched, when the switch is thrown in that direction, then that would be a single pole
double throw switch. And then sometimes you need multiple things to switch on at once.
So you might have multiple poles. You may have a double pole, single throw, double pole, double
throw. Anyway, that's not in the book. It's just a little practical thing. In case you ever play
around with electronics, electrical things, or if you're repairing something and you go to the
hardware store and they don't have exactly your switch that you need and you're going to have to
jerry rig it or something, then you'll need to know whether that switch that you're replacing,
whether it's got a single pole, a double pole, triple pole. There's no limit to the number of
poles that a switch can have. Anyway, just a little something there. So let's talk about how
you can arrange. So, so far we've had one battery and one resistor. If we have a battery and multiple
resistors, there's a couple of way things can be arranged. So this is one arrangement.
And here what you can see is that you have two resistors and they're connected so that
so this this end of this resistor goes to the positive terminal on the battery eventually.
And this this end of this resistor goes to the negative pole and then the two resistors are
connected in the end here. So this is called a series circuit and the way you can tell it
is a series circuit is that if there's current flowing in this circuit, then the the current
that flows through this resistor has to flow through this resistor. And one way to think about this is
if you all have ever had to like string water hoses together, you know, to get out far away from the
house or something. So you get one water hose and then you attach another water hose to it. Well the
current the water the current flowing in the first water hose is going to also flow in the second
water hose. So those two water hoses are kind of in series as well. All right, so another way to
arrange these though is like this. And this is where you have two resistors. And so the way you
read this circuit is that these two resistors are tied together at this end and they're tied together
at the other end. And so this is called parallel. This is a parallel circuit.
And what that means is that this current that flows from the battery actually gets split into
two different paths here. And we can, using conservation of charge, which we have talked about,
you can prove that this current is equal to this current plus this current. So again it's like
water hoses. Say you've got three water hoses, you've got one coming from the house, and then you
have one of those splitters. All right, so and then you put two other water hoses on there. So you
go from one water hose to two water hoses. Well, what you expect is is that the amount of water
flowing in the one water hose is split between the other two water hoses. That may not be split
evenly. You know, one may be putting out most of the water and the other one may just have a
trickle. Okay, and the same thing can go here. Depending on the value of these resistors,
this current could be most of this one. And this will not be a tiny fraction of this one.
All right, so those are the two main arrangements of two components, and we'll be able to use that.
And besides the another way to think about these is to think about the voltages. So here
I could talk about the voltage across resistor one. So if I had a little volt meter and I saw
resistor one, I could put say the red lead here and the black lead here and measure that voltage.
And that's not going to be the same voltage as this voltage. So that's why I had to put
V1. And also I could do the same thing for V2. And what I would find out is that
I have a similar rule that I had just a minute ago. I had i is equal to i1 plus i2. Here I would
find that V is equal to V1 plus V2. And so we call this kind of circuit also besides a series
circuit. These are still in series. We call it a voltage divider. So if for some reason
say I had a 12 volt battery and I wanted one volt, I could pick values of resistance so that
this represents one volt and then this one would have two 11 volts across it. So one plus 11 would
be 12 for my 12 volt battery. And so that way I can divide voltages up. So it's called a voltage
divider. And I can, and so yeah, so this voltage is the voltage of the battery and it's divided
into two pieces here. And for the, I can also do voltage for the parallel circuit.
And so I could measure the voltage across resistor one. I can measure the voltage across
resistor two. And what I would find out is that because these points are the same as these points
electrically, that the voltage V1 is equal to the voltage of V2 and that's equal to the voltage of
the battery. And that's called a current divider because remember on the previous slide that current
got split between these two resistances. So you can have a voltage divider circuit and a current
divider circuit. And you use this to try to get different things done. So we have series and
parallel circuits. And now we have to face the fact that we might have even more
circuit elements, more resistors in there than just two. So what if we really don't care about
R1 and R2? And we want to replace these two resistors with one resistor.
All right. So how would we do that? So we're going to do a little bit of math here which
is different than what's in the book. We'll derive the formula here actually. So we
know that for a voltage divider circuit that the voltage across both resistors is equal to V1 plus
V2. And we can also remember the formula that for a resistor that the voltage is equal to the
current times the resistance. So V1 is equal to I1 times R1. So I've just replaced V1 there.
And then for V2, I have the same relationship. The current through resistor 2 times resistor 2
is equal to V2. So I've just made a substitution using Ohm's law. But now we can remember that for
this circuit that the current that flows through this resistor is the same as the current that
flows through this resistor. So I1 is equal to I2 is equal to I. And so now I'm going to instead
I1 I'm going to use I and instead of I2 I'm going to use I. So now I have this expression and then I
see that I can simplify that. So I have I parentheses R1 plus R2. And so what I have then
is that now I can rewrite this and say that my voltage across those resistors is equal to the
current times R effective. So my new value of resistor is going to be R1 plus R2.
So for a series circuit, for resistors in series, I can find an effective resistance by just adding
them together R1 plus R2. Let's see if we can do something for the parallel one. So we'd like to
replace these two resistors with one resistor that causes the same amount of current to flow.
So remember we had that this current is split between these two resistors and I1 may not be
equal to I2. So I1 is equal to I1 plus I2. But for a resistor current is equal to V over R. So
current one is equal to the voltage across resistor one times divided by R1.
And same for I2. I2 is equal to V2 over R2. So that's just Ohm's law that we put in there.
But we also remember that V1 equals V2 is equal to V, the voltage of the battery. So now I'm going
to just replace V1 and V2 with V. And then I see that V is common to both of these terms.
So I can do some algebra and pull it out. So I've got the voltage times one over R1 plus one over
R2. And so what I can say is that I can replace those two resistors with the resistance of R
effective if one over R effective is equal to one over R1 plus one over R2. So this is a little
more complicated than just adding the resistances. But it's a pretty simple formula. And so in a
parallel circuit we find that the effective resistance one over the effective resistance is
equal to one over each of the resistances in parallel. And we can we could do this if we had
three resistors in parallel and so forth. So we'll write down our big formulas are that for a series
connection the effective resistance you just add them up. You could have three resistors in series.
You just add them up to get the effective resistance. In parallel we find that the formula is that the
one over the effective resistance is equal to one over each of the terms added together. And that
can keep going. The dot dot dot means that pattern can go on forever. So and then we have that the
voltage is equal to the current times the effective resistance. So we could take say four resistors
that are in parallel and reduce them to one resistor. And then this this law also holds. So
all right. So we're going to come back to that in just a minute when we do some more complicated
problems. Let's talk about fuses and circuit breakers. Sometimes you want to protect your
electrical equipment. You want to keep it from having from getting damaged from having too high
of a voltage or having too high of a current. Because if you put in if you make it too much
current flow things will get hot and maybe melt or start to burn. Or if the voltage gets too high
you may cause them to be ruined as well. So we want to have some way to limit the damage
as current flows from our battery. All right. So what we really want to do is limit the power.
And since power is equal to the current times the voltage we can design something that will
either interrupt the circuit when the current gets too large. That's actually usually the easiest
thing to do. If we're worried about too high of a voltage we can do that as well. In fact you could
buy these little devices. They're they're pretty easy to install as well. So if you buy like a power
strip and it says surge protection what they've done is they put in a component to keep the voltage
from getting too high like due to a lightning strike or something like that. So we're not going
to talk about that. We're going to talk about a fuse. A fuse is a circuit element which once it's
opened once it so it's got like a little piece of metal in there when and when current gets
higher than a certain level it'll melt that wire. And so that wire permanently breaks and so you
would have to replace that fuse to repair the circuit. A circuit breaker is a little different.
Instead of using a fuse this is a switch and if the current gets too high it'll kind of open on
its own. And probably this is what you would find in the breaker box. They call it a breaker box at
your house. It used to be that the house has used fuses but that gets to be a real pain like in the
middle of the night if there's a storm and you want the lights to come back on it's a whole
lot easier to just go reset a circuit breaker. And so most homes these days use circuit breakers.
The power company still uses fuses. If you get a power surge and we used to get these in Charleston
all the time our power would go out about once a week and sometimes it would really go out and the
electric company would have to come and you can see these if you look at the tops of
electrical poles you can see these fuses up there. They're usually about a foot long about
two inches in an inch or two in diameter and they're usually just sitting there on the pole. So
next time you drive if you get bored and you're driving around or if you're just sitting waiting
on somebody look at the usually it's a power pole with a transformer on it because they'll put a
fuse before the transformer because it's a whole lot easier to replace a fuse versus one of those
big old transformers and see if you can spot the fuse that the power company uses. Occasionally
they'll have circuit breakers so what will happen those circuit breakers are kind of special.
Usually these are designed for like if a tree limb touches the power line it'll cause a problem
and so what will happen they'll have these circuit breakers and they'll try to reset three times.
So if you see your lights go bam, bam, bam and then they go off that means that they've got a
self-resetting circuit breaker but it'll only try it two or three times. Maybe there's more than
that but the ones around are I got you get so familiar with this in a place like Charleston
where the power is so unreliable it's like living in the third world country it's unbelievable.
But you'd see the lights go off, off and off again and then they go off totally. Because the
tree limb what they hope for is if a tree limb causes a short circuit that the tree limb will
burn or the squirrel sometimes the squirrels do it you know the squirrel reaches across and all
of a sudden he's got 1400 volts going from one paw to the other paw he becomes the idea is he
becomes a puff of smoke and dies and then falls off the thing. Like in the movies. What's that?
I said like in the movies yeah yeah I mean in Charleston this happened so often you'd
go and you'd be walking and you'd find a dead squirrel and it wasn't just dead it was cooked
you know so high voltage and squirrels don't mix. We actually at our lab we had
these this bird it was an eagle we were getting eagles back in the Charleston area
and eagles build nests on high spots and what's the highest spot a high voltage wire.
So someday one day somebody at our lab noticed an eagle was building a nest on
telephone pole or power pole and that was the main feed to our building so it was like
14,000 volt
wires and so and it was three feet so there's a lot of wires and the bird was building this
nest they were grabbing limbs you know and building a beautiful nest and so we called the power
company and tried to get on and they said well it's an eagle we can't we can't touch it's a
protected species we can't just go and shoe the eagle away. So we had to let the eagle sit there
and but the guy told us he said you know hopefully the nest will be okay and the chicks will survive
and go away but what could happen is if they build the nest and then those twigs go across some wires
it'll start a fire and then the nest will burn and it'll fry the eggs or cook the chicks and that's
they said they see that all the time so so it was really interesting what they did so they let
that season go by and before the next nesting season came they went and they put another pole
a dummy pole and they made it taller than the one that they were building a nest on and then they
took the old nest they got a they had a somehow they lifted it up with a crane and they took it
from the power pole to this dummy pole and the hope was when the eagles come back to nest again
because I guess they come back to the same spot that instead of building a new nest where they were
they'll just go to the dummy nest which has no electricity on it and that's what they did actually
so the next year we saw the eagles were back and they were having their chicks in a in that nest
safe away from electricity and it also meant we didn't lose power if they made it short out
so that was good for us too so it was kind of interesting it was scary because I you know I
didn't our building had a lot of sensitive equipment in it I didn't like the power going out but anyway
all right so a circuit breaker so here's some important safety tips this will save your life
the the rule rule in red bold italic is never replace a fuse or a circuit breaker with a higher
rated device and this is really really tempting okay so you've got a piece of equipment and a
fuse blows now you might know that the fuse blew because of lightning or some kind of a surge and
and you might know kind of why that fuse blew sometimes they blow and you don't know why they
blew now this usually happens with complicated electrical equipment like you know if you work
in a laboratory or something like that and so the first thing you do is you just replace the
fuse maybe it was a fluke maybe something weird happened and then the fuse blows again
and you look around in the equipment you can't see anything particularly wrong
and you think well maybe the guy who picked that fuse size picked it just a little bit too small
and so you want to put in a slightly bigger fuse
that's an awfully strong temptation because it means then that maybe your your equipment will
keep working and you won't be interrupted and stuff like that so like another example is
like your air conditioner on your house if it keeps tripping a breaker
you know and you look at it and it's got a 30 amp breaker you might say well I can go get a 50
amp breaker and so you go buy that and put it in there well what the tripping is meaning is that
something's wrong with the equipment something's wrong with that circuit so you really need to
so and and the safety of the fuse or the circuit breaker is telling you I see something is wrong
I'm going to try to save the equipment from getting hurt worse and so really if you have a fuse that
blows or circuit breaker that trips more than once something's wrong and you've got to fix it
so the answer is not to replace the fuse with the and the book tells you I don't know if y'all
read that but it says oh some people put in a a coin or this that and the other yeah and sometimes
those people uh so like I'll pick on JT you know I don't know your car maybe you got this super
speaker system and you know 400 watts of bass you know playing state guard or whoever
all right all right country good okay so Garth Brooks I don't know actually I have a a cousin
who plays for Montgomery Gentry he's a three-finger guitarist that's cool when he was born he had a
deformed pinky and the surgeon the doctor just cut it off so he only has three fingers on his left hand
anyway um so anyway you like music you like it loud and fuses keep blowing and you think oh I'm
just going to put a bigger fuse in there well um and you do and it's fine for a little while
and then all of a sudden you smell your amp smoking you see smoke coming out and the fuse
doesn't blow and it smokes more and more and pretty soon this is this is your amp in the trunk of your
car and you know your your uh trunk starts smoking pretty soon well maybe it's your truck maybe you
got a truck um and so pretty soon your car truck is on fire because you put a bigger you stuck a
coin in there instead of getting the right size fuse and fixing the problem this is incredibly
common and so just like last week with my whole diet tribe about how to chart get a jump from
you know somebody who's trying to help you get your car started um yeah don't don't be
swapping out fuses if the fuse keeps blowing you've got to fix the problem before you can
keep going forward so all right so let's do an example here so here's a circuit i've got
three things three resistors and parallel i've got a switch which is closed so this circuit
should be operating and i've got a fuse and here's our battery and let's put some numbers on there
so it's a 12 volt battery um resistor one is nine ohms this one is 15 ohms and this is
eight ohms so the question is what size fuse should we use so how are we going to figure that out
any ideas what we have to know well we know the fuse should be the same size as the one we were
using okay well you're the electrical engineer you're designing this so this hadn't even been
built yet so you got to tell them what size fuses to order to put into this oh okay so yeah if this
was an existing circuit and this was a 10 amp fuse then yeah i would go now if i had to i might use
a 9 amp fuse it's okay to go down in size um so say say you've got a box of 9 amp fuses but
but no 10 amp fuses and this was had a 10 amp you could try a 9 amp in there and see if that
would work at least long enough to you could get the right size fuse usually that doesn't work i've
done that myself a few times just hoping because i don't have that stupid blasted you know 6.2 amp
fuse i have a 5 amp fuse and so i'll try that but anyway no we don't know what this number is so
what are we so fuses are meant to blow with a certain amount of current so what we need to do
is figure out how much current is going to flow from this battery through these resistors
and then i'm going to pick a fuse which is has a rating slightly higher than that current
and that'll protect me if in case like for example um a squirrel walks across this resistor
and all of a sudden this resistor is zero if it goes to zero then a whole lot more current would
be needing to flow and that would then my fuse would blow and it would keep these wires from
melting and stuff like that all right so how do we figure out this current
Caroline are you you're looking too comfortable there girl
not sure okay so what we need to do is it's all right uh we got a we got three resistors here so
one of the things we might be able to replace all three resistors with one resistor
and then we would have our simple circuit of a voltage circuit and one resistor and we could
then use ohm's law to figure out what the current should be and once we figure out that current
then we'll know what size a fuse to look at so let's let's try that so
um the rule for figuring the equivalent resistance uh parallel resistors is that
one over the effective resistance is equal to one over each of these resistances
so r1 was nine so one over nine plus one over 15 plus one over eight so let me let me show you how
to uh do that i'm gonna um
i don't want to do this let me go to my um
calculator uh calculator here y'all can y'all see my calculator now yes sir okay so uh
and your calculator may operate differently so i'm going to say nine one over that
plus what's the next one 12
on that page i think it was 15
i'm gonna cheat i'm gonna yeah 15 you're right something about 15
one over that equals then plus
eight
eight one over that okay so uh so that's the sum of all the inverses and then to get
are effective i have to take one over that so 3.303 actually i when i work this problem i know
to get things right later i'm going to remember it's 303 i think when i write it down though i'm
gonna here i'm just going to say yeah oh goodness no wonder i got it wrong no 3.303 303 all right so
effective uh resistance the first time i wrote it down i just kept three significant figures
but later i found out i needed more so all right so the effective resistance now
i can replace all three of these resistors with a 3.3 ohm resistor
and then i can find uh the maximum current then it's going to be this voltage divided by that
effective resistance so that's 12 volts divided by 3.3 so the maximum current flowing out of this
battery is going to be 3.63 amps so then i could now know the maximum current that i want to ever
let flow is 3.63 amps um so the fuse uh should blow at slightly over 3.6 amps so maybe if i had a
four amp fuse uh that would work now a real engineer is going to figure out safety margins
uh you know it could be that these wires uh are very long and they have a lot of resistance
and they may be small wires and so i may decide if i really did an engineering analysis and i had
all those details i might decide that i really need to go find a 3.7 amp fuse or have one made
or something like that so anyway so the problems that you'll get in fact this is out of the book so
it said you've got a two amp a four amp and a six amp fuse and which size is the best one
so our answer would be the four amp fuse okay so here's an additional question so how much power
should this battery be ready to deliver because i also since i'm designing this circuit
i have to decide what's how big this 12 volt battery is is it the size of a car battery
or is it the size of my desk you know what size battery do i need to think about here
so this battery is going to have to deliver 3.63 amps so the power coming out of the battery
is the voltage times the current now we do know the voltage and we do know the current
but we also know the effective resistance so let's use this formula so v squared divided by r
so v squared is 12 squared divided by the resistance the effective resistance over here
3.30 and we find out that this battery has to deliver 43.6 watts all right so that would be a good
answer on this problem but we there's other ways to solve it we could have used the we could have
just used straight power is equal to voltage times the current because we'd already calculated the
current maximum so we could figure that out and we get when we round that we get the same thing
43.6 watts and then the other way using our other power equation we could take the current squared
times the resistance and that gives us a slightly different answer it's 43.52
and what i did that's why i went back and i got more significant figures here
so you really have to think about how many significant figures you want
if your ultimate if the ultimate goal is figure out how much power this battery
has to be able to put out then you would want to you know we've practiced several times
in the intermediate calculation we try to carry along as many significant figures as we can
so anyway so using either either one of our three power equations we get about the same answer
43.5 43.6 watts and so that's a pretty good size battery for these resistors
i don't think a flashlight battery or d-cell is going to put out 43.5 watts for very long
it may try for a couple of seconds but it's going to lose its juice pretty quick
so all right so let's uh
it's 11 and i get you till 1130 right okay i'm not going to pan right again
all right so let's look at some more complicated circuits so here's a
circuit with six resistors in it and the values are shown there it's a 120
volt battery and so we could ask a couple of things we could um ask uh what the equivalent
resistance of each of these pairs is so let's look at this so how would we analyze this how
do we break down these six resistors and look at them usually you do it in multiple steps
okay so here we have two resist the smallest parts here we've got two resistors in there in
parallel so we could probably replace these with one resistor and same here i've got two
resistors in parallel and i could probably replace that with one resistor and these two resistors
are in parallel so what maybe the first thing i can do to simplify this circuit is to replace
these doubled resistors with single resistors so i'll go from having six resistors to three
resistors and then i'm trying to get you to draw this picture in your mind so then you're going to
have a resistor here a resistor here and a resistor here and those three resistors are in series
so then we can use our series addition rule to come up with an equivalent with one resistor
so let's see what question um uh is going to be asked so the question is how much power is used by
the circuit now the question this this would be an important place to slow down and to read carefully
um a harder question would be to say how much power is used by the 22 ohm resistor
let's think about that um just looking at this circuit how would can you see that that that's
going to be a pretty tough question i'm going to have to figure out a couple of one of two so to get
the power in this 22 ohm resistor i would need to know the current through this resistor then i could
do i squared times r or if i could figure out the voltage across this resistor now the voltage
across this resistor is not the same as the voltage across this battery because i've got
some other resistors in the circuit so i would have to calculate this voltage in a some special way
all right uh so then i could do v squared divided by 22 ohms v squared over r to get the power
so it's possible maybe if we have a couple of minutes maybe we'll just try this um i didn't
actually work it out last night but maybe we could um how much power is used by the circuit so
i want to know of these six resistors how much power does this battery have to supply
so all i'm like so all i'm low resistance
so um
now these are weird numbers 22 and 29 and 15 and 13 these aren't easy to do but maybe um
um if you had two you you should think about this parallel rule enough to get to the point
where you say if i have two 100 ohm resistors in parallel what is the resistance
or if i have three uh 500 ohm resistors in parallel so the resistance is all the same
what is my resistance
so uh let's let's do that real quick let me go back i can do that let's so i've got 500
one over that plus 500 one over that plus 500 one over that equals and then to find the equivalent
i've got a one over that so three 500 ohm resistors in parallel is 166.6666666
so let's try this is that truly 500 divided by three
oh so if i use equal resistant resistors in parallel i can actually divide the resistance
so two 100 ohm resistors in parallel would give me 50 ohms
okay now that doesn't apply if uh in this case where these two resistances aren't equal it's
not the average of these 22 plus 29 average together is not 12 and a half this is less than these two
okay so and then the third third one here to replace this one the 31 and 39 i need a 17.27 ohm
resistor all right so i could redraw my circuit now so i've replaced those pairs of resistors
with single resistors and i've written down the values here so now my circuit's getting a lot simpler
right so now i see that i've got three resistors in series and i could probably combine those and
the rule there is a whole lot easier the effective resistance of things that are in series i just add
the resistances together so the effective resistance of these three guys is just their sum
and when you do that you get that the effective resistance is 36.74 ohms so i could replace all
three of these resistors by one 36.74 ohm resistor so now then i have a simplified circuit with one
voltage source and one resistor and i can see that the power then that i need the battery to produce
is the voltage squared over the effective resistance so that's 120 squared divided by 36.74
so that battery needs to generate about 392 watts
all right so uh now you can imagine maybe you can imagine and when you work the problems for
this chapter let's say that i could take this very same problem and say i'm going to connect a resistor
from here down to here i'm going to connect a 20 ohm resistor between here and here oh my goodness
i'm going to have a much more complicated circuit but maybe i can still simplify it by using these
parallel and series combination rules and so if i if i had another i didn't make a drawing
let me see oh my god so let me let me um let me go ahead and go down here i've got you for a
few more minutes i'm going to make up for last week so now let me take a wire from
all right so this is all weird powerpoint stuff i'm going to copy that
and paste it so there's my new wire i'm going to connect it there
and i need a resistor
so i have maybe i can just use my mouse
oh man
go ahead
i'm going to go back and he just i need to picture one resistor
did i make my life really hard i'm going to go back even further because i know some of these are
i'm going to shoot bar all right i'll have to do it the hard way
let me ungroup this have y'all played around in powerpoint very much it's really not making
wrong ah there now i'm going to copy that i'm going to paste it so i'm going to drag this guy up here
i need to rotate it
ah
Ha.
Ha.
Let's see, I think there's a key that I can hold down.
I'm going to go up here and rotate it.
Oops, don't need to do that.
Come on, rotate, rotate.
All right, well, I'm going to make it go like this.
I'm going to put this resistor here.
I'm going to make this connection go over there.
Then I need another wire.
I'm going to make it connect here.
All right, so now I've made a much more complicated circuit.
Let me make that a 20 ohm resistor.
Okay, so now I've changed the topology of this.
Actually, what I've got now is a...
Let me do that.
So now my next...
Shoot.
My next step would be to...
So I can still do the parallel things there, but now I've got this connected here.
And I have to...
Okay, so this wire is connected like this.
All right, so now I'd have to do a different iteration.
I would figure out the equivalent resistance of these two, you see,
and then that's going to be in parallel with this guy.
So this is actually...
So 12 and a half plus seven.
That's almost 20.
Then I said this one was a 20 ohm resistor.
And so now...
So do you see now that I've got...
For this new problem, these two are in series.
So I can add these two together and get an effective resistance.
Replace these with one resistor.
And then I have a 20 ohm in parallel with that one.
So I have to do another parallel combination.
And then that'll give me one resistor.
And then that'll be in series with this guy.
And I can add those two together.
So now it turns out that you guys...
There are some problems that you can't really solve with the tools that you have.
Let's say that if I added another resistor going from here to here,
then that's a whole different ball game.
And we need to be able to solve some circuit equations.
It would be...
What you end up with is multiple equations with simultaneous equations that you have to solve,
which is...
It's not hard.
You'll probably know how to do simultaneous equations,
but it's just another level of difficulty,
which isn't fair to throw at you in two little lectures.
So that's why the book didn't go there.
So anyway...
But that might be a good test for you.
