As with any 3D application, the interface and navigating that interface is one of the
most important things to grasp when starting out with Blender.
The interface in Blender is comprised of several different elements.
Starting from the left to right, on the left side we have the toolbar, and this toolbar
contains a multitude of tools that allow you to work directly with your 3D model.
We'll start with some of these when we're in the modeling section, when we actually
start looking at manipulating our objects.
Right here in the center, we have the 3D viewport.
The viewport is your view into the 3D world, and is where you will spend most of your time
working directly with your objects.
The viewport allows you to manipulate all the different objects within your scene, including
the camera, the mesh, and the lights.
Moving over to the top right, we have the Outliner.
The Outliner is a display of all the different objects within your scene.
It allows you to see what's connected to what, select those objects, and manipulate them
in other ways.
Although you won't use this a lot starting out probably, it is very essential when you
start working with large scenes and you'll quickly begin to see how valuable it can be.
Right below it, you can find the Properties panel.
The Properties panel has a series of different properties along the header here, which all
contain different settings relating to your scene.
The default one are the Render properties that allow you to change things like image
size, output formats, and whatnot.
We'll explore a few of these here in this Getting Started series, here in a little while.
For the time being though, it's a good thing to just explore and see what's what.
Next, going back over to the bottom, we have the Timeline.
The Timeline here is used during animation, and allows you to move your view through time.
Now by default, you're not going to notice anything changing here, except for this number
here, which refers to the frame number.
The frame number is your number of frames per second, and we'll cover this more in the
Intro to Animation.
For the time being, let's go ahead and move on to Navigation.
Navigation is one of the most essential things, as it's what allows you to move around your
3D world.
Since we're working with a full 3D object that allows us to manipulate it from every
side and angle, it's important to be able to move around naturally.
Now with your mouse over the 3D viewport, you can move around using a combination of
hotkeys and the middle mouse button.
If you just click your middle mouse button, you're able to rotate your view around or
orbit your view around your model.
This is good for viewing at any angle.
However, it's also important to be able to pan your view, or move it from side to side
and up and down, which you can do by holding SHIFT and middle click and dragging.
You can also zoom your view by using the scroll wheel on your mouse, or the plus and minus
keys on your keypad to zoom in and out.
Obviously this is essential for viewing models closer, or getting real up close to details
or far away to view an entire scene.
Next there's even more, and it's necessary to be able to view your model from direct
angles, such as the top, the front, the back, the side, etc.
And this can be done by the keypad on your keyboard.
Now do keep in mind that this is not the same as the top numbers 1 through 0 on your keyboard
along the top.
They are very different within Blender without changing a few settings.
So if you do not have a keypad on your laptop, you can use the function keys and the JKL
and those keys to compensate for your number pad, or you'll find a setting within the user
preferences to emulate the number pad.
For the time being, if you can use a number pad, I highly encourage it.
This allows you to change directly to your individual views.
The three most commonly used are top, front, and side.
You can switch to top view by hitting 7 on your number pad, front by 1, side view by
hitting 3, and then you can go to the opposite of each of those by holding down CTRL and
hitting 7, 1 for back, 3 for side, or the left side, and of course the top was the bottom.
You can also toggle between perspective and orthographic mode, orthographic being that
there is no perspective applied to the viewport by hitting 5 on your number pad to toggle
between the two.
You'll normally use orthographic view while modeling directly from a reference and then
perspective mode to check that you have not overcompensated anything and that everything
is correct when viewed with perspective to make sure that everything is as it should
be in the real world.
Next, you can also use the 4, 6, and 8 on your keypad to rotate at increments around
your model, and this can be helpful for getting a more direct, exact view to your model.
And lastly on the number pad, you can use 0 to switch to your camera view.
As you can see in the 3D view here, we have a camera object that allows us to see what's
going on, and this acts just like a real world camera in that it captures the view, and so
anytime you want to create an image or render an image out into a JPEG, PNG, or another
image format, you use the camera to display what you want to view.
And so by hitting 0 on the number pad, you can see that, and that will allow you to save
out that image.
Now we will cover that more directly in one of the later sections in rendering, but for
the time being, go ahead and practice navigating around your model until you can navigate very,
very naturally to any angle you want to zoom in and out, pan around, orbit, you name it.
