Hello and welcome back.
In the last lecture we talked about how pedigree analysis can be used to map genes and diseases
to each other.
The pedigree analysis depends upon having a sufficient number of people in a family so
you can actually follow the transmission of a SNP-like marker with a disease trait into
enough offspring so that you have enough statistical power, enough information to make a significant
correlation between a SNP marker and a trait or disease, and then you're able to go and
find the particular gene responsible for the trait by looking at a particular region
in the chromosome.
Now there's a really severe limitation in that kind of analysis, and the limitation
is that most families are actually quite small in terms of what geneticists can do relative
to what they can do in experimental animals like mice or flies, where they can breed 50,000
or 100,000 animals easily to try to find linkage between a trait and a gene.
In human populations, families may have three, four, or five generations perhaps, but usually
not more than a couple hundred people at most in a family.
And so until the year 2002, geneticists thought it would always be impossible to map the location
of genes that had small effects on common diseases like diabetes or heart disease or
cancer, because we know there are many genes involved in those diseases, and each gene has
alleles that have a small effect on the disease, and it was clearly not possible to use the
available pedigrees to study those kinds of complex diseases.
There weren't enough people to analyze that were related to each other.
Well, today we're going to talk about how that problem was overcome with the realization
that you can consider every single human being in the world to be part of the same global
family, which I'll explain in a moment.
But the fact that you can look across the entire world means that potentially you have
hundreds of millions of people that you can study in a more sophisticated sense of a pedigree
analysis to find linkage between SNPs and disease.
And in fact, this new approach that we'll talk about today has completely revolutionized
human genetics, actually makes it much faster, much quicker to identify genes that are associated
with particular diseases, no matter how great the complexity is of the gene disease association.
And not only that, it makes it much quicker.
So let's start at the beginning and find out why this new approach has taken place, or
why we now know that the entire human population around the world is part of a global family.
And the first thing is to go back and consider how the population of our species has expanded
over the last 100,000 years.
50,000 years ago is when people first began to migrate out of Africa onto the other continents
of the old world, and eventually the new world as well.
50,000 years ago, the total human population was about 100,000, and it's thought that less
than 10,000 people actually migrated out of Africa into the other continents.
And the population after that point in time went up because people had more land area
to raise children on.
But 2,000 years ago, the total population of human beings was still less than 100,000,000.
Now today, the population is over 6 billion, which is 60 fold larger than the population
was just 2,000 years ago, and many orders of magnitude larger than the population was
50,000 years ago.
And what that means is that although there are 6 billion people in the world, we all
come from a small number of progenitors back a few 10,000 or so years ago.
When we look at mitochondrial DNA, this is the maternally transmitted DNA we talked about
two lectures ago, we can see we can actually trace back all of the maternal lines out of
Africa, as Europe and Asia and the new world, all of the maternal lines traced back to two
women who left Africa about 50,000 years ago.
Now obviously there were more women in the population that left Africa, but only two
women have given rise to all the mitochondrial DNA everywhere in the world except Africa.
Now in Africa, there was much more divergence among people taking place.
There are more mitochondrial lines within Africa, but outside Africa, you can see how
we can trace back to two women, because when we look at how portions of different alleles
vary across time, you see that a population can have a mutation and then generation after
generation, that mutation can gather speed and expand into a greater proportion of the
population.
That's with mitochondrial DNA.
The same kind of situation takes place in the nuclear DNA.
The nuclear DNA is transmitted in a more complex way because we have two copies of every chromosome
in the nucleus and in each generation, those two copies of chromosomes, one's from my mother,
one from my father.
I've got these two copies of chromosome one, for example, and when I transmit my genes
to my children, those two copies recombine with each other.
They mix up the genes from my two different ancestral lines, and that's what happens on
all of the chromosomes and all of the genes in the nucleus, which is over 99% of our genes.
Very few genes are in the mitochondria.
So in this example, I'm going to go two generations into the future from an original four grandparents
to look at how the DNA gets divided up, and in each of the grandparents, I've labeled
the chromosomes with different colors, and in the first generation, what happens is you
see that the colors are mixed together, and there are big blocks of color that are inherited
in each of the parents' chromosomes from the grand parental chromosomes.
You can see the blocks are quite big on each chromosome.
And then when those people, and in this example, I have two sets of parents, they form children
who further recombine the blocks, and so when you compare the children to the grandparents,
you see that the blocks of information that are transmitted together become smaller at
each generation.
Now there's actually a mathematical formula that you can use, knowing the facts of how
often recombination occurs.
You can look at how big a block of inherited DNA is likely to be based on the number of
generations into the future from a particular progenitor, and you go two generations, which
is from grandparent to grandchild, and the block's only going to be about 30,000 kb.
kb is kilobase, or 1,000 bases.
It's just a shorthand notation that molecular biologists use.
We also use the notation mb to mean megabase, or millions of bases.
The 30 kb is actually 30,000 bases.
It's also 30 mb, 30 megabases.
And as you go out through the generations, you go down many generations, the average
size of an inherited block of DNA that stays intact becomes smaller and smaller.
Now let me give you an example of this with a molecular analysis of my son's karyotype.
So in a previous lecture, you saw the traditional version of my son's karyotype, where the chromosomes
had black and white bands.
They weren't very distinguishable.
And this is a modern molecular version of a karyotype.
And I'm only showing you the first 11 chromosomes to make a point here.
Along each of these chromosomes, you see a region of light green.
That region of light green was inherited intact by my son from my father.
So over the generation from my father, to me, to my son, there's quite big blocks of
DNA, whole chunks of chromosome that are inherited intact.
The other DNA that is not inherited from my father going down to my son obviously must
come from my mother.
This is looking at one of my two chromosomes in each of these cases, and you can see very
clearly how big the DNA chunks are that come from my grandfather to a grandson.
Now here I'm comparing my DNA to the DNA of my wife, and I'm also comparing my DNA to
the DNA of an anonymous Nigerian man who took part in a genetic study.
All of these comparisons are done by comparing the results of DNA microanalysis of SNPs.
And this particular comparison uses a DNA microarray or microchip that has 500,000 SNPs
on it.
And the two companies that did my analysis are 23andMe and DecodeMe.
Now what I'm comparing here is all of the SNPs along all of my chromosomes to the SNPs
along my wife's chromosomes and the SNPs along a Nigerian man's chromosomes.
And you see these green bands.
The green bands are segments of DNA that have been inherited intact from each of these people
that I am comparing myself to.
If you look at the comparison to the Nigerian man, you'll see I don't have that many.
I have a few blocks of DNA in common, and I can calculate that those blocks came from
a common ancestor 20 or 30,000 years ago.
But when I compare my DNA to my wife's DNA, the first thing that you see is that there
are many, many more green blocks.
And the next thing that you see, if you look carefully, is that some of those green blocks
are quite wide.
And that means that those particular blocks of DNA all along that block, that's a pretty
big block of DNA, if you can see it at the chromosomal level, that block of DNA is identical
in my wife and me, and each of those blocks is inherited from a common ancestor about
two or 300 years ago.
Now the important thing to remember about the chromosomal DNA, not mitochondrion, not
Y, is that because of recombination, you actually are inheriting each bit of your genome, each
bit of every chromosome from a different ancestor.
So there are four or five very large blocks of commonality with my wife in comparing her
genome to mine, and each one of those blocks is not the same ancestor.
Each one of those blocks represents a different ancestor that lived a couple hundred years
ago.
So we have a lot of ancestors in common, and this is actually not unexpected because we
both have the same ethnic background, and all of our grandparents came from Eastern Europe.
But you can see this very, very clearly in this kind of analysis, and you can also see
very clearly that the size of the block is going to be bigger or smaller, and that's
going to correlate with how far back you go in generational time.
Another kind of analysis that 23andMe will do for you is they will compare your DNA over
the whole genome.
They'll use a mathematical formula to compare your DNA and how it is similar or not to other
people from other ethnic groups or other backgrounds.
And when I gave my DNA to 23andMe, they had no idea where I came from.
Their analysis is completely anonymous, but I can look on the screen here, and there's
a green symbol, which if I compare myself to the entire European, Asian, African populations,
each population is represented by a different color, and my dot is kind of in the mid-East
Europe and the intersection between the two, which in fact is where my heritage is from.
And then when I zero in on Europe, I see a green dot between Ukraine and Poland.
It turns out that half my ancestors come from Ukraine, the other half from Poland most recently.
If I look at the Middle East, I'm most similar to an anonymous Palestinian subject who took
part in this large genetic analysis.
And again, that's not surprising because actually in the Middle East, Jews and Palestinians
are genetically very similar to each other.
So my dot is at the intersection of these different ethnic groups in the Middle East.
This says that you can look at different regions of my genome and see different affinities
if you go into different parts of the world.
So there is a way of graphing out how large the region of, how large the block of DNA
is that is inherited from one generation to the next based on our ancestry.
And a remarkable discovery that was made just in 2002, 2003 is that if you look across
all the genomes of everybody in the world, it doesn't turn out that SNPs can be inherited
independently.
In fact, what happens, or what you can see very clearly, is that there are blocks of
DNA, blocks of DNA where there are a couple of SNPs present in the blocks, and those
blocks of DNA have only two, three, or four forms that they can take that represent the
entire world population.
And if you look along a chromosome, and so this is a little bit of a chromosome that
has been zoomed into, and there are lots of SNPs along this chromosome, and you look
at lots of people with a microarray, a DNA microarray analysis, and you find that there
are chunks of DNA that come in a small number of different forms.
Those chunks of DNA are called haplogroups, and there's a way of visualizing where the
haplogroups are located along the chromosome.
And if you look at each of the haplogroups, and in this example, there are two haplogroups.
Each haplogroup is made up of about six or seven SNPs, and you can see where the SNPs
are located along the actual DNA molecule.
In one haplogroup, there are three haplotypes.
So in other words, all the people in the world have one of these three sets of SNP alleles,
all the alleles are inherited together or not in these three haplotypes for this particular
haplogroup.
There's a second haplogroup here which has five forms, and again, all the people in the
world inherit one of these five forms of this particular haplogroup.
This is a very, very powerful information about the global human population, because
it means now that we can go back and look at everybody's DNA, and if you have particular
SNPs that are in a small location, that defines not just those SNP alleles, those particular
sites, it defines all of the DNA in that haplogroup, which might be as large as 100,000 bases
or 200,000 bases, which might contain four or five genes, and we know that the reason
it looks this way is because that particular region of DNA has come down to all people
in the world from just two, three, four or five ancestors.
But this is very useful because it basically says that we can look at the entire world's
population and do a kind of pedigree analysis because everybody is related, at least at
these little bits of DNA.
So this is actually a view of the haplotypes that I have from my mother in a particular
chromosomal region that affects eye color, which I've discussed previously, and there
are blocks in each of these haploblocks.
I've inherited a particular haplotype.
We know what the frequency of each of these haplotypes is in the world population, and
I can see the bits of DNA that I inherited from my mother and that she inherited from
her ancestors.
Now the interesting thing about this particular region of DNA is when I look at my father's
chromosome, the chromosome that my father gave to me, it doesn't exist in Europe.
There is a difference in the continents.
Everyone in Asia and Europe have been diverging apart separately for 30 or 40,000 years, and
this bit of DNA, this is the DNA that surrounds the gene that causes blue eyes, this bit of
DNA, it's sort of a pretty long bit of DNA on my paternal chromosome comes from China.
It is actually the most common haplotype in this region that exists in China today, and
it's actually quite long, and speculating, because this haplotype is so common and so
long, it is possible that it actually derives from Genghis Khan, who had such an impact
on the Chinese population and perhaps gave some of his genetic information to me as well.
Now the real importance of this way of looking at the genome, this new way of looking at
the genome, is in its power to tease out complex disease traits and their location of the genes
that are influencing that disease within the chromosomes.
And this new kind of analysis, which was first performed in 2007, is called genome-wide
association studies, and essentially what it is is a DNA microarray analysis of a very
large number of people.
So the DNA microarray is going to look at 500,000 SNPs, and you will test perhaps 10,000
people.
Each person is looked at with a DNA microarray, and the SNP alleles are recorded for 500,000
spots in their genome, and then an evaluation of their medical history and of their medical
traits is also recorded, as well as all the other traits that are expressed.
So it's a giant matrix, 10,000 people, 500,000 SNPs, and the computer, you need fast computers
to do this, the computer is what looks at the intersection and looks at the linkage between
particular traits and particular SNPs.
And this is essentially the process that takes place.
One SNP at a time, the computer will look at a single SNP, and so, for example, this
SNP might have a G-aleo and a T-aleo, and then the computer will look at the population
of people, and some of the people will be G-homosegous, some will be T-homosegous, some
will be GT-heterozygous, and then based on their genotype at this particular SNP, the
computer will divide them into three populations.
So these are artificial subpopulations that the computer has created to look at correlation
between this particular SNP and a particular trait.
It could be a complex trait like diabetes, and what will most often be found is that
people who are GG at this SNP or TT at this SNP, if you look at the whole population,
the distribution of the trait in each of these subpopulations won't be different.
So in other words, a typical SNP will not have alleles that are linked to the trait
in any way.
Now you do this entire process again for SNP number two, and you divide the population
up in a different way so that they're divided according to their genotype at SNP number
two, and you do this over and over and over again for 500,000 SNPs, and these 500,000
SNPs are across the entire genome, so the SNPs are actually sitting pretty close to
each other along the genome.
So if there is a gene somewhere that is related to the disease diabetes, you would expect
to find a different result, that when you test this SNP, when you divide the population
up into especially the two homozygote classes, those who are GG, those who are TT, and then
you look at the expression of something like blood pressure or any quantitative trait,
and you look at the distribution in the GG class and the TT class, you'll find a difference.
And geneticists know that when they find something that's not good enough, they have to repeat
it with a different population, and this kind of experiment is being done in hundreds of
laboratories right now on many different common diseases, and scientists are getting results.
In fact, there are now genes described throughout the entire genome that are associated with
all of the different common diseases that people may be afflicted by.
Now, this is the way that you would read the results of a SNP analysis relative to a disease.
You're looking across a horizontal line here, and each dot represents a different SNP along
the genome.
You're lining the chromosomes up tail to end, tail to end, and so forth, and so you have
the genome along a horizontal line.
Each dot represents whether or not there is an association between the SNP and the disease
that you're looking at, and as you go along, most of the SNPs are going to be, they're
not going to be very associated.
They're going to just be randomly associated, which is that big band in the bottom where
you can't recognize the individual dots.
But then you'll come to certain points along the genome where all of a sudden there's
a whole bunch of SNPs that show association with the disease, and when a SNP shows association
with the disease, the dot's going to be present higher on the graph.
And so if you look along the graph, you can see a couple of places where you see a lot
of dots up.
Now, the reason you see a lot of dots in a small number of places is because of the
way that the genome is inherited in blocks of DNA.
And sometimes the blocks are smaller or bigger.
In these examples, you can see an analysis where there's a region which is linked to
a single coding region gene that is associated with the disease, a whole bunch of SNPs which
show an association, they're all together.
And then there's another example where, in fact, the region that is conserved, the region
is actually much larger that is associated with the disease in this second example.
And in the second example, you can't go directly to the gene, but you have limited yourself
to four or five genes, one of which must be associated with the disease.
Often is the case, as I'm showing you here, you can go directly from the experiment to
identifying an actual coding region, a gene, that is responsible for a common disease,
which is really quite remarkable.
And this is an example of an analysis of cholesterol levels.
And again, it's actually quite easy to read this analysis.
You just look along the horizontal line for places where there are groups of SNPs that
are highly associated with HDL or LDL.
Those are the two forms of cholesterol or other fats.
And you find that different genes actually correlate with high HDL or high total cholesterol
and all of these studies.
Now the interesting thing about this analysis is you can use the same panel of people and
the same DNA microarrays to look at many different diseases or many different traits.
So because you have information on both HDL and LDL for this large group of people, first
you're going to look for association with HDL and you'll find certain genes.
And then you're going to look for association with LDL and you'll find other genes.
And so over the last couple of years, since June 2007, over a hundred different common
diseases that are complex in their inheritance patterns have been dissected in this way with
the identification of genes that influence the disease.
Now when you take a complex disease, and this is an example of type 1 or juvenile onset diabetes,
and there are over 20 different genes where there are alleles that affect the likelihood
of expressing type 1 diabetes, which is a very serious disease.
And each of these genes has a rather small effect.
So if you look at each of these genes one by one in isolation, you'll see that there's
a slight influence increasing the risk of being afflicted with type 1 diabetes.
It's not very useful, not very predictive.
However, when you put all of the information together, there are over 20 different risk
factors and when you put it all together, you'll find a small number of people who have
the risk allele at a large number of these genes, at all 20 genes, you actually can be
very confident that this person will be afflicted with type 1 diabetes, unfortunately.
So that shows you the power of this approach.
You narrow down a bunch of genes on many different chromosomes if it's an important disease like
diabetes, which affects a lot of people.
You can then look at people who have the risk allele at all of these different genes and
you can see this amplified effect.
This is just another example of how powerful this approach is.
It's an example of asthma susceptibility, close to me because I'm asthmatic.
And in a single experiment, the scientists were able to identify a single SNP that is
causative of part of asthma susceptibility.
Asthma like diabetes is influenced by many genes, but this particular SNP is in a regulatory
region.
A lot of these risk alleles are in regulatory regions, we're finding out.
And so it's the actual SNP in a regulatory region that comes into alleles and one allele
causes susceptibility to asthma and that what this SNP does, it's not in a coding region,
it regulates the expression of a gene that's involved in the immune response, which is
connected to asthma.
So by finding the gene that influences or finding the many genes that influences a disease
like asthma, you gain a lot of insight into the molecular basis for that disease and you
gain insight and a way to consider potential therapies for that disease.
So in this lecture, I've explained to you how the common ancestry of all people in the
world can be used in conjunction with DNA microarrays to give you an enormous amount
of power in linking particular genes to diseases that are quite complex that until a decade
ago, most geneticists thought that this would always be impossible because it's such a complex
interaction among genes and diseases.
And in the next lecture, we're going to approach the question, why are there so many disease
variants in people?
Why do so many people have diabetes?
We'll find out that it's not an accident, there's a reason for this.
So I'll see you next time.
