Welcome. Over the last few lectures, we've been talking about the most incredible thing
that genes have created, which is the human mind. And we've learned how genes operate
during evolution together, and the operation of genes together give rise to animals that
have certain behaviors, and that those animals eventually evolved into us. That's been through
the course of all of these lectures that we've been talking about that.
Now genes and genomes, which has been the subject of this course, we knew they existed.
We've known they existed for much of the 20th century, but we didn't actually have detailed
information about the genes inside individual people. That required new technology, and
required that technology to become cheap enough such that we could use it on a massive
scale to be able to study biological entities, including ourselves, at the DNA level.
And these technologies have become more and more powerful over the 21st century, the bit
of it that has now passed, and it's causing a paradigm shift across multiple disciplines,
across all of the biological sciences, including all of the sciences of biomedicine, but ecology
and environment, and zoology, botany, microbiology, all of these sciences now are using the accumulation
of tools that I've described over the last lectures, and they're using it to gain a lot
of insight into how these systems work. But it's not just the biological sciences, it's
psychology of course, which is now very much oriented towards neuroscience, and neuroscience
is using the genetic tools to make great strides forward, and it's even the social sciences.
As you'll see today, the genetic technology is being used to uncover disputes, to solve
problems in history, archaeology, biblical studies even, and linguistics. Perhaps all
of the disciplines at a university, except for English, are taking advantage of this
new technology. Now the new technology does two kinds of things. It gives us a lot of
information about what's here now, what my DNA looks like, what your DNA looks like,
whether or not you're going to have a predisposition to a disease. But because genes are digital
information, because the information within our DNA is digital, and because that digital
information is transmitted faithfully from one generation to the next, we can actually
use these technologies to look back in time. And so it's not just that we're looking at
individuals and thinking about what their genes might be causing in their future, we
can go back in time. We can go way, way back in time. And that's also what makes this technology
so powerful. It's really the only digital information that we have from prehistoric
eras, for example. And we're going to talk about that in a moment. The big question that
we've been considering throughout this course is, what are we? Who are we as human beings?
And where are we going as a species in the future? Which will be the topic of the next
and last lecture. We are very similar to chimpanzees. I've made this clear throughout
the course. But we are also fundamentally different from chimpanzees. And it's both
the similarity that we are interested in. And it's the fundamental difference that we
try to get our hands around. Chimpanzees that are living in a zoo in San Diego have a great
time there. Big enclosure for them to run around with artificial waterfall and trees
and lots of things for them to play with. They're there as a group. And there are some
people who think that the chimps should be freed from these nice modern zoos and sent
back to Africa where they came from. And yet, in my mind, if you took these chimps out of
this nice beautiful zoo where their health is monitored, and you put them back into the
jungle where they get malaria and get eaten very quickly, and if they actually could make
a choice, I suspect they would choose the zoo. And that's what makes them different from
us, because most people wouldn't choose the zoo to live in. Most people want their freedom
and very, very important difference because we understand there is a larger world out there
to be explored. So let's go back all the way to the beginning of the course. And one of the
first people I talked about who had a huge influence on biology and our understanding of
life was Aristotle, who lived, of course, over 2000 years ago in ancient Greece. And
Aristotle didn't have any of the tools we have today or any of the base of knowledge that we
have today to do his investigations. And yet he came up with some very important concepts,
concepts that were not accepted by most people in the world until much, much later. Aristotle
was the one who looked at living organisms and saw in them matter, just like nonliving
matter, and said that it was the form, it was the information in the matter that allowed the
matter to animate. And that was a fundamental idea that all molecular biologists accept today.
And for a very long time after Aristotle, there wasn't very much in terms of significant
contributions to really understanding what life is at a deeper level. It was in the 17th century
that the scientific revolution occurred. People in Europe, scientists in Europe had the freedom
to be able to investigate their ideas without being shut down by spiritual or superstition. And
the two scientists of the 17th century who were most critical to the development of science were
Francis Bacon and René Descartes. And the most important things that they did was to demystify the
natural world. Things didn't happen just by chance, they said. There were rules that objects
followed. And Francis Bacon was the father of the scientific method. He said, let's measure things,
and if we measure things, we can find patterns. And then once we know that there are patterns, then
we can predict future patterns that are going to occur based on previous measurements, and that
everything should be measured very, very carefully because nature follows rules. René Descartes was
a mathematician, and he also thought that nature follows rules, with one exception, that being the
human soul. But everything else was mechanical in his mind, and his way of getting at the problem was
developing equations and constructing theories, so using mathematics as a tool to understand why
nature behaves the way that it does. And that's a pretty incredible concept that things in the natural
world abide by mathematical equations. It's still a philosophical conundrum, why that is the case. So
that was the beginning of science as we know it in the 17th century. And when we get to the 18th
century, it was really near the end of the 18th century that the next most important advance
occurred in terms of demystifying life. There were a lot of scientists out there that were
examining life and looking at cells and seeing cells, and it certainly was a big step forward to
know that life was made of cells. But in terms of really demystifying what life is, the next person
that comes to mind is Lavoisier. Lavoisier is the grandfather of chemistry, and he was the first
one to show that all matter, whether it's organic matter or inorganic matter, is made up of a small
number of fundamental atoms. He demonstrated that in the air there is carbon and oxygen together,
they come together to make carbon dioxide, and water is made up of hydrogen and oxygen. And there's
a great picture in which he's actually taking gases from the atmosphere, the hydrogen and oxygen
gases, bringing them together and making them become water when those particular elements come
together. And he showed that all living things, including human beings, were made up of the same
matter, the same elements, were mostly carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and some nitrogen and a few
others thrown in. But there's no uniqueness to the material part of our body. It has to be
something else that is causing the uniqueness of human beings, not the substance of which their
bodies are made. In the 19th century, the two huge figures were Mendel and Darwin. And Mendel's
main contribution was a mathematical one. He demonstrated that genes, as far as he understood
them to be genes back then, that genes were discreet, integer, entities, and that their
transmission from parent to child followed rules once again. There was nothing mystical about why
a certain number of boys or girls were born to particular parents. It was just a throw of the
dice. And that was Mendel's main contribution. Mendel was not recognized during the 19th century.
People weren't ready yet for this conceptualization. Darwin, on the other hand, was recognized
instantly for his contribution, which may be the most important contribution ever to biology, which
is the natural selection theory, which demystifies our own origin. It was the first time that there
was an idea, a way in which human beings could come into existence other than instantaneously. And
Darwin is responsible for that. But Darwin also uncovered all of the consequences of natural
selection. And we're still indebted to him today, because natural selection and all of the related
concepts of evolution have a powerful effect on all living structures and all living processes. And
it's always best for scientists to think about natural selection, think about evolution when they
are investigating a new biological system. And Darwin was the person who put this all together, who
gave that enormous paradigm jump in the 19th century. Now, at the beginning of the 20th century, this is
not exactly in the same area. This is a histologist who was working in a different area. And his name
was Santiago Ramonica Hall. He was a Spanish histologist, microscopist. And he was the one who
demystified the brain. Before he published his work, nobody understood how the brain worked. The brain
was a mushy substance of unknown constituency, and somehow scientists knew by the 19th century that
somehow the mind came out of the brain in some mystical like way. And Santiago Ramonica Hall looked
inside the brain and he saw the networks of neurons. So he was the first person to realize that you
could explain the mind, the human mind and the minds of other animals through emergent properties that
come out of this network operation. And today, of course, this is not surprising because our computer
systems, most of the things in our world are run by electronic networks. But back then, electricity was
just being discovered. Electronic networks were on nobody's mind. And so for Santiago Ramonica Hall to
take this leap and to say that the brain is a network of neurons, and it's the communication of all
these neurons with each other that leads to the emergent property of mind was an enormous leap. And so he
should be recognized as being the next in the series of people who have had the most influence on our
understanding of ourselves as human being. Now, you can't get away from biology or molecular biology
without learning about James Watson and Francis Crick, who discovered, of course, the double helix during
the middle part of the 20th century. I count myself as privileged to have been hired by James Watson for my
first real job back in the 1970s. And what Watson and Crick did in the 1950s is they came up with the
chemical structure for DNA. And in doing so, when they saw the structure, all of a sudden, everything made
sense. Francis Crick ran into a bar nearby to their laboratory and said, I've discovered the secret of life. And in a
sense, molecular biologists agree to a great extent, this concept of DNA carrying digital information has demystified
life. And when you marry together our knowledge of DNA and genetics from Mendel and evolution from Darwin, when you
put all of that together, you come up with much of the explanation for all of all of the things that happen in
biological organisms, from embryonic development, to behavior, to the actual construction of brains that bring about
behavior, to societies, to ecosystems. It all comes out of a marriage of DNA, the molecule that contains the digital
genetic code, and genetics, the way in which genes are transmitted from parents to children, and evolution, the forces, the
forces that are pushing the DNA over generations in one direction or another, by selecting organisms over some
organisms over other organisms, or even selecting genes. As we talked about recently, some genes are selected over other
genes, because the genes that are selected are the ones that are able to organize. Maybe one organism, maybe many
organisms to transmit themselves to the next generation. Now, we actually knew a lot about genetics and genomics and how
life works by 1990. But our knowledge was a general knowledge. We knew all about DNA and RNA and proteins and many of the
things I've been talking about throughout this course. But we knew about them in a general sense. We didn't really
understand very many details. In 1990, before my second child was born, my wife had a karyotypic analysis done so that we could
look at his chromosomes. And the level of detail that we saw was not very great. We could see the chromosome and we could see
some bands and everything looked normal. The only time it would have been possible to see an abnormality is if a large chunk of the
chromosome was missing or a large chunk or a whole chromosome was present in too many copies. That's all that you could do in 1990.
Now, 20 years later, this has changed completely. We can look along the genome, the entire length of the 3 billion bases of DNA. They've all been
sequenced. We know where along the DNA the different genes lie. We understand that the genes are transcribed and then the transcripts are
spliced together in complicated ways. But we are seeing all of these details right before our eyes. And we understand not only the
sequence of the DNA, but the chromosomes made up of DNA and proteins and the proteins bind to the DNA in order to regulate gene
expression. And we can actually map where those proteins are. We can see the proteins binding to the DNA. And then over time, those
proteins will come off. Other proteins will go on. And it's a whole dance. Very, very tightly choreographed during animal development.
And we're teasing away all of the secrets. We're getting in and looking at everything. One of the most important tools that was developed back in the
late 1990s, but it really didn't come into into general practice and become cheap enough to use until the 21st century. Is the DNA
microarray or DNA chip? That's the same thing. On this little instrument that you can hold in your hand holds millions of microscopic
spots. And each spot is complimentary to a particular region of the genome. So this DNA microarray can be used to look at all of the genes that
are being transcribed at a particular point in time. And the microarray has been used to watch the entire combination of five to 10,000
genes going through complicated dances of turning on and turning off and correlating when they turn on and off with what proteins are sitting on the DNA.
We're actually getting this understanding of how human cells work, how the human body works down to the atomic level, which is really quite amazing. Now, one of the reasons that we are
studying genes and doing all of this very sophisticated analysis is to better humankind. In fact, that's the main reason that this research is being done and
everything else is sort of a byproduct. And the classic disease we've known about this disease and what causes this disease for a long time is
sickle cell anemia. Sickle cell anemia is caused by a single base change in the gene HBB, which is hemoglobin beta. So a single base change in that gene causes a protein to be made with a
single amino acid difference. And that single amino acid difference causes the protein to have a different shape. And because red blood cells are filled with this protein, it changes the shape of the red blood cell.
And when all a child has is two copies of the sickle cell mutation, then those red blood cells will will clog his his veins and bring on sickle cell anemia. So a whole point of the
major reason that we do this research is so that we can try to find ways to overcome these diseases, to prevent the diseases, and also want somebody has a disease to provide them with some relief. But as a byproduct,
we're learning a lot about our relationships to each other as a global society. And I had the pleasure of looking at my own DNA, as you can too. And one of the tools that the companies that that will give you a genome
profile do is they let you look compare your DNA to other DNAs, either DNAs of people who have asked for this service, such as family members or friends, or the DNAs of anonymous people who have been used in genetic studies. And so when I compare my DNA to that of an anonymous Nigerian man, and you can look at these chromosomes, and you can see a
scattering of those light green bands. Those light green bands are pieces of the of my genome, and the Nigerian man's genome that come from a common ancestor. They're little fragments that are left that relate us to each other back 40,000 years ago, perhaps, when I compare myself to a Japanese person, again, an anonymous person who gave permission to be incorporated into these experiments.
I see many more bands. And this is because, again, we can go back in history, we can understand this. When people traveled out of Africa, they came out of Africa and took a while before they split off into groups going to Asia and groups going into Europe. And in fact, they didn't get to Europe until later because Europe at the time was dominated by the Neanderthal tribes.
And so in fact, it is true that Europeans and Asians are more closely related than a European and Nigerian. And you can see this visually by more bands being present that demonstrate the commonality of particular DNA pieces that this Japanese man and I have in common.
And then if we go to my wife, who happens to have genetic origins from the same region of Eastern Europe that I have, it's even more stunning. You can see many, many more commonalities. And some of the green regions are a lot larger, which tells us that the common ancestor responsible for that particular bit of chromosome wasn't that distantly back in our past times, just a couple of hundred years ago.
So this is what you can see visually. And if you can see this visually, sort of these gradations of relatedness, then you know that a computer, computer program could look at this in much more detail and come up with much more detailed pictures of how people are related to each other.
And this is a fascinating result of a computer program that looked at thousands of people and it was looking at 500,000 SNPs in the genomes of thousands of people and then looking at the genetic distance between each of two individuals, one by one.
So there are pairwise comparisons of all the individuals. There's millions of different possible pairs and the computer sorts that out and it puts the individuals as dots on a two-dimensional graph surface and the computer did that without knowing where these people actually come from.
But then when you put colors onto the dots based on the origin of these people, you see something very dramatic, which is that you see this clustering of Spanish people. They're genetically more close to each other than to others.
Clustering of people in France. These are the populations that were studied, of course. But what comes out of this is solid indication that up until recently, most people did not move very far away from where their parents grew up.
Before we had modern transportation systems, people in general, except for the famous explorers, people in general stayed in the same community.
And so what's happened over a thousand or several thousand years is that there were variations that became fixed differently in the different populations.
And it's the subtle differences in all the people around the world are 99.5% identical. And what you're ferreting out here are these tiny little differences which have been fixed in one population or another.
They don't mean anything except for the fact that they can tell you where a person's genetic origins are.
I'll show you how powerful this is in an analysis of the people of Switzerland. They came up with an incredible stratification.
Switzerland's a pretty small country, but part of the Swiss people speak French, part speak German, part speak Italian.
And when they looked at the German Swiss and compared them to the French Swiss, there was an overlap, but it was clear that there was a distance between the average French Swiss person
and the average German Swiss person. And the Italian Swiss were completely distinguishable from the other Swiss people.
So that shows you how finally we can map things with this technology.
Now we can answer historical questions as well. And an interesting historical question that had bugged historians and others for many years
is whether or not Thomas Jefferson fathered the children born to his slave, Sally Hemmings.
Sally Hemmings was a slave that lived in his house. Sally Hemmings had several children.
And the descendants of several of those children are still alive. And the question that people ask
is whether or not Thomas Jefferson was the father, even though he never admitted it, maybe he is.
Well, we can actually get an answer or close to an answer to this question by looking at the direct male descendants
coming out of Sally Hemmings. So how Sally Hemmings was obviously a woman.
But if her son was fathered by Thomas Jefferson, then he would have Thomas Jefferson's Y chromosome.
And so you can look at people living today and you can demonstrate through genealogical records that they are descendants of
Sally Hemmings. And lo and behold, it's clear that two of Sally Hemmings' children did indeed get fathered by either
Thomas Jefferson or somebody in his very close family.
So the fact is that you can't distinguish with the genetics alone who did it.
But when you combine the genetics with the historical information,
it comes up very strongly that it's almost certain that Thomas Jefferson
did have children with the slave Sally Hemmings. And in fact, if you look at
different populations in the United States, such as African Americans and Latinos,
in the African American population, you find that there's an average contribution of African
heritage of about 75% and European heritage of about 24% and then one or two percent Native American heritage.
So African Americans are a combination. They are a melting pot of Africa and Europe for the most part.
If you look at Latinos, these are Latinos in Los Angeles.
You see a smaller part from Africa, a little bit less than 10%,
a moderate part from Europe. Most of the European component is from Spain, not surprisingly,
and a large Native American component, which people didn't expect to see.
Again, you see this melting pot of different genetic origins coming together in these people.
Another historical question that can be asked is what was the result of the Spanish
Inquisition of 1492? In 1492, the Spanish king told all of the Jews in Spain to leave
or they had the choice. They could leave or they could become Catholic.
And what happened to them? Well, one of the things I know that happened to one of them,
which is my maternal line, my maternal line probably left at about 1492
because that's where my maternal DNA comes from about that time, and that would make sense.
But recently, scientists have actually looked at the different populations of Spanish people
and mostly what they're finding, and they're looking at Y chromosomes here,
mostly what they're finding are the red Y. The red Y is what I talked about before,
which represents the old Europeans who had been there for 40,000 years.
But in three populations, they found a very high percentage, 25% of the men
in those populations had a Y chromosome that was otherwise only found in Jewish men.
So this suggests the Jews who stayed in Spain after the Inquisition retreated to certain towns,
including a small island off of the coast, and that's where they continue to stay.
Although the people today have no knowledge of that.
We can go back to the Bible. And in the Bible, in Exodus, Moses leads the Jewish people out of
Egypt into the new land of Israel. And during this period of time, according to the Bible,
the brother of Moses, whose name is Aaron, has the challenge or the respect of deciding who
are going to be the priests for the tribe of Israel. And all of his sons and only his sons
were given permission to be members of the priesthood. And in fact, if you are a descendant,
direct descendant through the Y chromosome, then you're supposed to be a priest. And the name
Cohen and other formulations of that name describe the people who have this kind of heritage.
Now, nobody knew whether this was really true or not until scientists looked at the Y chromosomes
of Coens, just the last name Cohen living around the world. And they were shocked to find that 70%
of the Coens alive today have a Y chromosome, which coalesces back at about 2700 to 3000 years ago,
which is when Moses was supposed to live. So there really was a single man back then,
who is the direct ancestor of all the or most of the Coens today. 70% is a pretty high number.
It means there's very, very little cheating or fraud going on through all of those generations.
And that's a remarkable thing. So the last point I want to get to is the fact that we not only have
the technology to look into people, to find out things about our ancestry, we also have the
technology to create things with the knowledge we have. The sequence of the Neanderthal man
is in our hands. And the question becomes, could we talk to him? Should we bring him back? That's
a question for bioethicists to answer. But a woman might decide that she wants to be the first mother
of a Neanderthal child. And that would cause problems in all of the many disciplines in which
this technology is being used. So these are some of the examples of the things that we can do
with our new knowledge. The new knowledge is causing a paradigm jump, not just in the biological
sciences, but in many other areas as well. And in the next lecture, we're going to go into the
future and ask the question, speculative question, what will become of our genome in the future in
the 1,000 million years from now? Will it still exist or will something else exist? And finally,
as true lords over the biosphere, we now understand what we've done to the biosphere,
what do we decide about its genetic future?
