Welcome back to the last lecture of the course.
In the previous lecture, I gave you a whirlwind tour of where we stand now in terms of advances
in science and technology that allow us to look deep inside of our bodies at the level
of our DNA to understand the cause of human disease and actually normal human behavior
as well.
And I showed you the contributions of the major scientists over the years leading to
where we are now and the exponential increase in the amount of knowledge and technology
that is being developed right now as I speak.
We know so much more today than we knew 10 years ago.
So it's unbelievable, it's unimaginable how much we will know in 10 years from now
or 20 years from now or 100 years from now.
Today's lecture is going to focus on tomorrow.
By tomorrow I mean any of the days in the future, thousands or millions of years from
now and the question I'm going to try to tackle, I won't answer it, but I will tackle
it, is what will the human genome look like in the future?
And the way I am describing it is based on the fact that we're not going to be here in
the future and in fact most people's offspring won't be here in the future.
We know that from evolution most of our descendants will disappear, but what will remain perhaps
is a human genome of some kind in the future.
Even if it's actually not carried in human beings and in a moment I'll explain what
I mean by that.
Sometimes people think we can get a sense of what's going to happen in the future by
looking at the past.
And if we look at the past evolution of human beings, what we see very slightly but continuously
over the last 3 million years is an increase in brain capacity.
That's the main thing that defines us as human beings.
And so by looking at fossil skulls, scientists have uncovered human-like creatures living
about 3 million years ago including a famous fossil named Lucy and their brain cases were
just barely above the size of chimpanzees.
But from 3 million years forward into Homo habilis and Homo erectus, clearly the brain
was growing, although we haven't actually recovered brains, but the skull was growing
and the assumption is that the skull was growing to hold a larger brain.
And so today the human brain is much larger, 3 times larger than the brain of a chimpanzee.
And so that leads to the question, well are we going to keep on getting larger and larger
brains into the future?
And that's a possibility that I will talk about, but I don't think it's going to happen.
There are three broadly different destinies that I can imagine for the future of the human
species.
One destiny is extinction without issue.
Extinction without issue means the species goes extinct and there's no second species
which has emerged out of that first species.
In other words, the dinosaurs went extinct without issue.
On the other hand, little rodents running around 50 million years ago, they went extinct
with issue.
They gave rise to us and lots of other mammals.
Extinction without issue could occur if a catastrophe happened on the earth.
We could be hit by an asteroid.
There could be volcanic explosions that changed the atmosphere, but human beings have become
very technological to the point that we can overcome very adverse environments.
People have landed on the moon which has no atmosphere and with the right technology
you can survive on the moon.
With the right technology people could survive anywhere and since we will have four warning
of asteroids or comets that are coming to hit the earth in the next million or 50 million
years, perhaps future people would be able to prevent extinction and survive underground.
It's pure speculation of course, but we have reached a point in our evolution where we
really can stop events from happening that would have wiped out the species in earlier
times.
Now we of course might cause ourselves to go extinct by fighting among ourselves or
causing nuclear wars.
So one can never say whether the future will be at least as good as the present and whether
we really will be able to survive until the sun burns out in a billion years from now.
The second broad destiny is survival without change.
So this means that if you went into a time machine and you went forward a million years
you would see people that didn't look very different from the people you see today.
That's the idea of survival without change.
It's an idea that has no place in evolution because it's never happened.
During the course of evolution whenever there are organisms that are optimized for the particular
environment they're in at that moment, they're not going to survive very long.
The competition is always intense and one individual in a group is going to gain an
advantage and out produce the other individuals in the group and then there'll be advantages
in his descendants and so on.
So there is never a stop in evolution.
There is never survival without change, but perhaps we could be the first species in
which this happened.
If we had a rule of law people were able to reproduce and live without other people interfering
with them then maybe the human species would survive without change.
The third possibility is evolution into one or more post-human species.
Now I don't know exactly what a post-human species is, all I would say is that the term
means that it's something different from human beings.
We usually consider it to be something more intelligent than current human beings, but
it need not be.
It's just something that has diverged apart from human beings so much so that there's
not reproduction taking on between the new population and the old normally.
So how would evolution occur?
Well, I said natural selection.
We've been looking at this for the last dozen lectures and it pays now to look in the past
at the ancestral species that preceded us in an evolutionary time over the last several
million years and what happened to all of those ancestral species is they all wound
up extinct.
They all went extinct.
It wasn't that they evolved into Homo sapiens.
Humans evolved because the species that it evolved out of went extinct.
So it's important to understand that.
That's the way evolution works, is by making old species go extinct.
So if there was evolution of the human species by natural selection, it would mean that the
species as we know it would go extinct and the way in which that could happen, the way
in which natural selection would cause most of the individuals who are living today and
their descendants not to be able to reproduce, the way in which that happens is fundamentally
incompatible with fundamental human rights.
Darwin explained very well the members of a species do not evolve together.
There are winners and losers in every single generation and the winners are the ones who
have the genes that allow them not only to survive but to survive and have babies and
have more babies than those who don't have the gene.
And those who don't have the gene are the ones who go extinct, they're the ones who disappear.
Now in modern society there is a very distinct dislink between having babies and genes.
Today we abide by fundamental human rights which says that people with one gene can't
kill other people just because they have a different gene and there's also the fact
that there's a disconnect between how genetically fit you are and how many children you have.
Infant mortality used to be very high in the past, 200 years ago it was 30%, now it's
less than 1%.
Life expectancy has jumped very high, used to be 35, 200 years ago.
Now it's greater than 75 and because of these facts people don't see a need to keep on churning
out more and more babies and people are reducing the number of babies that they're having.
And in fact even when they are Darwinianly unfit, modern technology can overcome infertility
and sterility and allow them to have babies where they would not have had babies before
the advent of modern technology.
Now the way people stop having babies which is one of the major ways in which most people
go against their genes is through the use of contraception.
And what happens, the outcome of this is infertile people have babies with medicine, highly
fertile people use contraception to not have babies and so the genes that somebody has
very little to do with whether you reproduce or not.
And Western Europe and Japan and other modern industrialized countries, in those countries
people are having less than replacement number of babies, they're having less than 2 babies
per couple, the number of babies is going down, this has nothing to do with genes, it
has to do with people taking control over their reproductive destiny.
And so there's no longer any connection between the kinds of things that we thought human
beings might evolve like higher mentality, creativity or intelligence or morality or
beauty, leadership, talent, self-awareness and a good example of how none of this is
going to be selected for by natural selection is just by considering President Barack Obama
and his Secretary of Energy Steven Chu, President Obama has just two children and his Secretary
of Energy who is a Nobel Prize winner as well has just two children.
So here you have people with a lot of things going for them and they have limited their
reproductive capacity below, far below what their genes would allow.
Since the number of children is the only currency of natural selection and if humanity
as a whole calls an end to Darwinian treachery, in other words countries all over the world
all decide to abide by human rights, it would appear that Homo sapiens is at the end of
its evolutionary line because there's no connection between genes and survival and reproduction.
So is that the case?
Well not necessarily because over the last 30 years a new technology has been developed
that might be able to allow people to change the genes directly in their children and this
technology originally was called transgenic technology because it was originally applied
by putting DNA from one organism into another but now it's generally called genetic engineering
or genetic modification technology and the first time this technology was applied to
mammals was in 1980 and in 1980 a scientist from a number of different laboratories took
mouse embryos and took purified DNA and injected the DNA, it happened to be human DNA, into
the mouse embryos and the DNA that had been injected was taken up by the chromosomes occasionally
and they were mice born with this foreign DNA, these pieces of foreign DNA were called
transgenes.
The impact of an experiment like this is really easy to see visually when you take an egg,
this is remember a mouse embryo, same size as human but it's a mouse and you take this
embryo and you inject a gene from the Y chromosome of the mouse that is responsible for the development
of maleness and you're injecting this Y chromosome gene into an embryo that is XX which should
be female and the outcome of this experiment which was performed in the early 1990s is
that mice were born that were XX like they should have been but they had this one extra
genetic component and they were male, they were male on the outside as well as male on
the inside in terms of their test, so it shows you how dramatic the kinds of changes are
that you can make to embryos by genetically manipulating them.
So that was the first level of gene modification technology, adding DNA from one source into
another and then the DNA would integrate into one of the chromosomes at random and there
was a limit to how useful that was but Mario Capecchi was a scientist who went beyond that
limit and he developed a very sophisticated technology which now allows scientists to
go in and not just add DNA but change the DNA that already exists and the example of
this could possibly do is with the sickle cell mutation again, the sickle cell mutation
causes the production of sickle cell protein which is what causes the cells to sickle and
the only way to cure that at the genetic level is to change the gene or turn off the gene
and put in a normal gene.
Putting in a normal beta-glubin gene into people who have sickle cell anemia, it's not enough
because those people are still making the sickle cell protein in their blood cells and
their blood cells are still going to become sickled and cause them to be sick.
So what you want to do is actually go into the cells of that person and have a technology
which will change the one DNA base so that the sickle cell protein is no longer produced
and instead a normal protein is produced.
And this technology is called targeted gene modification and it has become more sophisticated,
much more sophisticated over the years.
In fact a cure for sickle cell anemia has been demonstrated in principle in mice, a mouse
created to be sickle cell diseased, had some of its cells taken out of it put into a petri dish,
those cells were genetically engineered to get rid of the sickle cell, gene replaced
it with a normal gene and then the cells were put back into the same mouse and that mouse
was cured of sickle cell anemia.
So this is a very real kind of advance that may actually make it into the real world of
people who have the disease within the next decade.
The technology has gone way beyond just changing one base and scientists now have the ability
to put in whole chromosomes into a nucleus, a whole chromosome can contain dozens or even
hundreds of genes all lined up and all engineered in a certain way by scientists to know what
they want to try to accomplish and they can put a chromosome into a mouse nucleus now
and that will become a mouse which has a whole set of new genes and so in theory that kind
of technology of putting cascades of genes could be used not only to cure disease in
people who are already living but in theory it could be used by prospective parents who
wanted to provide their children with some health advantages or wanted to prevent a family
disease from being transmitted to their children.
They would start with embryos that were fertilized in vitro and the cells of those embryos would
be modified genetically in such a way that they could overcome a disease and then those
embryos or one embryo would be put back into the mother's womb and she would give rise
to a child, her child, who had had this correction in their DNA or who had multiple corrections
to overcome health problems in their DNA.
Now the point I want to make is that once the technology is developed and optimized for
use in human beings in this way for any one purpose it becomes very easy to use this technology
for any other purpose that you want to use it for because the material that you're actually
putting into the cells is DNA.
DNA is DNA is DNA is the same chemistry.
The only difference is the information in the base pairs but if you can get this technology
to work for a very serious disease then the technology will work for any other characteristic
that parents might want to modify in their children.
And so instead of just bringing up below average health to average health there are going to
be some prospective parents I suspect who want to take a child who would otherwise have
had average health characteristics and enhance that child's health.
So that child gets absolute protection against cancer which is not normal or that child gets
absolute protection against heart disease or absolute protection against all the other
diseases that afflict normal people over the course of their lives.
And we already know in mice how to alter genes in mice such that the mice become completely
resistant to cancer and that's the kind of thing that parents may want to give to their
children they're selecting genes they're not selecting children here.
But once they start doing this once modification is used in this way their children will be
born with enhancements that they themselves did not have.
So the children have DNA sequences that provide them with certain advantages which they can
transmit naturally to their own children but at some future point in time this is when
that would happen the technology would presumably be even more powerful and they'd want to give
their children some more enhancements.
And so you could have this process of generation after generation after generation of accumulating
enhancements that would make this line of individuals this population evolve at a much, much faster
rate than it ever did in the past.
And in the past it was always natural selection it was always the competition between two
one lost out one one he killed off that guy he was able to get the food and the females
and that's why his genes survive.
With genetic enhancement technologies like this the individuals who may want to use these
technologies don't have to hurt anybody else they're just giving their they're just selecting
particular genes selecting in their mind particular genes that they're going to put into their
child so that their child is better able to succeed whatever that means in the world.
This could lead to a very, very rapid evolution of the human species.
I don't see this happening anytime during my lifetime I think that there's a great
deal of resistance by society to having anything like this happen but it's hard to believe
that a technology which is so powerful and nearly available for use in this way is not
going to be used by at least some people in the next 100 years 200 years that's at the
at the far far end it's a technology I think that for better or worse people will be using
it because people have always wanted to provide their children with advantages and once some
people start to use it it will cause what is called a red queen effect.
Other people will feel they have to do it for their children as well and so you could
get an accelerated change in the human genome that occurs.
Now in addition to changing children's genomes although this course is focused entirely on
humans I just want to step back for a moment and talk about the entire biosphere.
The human beings have unconsciously altered almost all land areas around the world.
Europe used to be covered in forests the forests are all gone North America had a completely
different landscape before people came here there were lots of large mammals that were
killed off after the Ice Age by people and even in places like a national park where
it looks very wild it really isn't that's not the way the land would have looked like
if people hadn't come in and altered it.
So we've changed the entire globe and the biggest way in which we've changed the globe
is with agriculture which takes up 30% of the land mass in the world and has a huge effect
on the whole biosphere and we could either keep on going the way we're going now which
is not thinking about future consequences or people around the world could get together
and decide that they want to manage the biosphere in a particular way that you can't ever get
back to natural but they would like to have certain areas that are wild in a sense like
a national park but maybe they'll want to engineer the trees so that the trees are
resistant to fungus there are many ways in which they could control a wilderness to make
it even more self-sustaining and beneficial to human beings.
Now the other thing that certainly could happen at some point in the future is the resurrection
of extinct animals like the woolly mammoth.
The woolly mammoth has been extinct for 10,000 years and just recently its entire genome
was sequenced so in theory by using an elephant egg that has had its own DNA removed we could
make woolly mammoth DNA put it into the elephant egg and recreate woolly mammoths to roam
through Yellowstone National Park for example in Wyoming.
We could also at some point create species that never existed if we understand how genes
control development and we do understand this more and more now we can create organisms
that have particular characteristics that never existed together previously.
Now the ultimate question really is and this is more philosophical than scientific during
our lifetimes at least the ultimate question is can and will accumulating genetic enhancements
lead to the emergence of a post-human species?
Will something emerge out of Homo sapiens that is significantly different from who we are
today so significantly different that it would consider itself a different species just as
we consider Homo erectus to be a different species.
The biomedical philosopher Leon Cass doesn't think it's possible in theory I'm going to
read you a quote from him he has thought about this quite a bit and he says quote man is
the peak both in possessing the highest and also in possessing the complete range of faculties
of soul he's using Aristotle's definitions here even looking to the future what could
be higher than man granted we could be and might in time become more intelligent more
alert less forgetful more energetic etc but can we imagine for ourselves or for soul
anything really new the story of the ascent of soul may already be complete.
So that's one of the modern biomedical philosophers ways of thinking and in looking at Aristotle
souls and saying well there was the vegetative soul had no consciousness there was the sentient
soul which describes animals with functioning brains and then there's the human soul which
describes us as being qualitatively different from animals and Leon Cass is saying that
there can't be anything higher than what the human soul is right now but I think there's
a little bit of humbleness that is required here because although I can't I can't imagine
what it that's what it means to be higher than than man we have to remember that Homo erectus
who was pretty smart compared to everything else on this planet except our species Homo
erectus could not possibly have imagined what it was like to have the cognitive capacities
of Homo sapiens Homo erectus presumably had a very low level of language functioning may
have been able to speak like a five-year-old and an adult who speaks like a five-year-old
is one who doesn't understand how a twenty five-year-old can speak after going to college
and and to graduate school so just because we can't imagine what is higher than human
beings doesn't mean that that can't exist and whether it takes a thousand or a hundred
thousand years I suspect that the human species is poised to to self evolve if there is such
a thing as future post humans as humans can't possibly know what it is today and to speculate
even further which I like to do now at the at the end of the course in about a billion
years or so physicists have told us that the sun is going to burn out and when the sun
burns out it's going to become larger and larger and larger until it engulfs the earth
and the earth will go up in flames literally if we maintain our technological abilities
as of today and we can assume that the technology will become even more sophisticated people
are not going to wait around on the earth to burn up they're going to figure out how
to get off the earth to get to a nearby planet that can sustain them and so eventually and
this is all science fiction speculation right now but eventually people could leave the
earth go off into other planets and it takes a long time to get to even the nearest planets
and so once they go off to other planets if they go to different planets in the nearby
galaxy in our galaxy once they're at different planets they're going to be cut off from each
other and their evolution will continue to diverge from each other and so you could have
a situation in the distant future when there are different species of human derived individuals
human derived organisms on different planets what really excites me is just thinking about
the different possibilities and just thinking about how much knowledge we have now that
we didn't have 20 years ago it would be so incredible in my mind if I could take a time
machine and go forward and see how it all turns out and what a shame the scientist in
me thinks that I won't be around to see that.
