Of all the words I know, there's no word that makes many of my colleagues more emotional
and prone to foam at the mouth than when I'm just about to say consciousness.
A lot of scientists dismiss this as complete BS and totally irrelevant and then a lot of
others think this is like the central thing after worry about machines getting conscious
and so on.
What do I think?
I think consciousness is both irrelevant and incredibly important.
Let me explain why.
First of all, if you are chased by a heat-taking missile, it's completely irrelevant to you
whether this heat-taking missile is conscious, whether it's having a subjective experience,
whether it feels like anything to be that heat-taking missile because all you care about
is what the heat-taking missile does, not how it feels.
That shows that it's a complete red herring to think that you're safe from future AI if
it's not conscious.
It's just the behavior that you want to make sure is aligned with your goals.
On the other hand, there is a way in which consciousness is incredibly important, I feel,
and there's also a way in which it's absolutely fascinating.
If we rewind 400 years or so, Galileo, he could have told you that if you throw an apple
and a hazelnut, they're going to move exactly in this shape of a parabola and you can give
you all the math for it, but he would have no clue why the apple was red and the hazelnut
was brown or why the apple was soft and the hazelnut was hard.
That seemed to him beyond science and science back 400 years ago could only really say sensible
things about this very limited domain of phenomena to do with motion.
Then came the Maxwell equations and told us all about light and colors, and that became
within the realm of science.
Then we got quantum mechanics that told us why the apple is soft, third in the hazelnut,
and all other properties of matter, and science has gradually conquered more and more of the
natural phenomenon.
We ask now what science can do.
It's actually a lot faster to describe what little it is that science cannot talk about
sensibly.
I think the final frontier actually is consciousness.
People mean a lot of different things by that word.
I simply mean subjective experience, experience of colors, sounds, emotions, and so on, but
it feels like something to be me, which is quite separate from my behavior, which I could
have even if I were a zombie and didn't experience anything at all potentially.
Why should you care about that?
I care about it, first of all, because fundamentally that's the basic thing I know about the world,
my experiences, and I would love to understand scientifically why that is and not just leave
it to philosophers.
Second, it's incredibly important also in terms of purpose and meaning.
In the laws of physics there is nothing about meaning, there's no equation for it.
I feel that we shouldn't look for our universe to give meaning to us because it's us who
give meaning to our universe because we are conscious in experiencing things.
Our universe didn't used to be conscious, it used to be just a bunch of stuff moving
around and gradually these incredibly complicated patterns got arranged into our brains and
we woke up and now our universe is aware of itself.
We have galaxies out there, they're incredibly beautiful.
Why are they beautiful?
Because we are consciously aware of them, we see them in our telescopes.
If in the future we screw up with technology and all life goes extinct, then our universe
will go back to being meaningless and just a giant waste of space as far as I'm concerned.
When a colleague tells me that they think consciousness is BS, I challenge them to tell
me what is wrong with rape and torture and to explain that to me without using the word
consciousness or the word experience.
Because if they can't talk about that, it's just the whole thing that they are saying
is so bad is just a bunch of electrons and quirks moving around in some particular way
rather than some other particular way and what's so bad about that.
I feel the only way we can actually have any logical scientific foundation of ethics,
morality, purpose and meaning is precisely in terms of experience, in terms of consciousness.
This makes it really important as we prepare for our future to understand what this is.
I for one think that this is actually something that we can also ultimately understand scientifically.
I don't think that the difference between a living bug and a dead bug is that the living
bug has some sort of secret life sauce in it.
I think of the bugs as mechanisms and the dead bugs as the broken mechanism.
Similarly, I think that what makes my brain conscious, but the food I ate which got rearranged
into my brain wasn't conscious isn't because they're made of different kind of stuff, it's
the same quirks rearranged, right?
It's the pattern into which they're arranged.
And I think it's a scientific question, what properties does this pattern of information
processing have to have for there to be a subjective experience there?
You could imagine building a brain scanner, actually we have pretty good ones at MIT where
I work and having some software in it which tests out whatever theory you have for consciousness
and makes predictions for what you experience.
And if I'm sitting in this machine and the computer screen tells me, okay right now I
see information processing in your brain indicating that you are consciously aware of the thought
of an apple.
I'm like, yeah, that's right, I clicked, correct.
Then it says, I see information about your heartbeat in your brain when you're aware
of this.
And I'm like, no, I was not conscious of that.
Now I've ruled out the theory that was implemented in this software, so it's falsifiable, that
means it was a scientific theory, right?
If we can one day find a theory like this and there are some candidates on the market
like Giulio Tononi's integrated information theory, for example.
So if we ever find any theory that keeps passing tests like that and we start taking
it seriously and we can use it to build a consciousness detector, that's first of all
going to be really useful.
Physicians in the emergency room would love it if they get an unresponsive patient coming
in, put them in the consciousness scanner and figure out whether they have locked in
syndrome and just can't communicate but they're conscious or whether there's nobody home.
And this will also let us understand whether future AI systems we build are conscious and
whether we should feel guilty or not about switching them off.
Some people might prefer that their future home helper robot is an unconscious zombie
so they don't have to feel guilty about giving it boring chores or powering it down.
Some people might prefer that it's conscious so that there can be a positive experience
in there and so that they don't feel creeped out by this machine just faking it and pretending
to be conscious even though it's a zombie.
And most importantly, in the longer term future, if far from now we have some, we have
life that's spread out from Earth to other galaxies and the whole cosmos is alive and
doing amazing things and although if this life becomes the descendants of humanity wouldn't
it suck if it turns out that this is all just zombies with no consciousness and the whole
thing that we felt so good about before we passed away was just a play for empty benches.
I feel that we should really, really tackle this final frontier of scientific ignorance,
the problem of consciousness and get this stuff figured out so we can shape the future
which is truly awesome not just kind of from the outside cool stuff seems to be happening
but that there's actually someone home to experience all this.
