Imagine that we have a cylinder.
Cylinder is a very simple three-dimensional object,
but imagine that we have two-dimensional creatures
trying to make sense of a cylinder.
It's like the Flatland conversation.
So two-dimensional creature intersects the cylinder this way,
and they see a circle.
And in a two-dimensional world, circles are a very clear object,
and in perfect sense they can describe the mathematics of it,
and they can verify that empirically they really did see a circle.
Of course, a two-dimensional creature that happens to be in another plane
could bisect the cylinder like this and see a rectangle.
And they could be very clear on that also,
and they're both partially true,
but they're also both totally wrong in that rectangle and circle
are both two-dimensional objects,
and the thing they're encountering is a three-dimensional object
that they really understood in the dimensionality that they're in.
So then we can see that a debate ensues
between the two-dimensional creatures in orthogonal planes,
the circlers and the rectanglers,
who are both utterly sure that the thing that they're seeing
is what they think it is,
and obviously rectangle and circle
are mutually exclusive descriptions of reality.
One has no corners and straight lines.
They're defined exclusively by corners and straight lines.
So it's easy to see how one can hold a kind of reductive,
fundamentalist perspective
without even thinking that it is that.
It's just what I'm observing.
And so then they can debate.
Let's imagine that one of the two-dimensional creatures
was able to switch planes and see the other one
and see that there was some truth in both of them.
Then they could flip-flop between perspectives at different times,
or they could say we just need to hold paradox.
Which mostly means give up on making sense of reality.
Or they say it's a middle path that's somewhere between the two,
and a middle path in two dimensions is like a rounded rectangle
where you kind of do something that's a little bit
circular and a little bit rectangular,
which isn't even any true part of what a cylinder is.
And the thing is that they're just at too low
of a dimensional perspective
to properly understand the nature of cylinder,
which is actually a very simple thing.
It doesn't require holding paradox.
It doesn't require a middle path in that way.
And it's because we think of middle path.
Oftentimes we're thinking of extremes on left or right
in a gradient.
But sometimes the two different perspectives
aren't on a gradient on a single axis.
They're orthogonal to each other.
And the reason why this is kind of actually
an interesting example is because perception itself,
a perspective on something defined by perception,
is inherently a reduction of the information of the thing.
My perspective of it is going to be a lot less
total information than the actual thing is.
So I can look at the object from the east side,
or the west side, or the top, or the north side,
or the inside, microscopically, telescopically.
They'll all give me different information.
None will give me the entirety of the information
about the situation.
And so there is no all-encompassing perspective
that gives me all of the information about really any,
almost any situation.
And so what this means is that reality itself
is trans-perspectival.
It can't be captured in any perspective.
So multiple perspectives have to be taken,
all of which will have some part of the reality,
some signal.
There may also be distortion.
I may be looking at the thing through a fisheye lens
or through a colored lens that creates some distortion.
But then, like let's say I'm looking at a building,
and the picture, the 2D picture from the east side
and from the west side and from inside a particular room
and the aerial view are all obviously very different pictures.
And it's because the 3D complex building
actually can't be seen in a 2D process.
So I could take a lot of pictures
and I could seam them together into a kind of video
that moves through the building.
Now, by having a video, I added the dimension of time
and I got back to kind of the right dimensionality
to be able to understand the thing.
But that's not a perspective.
That's a lot of perspectives that we're able to put together.
So why does this matter?
Well, when we're looking at political processes
and we think about classically political left kind of perspectives
that have more to do with the orientation of the collective
and the whole and political right
that have more to do with the individual and sovereignty.
On the right, do we want people who are more self-responsible
and who are more sovereign and who are more empowered
and do we want to give more power to people who are doing a better job?
All of that makes perfect sense.
Left perspective, do we want to create situations
that actually influence the individuals and the situations to do better?
Social systems, education, health care,
does the environment affect the individual?
You can really think of it as does the environment affect the individual
while understanding evolutionary theory that individuals
are really formed by their environment, of course.
With humans that are niche creators,
do the individuals affect their environment?
Of course.
If you hold either of those as the only perspective,
obviously you're just missing so much
which is that the individual is affecting the whole,
the whole is in turn affecting the individuals
and how do we create systems that have virtuous cycles
between empowering individuals and creating better social systems
that have the effect of creating humans
that are not dependent on the social systems
but that are more sovereign and can in turn create better social systems.
Whether we're thinking about a political issue like that
or we're looking at a psychological issue like the orientation of being
and enjoying reality as is and accepting ourselves and others as is
and doing and becoming, which is adding to life, adding to ourselves,
seeking to improve ourselves, how do we hold these together?
They don't just have to be held as paradox or holding one or flip-flopping.
There's a way that when understanding how they relate to each other,
so in that example, if I understand the nature of a person as a noun that is static
then it seems like accepting them the way they are unconditionally
removes the basis for growth.
But if I understand that the person is a dynamic process,
that they're actually a verb, that intrinsic to what they are in the moment
is desire and impulse to grow and become and like that
then loving someone unconditionally involves wanting for them their own self-actualization
and there's no dichotomy between accepting someone and ourselves as is
or the world and seeking to help it grow, advance, express.
So it's a very simple process of saying the ability to take multiple perspectives
to see the partial truth in them
and then to be able to seam them together into something that isn't a perspective.
It's a trans perspective capacity to hold the relationships between many perspectives
in a way that can inform our choice-making is fundamental to a navigating reality well.
