All right, last time where we stopped,
we were talking about
ultrometric trees and ultrometric distance.
Okay. Let me just remind you that we have a symmetric matrix.
I haven't written the bottom portion because it's just the flip of the top.
If you can create a tree where each row labels exactly one leaf,
and you have one number at each node,
and walking from the top down,
those numbers are strictly decrease,
and for any pair of rows,
let's say A and D,
when you walk up to the nearest ancestor,
both of them nearest common ancestor,
the number that's written there is the A D entry in the matrix.
Then this is called an ultrometric tree for this matrix.
The point is that this looks like an evolutionary tree.
If we think of these numbers as somehow time in the past,
or something that's proportional to time in the past.
This may not really be eight units,
but from that number eight,
you can convert to however much time,
or how many generations,
or whatever your unit is in the past.
But the data, so this is what we want to build.
If you have species or organisms A through E,
and you want to understand the revolutionary history,
this is the output that you finally want.
The kind of data you have to work with
comes from sequences.
This is a sequence-oriented course.
Of course, in the past,
there were other things that you could work with,
morphological features.
But let's concentrate on sequence,
because it's a little bit easier to think about.
You have sequence data from these different species,
and you can do comparisons of those sequences.
Let's say pairwise comparisons,
and you find that the distance between A and B is eight,
under some objective function.
Now, this is a minimization objective function,
let's like a distance.
So we're trying to minimize the number of mismatches
or spaces.
The reason I know that is because further back in time
is a larger number.
You expect that things that diverge
just a little bit in the past
should be more similar than things
that diverged quite a bit in the past.
So you get bigger numbers as you go further into the past.
So this is some kind of distance,
and smaller equals closer.
Closer in time anyway, since divergence.
So this is the kind of data that you can collect
by looking at the sequence,
and this is the kind of tree that you want
that explains the history of these organisms.
And what I want to try to explain today
is how you recognize whether or not
your matrix has an ultrametric tree,
not all matrices do.
Can somebody off the top of their head
see a condition that says that a particular matrix
would not have an ultrametric tree?
Is what?
Is what?
Well, okay, now the reason why it may not have one
in terms of biology, convergent evolution,
other things may be true,
but I just mean just in terms of numbers in a matrix.
Is there some simple thing you can look at
and say, if it has that property, then you're cooked.
There's no way you can have an ultrametric tree, yeah.
Say it again?
Yeah.
Well, A and B and A and C being the same number
doesn't sound too bad.
A and B, oh, I see, and A and C,
if they were the same number,
then you would expect them all to meet at one place,
and we said that these trees have to only have two children.
Yeah, that would be certainly a condition that would be bad.
Right.
Another one, if you have one, two, three, four, five leaves,
it turns out, no matter what the shape of the tree is,
as long as every node has only two children,
you always have only four other nodes in the tree.
No matter what tree I draw, with five leaves,
as long as each interior node only has two children,
it's easy to argue that you have to have
exactly four other nodes in the tree, okay?
So if I have more than four different kinds,
four different numbers in here, okay, off the diagonal,
if I have more than four distinct numbers in here,
then I'm in trouble too.
That's another condition.
So we have the eights, that's one type of number,
we have the threes, we have fives,
and that's only three distinct numbers,
but that's less than four, less than or equal to four,
so we're not in trouble.
We don't necessarily, there's an ultrometric tree.
Okay, anyway, so my point is that most matrices
of numbers you make up is not gonna have an ultrometric tree.
This is a very special situation when that occurs, okay?
But, let me just put a theorem here.
A matrix M has an ultrometric tree,
if and only if, for any three rows, Ijk,
this thing was a distance matrix D, okay?
The max of Dij, Dik, and Djk is not unique.
Okay, a lot of words again,
let me try to illustrate what that means.
Okay, let's just take three rows, okay?
Somebody in the audience that I've never met before
suggests three rows in this little example.
This is an easy question.
ABC, okay, very good.
ABC, and if I look at Dab, Dbc, and Dac,
what do I have over here?
Dab is eight, Dac is eight, and Dbc is three.
So, eight, three, eight.
And so, what you see is the largest of those,
the max of those, which is eight, is not unique.
There are two of them, okay?
There's always a tie for the max.
That's another way of saying it's not unique.
There is a tie.
A tie for the max.
Now, one way, one side of this theorem is very easy to see.
If this matrix M is ultrametric, okay,
then this certainly has to hold.
How do we argue that?
Well, if it's ultrametric, then we know by the definition
of what it means to be ultrametric,
is that there's some tree like that
that represents the matrix.
And if we just look at the three leaves that are being enumerated,
I'll do this abstractly, I, J, K are three leaves
that are being enumerated,
and we walk up from those leaves to see what portion of the tree
is being described by them as you walk up
until you see a common ancestor of some two of them,
and then finally you walk up until you see the common ancestor
of three of them.
What does it look like?
It looks like that,
or actually there are three possibilities
depending on which two of these meet first, okay?
But they all have the same form.
I could change around the labels
and we would have all the possibilities, okay?
So, you have one pair of this that's meeting first,
and because the numbers are decreasing,
this number here,
what we said it was supposed to be Dij,
if the tree is ultrametric.
This has to be Dij,
and what's the number up here
is Dik,
and that's equal to Djk,
so if the matrix has an ultrametric tree,
then whenever you look at three rows or three leaves,
it has to have this property
that the max of these three numbers is not unique.
It's a tie.
The other point was that Dik,
these numbers are bigger than that number,
so these are the max and there are two of them, okay?
There's a tie there.
So that's one direction of this theorem.
The other direction is that if this is true of each triple,
then you can actually form an ultrametric tree, okay?
Now, I'm not going to prove that side,
although I have notes that I'll put on the web.
I haven't done that yet that do have a proof of that.
And in the biological circles,
this condition here is called the relative rate test.
So in the evolutionary world,
building evolutionary trees,
this condition is referred to as relative rate test,
but it's just the standard ultrametric condition.
Okay, well, that tells you an algorithm, by the way,
determining whether or not your matrix has an ultrametric tree.
You just enumerate all triples.
If you're writing a program, you'd have three loops,
and you'd pick I over all the ranges
and J over all the ranges and K over all the ranges,
and then you'd look up the D values for those pairs
and check them to see whether this condition
held for each triple.
That wouldn't actually build the tree for you,
but I'll show you in a minute how we can build the tree.
All right.
What's next is the most important theorem here,
which is that if M, that's the matrix,
has an ultrametric tree,
then it is unique.
There's only one tree.
We have this matrix.
The matrix gives you a tree in only one possible way.
So why is that really important?
If this is data that comes from sequence comparison,
and we think that the differences,
the distances between two sequences
are somehow proportional to the time
since those organisms diverged,
if we really think that this sequence difference
is telling you something about the time since divergence
at some proportionality rate,
in some way of converting this number 8
into some actual distance in time,
if we think that the numbers have that property
and they're all ultrametric,
then it says that this is actually
the historically correct tree.
It isn't just some nice representation of this matrix,
and maybe there are many, many other representations,
many, many other trees that look different
but have the same property.
What this theorem of uniqueness is saying
is that if this is ultrametric,
and moreover, if we really believe that these numbers
are telling you something about time,
these numbers are proportional to the actual time
since these organisms diverged,
then you can completely and correctly infer
what the history of that divergence was.
There's only one possible explanation for these numbers
if they're ultrametric.
It's this tree.
So that's very, very powerful theorem,
very powerful.
It says that ultrametric data is likely
to be biologically significant.
Another way of arguing this is that most data,
most matrices that you would invent are not ultrametric.
In fact, not even close.
Lots of violations of this by a lot.
So if you have data that really is,
if it either really is exactly ultrametric
or it's very close to being ultrametric,
it really is suggestive that A, this data,
the numbers that you're working with
really are proportional to time since divergence,
and B, that the tree you get out
is the historically correct reflection of their evolution.
Ultrametric data is very, very significant if you find it.
One of the things that gave this whole area of boost
was a large project that was done in the 1970s
that compared distance between sequence and birds.
This was, I don't know how many,
hundreds or thousands of bird species were done
that compiled an enormous book.
They didn't do it by looking at sequence.
They did actual laboratory hybridizations.
Anyway, they had some laboratory method
for calculating the similarity of the molecules
from different birds,
and they had, from those,
they came out with a particular number for each pair.
Now, there's a lot of controversy, actually,
about whether they did their chemistry right
or their biology right,
but the point is that they had maybe a thousand different birds,
and the data was almost perfectly ultrametric.
So when it's so rare to have ultrametric data,
the only reasonable explanation,
well, on the one hand, it's rare to have ultrametric data.
On the other hand, if the data really does reflect evolutionary time,
then you expect it to be ultrametric.
So the only explanation, really,
for why you had ultrametric data
was that it was really reflecting evolution,
and therefore the tree was the appropriate reflection
of the evolutionary history.
Of course, there's always a third explanation
for why you have ultrametric data.
Why is that?
Some people are laughing, so they know the answer.
I mean, in real science, the third explanation is that you,
you know, you fudged the data somehow
either consciously or unconsciously.
You wanted it to be ultrametric,
so, you know, you kind of made it ultrametric.
After many, many, many years of sifting
through lots of different kind of data,
and you look at it, and this one doesn't quite work out well,
it must have been because I didn't turn the knobs quite right.
We'll throw that out.
And then this experiment I did on Tuesday looks better.
That must be right, so we'll keep that one.
You know, who knows?
There's a lot of controversy about this.
But the conceptual point is this, again,
if you see data that seems ultrametric,
the only explanation anybody's ever proposed is that,
yeah, that's really, those numbers are proportional
to times since divergence,
and therefore the tree you get out
really does capture the evolutionary history.
Okay.
Now, another thing that happened at the same time
the bird study was done was the,
which really, again, helps to explain why ultrametric data
is so suggestive of evolution,
is the molecular clock theory.
Theses.
Has anybody seen this before?
What is the molecular clock thesis?
Nobody's seen this at all?
This is one of the great, well,
this goes back to the first lecture,
you know, in terms of the dogmas that we talked about
or the simplifications that we talked about
for a while.
This was one of the great accepted simplifications.
Now it's in a great deal more trouble.
But this basically said that absent of selection,
mutations that were occurring in molecules
were happening at a uniform rate.
Okay.
And this could differ by different protein,
but the point is that if you looked at a particular protein
in birds or crocodiles or humans
or all the different organisms
and you were able to see how that molecule
was mutating over time,
and you were not looking in the functionally important parts,
but sort of the parts that were not under selection,
you would see mutations happening
at a fairly constant and uniform rate.
So this was that mutations outside of functional domains
occur at a constant regular rate.
Okay.
So there's a clock.
All right.
So that if you took a look at two sequences,
and by again, this is for a particular protein,
different proteins have different clocks.
That was certainly known.
Some proteins are evolving at a much faster rate than others.
But if you focus on a particular protein
and you look at its rate of change,
if you could look at its rate of change
over a number of different organisms,
then the belief was that these changes were occurring
at a more or less constant rate.
Now, by the way, more or less,
you know this has to do with long enough time periods.
It's not like there really is a clock,
and somewhere in the molecule it says,
well, it's been 23 hours since the last change.
Now I'm going to change again.
So this is something that's statistically,
you're seeing this over a long enough range of time,
and you shouldn't be surprised if you see
that this isn't exactly right,
even if you could look in the past, which we can't.
Even if you could absolutely see what was happening in the past,
it shouldn't be amazing that there's some minor deviations.
But statistically, over long enough time periods,
this was the belief.
I'll connect this to ultrametric in a minute,
but just to make this point that we're only talking about
kind of statistical generalizations over long enough time,
it reminds me of the joke that I'm supposed to tell at this point,
which was, at this point in the lecture,
the professor was supposed to ask,
you know, how long has it been since birds and crocodiles
or birds and giraffes diverged?
By the way, does anybody have an idea?
You're all biologists after 40 million years.
I don't know, I'm making it up, I have no idea.
Let's say 40 million years is sort of the canonical number.
But the point is that the professor asked that question
and one of the students said, 40 million in one year.
That's a very exact answer, isn't it, professor?
Well, how can you be so exact?
40 million in one year.
And the student said, well, you see, the thing is,
I took this class last year and I failed it,
but last year you said it was 40 million.
Anyway, so this is just rough.
This is very rough.
But how does this help?
How does this help the molecular clock thesis
help strengthen the belief that
Ultrametric tells you something about evolution?
Because these numbers have to do with differences
between the two molecules.
Why should they tell you anything about time?
Remember, we said these numbers, if they're ultrametric,
will give you a nice tree and that tree will be meaningful
if we believe that these numbers are proportional
to time since divergence.
These numbers will be meaningful to you as biologists
if these numbers are proportional to the time
since the two sequences, the two organisms
that sequences were taken from, diverged.
Why should that be?
Why should somehow the difference,
some measure of difference between two molecules
have anything to do with time?
Well, it's the molecular clock hypothesis.
If you're, let's just, for simplicity,
say that we started out when two molecules,
here, we're looking at a particular sequence
in a bird, some bird, and here's giraffe.
And at their ancestry, at their common ancestry,
that sequence was the same.
That's what it means for it to be a common ancestor.
And now, since divergence, this one started changing.
It got some mutations in it.
And this one changed.
So it has some mutations in it, too.
Now, it's possible that two mutations
actually happen at the same location.
But for simplicity first, if those mutations
don't happen at the same locations,
then when I do this alignment,
I'm roughly going to see, you'll see identity.
When you do a good alignment, you'll see identity
on these sections, where there weren't any mutations,
you'll still see the identity.
But you'll see a number of differences, mismatches,
let's just say, without interchersions and deletions,
which complicate things a little bit.
But let's just say the mismatches,
the total number of mismatches
is equal to the total number of mutations
that happen along here and happen along there.
But if the molecular clock is to be believed,
the number along this side is roughly equal
to the number along that side.
So that when you take your, when you compare the two sequences
and you find that there are, let's say, in this case,
six differences, then that tells you that
the time since divergence is however much time it takes
to have three, that's six over two,
three mutations in a single sequence.
So that's why if I take the comparison here,
six mismatches, I can then say,
oh, I think the time since they diverged
was however much time the molecular clock needs
to have three mutations in that particular protein.
And therefore, you can go from a number like six,
which is based, which you get by comparing the two sequences
to a number which is proportional to the actual time
since these two sequences diverged.
And you don't need to know what that rate of personality is
in order to build the tree.
I don't have to, you don't have to know, you know,
how long it is in that protein between mutations.
In fact, people figured that out by thinking backwards.
If they happen to know from fossils what this time,
what this point in time was, or from some other reasoning,
what they think this point in time is,
then they look at the molecules and they say,
oh, there are 15 changes.
Okay, or let's make it an even number.
Well, 15, okay, so they look and they see 30 differences
between the two molecules, so that's 15 time units.
And they know what this absolute time is,
40 million in one year ago.
And then they can divide that by 15 and say,
okay, the clock ticks at the following rate.
Every however many years or how many generations,
that's what we think a single mutation is.
Now, all of this is complicated by the fact
that you can have mutations at the same place.
But under a certain probabilistic model,
you can figure out how many coincident mutations
you should expect.
And therefore, it's easy to work backwards
to say if I really observe six mismatches or whatever,
it was really because of, by the way,
more mutations or fewer mutations.
If you observe a total of six mismatches,
that's what you would get if all the mutations
happened at different locations.
If they happened at the same location,
let's say we had an A here, this mutates now to a C.
At the same location, this mutates to a T.
When I look at these two, I count that as one mismatch.
I don't realize it was actually two mutations.
So when you do your comparison here,
you can undercount the total number of mutations.
You don't overcount the number of mutations.
You can also have back mutations, for example.
You might have this A turning into a T at some point in time,
and then some time it turns back.
So again, that undercounts the number of mutations.
But the point is that that's been studied.
So you can have a formula which tells you
if we have six observed differences,
we really think it was eight.
And then instead of six divided by three,
we take eight divided by three,
and we think it's four time units since divergence.
But anyway, that's all details.
The main concept, the main point is that
because of the molecular clock thesis,
it's believed therefore that you can just take a look
at two sequences, look at some measure of their difference,
and think that that's somehow proportional
to the time since they diverged.
Or these numbers corrected by the fact that there may be,
you may have undercounted somewhat.
But once you correct for undercounts,
then the numbers should be proportional to time since divergence.
And if the numbers are proportional to time since divergence,
and this is ultrometric,
you really feel confident that you have the tree in hand.
So this is the tree of truth.
This is the true tree that you're looking at,
and you've got it.
And as I said in the early 70s,
people were finding ultrometric data all over.
Wherever they looked, it all looked ultrometric.
Now things don't look so ultrometric,
and there's sort of a questioning of why people
were so convinced early on.
But still the basic game plan is very important.
Okay, now how do you actually build a tree from the ultrometric data?
And it really turns out that almost anything you do that's sensible works.
When the tree is ultrometric,
when the date is ultrometric,
it's somehow screaming out for an ultrometric tree.
Almost any idea you come up with will work to build it.
I'm sure you could put your mind to it and find some that don't.
But if you just think again,
these numbers are telling you time since divergence.
So small numbers mean that the two leaves,
the two organisms,
they're probably neighbors in the tree.
So you just take the smallest number,
could be ties,
but that's AE.
You put AE together.
There's a three.
Next smallest number is BC.
Well, I mean it's a tie, okay.
B and C are not related to this,
so here's B, here's C.
Put those guys together.
Next smallest is five.
That's what is this?
A, B, C, D.
So that's DE.
Now E is already in the tree,
and D is not,
so you represent that as this way.
Remember we're trying to build an ultrometric tree.
It's bigger than three, so it has to be above it.
So D and E,
but they have to have as their ancestor that five,
so it forces that kind of connection.
There's another five in here that's AD.
But what?
I just did AD.
DE.
Well, okay, no, I did DE.
DE, and now we're learning AD,
that's just reinforcing that.
There's nothing more that's happening there.
And then you have an eight,
that's C and D.
Put those together because C is in here and D is in there,
so they put that together,
and there's your eight, okay?
And I could have worked this algorithm backwards
by throwing away big numbers.
There are zillions of ideas that people have come up with,
which always come back to the same tree.
Well, because the theorem says the tree is unique, okay?
And just about any algorithm you dream up that's somehow sensible
is going to give you that unique tree, okay?
So that's the ideal case of ultrometric data.
Now, in reality, most data is not ultrometric,
as I mentioned.
And I hope next time I'll have time to tell you about
the algorithm that people use when data really isn't ultrometric.
But there's another compromise before the real world,
which is additive data.
So sometimes the data is not ultrometric,
but it is additive.
And what additive means is that I can draw a tree.
I start with a matrix, again, as we did here.
And I have a tree
where I put numbers.
So some number eight, three, two, one, four.
The numbers now are not on the nodes, they're on edges.
But again, they're going to represent time,
the time it took evolution to go from here to there,
the time it took to go from here to here, and so on.
And for two organisms,
if we add the numbers along the path between them,
if that number is the same number in the matrix,
and that's true for every pair,
then this tree is called additive.
And additive is also,
that's a property you absolutely expect from an evolutionary tree.
If you think about it, every ultrometric tree is additive.
But not every additive tree is ultrometric.
So we'll talk about this next time.
The reason I'm stopping a little bit early
is I have to pass out the evaluations,
which are really quite important in the scheme of the university.
And I would like you to take the time that we have left
to actually fill these out.
I also need somebody to deliver them to the department
because they don't trust faculty.
We could cheat.
So when you have yours done,
come up and put it in this envelope,
and somebody please come and volunteer to bring it to the department.
I'll be here to answer questions for the next few minutes.
There are two, by the way, there are two forms.
One is for me and one is for Sasha.
And I should mention that Sasha put together the lab this morning
that she all did, which I think was a very nice lab on genscan.
That was her project.
