We first discussed Nietzsche's infamous aphorism entitled The Madman way back in the early days of the podcast, I think Episode 3.
This is the aphorism that contains Nietzsche's famous declaration that God is dead, that all that man once aspired to, all that man once saw as his noble ideal, all that anchored us and gave meaning to our lives and the suffering within our lives.
That great idea of God would not survive modernity.
For Nietzsche, this is the most momentous and calamitous of events, but it is above all the blunt reality.
Our situation in the modern world is that we have to move on from the Christian God and create ourselves anew in the light of that knowledge.
That we must impart meaning to our own lives, craft new ideals, anchor our understanding of reality by new means.
The entire revaluation of values takes place in the wake of God's death, and it's only really comprehensible as a response to God's death.
This is why it's such a foundational concept in approaching Nietzsche.
His whole mature philosophy exists in the aftermath of the death of God, and I would dare say that it would be incoherent for anyone who has not perceived this.
Nietzsche's answer to this challenge is also taken up by Freud, Jung's former mentor.
For both Nietzsche and Freud, the looming end of Christianity that was unfolding in modernity was truly the end of Christianity.
The answer was psychology, a grounding of our understanding of mankind in naturalistic terms.
For whatever their differences, both Nietzsche and Freud would argue that the only way out is forward.
A return to the mental framework of a mythological past does not seem to be an option for the modern man.
Nietzsche writes not in favor of a romantic return, but an active nihilism, a critique of all modern values, the full recognition of the way in which the highest values have devalued themselves.
This lays waste to the whole field of moral ideas, but that may clear the way for new possibilities.
Myths may ever remain a profound source of meaning, but Nietzsche and Freud see in the gods evidence of one's physiological drives in impulses.
Where Jung differs is that he sees in one's physiological impulses the evidence of the gods.
Jung, in effect, comes to the opposite conclusions of Freud, that the significance found in myth and religion is so profound that we ought to understand psychology in terms of myth,
rather than attempt to psychologize away the apparent significance of myth.
Jung's judgment, his evaluation of the situation for the modern man, is profound, and it's radical.
Jung perceives that these archetypal subcomplexes seem to appear independently of tradition or culture,
and he argues that we should treat them precisely in accordance with all that this discovery demands.
That is, treat the archetypes as independent, definite entities, real beings, spirits, so to speak, perhaps even deities.
At least that's the way they would have been understood mythologically, and given that they do seem to appear independent of these factors of culture or upbringing,
it's just further evidence of the fact that they should be afforded this kind of respect or awe.
Jung sees the ways in which the modern lexicon for understanding ourselves, for understanding the psyche, has become impoverished.
How it has overestimated the ego, overestimated the benign nature of man, or the goodness of man, overestimated the power of rationality.
In all of these respects, he agrees with Nietzsche, but Jung draws attention to the fact that the mindset of people who lived in the ages of so-called mythic thinking
was far closer to the truth of the self than our modern, essentialist view of the ego consciousness as this arbitrary, rational ruler.
Jung's work with schizophrenic patients, his study of dreams, and his tour of the world's religions, this had all convinced him that there was a concrete truth to religion that could not simply be hand-waved away.
Perhaps we could say, at the very least, a concrete usefulness or utility to religion.
That it was our only way to confront the numinous, the mysterious, the most important events of life, coming of age, self-transformation, passing into death, and so on and so forth.
It is the very fact that Jung can easily observe in his patients that they unconsciously employ religious symbolism.
This convinces him that, in fact, God is not dead in the sense that Nietzsche means this utterance, that we may have the pretensions of having done away with God,
but perhaps this only really applies in the realm of the rational intellect that now lives in a sort of mechanistic world.
But in the unconsciousness God lives on, that God's still are the set of symbols that we use to express that type of thinking.
And so it seems almost incredible that Nietzsche, a man who was suspicious of the powers of the intellect and emphasized the relative dominance of the unconscious part of the psyche,
could have construed the death of God as some sort of objective event or objective happening.
Because after all, such an event has only happened in the terms understood by the ego consciousness and its representations of reality.
That is to say that the divine is part of the independently living world of spirits that exists in the collective unconsciousness,
which is larger and more complex than any mask which the consciousness gives to it.
That we have oftentimes changed our symbols for the divine in accord with the perception of the age,
but this transfiguration from one symbol to another is not indicative of the final death and repose of the divine as such,
but part of a cycle of death and rebirth which is itself part of that divine language.
God is part of our inner life, a self bigger than the ego with its pretensions to total freedom.
God in one form or another may slip away from us.
One divine symbol autonomously departs from our sight.
But Jung writes about this quote,
Because this inner life is intrinsically free and not subject to our will and intentions,
it may easily happen that the living thing chosen and defined by us will drop out of its setting,
the man-made image, even against our will.
Then perhaps we could say with Nietzsche, God is dead.
Yet it would be truer to say, he has put off our image and where shall we find him again?
The interregnum is full of danger, for the natural facts will raise their claim in the form of various isms,
which are productive of nothing but anarchy and destruction,
because inflation and man's hybris between them have elected to make the ego with all its ridiculous paltryness, Lord of the Universe.
That was the case with Nietzsche, the uncomprehended portent of a whole epoch.
End quote.
Jung here references the fact that Nietzsche predicted massive violence in the rise of new political ideologies
as attempts to grapple with the coming nihilism.
This is the great prophecy of Nietzsche that concerns the history of the coming two centuries, as he says,
which I've often filled later interpreters of Nietzsche with terror and wonder,
as we're all struck in the present day with how accurate Nietzsche's predictions were.
The isms in light of retrospective analysis would, of course, be communism, Nazism,
these outbursts within the interregnum.
The meaning of that word is the period between kings, usually a time of unrest or civil war.
To use the language of myth, when one old king meets his downfall, there's a period in which there's a great danger.
The society finds itself beyond the protection of a perceived order to the world,
and another king must rise up to take charge of the kingdom.
Still, Jung's remarks about Nietzsche's egotism are biting.
It's striking that a man who disparaged the ego consciousness so much,
who had so little regard for its pretensions, would nevertheless be, for all intents and purposes, so egotistical.
So, confident in his own strength to endure hard truths and live in the moral, ideological desert
beyond the approval of the collective and so on, Jung continues in the same passage, quote,
The individual ego is much too small.
Its brain is much too feeble to incorporate all the projections withdrawn from the world.
Ego and brain burst asunder in the effort.
The psychiatrist calls it schizophrenia.
When Nietzsche said God is dead, he uttered a truth which is valid for the greater part of Europe.
People were influenced by it not because he said so, but because it stated a widespread psychological fact.
The consequences were not long delayed after the fog of isms, the catastrophe.
Nobody thought of drawing the slightest conclusions from Nietzsche's pronouncement,
yet it has, for some ears, the same eerie sound as that ancient cry which came echoing over the sea
to mark the end of the nature gods.
Great Pan is dead, end quote.
The story that Jung references here is a strange one.
It's a sort of fable that comes to us through the historical record.
It almost reads like a rumor or just a strange story that was bandied about the Uso Bar in ancient Greece,
but it's an example of what Jung called synchronicity,
where events which are seemingly unrelated in terms of causality, in terms of the material world,
are nevertheless related in terms of their underlying meaning.
They're related in a deeper way than our rationality can explain.
We find this story in Jung's notes from a seminar on Nietzsche's Zarathustra given in the 1930s.
The background context of the conversation is Jung's assessment of Nietzsche,
what he calls Nietzsche's inflation with an archetype, in this case, with Zarathustra.
In Jung's view, any one of the archetypes can become inflated,
meaning that within the community of drives, impulses, sub complexes within one's unconscious,
one particular complex begins swallowing up a great deal of energy,
growing larger than the others, literally becoming inflated, you can use that image.
And eventually the inflation reaches a point where the individual begins to consciously identify with the archetype.
It becomes a kind of usurpacious persona, to where it becomes so big that it swells to include the ego consciousness within it.
So this is an excerpt from that seminar.
Dr. Jung.
For Nietzsche, the world was always exceedingly dull.
Nobody had ears or eyes or a feeling heart, so he had to knock at the doors with a sledgehammer.
But when people locked the doors, he attacked them with such fearful words that they became frightened.
His contemporary Jacob Burkhart, the famous historian, grew quite afraid when he read Zarathustra,
as I know from people in Basel who were acquainted with them both.
It was uncanny to him.
It was the language that overcame him.
He shut the door to Nietzsche because he was too troublesome, he made too big a noise,
and one always has the impression in reading Zarathustra that it does not really reach people.
Nietzsche felt that too, and therefore he increased the weight of it in order to make it sink in.
If only he would wait, be a bit more patient, a bit less noisy, then it would sink in.
Certain passages in Zarathustra are of supreme beauty, but others are in very bad taste,
and the effect of the whole is somewhat endangered by that style.
Those are the main reasons for it then, but there is still another point which explains the extraordinary weight of Zarathustra.
Mrs. Adler
It is because the aspirations or intuitions are not quite real, and therefore they need a particular emphasis, as it were, against Nietzsche,
as if he were preaching to himself in the first place.
Dr. Jung
That is a very subtle point of view.
It is surely a valid argument, since there is plenty of evidence that what we would call realization had not taken place.
Mrs. Baines
I don't understand what Mrs. Adler means by there not being quite real to him.
Dr. Jung
It would mean, in this case, not quite realized, as a matter of fact, when there is an inflation by an archetype, there is no realization.
One cannot realize the thing by which one is inflated.
First, the inflation must have come to an end, and then one may realize, not before.
Dr. Reichstein
Perhaps it was because Nietzsche was against the whole world, and so he had to knock very hard.
Dr. Jung
Yes, that is quite certain.
Nietzsche was in a sort of fighting position against the whole contemporary world, and it gave him a peculiar feeling of inefficiency that his words reached nowhere,
no echo anywhere.
That really was the case.
Nobody cared.
His was the voice of one shouting in the wilderness, and so naturally he would increase his voice instead of lowering it.
You see, when one is not understood, one should, as a rule, lower one's voice, because when one really speaks loudly enough and is not heard, it is because people don't want to hear.
One had better begin to mutter to oneself than they get curious.
End quote.
So, lots of very clever remarks from Jung and his colleagues in this excerpt from the seminar, but Jung's main criticism here is actually an attack on the style of Zarathustra, which is interesting.
Some passages are beautiful, others in bad taste, and he sees this as a result of Nietzsche forcing certain things.
And one of Jung's students suggests that this forcing is a result of the fact that Nietzsche may not have fully realized the truths contained in the book, that he is preaching to himself as much as to everyone else,
that's the way they put it.
Jung believes this is a valid point of view on Nietzsche's work, and it is a variation on the common refrain among Nietzsche's critics that Nietzsche himself was not a hard, immoral, tyrannical kind of man.
By all accounts, he was a kind, moral gentleman.
Well, didn't Nietzsche say that one does not have a quote-unquote right to all truths, and that for this very reason, that truth can't be regarded as universal?
Perhaps it was the case that Nietzsche himself did not have a right to every last truth that he wrote in the Spokes Zarathustra.
And so the Jungian view of the situation would be, this is because as the archetype is inflating itself and taking over Nietzsche's psyche, he as the whole subject is not actually coming into the realization of the truths known by the archetype.
He does not gain a right to them to use Nietzsche's language, just merely on the basis of the archetypal inflation.
And there's still the truths of someone else, because Zarathustra is operating as a kind of autonomous subpersonality at this point.
And so perhaps because Zarathustra sort of confronts Nietzsche with certain ideas, perhaps his most dangerous, blasphemous, or harsh ideas, that Nietzsche himself does not fully believe,
and by this we mean, does not fully realize in his life maybe, he does not live these ideas, he does not have a right to them.
Perhaps his work is forced in some places, or it feels forced, the style, because he's preaching to himself, trying to get himself to adopt ideas that are not really his.
And the way that Nietzsche talks about the experience of writing Zarathustra, he says that the ideas just sort of flashed before him like lightning.
That this truly was a book written by a muse, he often uses that language in talking about it.
And so there is somewhat of a basis in the textual evidence for Jung's position here, and in my view this is the most biting thing that Jung says.
Because it's a criticism not just of Nietzsche's ideas, but of his style, and a work that is, it must be said, perhaps the most vulnerable to that kind of criticism.
This is not an arbitrary critique.
It flows out of an underlying charge that the failures in Nietzsche's style, wherever they arise on Zarathustra, wherever he becomes excessive, whenever he's yelling too loudly, right?
That comes directly out of his failure to fully integrate himself and his personality.
There's a real psychopathology going on that forced Nietzsche to force the issue.
But we're going to continue a little further with this seminar, because after this, the discussion turns to the use of Christian language and symbolism within thus books Zarathustra.
And Jung levies the charge that we've considered already, the use of Christian language and symbolism was necessary for Nietzsche precisely because of what Nietzsche felt he had lost in the death of God.
Jung brings up that the parallel style to that of the Gospels was a conscious choice, and that therefore Nietzsche on some level knew that he was seeking for what could only be given by religion.
What he'd only known before in the language of the Gospels.
The conversation is quite extensive in analyzing Nietzsche, but the key point of discussion is that Jung sees Nietzsche as somebody carried away with the power of an archetypal force.
Zarathustra is electric, he's full of passion, he's completely overwhelming for Nietzsche, who writes of himself as a kind of instrument at times.
Nietzsche sees himself in the way that he writes about in the Zarathustra's prologue, mankind being a bridge and not a goal.
Nietzsche himself is a bridge and not a goal.
He himself is stretched between animal and overman.
He sees his job as bringing forward something that will bear fruit in the far off future.
In the present, all we can do is sacrifice to it.
For Jung, these very ideas are tell-tale signs of inflation, that the personality is becoming dominated by a complex to which everything is being sacrificed.
And so the result is that Nietzsche, in his actual life, becomes a solitary, lonely figure.
His real life suffers because of his philosophy.
He's alienated from all around him, from his family, his religion, eventually from his friends, from the Wagner's, from his fellow academics.
And he writes a philosophy which sets itself at odds with, quote, the herd, right?
So why would Nietzsche so strongly set himself as the individual in this eternal struggle against the collective?
Back to the seminar, and this is the part that contains the strange folktale that I referenced earlier.
But they begin by analyzing one of the first scenes from the Spokes' Arthustra.
So we'll get back to the folktale a bit.
Back to the seminar, quote, Dr. Jung.
Yes, he is no longer in touch with the world.
And that Christianity has left the world is exactly the reason why Zarathustra is born again.
He must come back because the spirit he created and left behind him has evaporated.
You see, that is a repetition of the very important psychological fact that when Christ died,
he left behind him, or promised, according to the dogma, the paraclete, the comforter, which is the spirit,
like the descent of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost, that is the aftermath of the Christian revelation,
the spirit left by the appearance of Christ on earth.
His appearance was like a bursting shell that leaves the spirit trailing after.
It remains for a while and then slowly recedes into the background again, end quote.
And so Jung then ties the paraclete, one of those names for the Holy Spirit, the comforter, the advisor, or the counselor,
to the old man in the forest, the old priest, the old ascetic,
that Zarathustra meets in the forest at the very beginning of Zarathustra's prologue.
And so Jung then quotes from Nietzsche from the book Zarathustra,
quote, Go not to men but stay in the forest. Go rather to the animals.
Why not be like me, a bear amongst bears, a bird amongst birds?
And what do with the saint in the forest? asked Zarathustra.
The saint answered, I make hymns and sing them, and in making hymns I laugh and weep and mumble.
Thus do I praise God, end quote.
And Dr. Jung then continues in the seminar, quote,
While the old anchorite spirit is now receding, he makes a regression having understood that nothing was to be done with these human beings.
He becomes quite skeptical and thinks it best to worship his God in nature,
to be a bear with bears and a bird with birds, to imitate the animal voices again, to sing as a bird would sing.
So he is isolated in his wood, a sort of penchant paraclete, ompinchon at least.
The new spirit is now a Christ, therefore the analogy of Zarathustra with Christ.
He comes down from the mountains with new hopes, new expectations, and a new message to man,
and he passes the old fellow, and the new message which the old man does not know of is that God is dead.
You see to the anchorite God is active, he still believes that there is a God outside of him,
but Zarathustra is convinced that there is no God outside of him.
God is dead.
Mrs. Bauman, it corresponds with the death of Pan 2000 years ago.
Dr. Jung, exactly.
One reads in old Latin literature that 2000 years ago,
the captain of a boat sailing from the Grecian Islands to Ostia, the harbor of Rome,
demanded an immediate interview with the emperor in order to report
a most remarkable event which had taken place when he was sailing through the archipelago.
He had passed in the night an island where there was an extraordinary noise.
He heard people shouting, Pan Magistos Ethnican.
Pan the greatest is dead.
Pan was the philosophic God of those days.
Originally he had been a Latin local God of the fields in the woods,
a sort of midday demon with no philosophical or universal importance whatever.
Only later, when they learned Greek, did they see that the name of the old Latin God Pan
was the same as the Greek word Pan, which means all the universe.
So they had new ideas about their old Pan.
He became the God of the world.
Then about the second century AD, rumors spread that Pan the greatest was dead.
Christianity had prevailed against him.
The last conception of a nature God created by antiquity.
And when the God is dead, it means the end of an epoch.
Therefore the great emphasis laid upon that story.
In this chapter then we have watched the way in which the spirit of a whole historical epoch recedes,
disappears into nature and how at the same time it is renewed in a new figure with a new message.
Yet it is still the same old figure, the same spirit that taught mankind the difference between good and evil
is now informing us of the fact that there is no difference and that God is dead.
I think that's a powerful critique that Jung makes.
That God is dead, yes, because the death of God is a recurring event.
And in a way, by pointing to the ever recurring nature of this event,
Jung is approaching Nietzsche's own proclamation in a very Nietzschean way.
That's, even if we grant that this is a European event, a grand historical event,
of the belief in the Christian God becoming something unworthy of belief, this is nothing new.
No more than when Nietzsche laments the fall of the tragic worldview,
the death of that old empire of the mind governed by Apollo and Dionysus
and the harsh tragedies and the life-affirming Olympians.
That was the world that is last presided over by Pan,
the world of the Antica Morale, where the forces of nature were perceived as autonomous gods.
Pan was simply yet another divinity laid in the grave.
And for Jung, he tied this belief to the astrological ages.
The notion that Christianity was the age of Pisces, the two fish,
this is the age in which God comes to reconcile with his wayward children, mankind.
You know, the fish is the symbol of Jesus Christ, dating from the period of the early Christians.
Before Christianity, however, the Greco-Roman period was the age of Aries, the ram.
This is a war-like age, an age governed by divinities that have the horns of sheep and goats and rams.
And Aries quite literally is the name of one of the Greek gods, and he's a war god.
But even before this, there's the age of Taurus, the bull.
And what deities do we see as characteristic of the period of the early Bronze Age?
Well, figures such as Inanna, Ishtar, Astarte, the bull of heaven,
the pastoralist beginnings of civilization,
sort of governed by the imagery of cows and bulls, and fertility goddesses.
We can set aside whatever metaphysical importance that someone might think to attribute to the turnings of the astrological epochs.
But we might simply note on a more basic level, lots of gods and deities have come into being in the human psyche,
and then fallen out of worship, and that these images of God all have their time,
but then recede into the background of consciousness.
Those are the long list of deities that atheists will cite as the gods that every modern theist is an atheist in regard to.
That's a common argument.
But for Jung, that's no great argument for atheism.
He would argue, yes, and yet the gods always return, don't they?
The fact that there have been so many religions that people have been atheistic towards
might score you some debate points against an individual religion,
but it actually goes pretty far towards establishing the value of religion as such,
or at least that human being seemed condemned to this way of thinking,
and that pointing to the fact that we are all becoming atheists in regard to the latest deity
is not at all indicative that we are about to enter an age of atheism as such.
You can look at the deaths of all these past divine images in those two very different ways,
that either the divine is always dying or the divine is always being resurrected.
And we cannot help but notice the central religious motif of Christianity,
and indeed many world religions before Christianity, is that of death and resurrection.
Perhaps no religion other than Christianity is better suited to take on the idea of their own God dying and then resurrecting.
It's based on the faith that their God came to earth, died, and then lived again.
And so, in a sense, we can see Nietzsche's proclamation of the death of the Christian God
as a mirror image to those shrieks that were heard from that mysterious island 2,000 years ago.
That pan is dead.
But this, of course, raises a serious question.
Considering that Nietzsche sought to revitalize the spirit of the Greek morality,
then it ought to be possible to revitalize the spirit of the Christian morality.
If the Christian God ever lived, it's because Pan is dead.
And if Nietzsche thinks that Pan can live again, then certainly so could Jesus Christ.
Nietzsche's insistence on the finality of the Christian God's death,
but his implicit desire to see Pan live again, is a huge contradiction in his approach to these ideas.
But perhaps the more insightful observation, in my opinion,
aside from any specific criticism of Nietzsche's ideas that Jung may be making,
there's a rather straightforward underlying truth.
In the unconscious, God, religion, all the symbolism and sentiments of religion,
these remain.
Humanity, European or otherwise, has not even come close to moving on from these religious symbols,
this entire religious way of thinking.
Even Nietzsche himself, living in the darkness after God's assassination,
finds a kind of psychopomp in his characters Arthustra.
He is the wise old man, the prophet of the ancient world,
and what he comes to teach mankind are actually truths that mankind has already known since time immemorial.
Arthustra teaches that this self is something larger than the ego.
He teaches that good and evil are relative and interdependent,
that one must be reconciled to even embrace their fate with an eye toward the eternality of their destiny.
These kinds of assertions have been the stuff of religious talk for thousands of years.
Arthustra is a figure that comes from Nietzsche's unconscious,
returning him to the most religious of language and metaphor,
and drawing him inexorably into the world of myth and religion.
And so Jung's great rebuke to Nietzsche is that his fundamental assertion is that a return to the mythic
is precisely what we need as the curative of the excessive materialization and mechanization of reality.
Even patients who are undergoing a completely secular form of self-transformation speak in such religious language about the experience.
Jung argues that people use the language of,
I return to myself, I could accept myself, I was reconciled to myself,
and he says this is what we used to say by expressing I have made my peace with God,
I've submitted myself to the will of God, I've surrendered my will to the plan of God, and so on and so forth.
And so Jung sees the key application of religious thought primarily in the realm of psychology.
He sees how religion is the central anchoring structure reigning over the psyche.
One might suggest that it's quite possibly an innovation that we now speak of the self and not God,
in terms of all the statements that Jung reports his patients making.
But Jung would say that's a distinction without a difference,
that unconsciously the ideal complete self that we seek is identical to the idea of God,
and that in both cases we would be describing the same thing,
and that we just can't, we have to acknowledge that fundamental truth,
that religion seems to be an orienting force for the mind.
It seems to have that psychological function, that seems to be the value of religion is psychological.
But in spite of this need for a sort of religious order,
a kind of understanding of our place of existence, the meaning and purpose of existence,
which has always been the North Star of the human mind,
we have, through excessive scientism, now thought that such things can be done away with,
and for Jung the proof that this is a bad idea is Nietzsche himself.
This is the man who went so far beyond the Christian metaphysics and morality,
and yet was not by his inclination a positivist or an atheist.
Jung says straight out, Nietzsche completely accepted the death of God
and tried to see what we should do beyond that, but he himself was no atheist.
Nietzsche feels the de-spiritualization of the world very strongly,
and he experiences its effects before anyone else.
The atheists in Nietzsche's own time are quite literally like the atheists in the marketplace
when the madman makes his declaration.
They've become unaware of their religious framework by which the human mind is organized.
They don't believe themselves to be susceptible to it.
They think that their thought exists beyond it.
Jung believes that the demystification of the world occurred gradually,
and initially it was for quite a worthy purpose.
The sciences are a worthy endeavor because the gaps of human knowledge
are always filled with projection, and such a world is a chaotic world
when your world becomes ruled by projection, so to speak,
when you're in a world you don't understand.
Science has been our way of taming the world in that way.
Science has become the new expression of the pre-existent order behind the chaos of life.
Nietzsche himself was rather insightful to give this scientism its own wise old man,
its own magician, who is Socrates.
The death of Socrates is another repeated motif in Nietzsche's writing,
which is particularly interesting in light of Jungian analysis.
Socrates is the wise old king who represents the positivist worldview.
In many ways, he has as much of a modern problem for Nietzsche as he is an ancient Greek problem.
He inevitably must drink his poison as a form of martyrdom for the truth.
Scientism is a kind of eternal religious project,
but one which never manages to become the final state of the soul
because when you totalize the value of scientism, it is deadly.
So Jung in his essay, Psychology and Religion, writes the following,
Consciousness can hardly exist in a state of complete projection.
At most, it would be a heap of emotions.
Through the withdrawal of projections, conscious knowledge slowly developed.
Science, curiously enough, began with the discovery of astronomical laws
and hence with the withdrawal, so to speak, of the most distant projections.
This was the first stage in the de-spiritualization of the world.
One step followed another.
Already in antiquity the gods were withdrawn from mountains and rivers, from trees and animals.
Modern science has subtleized its projections to an almost unrecognizable degree,
but our ordinary life swarms with them.
You can find them spread out in the newspapers, in books, rumors, and ordinary social gossip.
All gaps in our actual knowledge are still filled with projections.
End quote and further down Jung continues, quote,
The materialistic error was probably unavoidable at first,
since the throne of God cannot be discovered among the galactical systems,
the inference was that God never existed.
The second unavoidable error is Psychologism.
If God is anything, he must be an illusion derived from certain motives,
from will to power, for instance, or from repressed sexuality.
These arguments are not new.
Much the same thing was said by the Christian missionaries who overthrew the idols of heathen gods.
But whereas the early missionaries were conscious of serving a new God by combating the old ones,
modern iconoclasts are unconscious of the one in whose name they are destroying old values.
End quote.
So we should take note Jung brings up two of his predecessors in this passage, but not by name.
Nietzsche and Freud, men who say that God is an illusion derived from certain motives.
One could read Nietzsche's on the old and new tablets and thus spoke Zarathustra,
which I'm almost certain is what Jung is thinking of here,
especially given that he references the smashing of old tablets a bit further in the paragraph,
which we'll get to in a moment.
But importantly in that passage, Zarathustra tells us every people has had its sacred values,
all of which have been different and all of which have actually expressed the will to power of a people.
He says that they defined their sacred values by differentiating themselves from their neighbors,
seeking an altogether different form of the good than their neighbor sought for.
That the many different gods therefore are imagistic expressions of a particular way of expressing power.
And that therefore the idols of man don't refer to anything metaphysical,
but are simply the representation of a psychological need.
Freud's explanation is that we believe in God because of in so many words,
terror management theory from my own understanding.
Freud basically thought that the root of God belief was prior to anything rational.
It's simply a way of dealing with an indifferent, uncaring existence.
Nevertheless, Freud had quite a bit to say about God the Father
and so far as God in the way that God is portrayed in our sort of cultural images
the wise old man with the beard, that is somewhat indicative of an infantile regression
to a state where one wants to be cared for by daddy.
So here, as with everything in Freud, there's an influence of one's psychosexual family dynamics
that continually recreates the image of God the Father.
In the words of Christopher Hitchens, quote, Nietzsche said God is dead,
Freud said God is dead, end quote.
I've been waiting to quote that one for probably the whole podcast.
But Jung calls this an error.
He calls it psychologism to reduce everything down to being merely psychology.
That's not Jung's task. Jung's task is the opposite,
not to regard psychological phenomena as merely or simply or just.
Whenever we insert those sorts of words, we're saying it's insignificant.
Rather, Jung's task is to understand psychological phenomena as being as significant as our myths,
as significant as our religious ideas, to see some common essence to the disciplines of religion and psychology.
So his criticism of both Freud and Nietzsche here as iconoclasts
is that they do not know or are not conscious of the new gods that they are serving
as they bring forth this anti-Christian age.
Nietzsche might think I'm restoring Greek values, but is that what Nietzsche actually did?
Is that what he's actually doing?
Have we seen that effect in the collective psyche as a result of Nietzsche's work?
Have Greek values been restored?
So Jung continues, quote,
Nietzsche thought himself quite conscious and responsible when he smashed the old tablets,
yet he felt a peculiar need to back himself up with a revivified Zerothustra, a sort of alter ego
with whom he often identifies himself in his great tragedy of the Spokes Zerothustra.
Nietzsche was no atheist, but his god was dead.
The result of this demise was a split in himself,
to call the other self Zerothustra, or at times Dionysus.
In his fatal illness, he signed his letters Zegreus, the dismembered god of the Thracians.
The tragedy of Zerothustra is that because his god died, Nietzsche himself became a god,
and this happened because he was no atheist.
He was of too positive a nature to tolerate the urban neurosis of atheism.
It seems dangerous for such a man to assert that god is dead.
He instantly becomes the victim of inflation.
Far from being a negation, god is actually the strongest and most effective position the psyche can reach,
in exactly the same sense in which Paul speaks of the people whose god is in their belly, end quote.
So, you know, this is why I love Jung's criticism of Nietzsche, perhaps most of all.
You can poke all sorts of logical holes in it,
and accuse Jung of stating things with certainty that are basically just speculation, and that would be true.
But Nietzsche philosophized and made critiques, and stated his own speculations with certainty in sort of the same way.
So, how can we really defend Nietzsche on that basis?
Like, you're not making the most rigorous argument.
I mean, go look at a lot of the way Nietzsche attacks and polemicizes against past philosophical figures by psychoanalyzing them.
And Jung is mostly taking the same mode of attack here, so it's kind of hard, you know, turn about his fair play, is what I'm trying to say.
But what I love about Jung's comments here is that he's complimenting Nietzsche in the highest terms, and also basically calling him crazy.
That Nietzsche is not like the simple-minded variety of atheists that came after him.
It really, he's not an atheist at all, not by temperament, and not in practice,
as he is forced by a God inhabiting him to construct a new religion, to author in a new religious language.
And this new God, he feels to be something he himself created.
And that's, in some sense, the source of the inflation, the idea that a God is inside of him.
He feels himself to be more of a prophet than a philosopher,
the man who must make the most serious demands that have ever been made of mankind.
It's the way he classifies his project in Achehomo.
God actually is in Nietzsche's belly, both in the sense that he carries the spirit of Zarathustra,
and that he relocates the pre-rational intelligence governing our very being to the physiology quite literally to the belly, right?
Think about all the comments Nietzsche says about the importance of diet in terms of what your ideas are going to be.
But as Jung points out here, Nietzsche himself feels torn.
He signs his letters as Dionysus, or as Agraeus, who is Dionysus in his dismembered form.
It's surprising that Jung doesn't mention in this passage that Nietzsche signed his letters as the crucified, although I think Jung mentions it elsewhere.
But it indicates that even for Nietzsche, the pole of that opposite moral orientation that other archetype still exists,
that Nietzsche felt himself not wholly Dionysian, but divided between the two, which is a similar critique that Gerard makes.
What the Christian represents to Jung is far more than Nietzsche's conception of the Christian.
To Nietzsche Christianity is first and foremost a moral framework.
It's a system of reacting against the powerful, driven by an inborn pity.
It's fueled by resentment, and it deals with resentment by creating the bad conscience within the individual.
Its existence therefore becomes a delivery system for pity, which results ultimately in a mankind which lives in a state of guilt.
For Jung, Christianity has to be understood as a religion centered around the life of Christ.
Christ, like Dionysus, or Zarathustra, is an archetype.
We could say that Christ is the most powerful archetype in all of human history, even.
And just as we might consciously disavow the religious, while our unconscious goes right along thinking in religious terms,
we can consciously criticize the Christian moral feeling, as Nietzsche did.
But all the while still find our thoughts and actions motivated or affected by the imagery and the narrative,
the pre-rational sensibility that Christianity represents.
Jung writes in Psychology and Religion, quote,
The life of Christ is no exception in that not a few of the great figures of history have realized more or less clearly the archetype of the hero's life,
with its characteristic changes of fortune.
But the ordinary man too unconsciously lives archetypal forms, and if these are no longer valued,
it is only because of the prevailing psychological ignorance.
Indeed, even the fleeting phenomena of dreams often reveal distinctly archetypal patterns.
At bottom, all psychic events are so deeply grounded in the archetype and are so much interwoven with it
that in every case, considerable critical effort is needed to separate the unique from the typical with any certainty.
Ultimately, every individual is continuously historical because strictly time bound.
The relation of the type to time, on the other hand, is irrelevant.
Since the life of Christ is archetypal to a high degree, it represents to just that degree the life of the archetype.
But since the archetype is the unconscious precondition of every human life,
its life, when revealed, also reveals the hidden unconscious ground life of every individual.
That is to say what happens in the life of Christ happens always and everywhere.
In the Christian archetype, all lives of this kind are prefigured and are expressed over and over again, or once and for all.
And in it too, the question that concerns us here of God's death is anticipated in perfect form.
Christ himself is the typical dying and self-transforming God.
The psychological situation from which we started is tantamount to,
Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here.
Luke 24-5.
But where shall we find the risen Christ?
End quote.
So another striking disagreement between Nietzsche and Jung.
Jung calls Jesus the perfected archetype of the hero.
Nietzsche completely disagrees with this, and he mentions in his book The Antichrist,
that much of his comments against Jesus as the heroic figure are a polemic against Renan's view of Jesus,
who was also put forward the notion that Jesus perfects the heroic type.
Nietzsche thinks there's no one further from a hero than Jesus of Nazareth.
And we could say that this position comes out of Nietzsche's perception,
that there are two different competing types of aristocracy in human society.
Two centers of power that emerged since ancient days.
Warrior aristocracies and the priestly castes.
The aristocracies attain the ability to create values by fighting for worldly power.
The priestly castes create values via the ascetic ideal,
which essentially involves not fighting, not struggling to attain worldly power,
eschewing worldly power.
Nietzsche sees an essential difference here and sees Jesus as sort of like an ultimate ascetic.
It can't even be classed among the heroes such as Gilgamesh or Hercules.
Those are symbols of vital fighting, struggling life.
Jesus is defined by not struggling against the powers that be.
He gives no worldly resistance at all.
He teaches his followers to turn the other cheek, resist not evil.
Nietzsche says those three words, resist not evil, are the key to the entire gospel.
Jung sees things differently.
Precisely insofar as the archetype itself of the self-sacrificing individual speaking truth to power
is a form of struggle.
The way of life of Jesus, the image of life that Jesus gives us,
it's a form that recognizes that it is not by worldly competition,
by strife or violence, in the manner that Cain killed Abel,
that power itself can be opposed.
The most famous example of what we might call Christian heroism,
overcoming the old morality, the antiche moral,
is the story of the last gladiatorial games.
Two gladiators are about to do battle in the arena.
A Christian walks down into the arena, tells them to stop in the name of Christ.
They killed him, but the audience walks out in protest.
It's the end of this spectacle of public collective violence.
Through martyrdom, through a loving, sincere, nonviolent will,
one can put themselves into opposition with power itself
and be a more effective threat to it than all of the violent revolutionaries that have ever existed throughout history.
Because violent revolution only ever creates more violence, a harsher crackdown.
Whenever it succeeds, it almost always becomes the tyranny it opposed
and whenever it fails, it only ever brings about a harsher response from the powers that be.
So it seems that the only way to actually oppose the corruption of power
is not to resist it in physical terms, but to resist it spiritually, to condemn it morally.
And so for Jung, the life of Christ is a heroic life.
This is a man who lives by his principles and suffers supremely for it.
But he does so as a personal sacrifice for the greater good of mankind.
What is that if not heroic?
The heroic archetype and the language of all religions and cultures is related to the symbol of the self.
The hero is the protagonist, so to speak.
Jung writes in the chapter of Aion, Christ, a symbol of the self,
quote, Christ is our nearest analogy of the self and its meaning, end quote.
This cross-cultural idea of a heroic self is always found in relation to the savior archetype,
or the redeemer, as Jung calls it.
It's a timeless experience that in a period of chaos in which God seems to have vanished,
it's at that moment that we begin to search for the savior.
And in terms of personal psychological development, this is exemplified in the practice of giving oneself over to a higher power,
as an effective means of personal transformation.
Christ, as the hero who is born, lives, and dies as God on earth,
it's a God image and ideal that man can and will hold on to whenever God seems to be absent.
It's the message that the savior will always return.
And since his life is so archetypal and thus eternal and universal,
we can find endless inspiration and comfort in the example of the life of Christ.
Further, in the essay Psychology and Religion, Jung continues, quote,
The death or loss must always repeat itself.
Christ always dies and always he is born.
For the psychic life of the archetype is timeless in comparison with our individual time-boundness.
According to what laws now one and now another aspect of the archetype enters into active manifestations, I do not know.
I only know, and here I am expressing, what countless other people know,
that the present is a time of God's death and disappearance.
The myth says that he was not to be found where his body was laid.
Body means the outward visible form, the erstwhile but ephemeral setting for the highest value.
The myth further says that the value rose again in a miraculous manner, transformed.
It appears as a miracle.
For when a value disappears, it always seems to be lost irretrievably.
So it is quite unexpected that it should come back.
The three days descent into hell during death describes the sinking of the vanished value into the unconscious,
whereby conquering the power of darkness it establishes a new order and then rises up to heaven again.
That is, attains supreme clarity of consciousness.
The fact that only a few people see the risen one means that no small difficulties stand in the way of finding and recognizing the transformed value.
End quote.
From this, it may be difficult to say exactly what Jung really believes about Jesus Christ.
Was he a literal God on earth who physically resurrected?
Or is it just that the psychological truth of the story is so powerful and so eternally real to us for all intents and purposes?
Such questions of the material reality of the story cannot be taken seriously.
And you could say that this kind of confusion, what do you really believe about this story,
applies to some prominent Jungians in the light of the public eye today.
It's real for us psychologically, and so such questions of the material reality of the resurrection are merely academic.
That might be the Jungian response.
I understand it. I think for me personally it's a bit unsatisfying.
But all the same, there are moments in this passage where it seems as though Christ is being used as a metaphor for personal development.
And I'm sure that Dr. Jung would insist that, sure, it is a metaphor.
It's not just a metaphor, right?
That we really need to get over that kind of productive thinking.
And I'd agree with him to some extent there too.
But I suppose that I've never been satisfied by such reasoning.
To put my issues with it into words that might be commensurate with Jung's own thought,
if the sciences have de-spiritualized the world to the point that people no longer consciously accept mythic explanations,
then shouldn't we have to reconcile ourselves to this reality
rather than attempting to reconcile our conscious sober understanding of reality?
The one that's banished all those projections, right?
That Jung says is just chaos.
Now that we're living in a more conscious sober understanding,
should we reconcile that reality to the world of dreams and schizophrenic visions?
Or should we reconcile the world of dreams and schizophrenic visions to the more sober view of life?
The fact that we habitually think in certain terms does not preclude the possibility that these are still incorrect terms.
And I would say that's one of the main great critiques of Nietzsche, right?
That we have these thought habits that are ultimately erroneous.
And even if we can't escape certain pitfalls of thought,
does that mean we should make a decision to become irrational to forget what we've learned?
Or do we say perhaps I will begin to measure the strength of my soul by how much truth I can tolerate?
That's all an open question.
Perhaps Dr. Jung could point out the ways in which someone like myself has gone along with the fantastical views of a man like Nietzsche,
who was undoubtedly driven by a kind of prophetic inspiration,
and that therefore, even my own way of life is proof, we all must choose our religion,
and to follow in the footsteps of Nietzsche is no less another choice of religious affiliation.
And as a consequence of Nietzsche's inflation with that Zarathustrian archetype by becoming Zarathustra's prophet,
and Nietzsche's attempt to force certain anti-Christian sentiments or strange moral ideas into existence
that Jung thinks even he couldn't fully believe,
Jung alleges in an infamous section of memories, dreams, and reflections that Nietzsche fell into unreality.
quote
Nietzsche had lost the ground under his feet because he possessed nothing more than the inner world of his thoughts,
which incidentally possessed him more than he it.
He was uprooted and hovered above the earth, and therefore he succumbed to exaggeration and irreality.
For me, such irreality was the quintessence of horror,
for I aimed, after all, at this world and this life.
end quote
You know, it's the brilliant thing about Jung's critiques because the precise thing Nietzsche would say
is that they aim at this world and this life.
The affirmation of this world and this life is the very thing that Nietzsche said as his goal.
But a Jungian would counter, is that what his philosophy actually resulted in?
What was the actual operative process going on in Nietzsche's thought?
Was it actually being grounded in the material reality around him?
Jung would say no.
For one, Nietzsche did not live up to that very ideal that he set for himself.
Why not?
Well, by the very fact that he set himself against the entire modern world,
Nietzsche is keen to understand our existence as an indelibly human existence,
and yet he thinks that the human psyche, as it is, is fundamentally sick and deluded.
He smashes the tablets of old.
He engages in that iconoclasm for which Jung criticizes him.
He tries to destroy all that, which we formerly regarded as real.
But he does so while being driven by forces that he admits he doesn't fully understand.
And he knows that he's showing signs of incipient madness.
So I think there is at least something to Jung's critique here of Nietzsche.
There's a passage in volume 7 of Jung's collected works that clarifies this.
This is on page 37.
We must look very critically at the life of one who taught such a yeh saying
in order to examine the views of this teaching on the teacher's own life.
When we scrutinize his life with this aim and view, we are bound to admit that Nietzsche lived beyond instinct
and the lofty heights of heroic sublimity,
heights that he could maintain only with the help of the most meticulous diet,
a carefully selected climate, and many aids to sleep, until the tension shattered his brain.
He talked of yeh saying and lived the nay.
His loathing for man, for the human animal that lived by instinct, was too great.
Despite everything, he could not swallow the toad he so often dreamed of,
and what he feared had to be swallowed.
The roaring of the Zarathustrian lion drove back into the cavern of the unconscious
all the higher men who were clamoring to live.
Hence, his life does not convince us of his teaching.
For the higher man wants to be able to sleep without chloral,
to live in Nomburg and Basel despite fogs and shadows.
He desires wife and offspring, standing in a steam among the herd,
innumerable commonplace realities, and not least those of the Philistine.
Nietzsche failed to live this instinct, the animal urged to life.
For all his greatness and importance, Nietzsche's was a pathological personality.
End quote.
So as we all know in Nietzsche's biography,
as Jung says, he fails to ever find a wife or start a family,
which does seem to be something he was interested in,
in spite of the ways that he disparaged married philosophers,
and at least one passage I can think of,
which could come off like sour grapes in that old fable of Aesop.
And what happened to Nietzsche?
He began to steadily detach from reality itself.
His mind began to become consumed by these warring forces,
Dionysus versus the Crucified.
He eventually has his collapse and becomes an invalid,
muttering insane phrases and living in a hazy world of hallucinations.
So Nietzsche and Kant accuse a Jungian of not wanting to live in reality,
and a Jungian can say, well, Nietzsche didn't live in reality.
He quite literally went insane.
So was the Nietzschean philosophy really a good approximation of reality,
or was his iconoclasm something ill-advised,
something which actually did not achieve its aim of destroying the old religious power,
it in fact destroyed Nietzsche.
And in writing his philosophy, Nietzsche opened the floodgates
for all sorts of older, dangerous spiritual forces to take hold.
And the Nietzschean might counter that by saying,
well, is that a material claim or a metaphor to which the Jungian might say both,
and on and on and on.
Still, we should keep in mind that Nietzsche was an important influence on Jung,
and Nietzsche as a case study was invaluable to Jung.
I mean, the very fact that Nietzsche is a case that Jung returns to
again and again throughout his work proves this.
The case of Nietzsche is perhaps one of the greatest psychological events that has ever happened
from a Jungian perspective.
How could you be anything but grateful that you have a work like The Spook Zarathustra,
which is a living record of archetypal inflation on a scale that has perhaps never been seen before since.
Jung was influenced by the Gnostics and by the Alchemists.
And while a discussion of Jung's views on alchemy is something I'm certainly going to cover in the future,
it would take us way too far afield here,
but I just wanted to mention Jung's interest in esotericism, Gnosticism, Hermeticism,
alchemy, Theosophy, magic, astrology, divination.
The fact that Jung was interested in these things is often added to the list of reasons why Jung is a kook or something like that.
But in truth, his method here is quite consistent with his method generally,
and it's seen in the way he looks at Nietzsche.
He looks at Nietzsche as frankly insane.
But what Jung does is he looks to these domains of human thought with the aim of gathering truth about the human mind,
which is undoubtedly where all these ideas emerge.
It's where they exist, right?
Whatever you want to say about an idea, you know it comes from the mind, so it tells you something about the mind.
So Jung doesn't start from the position that astrology reveals truths about material physical reality.
He starts from the position that astrology is the projection of the contents of our unconscious onto the stars.
It comes from the intuition that the turning of celestial bodies is somehow involved with the destiny of mankind
in some strange, distant way that's perhaps larger than we can even perceive.
And so there's like an intuition that the cycles of life here on Earth are governed by the stars.
And that idea when we stated in that very general sense is true, by the way.
But that's not why Jung studies it, is not to, you know, to read horoscopes.
The work of the alchemists is much the same.
The alchemists believed, as above so below, the laws that govern heaven are the laws that govern matter.
Whatever apprehends in the domain of spirit ought to apply in the domain of science.
And so the magnum opus, the name for the great work of the alchemists, is not simply a charlatan's promise of turning lead into gold.
It's something much bigger than that.
It's the notion that we could transform one type of substance into another type.
That the elements that we perceive in the world are all related to one another as matter, as something physical.
And just as the spiritual world, you know, we speak of the language of change and transformation as the main spiritual narrative.
Perhaps we can learn the corresponding laws that apprehend here on Earth so that we could use scientific knowledge to affect change or transformation among material forms.
That, you know, different types of matter, different forms of matter as we perceive them aren't actually like fundamentally different.
That they all have a unity to them as matter and that, you know, and again, that's something that is actually true, right?
Maybe you could say they didn't know that empirically or experimentally, but this is the insight of going all the way back to Democritus.
Matter is united to other forms of matter as matter and that they all behave by the laws of matter.
If they're all made of atoms and these configurations of elementary particles, then yes, we find out in the modern day when we have a particle accelerator that we can actually turn lead into gold, right?
The atoms that make up lead and the atoms that make up gold are the same atoms, right?
No, they're not actually literally the same atoms.
You know what I'm saying. They're all made up of the same subatomic particles.
And, you know, alchemy was the basis of chemistry and that's to oversimplify things.
You know, in truth, alchemy was practiced concurrently with chemistry for a very long time.
This is sort of like an esoteric form of chemistry where a lot of the results are kept secret or preserved in the form of code because they wanted to keep the unwise from learning about these chemical changes and secrets.
But, you know, the alchemists did in fact make discoveries that were relevant to early chemistry.
They discovered phosphorus.
They learned develop techniques that we use to this day and distilling, creating alcohol.
The word alcohol comes from alchemy, but that's not Jung's interest.
Where he finds his interest in the alchemists is insofar as they write of the esoteric work of self-transformation,
where they use the metaphors of the chemical transformations they're able to affect.
They find a correspondence there to the world of the spirit, as above so below.
So moving from lead to tin to iron to copper to mercury to silver to gold,
that's a kind of metaphor for the soul and its own path of transformation.
And so the material that the alchemists leave behind, the textual record that we have today of alchemy,
has a psychologically relevant dimension because oftentimes they're using the chemical processes they've discovered
and mixing it together with religious imagery and symbolism in order to try to convey a metaphor of spiritual development.
And Jung is perhaps the first person to perceive this.
Alchemy is a psychologically relevant field of study.
Furthermore, Gnosticism, Hermeticism, all these esoteric religious movements,
these are also psychologically valuable fields of study.
What Jung finds so valuable in these traditions, we might say, is that it's an artistic expression of religious thought.
In other words, it's written by people who are letting their creative metaphor-making side of the mind run free, so to speak.
They're giving voice to the most significant and numinous concepts in their minds,
which we might say within traditional dogmatic religion is circumscribed within a set of traditional symbols.
You're not really allowed to be creative or you're not supposed to be creative with the symbols and imagery within the tradition of the religion.
Jung writes quite a bit about mandalas as a result of this, those eastern symbols of spiritual wholeness.
A mandala has a circular shape. It bears resemblance to the kind of paradisaical walled garden that indicates a fully actualized self.
Jung's patients would draw mandalas as part of their process of psychological convalescence, sort of spontaneously expressing they were moving toward the state of wholeness.
And in the mandalas, drawn by his patients, Jung basically saw it as though their artistic faculties were being used to sort of channel that language of spirituality.
And it's the same with an alchemical text or a gnostic text.
And then furthermore, Jung finds examples in literature in which a work that might normally be considered secular has a deep religious dimension.
And a work we've considered throughout the episode is Zorathustra, but another main source of influence is Goethe's Faust, particularly Faust II.
And one of the things that Jung sees in these works of apparently secular fiction is that often they use alchemical imagery or symbolism.
Which again, isn't because Jung thinks there's like a secret influence from the alchemists there, although there certainly might be in some cases.
But that the thing underlying that use of imagery is, we might say, prior to alchemy and prior to the text.
The reason why it resonates with us is because it's something that there is a grain of psychological truth within these gnostic traditions.
I'm going to quote now from Paul Bishop's, the Dionysian self, Carl Jung's reception of Friedrich Nietzsche.
Jung's study of gnostic literature is also important because together with his own personal experiences, it led him to an entirely new understanding of Goethe's Faust and Nietzsche's Zorathustra.
According to his autobiography, Jung concluded that he could resituate both these works within the matrix of the mythopoeic imagination, which in his view had disappeared in the modern age of rationality.
Both Faust and Zorathustra could be subsumed in the golden or Homeric chain, the alchemical term for the series of great wise men, starting with Hermes Trismegestus, which links heaven and earth.
End quote, and then he quotes from Jung here, quote, the second part of Faust, too, is more than a literary exercise.
It is a link in the aria catena, which has existed from the beginnings of philosophical alchemy and gnosticism down to Nietzsche's Zorathustra.
Unpopular, ambiguous, and dangerous, it is a voyage of discovery to the other pole of the world.
End quote.
And so that's the value of Nietzsche as a case study.
He presents us with a journey through his own psyche to a pole of reality that is far flung from our normal, everyday conscious experience.
Both Goethe and Nietzsche accomplished this because their works consciously or unconsciously drew from the well of religious and alchemical symbolism.
Both are engaged with the Aries era religion of Greek antiquity and with the Pisces era religion of European Christendom.
And both Goethe and Nietzsche are in their way heralds of a new kind of modern man, a man who has to live in this de-spiritualized reality,
who thinks in terms of mechanistic explanations and positivistic empiricism, and yet beneath the surface there's that same archetypal drama.
Those archetypes still reach up and take hold of the human heart.
They are still the driving sub complexes that determine our fate.
In dreams, as in our most desperate moments, we still think in those same terms.
Like Faust, when we reach the end of all of our studies of the physical world, all of the knowledge and the art and science of mankind,
we sigh aloud and say, quote, and here I am for all my lore, the wretched fool I was before, end quote.
And in our heart we wonder, as Faust does, what is that secret force? What is it that hides behind the world?
And so Jung reads Faust like a gnostic text, and he reads Zarathustra like a gnostic text.
He asks what the psychological relevance is, what is their timeless truth that stands prior to the author's conscious reasons, which are really just post hoc.
The conflict that is the main undercurrent of both of these works and the malady that split Nietzsche in half is described by Jung in the essay The Undiscovered Self, quote.
Nothing is more characteristic and symptomatic than the gulf that is opened out between faith and knowledge.
The rupture between faith and knowledge is a symptom of the split consciousness which is so characteristic of the mental disorder of our day.
It is as if two different persons were making statements about the same thing, each from his own point of view, or as if one person in two different frames of mind were sketching a picture of his experience, end quote.
The conflict, as it were, is between our conscious and unconscious.
Consciously we're guided by knowledge, unconsciously by faith.
We ignore the unconscious side because it contains the shadow, among other things, all of that we have tried to suppress about ourselves.
The unconscious remains a fearful place, a place from which the individual always tries to look away or flee.
And that only means that the unconscious contents will remain ever more dangerous.
They're already ready to take hold and subsume the individual in moments of crisis or great social upheaval.
Nowadays in the modern age that we've lost our religious lexicon for talking about them, that's why they take on a greater danger.
And those political isms, communism, fascism, for example, those are the work of archetypal thoughts.
Archetypal feelings, archetypal actions, taking hold of a mass of individuals that have become disintegrated.
Jung stresses that there is a real peril here, therefore, in continuing to ignore the unconscious or assuming that we could iconoclastically smash the contents of it.
We will always find our destiny is made there and not authored by the ego.
And on that respect, Jung and Nietzsche are in agreement.
But Jung would argue that Nietzsche was one-sided.
He was brilliant, he was deeply in touch with himself, and he wrote some of the most beautiful passages in the history of literature.
But nevertheless, he was the victim of archetypal inflation, a one-sided man who followed the will to truth under the harshest, coldest territory that its extremities could offer
and found that in that vast cold darkness an archetype was waiting for him.
The archetype of the wise old man that returned only more powerfully because Nietzsche had tried to make war upon that very thing, the anchoring meaning behind our society.
Jung writes, quote,
And therefore he sought a higher human wholeness beyond good and evil.
But he who seriously criticizes the basic attitudes of Christianity also forfeits the protection which these bestow upon him.
He delivers himself up unresistingly to the animal psyche.
That is the moment of Dionysian frenzy, the overwhelming manifestation of the blonde beast, which seizes the unsuspecting soul with nameless shudderings.
The seizure transforms him into a hero or into a godlike being, a superhuman entity.
He rightly feels himself 6,000 feet beyond good and evil, end quote.
Jung's way of approaching other thinkers from this psychoanalytic angle is as powerful an interpretive framework as anything Nietzsche himself gives us.
Jung finds that there's much truth in what is hidden, invisible, unsaid, or even unable to be said.
And the metaphor that Jung uses for this made it so I couldn't resist quoting him, and I think the Delusians will enjoy this quote that we're going to end on.
This is from Memories, Dreams, and Reflections, quote,
Thank you for joining me and examining Nietzsche through the Jungian lens.
I feel that now that we've introduced Jung into our rogue's gallery of thinkers, I can now include more of Jung as we continue on.
And I intend to do that with many of the figures we've discussed so far.
I usually try to introduce a new philosopher with the most wholesome possible introduction that is to say an introduction that conveys the whole person, also offering some concrete ideas from specific works,
and in a way which is as steel manned as I'm capable of doing.
And secondly, because of the topic of the podcast, I feel obligated to explain their relation to Nietzsche as sort of the task number one in bringing up a new figure.
And so once we get both of those steps out of the way, I feel that I have more freedom in future episodes to return to that figure without having to constantly tie it back to Nietzsche.
And since we've now gotten a lot of Nietzsche's main influences introduced, I've talked about a handful of interpreters, the podcast, I think as we go forward, it's going to continue to shift its focus, so to speak.
More and more episodes will be about people who aren't Nietzsche.
But personally, I'm looking forward to this, because it's not as if I'm not going to talk about Nietzsche anymore, but there's just so much other great philosophy work out there to talk about, and I like the variety.
I hope all of you do as well. I'd expect next season we're going to probably have more episodes than not, which are not Nietzsche-centric, so to speak.
But again, this is still the Nietzsche podcast, which means that in our next main episode, we're going to get back into Nietzsche's work, and we're going to continue with that theme of psychological investigation.
We're going to consider one of the most important psychological passages in Nietzsche from Twilight of Idols, The Four Great Errors.
I've referenced it before. I think it's time to give it a proper episode all to itself.
Before we get there, though, I have another conversation coming next week. This one I'm very excited about as well.
So hopefully all of you will join me then for a conversation. It's going to be sort of a counterpart to the one I did with Devon Gorey.
We're getting political again, but I think it was a great conversation. I think you're going to enjoy it.
So tune in next week. By the time this episode's coming out, I'm going to be on tour. I'm going to be on the road.
So look me up. See if I'm going to be in your city. If you're not going to be a weirdo, then please come out and come see me.
I say that, but I haven't had anywhere. I've had lots of fans of the podcast come out to shows. They've all been great.
You just get weirded out saying things like that online.
All right, everybody, that's going to be it for this week. Hope you'll join me next time. Cheers, everybody, signing off.
Thank you.
