If I were to suggest a use for philosophy, I would argue that perhaps its best use is as a tool
for uprooting weeds. Let's assume for a moment that the psyche, the mind, is something like a patch
of earth, and that within our minds we have all sorts of plants that are growing in there,
and you know where the germs for these plants come from it may not always be obvious,
much that's within the mind, remains deep beneath the soil, beneath the surface of our
consciousness. All of us would like to imagine that, at the very least, we are competent gardeners
of our own mental soil, and that only those beliefs and opinions and sentiments which we
planted there, and that we nourish, only those are allowed to grow there. But the reality is,
perhaps, unfortunately, that the ecosystem of the mind is not so consciously planned
as we'd like to imagine it. All sorts of invasive species make their way into the psyche,
and our minds are cross-pollinated, so to speak, with all the other garden plots around us,
all those other individuals, and their beliefs and their opinions. Things were planted in us
before we were born, or before we were old enough to have any understanding of what was being planted.
In short, most of us walk around with the ideas of other people in our heads,
and while this certainly doesn't mean that everything we receive from our culture
and from our upbringing is negative, it does mean that it is a somewhat natural inclination
for human beings to passively or even unconsciously accept any number of what we might call
common-sense notions. Here in modernity, we are more or less comfortable with admitting
that this sort of passive receipt of ideas occurs when it comes to, for example, moral judgments.
It's easy enough to see how a social animal, such as a human being, would naturally mimic
the moral beliefs of other human beings around them, to whatever degree, and whatever you think
about morality, I would say most people are on board with that idea, but this doesn't stop with
morality. Suppose there are prejudices with even deeper roots. Suppose these prejudices are not
simply moral, or that they don't only concern themselves with human behavior and the social
mores. Suppose that we have prejudices that constitute a kind of received wisdom as concerns
the most basic facts of reality, that when it comes to not just how to act, but the nature
of reality itself, we are operating based on a series of beliefs that we've simply passively
accepted. Philosophy finds its use here. It's an activity in disabusing ourselves from believing
in truths that we've received as common sense wisdom with no other justification beyond
that simple fact. Philosophy, in some sense, begins when we start to take note of the ways
in which even the most mundane assertions and statements of opinion contain within them
metaphysical beliefs, and that these metaphysical beliefs have simply been allowed to grow within
your garden without you even taking note of it. Now, suppose that among such received beliefs
that you possess are included beliefs that are in fact errors. Mistakes, perhaps owing to an
inherent flaw in human psychology, or whatever the case may be, and that nevertheless such a
mistake has simply been allowed to propagate or even been called self-evident. This is what we
would call a weed. We could in fact characterize the various great philosophers according to which
weeds they set themselves the task of uprooting. So with Socrates, the unquestioned way of life
of the Athenians set by religion and tradition, Descartes, the prejudice that the external world
in our perception of it can simply be taken for granted. Rousseau, the faith that civilization
has improved mankind. Hegel, that things are things in themselves, separable from the things to
which they are related, and so on and so forth. We've defined all these philosophers by what
they're attacking, right? In some sense, philosophy always begins within attack on a view that the
philosopher has realized to be nothing more than an assumption, an unquestionable assumption,
because it's assumed by so many. As we all know by now, Friedrich Nietzsche was a prodigious critic,
and if we were to say that philosophy begins at this point of attack, you'd also have to say
few philosophized as hard as Nietzsche did. He never declared peace. His critique of modern
thought begins in his first book, and it continues through to the very end. His targets are numerous,
among the assumptions that he attempted to weed out are, well, morality itself,
or the notion of a true world, an intelligible world behind the senses,
an intuition that begins in philosophy but becomes passively accepted through religion.
Nietzsche also attempts to uproot nihilism or world weariness, sentiments that Nietzsche believed
were suffused throughout modern culture. Already, these are sort of titanic, monstrous weeds that
Nietzsche has decided to wrestle with. Today, we're going to take a look at one of those critical
passages in Nietzsche, which is in Twilight of Idols. Many of the sections contained in Twilight
of Idols are Nietzsche's attempts to summarize or condense ideas that he'd written about for
over a decade by this point. This section is no different. It is called The Four Great Errors.
I've discussed this section a long time ago on the podcast in the episode on free will,
and I think it's been brought up in one or two other episodes over the years.
But this passage is important enough on its own to warrant its own discussion.
It was relevant to our discussion on free will because the Four Great Errors
is the most significant passage for comprehending Nietzsche's view on that subject,
above pretty much all other passages in Nietzsche's corpus. And in The Four Great Errors, he attacks
free will, but without falling into the determinist camp. The reason he doesn't fall into that
camp is because the criticism in The Four Great Errors is targeted at our whole mental framework
of cause and effect, or rather the way in which cause and effect are applied in our thought.
Nietzsche can't be a determinist because he's not even convinced that our will is bound within
an infinite net of causes. That would be the normal determinist critique of the libertarian
free will doctrine, but it would still fundamentally be the same error. And while Nietzsche doesn't
quite come up to the point of denying causality altogether, he calls into question all of the
commonplace habits in our thinking about causality, that color the way that we make
sense of reality, that what we designate as a cause and what we designate as effect
is often an arbitrary distinction. Usually the reason for distinguishing the cause from the effect
accords with some kind of psychological need or inclination, rather than what might be a sober
understanding of reality. Furthermore, we often reason backward to determine the so-called cause
of a given event. The mind will invent causes where one is not immediately perceptible.
Free will is merely one of the erroneous thought processes that Nietzsche draws our
attention to in this passage. But in fact, this type of error goes all the way down to our very
conception of being, of a reality full of quote unquote things that are consistent, unitary,
coherent. In other words, existence or beings. Again, one of those apparently self-evident
truths contained within that word being, that nevertheless has metaphysical implications
about reality itself, and that we nevertheless all use on a daily basis because it's baked into
the structure of our language. So first, I'll list off these four errors, and then we'll get
into the nuts and bolts of the passage in which Nietzsche explains what he means by each and gives
examples. The errors are as follows. One, the error of confusing cause and effect. This is quite
straightforward. We believe something is a cause when actually it's an effect. Two, the error of
false causality. That is, we believe something is in a causal relationship when in fact it only
accompanies the so-called effect, and that we've not actually established a causal relationship.
Three, the error of imaginary causes. We invent causes based on a sensation or a mental state,
and Nietzsche says that this is in order to justify that mental state. And finally,
four, the error of free will. A specific example of such an error in our causal thinking.
And on closer inspection, the error of free will points to a more profound error,
that we establish such cause and effect relationships such as the ego causing one's actions
because of a psychological necessity, the perceived consequences of believing in this
causal relationship, the consequences of holding the belief, or the consequences of not holding the
belief. That's what actually motivates the belief itself, or perceived or imagined consequences
of if we hold the belief what happens, if we don't hold the belief what happens,
what are the consequences for humanity. So, confusing cause and effect, false causality,
imaginary causes, and then freedom of the will. With that introduction, let's look to the passage.
The beginning of the four great errors concerns the error of confusing cause and effect,
and Nietzsche explains this error through the example of Alvice Cornaro. So, Cornaro is a writer
and an architect during the Italian Renaissance period. He's born in the 15th century in Padua,
although the exact date of his birth is disputed, and I bring this up because it's disputed for
an interesting reason which we'll discuss in a moment, but Cornaro is born sometime between the
1460s and the 1480s, and he lived until 1566. Although he's related to a noble family from
Venice, Cornaro is merely the son of an innkeeper. He would sort of draw upon that relation to
nobility because of the prestige of it, but in fact, he's from a lesser branch of the family,
but he's able to take what little money his family had and became a rather successful entrepreneur.
He's a somewhat interesting character, actually. He had little scientific training.
He attended university in Venice, but he dropped out because he felt that the education he received
was overly philosophical. It was disconnected from practical knowledge, which tells us something
about him right there. He made his fortune by obtaining permission to attempt to reclaim land
from the lagoon near Venice on the Adriatic Sea. So, what Cornaro does is he successfully applied
the science of hydraulics to turn this portion of the lagoon into wheat fields and fishing ponds.
This is good for Cornaro as a business venture, and it's good for the city because the lagoon,
it causes swarms of insects in the summertime and winter fogs. It smells terrible. There's just
all sorts of problems. It's much better to have wheat fields and fishing ponds next to your city
than a stinky, hazardous lagoon. So, after this, Cornaro publishes a treatise on water management,
and he would go on to become a patron of the arts with the wealth that he made from
ventures like this, and he is credited with introducing the Roman Renaissance style of
architecture into Northern Italy. None of this is why Cornaro is of interest to Nietzsche,
by the way. Nietzsche's fascination with the example of Cornaro is due to a series of treatises
that he published later in his life. Cornaro is known as a humanist to this very day because he
attacked a prejudice that was common in medieval European society and had lingered. It was popular
up to his own time, and this is the view that old age is nothing but a period of pain and decay.
You know, this is the harsh winter of life. The years that you spend as an elderly person
are not but suffering, and that this is in some way simply the natural order of human life. That
you should expect this and endure it stoically, but just know that when you get to old age,
it's going to be a bad time. You know, you can rejoice because your body is about to be
rejuvenated in heaven, but it's more or less accepted that one's physical existence at the
end of their natural life is, well, bad. Cornaro lives to a very old age, and he says on the contrary,
one's elderly years are the most beautiful period of life. He says that God wills all of us to live
long and healthy lives, and to live to reach this best age of one's lifetime, because in old age,
all of your accumulated wisdom allows you to see the world with new eyes or with just a better,
higher perspective than the youth have on life. And so, Cornaro becomes a kind of health and
longevity advocate, and he lives to either his 90s or to be over 100 years old, his exact age
when he dies is disputed because we have various birth dates for him, with some sources saying he
was born in 1464, although it seems more likely he was born in the 1480s. That's just my belief
that as Cornaro becomes a sort of guru on longevity, people begin to overestimate his age. It becomes
exaggerated just how old this man lived to be. That's not an unusual phenomenon at all. It's
very common among, for example, Taoist sages or Zen masters in the East. In any case, he did live to
a very old age for somebody living in the 15th century, and so we finally come to the main point
on which Nietzsche will use Cornaro in order to demonstrate a great error in thinking. Cornaro
began to suffer from gastrointestinal problems and feverishness when he was around 35 years old.
His doctors advised him to eat a very sparse diet, and Cornaro restricted himself to 12 ounces of
food a day. Bread, egg yolk, meat, and soup, and 14 ounces of wine every day. So when he was in his
80s, he was asked to write a treatise on his secret to longevity, and Cornaro attributed his
good health to this diet. And Cornaro genuinely believed that liberality in one's diet, gluttonous
consumption of food and drink, he says this is contrary to the will of God, and this is evidenced
by the fact that it shortens your life. By living virtuously, by consuming only the caloric intake
that you absolutely need, one earns a long life. And it's worth noting, aside from this religious
or moral dimension of Cornaro's thought, this popular wisdom of caloric reduction
would remain in the zeitgeist for hundreds of years afterwards. This was true up through Nietzsche's
time. The popular wisdom that Nietzsche calls coronarism is not really overturned until the 20th
century. And so now the passage Nietzsche writes, quote, everyone knows the book of the famous Cornaro
in which he recommends his slender diet as a recipe for a long and happy life, a virtuous one too.
Few books have been read so much, even now thousands of copies are sold in England every year.
I do not doubt that scarcely any book, except the Bible as is made, has done as much harm,
has shortened as many lives as this well-intentioned curiosity. The reason? The mistaking of the
effect for the cause. The worthy Italian thought his diet was the cause of his long life, whereas the
precondition for a long life, the extraordinary slowness of his metabolism, the consumption of
so little was the cause of his slender diet. He was not free to eat little or much. His frugality
was not a matter of, quote, unquote, free will. He became sick when he ate more. But whoever is
no carp not only does well to eat properly, but needs to, a scholar in our own time with his
rapid consumption of nervous energy, would simply destroy himself with Cornaro's diet,
crede experto, end quote. That last line means, believe him who has tried, credit the expert.
So implicitly, Nietzsche is tying himself to the type of the nervous modern scholarly type.
At least he was at one time during his professor days. So again, who says that Nietzsche can't
take a shot at himself every once in a while. In any case, as we've discussed many times on the
podcast, Nietzsche spent quite a lot of time experimenting with his own diet. He believed
there was a very real link between your overall physical and mental health. And that one's daily
habits, your daily intake of food, you shouldn't simply go about these things thoughtlessly.
The question of Nietzsche's own diet and his views on diet are somewhat fascinating,
but the key point to understand about this is that Nietzsche has come to understand something
that I think most nutritionists today would agree with. There is no universal diet. Now,
this doesn't mean there's no definite claim that we can make about what is healthy and unhealthy
in general. But different people have different physiological needs, different lifestyles,
just different restrictions on what they can or should eat for their best health.
And Nietzsche learns that through first hand experience. He also sees that the eating habits
of European countries differ dramatically, such as when he compares the eating habits of Germans
to that of the Italians and so on. As a result, he's able to see that Coronaro's diet can't be a
panacea, that in fact, it was right for Coronaro, but that it would not be right for many others.
And if this is the case, this means that Coronaro's diet may have shortened a few lives
rather than lengthened them, that people with a higher caloric need might have fallen victim to
thinking that, you know, Coronaro's diet is the cause of his longevity. As I noted earlier,
this isn't a critique of cause and effect as such. In fact, Nietzsche says that Coronaro's
longevity is the cause of his diet. If you pay attention, that's actually a very funny claim,
but he makes it quite clear a slow metabolism is the cause of a long life. This kind of thinking
in Nietzsche, by the way, goes all the way back to his lectures in the pre-plotonics,
where he references the thought experiment by the philosopher of science, von Baer,
in which it is imagined that pulse rate correlates with one's experience of the passage of time.
That is one hypothesis that as far as I understand has not been borne out in terms of
modern scientific knowledge, as Nietzsche's insights on nutrition perhaps have. But that said,
this colors Nietzsche's thinking, there's a speed to one's physiological existence, that we can
measure the existence of a phenomena, in some sense, by the tempo at which it manifests.
But if Coronaro's metabolism is what causes his long life, his slow rate of metabolizing
sort of equates to a slow and long-lived existence, then that means that his physiology,
what he is, is what accounts for his dietary needs. And in spite of all the unanswered questions that
still remain concerning diet even to this day, it seems quite clear that on an epistemological level,
the causal relationship has not been established here. That if we are to admit that once diet
depends on their physiology, then is their physiology not the cause of their optimal diet
rather than the optimal diet, the cause of the state of their physiology? We could of course say
that living at variance with your optimal diet could be the cause of an early death, or living
in accord with your optimal diet is the cause of a long life. But in that case, couldn't we just
take the argument a step further? Why can't this person eat only according to their ideal diet?
Maybe somebody really needs to have just red meat and potatoes and vegetables,
why is it that they're always eating junk food? Well, maybe they have no impulse control. So why
do they not have good impulse control? Isn't there a physiological reason for that too?
Something about just their nature that makes them crave junk food and so on and so on, right?
It's very hard to draw the line at a certain point and say, this is the final cause. That's one of
the things that's sort of implicit behind this critique of our causal thinking is that in some
sense, it's always arbitrary where we say, no, this is the cause. Somebody can always come along
and say, okay, but what's the cause of that? And this answer doesn't satisfy us with our common
sense wisdom, right? Why is it not satisfying? It's because we've been taught a certain mental
framework throughout our whole lives that tells us exactly the opposite. And Nietzsche says that
this radical idea here is pointing to this very error is the first example of his revaluation
of all values. He writes that quote, the most general formula on which every religion and
morality is founded, quote, do this and that, refrain from this and that, then you will be happy.
Otherwise, end quote. That's what Nietzsche calls the original sin of reason in this passage in
Twilight of Idols. But I should note here that this tendency and thought was observed by Nietzsche
as early as human all to human. It's what he characterized there as one of the most common
false conclusions arrived at by human reason. For the sake of comparison with the four great
errors, let's look at section 227 of human all to human, where Nietzsche writes quote, Christianity,
which was very innocent in its intellectual ideas, demanded faith and nothing but faith,
and passionately rejected the desire for reasons. It pointed to the successful result of faith.
You'll soon discover the advantage of faith is suggested. You'll be blessed because of it.
The state, in fact, does the same thing, and each father raises his son in the same way.
Just take this to be true, he says. You'll discover how good it feels.
But this means that the truth of an opinion should be proved by its personal benefit.
The usefulness of a teaching should guarantee its intellectual certainty
and substantiation. This is as if the defendant were to say in court,
my defender is telling the whole truth for just see what happens as a result of his plea. I am
acquitted. End quote. So Nietzsche's point here, and human all to human, is that the proof for a
given proposition in this formula is the happiness that the proposition creates. Do this and you
will be happy. Believe this, you will discover how good it feels. The church called this the proof by
pleasure. Nietzsche's point in human all to human is much more straightforward than it is in the
Four Great Errors passage in Twilight of Idols. In human all to human Nietzsche is simply exposing
the fact that this is a paralogism, a false syllogism that does not serve as proof of anything.
Nietzsche's point here is simply this reasoning is false. It's incredibly common,
but nonetheless it's false. Another example of human fallibility and reasoning often covered over
by moralizing driven by a psychological need. So it's typical of the critiques we find in this
book. Our reasoning here is human all to human. In the Four Great Errors passage, this proof by
happiness is examined on another basis. The fact that the proof by happiness is a confusion of the
effect for the cause. Why is this? Because like with Coronaro's diet in which slow metabolism,
you know, a physiology with natural longevity is actually the cause of one's sparse intake of
calories. Nietzsche argues here that one's happiness is the cause of their virtue, not virtue, the
cause of their happiness. That some people are by their very nature, by their very constitution,
happy. The reason why a person lives happily is the same reason that they live virtuously because
of what they are, which means that once again, when we promise that virtuous living creates
happiness, we're reasoning based on a causal chain that we haven't actually established.
Nietzsche writes in Twilight of Idols quote,
A well turned out human being, a happy one, must perform certain actions and shrinks instinctively
from other actions. He carries the order which he represents physiologically into his relations with
other human beings and things. In a formula, his virtue is the effect of his happiness.
A long life, many descendants, this is not the wages of virtue, rather virtue itself
is that slowing down of the metabolism, which leads, among other things, also to a long life,
many descendants, in short, to cornerism. The church and morality say,
A generation, a people are destroyed by license and luxury. My recovered reason says,
When a people approaches destruction, when it degenerates physiologically, then license and
luxury follow from this, namely the craving for ever stronger and more frequent stimulation,
as every exhausted nature knows it. This young man turns pale early in wilts, his friends say,
Well, that is due to this or that disease. I say, that he became diseased, that he did not resist
the disease, was already the effect of an impoverished life or hereditary exhaustion.
The newspaper reader says, The party destroys itself by making such a mistake.
My higher politics says, A party which makes such mistakes has reached its end.
It has lost the sureness of instinct. Every mistake, in every sense, is the effect
of the degeneration of instinct, of the disintegration of the will. One could almost
define what is bad in this way. All that is good is instinct, and hence easy, necessary, free.
Laboriousness is an objection. The God is typically different from the hero. In my language,
light feet are the first attribute of divinity.
End quote. When I read passages like that one in Twilight of Idols, it is almost daunting to
try and unpack it, as they say, because Nietzsche has already condensed everything down to the finest
subtlest version of the point. But Nietzsche asserts here, Virtue is an effect of happiness,
which is a revaluation because it completely inverts the moralist narrative that happiness
only comes as an effect of virtue. This is why Nietzsche says at the beginning of the
four great errors, that this erroneous thinking is hollowed by the names religion and morality.
Because all religion, all morality is based on this proposed causal relation,
where virtue is the cause and happiness the effect. Whether it is the Christian duty to turn away
from your sins, or the Buddhist abandonment of desire, or the Muslim submission to God,
whether it is the deontologist who speaks of moral obligations, or the utilitarian who
preaches the greatest good for the greatest many, or Socrates telling us that eudaimonia
arises from living virtuously. Really, it is with Socrates that Nietzsche finds the
philosopher of this formula. Nietzsche writes in another section of Twilight of Idols,
the problem of Socrates, quote, I tried to understand the idiosyncrasy from which the
Socratic equation, reason equals virtue equals happiness, could have arisen,
the weirdest equation I've ever seen, and one which was essentially opposed to all the instincts
of the older Hellenes, end quote. So once again, Nietzsche would probably suggest that
his notion that happiness is the cause and virtue the effect is closer to the older Greekism,
as he called it, the idea that the good man was good by nature, and thus acted good by nature,
had good feelings by nature, had a healthy diet by nature, was virtuous by nature.
And so to return to the four great errors passage, this is why Nietzsche says that a God has light
feet, because for the person with that natural goodness in them, virtuous actions don't come
as a labor. They don't have to force themselves. They don't have to tyrannize over themselves
in order to comport themselves in a just or admirable way, or to be generous or courageous people.
If that is a burden, it already indicates a disintegrating instinct, a failing health.
Nietzsche then gives a series of examples of the opposite. That one's health is not destroyed by
vice, but one engages in vice because of their failing health. That applies on a societal scale.
This is a point in Nietzsche that oftentimes, I would say both his reactionary interpreters
and his leftist critics fail to understand. Nietzsche would completely disagree with anyone
who thought that the answer to decadence, that is the decline of a civilization,
is to institute some program of virtue, that we're going to get everyone back on the same page,
get everyone to begin acting virtuously again, and through this reinstill the old values of the dying
or dead traditions, and that this will then rejuvenate our society. Because not only is this
remedy sure to fail, on a deeper level, the entire proposition is based on that erroneous
perception, that vice, depraved behavior, sexual license, luxury, and so on, that these are the
cause of society's downfall. Nietzsche says no, the society's downfall causes those things.
The reason? Physiology expanded to a grand scale. The declining physiology always needs
greater and greater stimulation in order to feel anything at all. The same way we might compare
to the taste buds of older people begin to wane, the same way you simply don't get the same thrill
out of something pleasurable, the thousandth time that you do it as you did on the first or the
second time. Furthermore, errors in judgment, errors in thinking, mistakes, these are again
sourced to be the cause of one's downfall. One really Nietzsche's point is if you had been on
top of your game, you wouldn't have made the mistake at all. The mistake didn't cause you to
fail. It's like when in a game of chess you say, you know, I lost because I blundered one of my
pieces. But why did you blunder one of your pieces in the first place? You know, well then you might
say, well because I was tired or I wasn't paying attention. Or I based my move on an instinct
that turned out to be wrong. Sometimes players who are on the verge of defeat just start to
blunder piece after piece. They get irritated and they make riskier moves to try and regain the
advantage and they just lose piece after piece after piece. And so too with the political chess
game with the geopolitical chess game, you know, with a political party, they're defeated not because
they politically miscalculated, they miscalculate because they're on the verge of defeat.
So I think those are all very helpful examples. Now we come to the second error.
The error of false causality. In this error, Nietzsche probes a bit further into our whole
manner of thinking about cause and effect. And he asks, where do we get our faith that we know
what a cause is? And this is a serious logical challenge, I would think, to put to most people
with such common sense notions in their head as to how they come to designate something as a cause
and something else as the effect. Aside from however we might go about logically establishing
this, Nietzsche says, if you want to know the actual reason why people possess this faith and
causality, he thinks it comes from, quote, the realm of the famous inner facts, of which not a
single one has so far been proved to be factual. We believe ourselves to be causal in the act of
willing. We thought that here at least we caught causality in the act. Nor did one doubt that
all the antecedents of an act, its causes, were to be sought in consciousness would be found there
once sought as motives. Else one would not have been free and responsible for it. Finally, who
would have denied that a thought is caused? That the ego causes the thought, end quote.
So this faith and causality, it comes from our own inner experience of willing.
We perceive that our thoughts, our motives have a cause, which is the ego, and that these motives
then cause our actions. But as Nietzsche says, this is a faith. And that is because it's derived
from an intuition. It's derived from a feeling, just a sense that we have that we're the cause of
ourselves and the cause of our actions. But it's not established by evidence or reasoned argument.
It was simply taken as a given that such inner facts are to be taken as true because
what could be more of an immediate certainty than our own perceptions and our own inner feelings.
But Nietzsche thinks there's a mistake here. He says that the so-called motive is an error
because it is, quote, merely a surface phenomenon of consciousness, something alongside the deed
that is more likely to cover up the antecedents of the deeds than to represent them, end quote.
And Nietzsche says of the alleged origin of our motives, the ego, that it has become, quote,
a fable, a fiction, a play on words. It has altogether ceased to think, feel, or will, end quote.
What Nietzsche means here is that the ego is a narrator, which gives
post hoc explanations for the actions of the organism, which in truth are, quote, unquote,
willed by impulses, which are unconscious. This notion of the self, first seriously proposed by
Nietzsche, would later be expanded into the psychoanalytic school of thought, led by Freud,
carried on by Jung and many others. So the thinking, feeling, and willing does not originate in the ego
in this new understanding. The ego is this self-image, this constantly self-creating narrator
that is attempting to make sense of and justify the actions that are thought, felt, and willed
by unconscious drives. So the ego is not the cause of motives. And motives, as the consciously
articulated explanation for how we act, Nietzsche writes, quote, merely accompanies events. It can
also be absent, end quote. So what is our justification for saying the motive is the cause? In other words,
the motive accompanies the event, yes, the motive that we consciously narrate to ourselves,
accompanies whatever act or deed we are doing, but he says it can also be absent from it.
That's a strange thought, taking an action but with no
conscious motive. But nevertheless, I'm sure almost all of us have had something like this
experience. I mean, when you do something and then later you come to the realization,
I don't know why I did that, right? Shouldn't it be impossible to have that thought? And yet
many people have that thought. Perhaps if we know ourselves fairly well, you know,
you might be able to come up with an explanation after the fact, but that wouldn't change
having the experience of doing something without being conscious of our motives. And if that's the
case, then could conscious motive really be the cause of action? Or is it merely an accompanying
phenomenon, not the cause? So in other words, an event happens, several phenomena occur,
we have a human action, and accompanying that phenomenon, we have the conscious subject who is
taking the action, we have the conscious subject's understanding of their motive for the action.
What is the cause of the action taking place? Nietzsche says that by attributing it to the
motive or to the ego consciousness, we've just leapt to an unjustifiable conclusion.
In light of Nietzsche's new appraisal of the self that would become powerfully influential
on the psychoanalysts, Nietzsche writes, quote, there are no mental causes at all.
The whole of the allegedly empirical evidence for that has gone to the devil, end quote.
But then Nietzsche goes on to suggest that this belief in mental causes is at the root of our
notion of being. What do I mean by that? Well, when we designate a quote unquote cause, we always
have to essentialize events as things. The reason for this is that the entire mental
framework of cause and effect has to separate the effect from the cause, or else it would be
nonsensical. So it has to create a doer and then the deed, a subject, and then the action the subject
takes. But as Nietzsche argues in genealogy of morality, when he says that this is like separating
the lightning from the flash, that's simply a grammatical faith. When we say the lightning
causes the flash, we're saying nothing at all there. We're simply taking an event that happened,
a series of sensations that we had, maybe it's sensations of a routinely repeated and even
scientifically understood phenomenon like lightning. But nevertheless, we're taking an event that
happened, which is inseparable from the process that creates that event. It's all the same thing,
one big process, one big happening, one big becoming. And we're distilling out of that,
a subject that does the thing. Further down in the passage Nietzsche continues quote,
all that happened was considered a doing, all doing the effect of a will. The world became to
it a multiplicity of doers, a doer, a subject was slipped under all that happened. It was out of
himself that man projected his three inner facts, that in which he believed most firmly, the will,
the spirit, the ego. He even took the concept of being from the concept of the ego, he posited
things as being as a cause, small wonder that later he always found in things only that which he had
put into them. The thing itself to say it once more, the concept of thing is a mere reflex of the
faith and the ego as a cause. And even your atom, my dear mechanists and physicists, how much error,
how much rudimentary psychology is still residual in your atom end quote.
So when we slip being beneath everything, that is the creation of the doer that does the deed,
the lightning that does the flashing. Nietzsche's suggestion here is that this is a kind of sly
trickery, it's like a magic trick, sliding the card that the audience member revealed to you
back under the deck, right? That's what we have done with all phenomena. All that is given about
a phenomena is sensation, that's all we know of the world, what is given to us by the senses.
And we are by no means justified in positing being on that basis. These sensations are caused by
definite separate things with their own essence, that is sort of the best I can do it, positing the
ordinary notion of being. But we create the sense through our language, through the creation of the
thing, the subject, the object. This relates to atomism because the atomist is trying to discover
in some sense, the smallest thing, the bedrock of physical existence, the smallest possible particle,
the smallest unit of matter. Because if we were to discover that, we could then say that something
is real, something is existent in the way a platonic form exists, the atom is this thing,
the atom is that enduring unity that we always indicate when we indicate being. And thus, whatever
you may think of atomism, Nietzsche's point here is that the same tendency to think of the world in
terms of being is the same psychological undergirding of that atomist project. Fundamentally, this is
the same thing that undergirds the Theists project. He's articulating the same faith when he makes
spirit the cause of reality. God is the cause of reality. And here that prejudice is articulated
in the same form as its origin, reality as caused by the will of a thinking subject.
That intuition of being a thing that thinks, that's the reason for this type of error,
slipping that thing-ness, that being underneath the ego itself. And so we may say that in the
second great error, Nietzsche has gone farther in critiquing causal thinking itself. The third error,
that of imaginary causes, may at first appear to be less of an attack on causality than, you know,
simply another misapplication of causality. But as we get into this third error, I think it will
become clear there is a even further critique, an even deeper critique here as well. The error of
imaginary causes is best exemplified by dreams. Nietzsche here, again, returns to musings, which
he first put to the page in human all too human, and which were later revisited by Freud in his
work The Interpretation of Dreams. It's a well-known phenomenon that dreamers will experience external
stimuli of some kind, such as a loud sound, light flickering on their eyes, or as is the case in
some of Freud's experiments being tickled with a feather while you sleep, and the dreamer will
incorporate that sensation into the logic of the dream. Nietzsche writes, quote,
A cause is slipped under a particular sensation. For example, one following a far off canon shot,
often a whole little novel in which the dreamer turns up as the protagonist. The sensation endures
meanwhile in a kind of resonance. It waits as it were until the causal instinct permits it to step
into the foreground, now no longer as a chance occurrence, but as meaning. The canon shot appears
in a causal mode, in an apparent reversal of time. What is really later, the motivation,
is experienced first, often with a hundred details which pass like lightning, and the shot follows.
What has happened? The representations which were produced by a certain state have been
misunderstood as its causes, end quote. So the interesting thing about the dreaming mind
is the way in which a sensation is represented to the dreaming subject as a cause of events which
are entirely scripted and represented by the mind alone, for the mind alone. That the events in the
dream are not in fact caused by the canon shot. The canon shot is simply incorporated as the cause
as an event with meaning. The representations that were produced according to the logic of the dream
come from the motivating drives, the entire cacophony of all the organs and impulses within the
dreamer. And dreams also have that funny way of playing with time, as we all know from the film
Inception for example, in which some sense impression the dreamer receives can persist,
resonate as Nietzsche says here, and then be explained after the fact by the dreaming mind.
Which Nietzsche is comparing to the way that we represent the world, our sense organs interact
with our mind in such a way as to produce a representation. The representation of course
comes after the initial stimulus, but Nietzsche says in the logic of the dream this is precisely
reversed, and where Nietzsche makes another radical claim, another challenge to the common sense
wisdom is in the following paragraph, quote, In fact, we do the same thing when awake. Most of
our general feelings, every kind of inhibition, pressure, tension, and explosion in the play
and counterplay of our organs, and particularly in the state of the nervous sympathicus,
excite our causal instinct. We want to have a reason for feeling this way or that,
for feeling bad, or feeling good. We are never satisfied merely to state the fact that we feel
this way or that, we admit this fact only, become conscious of it only, and we have furnished some
kind of motivation. Memory, which swings into action in such cases, unknown to us, brings up
earlier states of the same kind, together with the causal interpretations associated with them,
not their real causes, end quote. This I think is imminently relatable, because for one I think
it's fairly common, it's a fairly common experience that sometimes you just wake up and feel,
for lack of a more descriptive word, happy. You're just having a good day, and you can't even find
any particular reason for it. Or maybe you wake up in a bad mood, you know, you woke up in the
wrong side of the bed, as we say, and then a friend asks you, why are you in such a bad mood?
And then what happens? You begin to search for reasons, some sort of consciously experienced
or consciously articulated cause for why you're in a given mental state or in a given mood.
And the memory begins to present you with all these possibilities. Here's why you might feel
that way. And as Nietzsche coins the phrase, and beyond good and evil, there might not be such a
fine distinction between finding and inventing, Finden und Erfinden, as these words are in German.
There's not as much of a difference between that as those two things, as we would like to think.
Now it's worth noting that in some sense, one could make the argument that it's actually the
point of memory to give you answers to the question, why do I feel this way? Like specifically
answering that question, that's one of the main tasks of memory, because one of the main advantages
of being a remembering organism is that when something isn't working for us, we can course
correct, we can say, I feel bad all the time. What am I doing that's making me feel bad?
And that's an indisputably useful function of memory, because an animal with no self-consciousness
across time doesn't have access to that kind of self-awareness. It might know I feel bad in the
moment. But if you can't string moments together and bring to mind the fact I felt bad every
single day for a week now, then course correction becomes difficult, if not impossible. And so this
is the main use of memory is actually to ask that question. But this is where the Nietzschean
critique of our notions of truth, given the context that we are biological
creatures that were physiological creatures. This is where that comes into play, because then
there's sort of a difficult question that is raised in the wake of this. Does memory actually
establish a firm empirical foundation for positing causal relationships between external events and
how we feel? All memory can do is correlate together all the times I felt a certain way,
and then ask what events preceded that. But can we actually say with certainty that the events
that preceded the way we feel caused that feeling? And if we can't say that with certainty, which I
think would follow from Nietzsche's argument so far, then tracing over all our past memories will
actually not bring us closer to any sort of certainty. It will simply remind us of past
interpretations we've made, past conscious explanations that we've given to ourselves,
post hoc, as to why that we feel the way that we do. And if every one of those past interpretations
was just as erroneous as the one prior to it, this kind of mental habit actually gets us nowhere.
The truth for Nietzsche is that there's this whole interplay of forces in our physiology,
that blind contest of impulses and drives. This is, in truth, why we feel the way we do.
But because none of those causal factors are actually conscious to us, none of them are freely
chosen to say this, to bring this to our attention, as Nietzsche does, as the equivalent of saying,
well, you simply feel this way, and that is that. But that's not satisfying, right?
That explanation, or frankly, that non-explanation, is not satisfying. And why? Well, Nietzsche says
there's a psychological explanation for why it's not satisfying, and it's fairly simple.
To locate a cause is to make known the unknown, and this quote relieves
comforts and satisfies, besides giving a feeling of power, end quote. When we're confronted by
an event beyond our control or understanding, the least we can do in order to not feel overwhelmed
by this is to explain why it is the event is happening, to give the event a meaning. Simply put,
to remain in a situation in which we're surrounded by the unknown is terrifying,
and the mind starts to grab for a cause in order to abolish the sense of terror,
like sort of grasping at vines to claw our way out of that pit, right? And so Nietzsche writes,
quote, first principle, any explanation is better than none. Since at bottom, it is merely a matter
of wishing to be rid of oppressive representations, one is not too particular about the means of
getting rid of them. The first representation that explains the unknown as familiar feels so good
that one quote considers it true, the proof of pleasure, of strength, as a criterion of truth,
end quote. We return to that old bad habit in drawing conclusions that Nietzsche wrote about
way back in human all too human, the proof by pleasure, believe this because it feels good,
in this case, because it abolishes that which feels bad, the sense of the unknown.
It doesn't even have to be a good explanation, any explanation that delivers us from the fear of
the unknown. The first one that seems to work as a cause, we will pick that explanation as soon
as possible, so that we can stop thinking about it. Nietzsche goes on to say, of course,
that we will adopt familiar causes over anything strange, over anything never experienced before.
Whatever we have already inscribed into memory and labeled as a cause will be our go to,
and memory will habituate this kind of thinking as a heuristic for future encounters with the
unknown. The lingering doubt, the mysterious, the unexplained, this is in many ways a torment,
causal thinking is a delivery from that torment, but that doesn't make it true, it just makes it
pleasurable. See, this is the the radical critique that Nietzsche is giving us about the structure
of our thought. Why we think the things that we do, as Deleuze would put it, truth is not an
element of thought. Nietzsche here is saying pleasure is the use of familiar habitual thought
patterns is pleasurable, which is why once this error in thought seeps into our thinking, we just
continue in it insensibly. There's a dimension of this in our own individual psychology as well,
Nietzsche writes, quote, one kind of positing of causes predominates more and more, is concentrated
into a system and finally emerges as dominant, that is, as simply precluding other causes and
explanations. The banker immediately thinks of business, the Christian of sin, and the girl
of her love, end quote. This kind of habituated thought pattern is a common error all its own,
albeit only a subset of this great error. But we've all seen it, I'm sure, the political activist for
whom the cause of everything in life is political, whatever the problem is, that was because of the
politics of the other side, whatever the solution is, or whatever good thing we have going on in
society, that's because of the politics of my side, every single problem is considered politically,
everything is assumed to be the result of this one system of causes, which is dominant in their
thought, and so they ignore all the other causes. Or we might think of the paranoiac, the person who's
dominated by paranoid suspicions and fears. They have an internal problem, they have their own
pathology, their own excessive blood of fearful and suspicious feelings, but they find the causes
of those feelings projected onto the external world. I'm fearful and suspicious not because I'm
paranoid, but because I'm being followed, right? Anything that happens in such a person's life
can be explained by some malevolent external force, some person that they're suspicious of,
and on and on. Carl Jung's notion that everything within the psyche that remains unconscious becomes
projected onto the world, and seen as a sort of external force or external actor, that idea
bears mentioning here because it resembles Nietzsche's idea in this passage. Everything
beneath the surface of consciousness is worked into the same familiar framework and projected onto
an external cause. Nietzsche goes on to argue that, quote, the whole realm of morality and religion
belongs under this concept of imaginary causes, end quote. And what Nietzsche means by this is
quite clear when we look at the concept of sin. How would Nietzsche regard sin, given the critiques
he's made so far about our causal thinking, our misapplications of causality? Well, he says the
feeling of sin is, quote, slipped under a physiological discomfort. One always finds reasons
for being dissatisfied with oneself, end quote. This kind of critique harkens back to the genealogy
of morals, in which Nietzsche says that the priest tells his flock, you sickly sheep, you are to blame
for your own suffering. Nietzsche wonders in that work how it is that such a sick ideology,
such as the ascetic ideal, could ever take hold. And this third great error is one of the elements
of that. The dismal workshop of the psyche that Christianity establishes, in which guilt is actually
heightened, the individuals made to work at making himself feel guiltier and guiltier.
This workshop gets going with the fuel of Rosentum all directed by the priest,
but its operations follow the formula as laid out here in the error of imaginary causes. That is
its structure. That is to say that the individual suffers and without an explanation feels his
suffering to be meaningless. It's part of the unknown, right? The discomfort of the unknown is
a thousand times more painful than the suffering itself, the sense that one's enduring a kind
of meaningless suffering. The priest gives the parishioner suffering meaning, that is his great
benefaction to mankind in a way, that he can make their suffering meaningful, and thus eases the
pain of suffering by attributing it to a cause. Now the entire mechanism of this, in Nietzsche's
view, is very bad because it multiplies the suffering in order to deal with the suffering.
But that's neither here nor there for our purposes in analyzing this passage. The key point
is that by giving the suffering meaning, the priest is engaging in this thinking based on
imaginary causes, and that it's better to have this imaginary cause than no cause at all.
Nietzsche finds that this prejudice is right there in the work of, for example, Schopenhauer,
his once great influence whom he later rejected. Nietzsche quotes world as well in representation,
quote, every great pain, whether physical or spiritual, declares what we deserve, for it could
not come to us if we did not deserve it, end quote. Nietzsche criticized this aspect of Schopenhauer's
thinking, once again in human all to human, where he said that we tend to think that because a
sensation exists, there must be some justification for it. The word deserve in Schopenhauer
is really an attempt to legitimize or justify suffering. Why? Well, in order to give it that
much needed meaning. What does it mean for suffering to be deserved? Well, it means there
was some way that it could have been prevented, some way of acting or being that we did not
properly fulfill. And as a result, we must suffer. And Nietzsche argues that reveals the truth of
morality as a poisoner and slanderer of life that it is. Morality always has this idea behind it,
of treating the suffering of life as a punishment for wrong action. Meanwhile, good feelings,
good conscience, happiness, that's all conceived as the reward for the consciousness having done
good deeds, of having acted the proper way. You used your will to obey the laws of God and so on.
And so good feelings are the reward for right action, bad feelings are the punishment for wrong
action. You know, again, the pleasure in these ideas is in giving a meaning to the entire human
psychodrama of feelings and sensations. Nietzsche raises an issue with this as well, though. He
writes that the so-called good conscience is, quote, a physiological state, which at times
looks so much like good digestion that it is hard to tell them apart, end quote. In other words,
the reason you're in a good mood is probably because you had a good wholesome meal and no indigestion
while metabolizing it. You say the cause of your happiness is your virtuous deeds. Nietzsche says
the cause of your happiness is your gut. He also takes issue with what he calls a nave fallacy,
that happiness comes from the successful completion of some enterprise. That in other words, you
know, we reach a goal that we've we've long tried to attain. You complete some meaningful task or
project and that's what makes you happy. Nietzsche says, quote, the successful termination of some
enterprise does not by any means give a hypochondriac or a Pascal agreeable feelings, end quote.
So to use the example of Blaise Pascal, it seems quite probable to me that Pascal was never happy
or rarely if ever happy might be a more measured way for me to put it. Pascal was an extreme depressive.
You know, he writes extensively about just how horrible it would be if it turned out that the
only existence were this world, you know, this world of impermanence and suffering, right? That
the human condition is like being one of many chained prisoners simply awaiting our execution.
That we're like a mode of dust in a chaotic universe whose scale is just beyond any comprehension.
These kinds of terrifying existential thoughts are always sort of storming through Pascal's mind
and they don't go away when he completes some task or personal challenge. They don't go away when he
you know, achieves his salvation of his soul through Christianity. So he believes, right?
If anything, these feelings are heightened now when Pascal becomes a Christian because he begins
to fear for his own salvation and he writes that salvation is uncertain even for the martyrs
up until the time when you face, you know, the justice of God or so on and so forth, whether
or not you find out that God will extend his grace to you. We might say the example of the
hypochondriac is also instructive here, you know, types with sustained high anxiety.
The actual circumstances of their lives don't matter that much in terms of regulating the state.
You know, their brains just always invent some reason why they need to be freaking out because
there's always at least some possibility that you ought to be freaking out. You know, there's always
could be some medical reason lurking within your physiology that you haven't become aware of yet.
You can always come up with something if your brain is dead set on worrying.
And so again, attributing the cause of your worrying to some definite event or external force
is an imaginary cause. And that becomes very obvious with such terminally anxious people
that they simply have something wrong, something that's malfunctioning with their brain that's
making them anxious. And then in fact, the searching for the imaginary causes of their anxiety is
actually part of the anxiety. It's actually part of that anxious brain cycle. You know,
similarly to with depression, depressed people aren't sad all the time, because every single
day of their lives is a never ending tragedy of just horrible calamitous things. It's because
they're incapable of being happy. That doesn't mean that that situation can't change by the way.
I'm not saying you're doomed to depression forever. That's not what I'm saying at all by the way.
I'm not saying there isn't a solution for their depression. It just means that blaming
external circumstances for a repeated sustained feeling that's happening inside of your head.
That is rather obviously a mistake. And it's actually part of that whole pathology is to
make those projections. Nietzsche writes, quote, in truth, all these supposed explanations are
resultant states. And as it were, translations of pleasurable or unpleasurable feelings into a
false dialect. One is in a state of hope because the basic physiological feeling is once again
strong and rich. One trusts in God because the feeling of fullness and strength gives a sense
of rest. Morality and religion belong altogether to the psychology of error. In every single case,
cause and effect are confused. Or truth is confused with the effects of believing something to be
true. Or a state of consciousness is confused with its causes. End quote. And so at this point,
we arrive at the final great error. Free will. In many ways, free will exemplifies all of these
errors and thought that we've previously considered. But Nietzsche lists it as a special case. And I
think because from free will, we can infer what it is that sets this entire erroneous thought
process into motion. The germ of the idea of free will Nietzsche alleges comes from what he calls
the foulest of all the theologians, artifices. So the worst thing that the religious thinkers
have ever created. This is the notion of responsibility, which makes the subject dependent
on the religious caste. This is because responsibility is what sits at the foundations of
all morality. This is what we have been articulating throughout this examination when it comes to
the tendencies of all moralities and religions to promise happiness in exchange for quote unquote
good behavior, and to promise punishment as the wages of sin. Responsibility is the concept required
for all moralism, without which the moral interpretation of human life just simply falls
apart. And why do we consider human beings responsible? Why are we responsible for our
actions or for our will? This is because of the belief in the doctrine of free will free will
responsibility. These concepts are more or less the same thing. We might ask a simple question
therefore. Why seek responsibility? Why would we create such a concept assuming that it is
false as Nietzsche says? Why would we have this notion then quote, wherever responsibilities are
sought? It is usually the instinct of wanting to judge and punish, which is at work. Becoming has
been deprived of its innocence when any being such and such is traced back to will to purposes,
to acts of responsibility. The doctrine of the will has been invented essentially for the purpose
of punishment. That is because one wanted to impute guilt. The entire old psychology, the psychology
of will, was conditioned by the fact that its originators, the priests at the head of ancient
communities, wanted to create for themselves the right to punish, or wanted to create this right
for God. Men were considered free so that they might be judged and punished, so that they might
become guilty. Consequently, every act had to be considered as willed, and the origin of every
act had to be considered as lying within the consciousness end quote. So this passage is
important in light of the fact that Nietzsche has attempted to make sense of human life with what he
calls an economy of principles. That is to say the greatest possible explanatory power excuse me
in the fewest possible principles. If human life is to be understood naturalistically then where
do we get the notion of free will? Here as elsewhere Nietzsche says the answer is will to power.
The priestly class, the ascetic types, they create free will, they create moral responsibility
because it's a means of wielding power. It makes the individuals of the community responsible,
and not just responsible in some sort of abstract sense, responsible to the priest,
who is the intercessor between man and God. If man thinks that there is right action and wrong
action, and that he's morally responsible for choosing right action over wrong,
he will naturally ask the priest, how should I act? And if he's asked, uh,
actioned wrongly in the past, he'll go to the priest and ask to be absolved.
The priest attained power over the flock by making them guilty. As Nietzsche writes further down in
the passage, quote, Christianity is a metaphysics of the hangman end quote. That is the aim of this
doctrine of responsibility, which is substantially identical with the doctrine of free will. And
Nietzsche writes that the priests and theologians continue to infect becoming, which is nature in
its pure innocence, with this guilt, that this is in some sense the ugliest thing that the human
animal does, and that the human animal does uniquely. It introduces guilt into innocent nature, innocent
becoming. To Nietzsche, therefore, free will is not simply a doctrine that expresses a common
sense truth about the world. It was a weed that was planted in us all for a very specific purpose.
And perhaps all such ideas, all such beliefs are planted for a similar such purpose to motivate
a certain kind of behavior, to express the power of a given drive within mankind.
This doctrine of responsibility, if we examine it in light of a naturalistic understanding of the
world, is a strange and unique thing. It doesn't really fit with the rest of our comprehension
of nature, where we never perceive, we never look for responsibility. We don't see responsibility
in the cosmos and the orbiting bodies slamming into one another or flying off into the abysses of
space. The one place that we find it is in ourselves, due to what we call these inner facts,
actually, conscience, or an intuition that has been inculcated in us and nurtured.
If we examine the doctrine strictly on a logical basis, we find it's premised on great
leaps of logical supposition, which designate the will as a causal force, the ego as the cause of
the will, and the ego one's self-nature as an uncaused cause, for which one becomes responsible
for themselves, that is, as if one had created himself and decided his own nature. This is a
series of fallacious assumptions, which we're not at all permitted to make according to the facts
at hand. It's nothing but an interpretation based on the attribution of imaginary causes,
taking something that merely accompanies the event as the cause of the event,
and nature, as he says, is an immoralist who's trying with all his strength to, quote,
take the concept of guilt and the concept of punishment out of the world again,
and to cleanse psychology, history, nature, and social institutions, end quote.
As this is his goal, he must necessarily oppose himself to the doctrine of free will,
which is the origin of that stain on the self-consciousness of nature, which is
man. The last section of this chapter, the four great errors, section eight, we can regard as
Nietzsche's mission statement, so to speak. If all of these apparently self-evident beliefs are
in fact errors, then what doctrine ought we take up instead? And he directly contrasts himself
with the positions of Kant and Schopenhauer, who both question free will on a strictly logical basis,
but appeal to two things, our intuition of free will, i.e., the way we think about ourselves
and think about our actions, regardless of the truth of those thoughts, and also to the notion
of intelligible freedom, that in spite of the fact that we act in one way or another
in accord with our own nature, meaning that apparently we simply are one way or another,
man must have had a freedom to be this or that kind of person. There must be some kind of choice
prior to the realization of one's nature. And Nietzsche implies that this is because we've
always held a more basic and blatantly false prejudice, but one which nevertheless colors
our thinking, that man is the effect of some special purpose or some special destiny.
This kind of thinking is right in line with our entire concept of being,
which draws these lines of separation between subject and object, between cause and effect,
between one phenomena and another. That man is divided from the rest of nature as a special
quote-unquote thing, a special case, something capable of attaining the ideal of humanity,
the ideal of happiness, the ideal of morality. But Nietzsche argues, quote,
the fatality of his essence is not to be disentangled from the fatality of all that has been and will
be, end quote. The counter doctrine then to free will and to the entire doctrine of causality,
which includes even the refutation of free will, the doctrine of determinism, all of this is to be
dismissed in the face of Nietzsche's new doctrine of fate. This is why I tend to call Nietzsche's view
fatalism, in which all apparently separate things and events are part of a vast tapestry. And this
isn't like a mechanistic series of billiard balls clacking into one after the other in a chain of
causes and effects that must either end in the absurdity of an infinite regress or the equal
absurdity of an uncaused cause. We might say, by the way, the infinite regress absurdity is found
in determinism, and the uncaused cause absurdity is found in the libertarian free will doctrine.
That is what the debate is between. No, Nietzsche is not having any of this, because to even create
that image of existence as a chain, a series of links, is to draw arbitrary divisions to,
from our human perspective, which informs us not one bit about the nature of human independent
reality, create all of these separate categories and then call them beings or existence or causes
and effects. And in this way, Nietzsche rebukes Kant while retaining his influence from the neocontians,
which is with Nietzsche all the way from the beginning of his career. He carries forward
that intuition that causality is not something, quote unquote, out there in an objective world.
It's something which happens at the intersection of human perception and the so-called external
world, something that is useful for us as an interpretive framework, even though it may be
a false framework for all that. We'll now look at the final paragraph of the chapter,
the conclusion of the four great errors, quote. One is necessary. One is a piece of faithfulness.
One belongs to the whole. One is in the whole. There is nothing which could judge, measure,
compare, or sentence our being, for that would mean judging, measuring, comparing,
or sentencing the whole. But there is nothing besides the whole, that nobody is held responsible
any longer, that the mode of being may not be traced back to a cause of prima, that the world
does not form a unity either as a sensorium or as a spirit. That alone is the great liberation.
With this alone is the innocence of becoming restored. The concept of God was until now the
greatest objection to existence. We deny God. We deny the responsibility in God. Only thereby do
we redeem the world, end quote. To want one aspect of fate to be different is to want the whole
thing to be different. The entire interplay of forces would be altered by one force disappearing,
changing its course or intensity. And yet reality is not to be conceived as a unity,
as a monism, and the way that, say, many of the early pre-platonics thought that reality could
be conceived. No, Nietzsche is with the pluralists, and he's with Heraclitus. The one is the many.
The many is not reducible to a one, but neither is any part of the many to be conceived as a
cause unto itself divided ontologically from the rest of the many. The many remains a many,
not the subject divided from the world of objects. Nietzsche's fatalism therefore
dares us to accept a pluralistic reality, and every event within it, as absolutely necessitated
by a non-purposive relation of forces. If we take that great leap of acceptance,
of regarding every piece of fate as necessary, we affirm the entirety of the great play of
becoming. And if one does this, then imputing guilt or responsibilities to some portion of it
would be just another absurdity. Because every other part which we affirm and call good can only
exist in relation to those parts that we call bad. That we are to say, along with Spinoza,
that the many modifications of existence, the various phenomena, meaning animals, trees, mountains,
lightning, flash floods, human beings, warfare, disease, weather patterns, all of it, can only
be regarded as good or bad from the standpoint of our limited human reason, from the standpoint of
one particular perspective. None of it is good or bad in and of itself. Because to say that would
be to deny the whole the right of existence. In Nietzsche's eyes, this is the effect of the
God doctrine, the idea of an eternal moral judge presiding over all being. Being instantiated in
our thought has an eternally existing form of consciousness, and in eternal moral law, which
intercedes in existence, judges and condemns some, affirms and uplifts others, divides all the souls
at the end of time into the good people and the bad people. This is not a healthy view of existence.
It's an argument against existence, in fact, because it necessitates, as it were, a judgment
passed against the world. If this world of nature and the people living in it, its states and empires,
are to be judged from the absolute moral standard of Christianity, then the world must be deemed guilty.
But we already know where this drive to call the world guilty comes from. Nietzsche suggests
that this is where we should look to determine why it is that we would make such errors as those that
we have considered. Once again, under our apparently cool-headed rationalist view of the world,
we find what is ultimately religious. And that is true, even of those of us
who have formally left religion. These great errors still remain in our thought.
That's all for this week, everyone. Thanks for joining me. I'm back at home from after being on
tour. I was sick for a while. I don't know if you can hear it in my voice, maybe it gives my voice
a little more roughness or grit, but I'm getting better. I'm improving. As many of you know,
if you've been listening for a while, you usually get sick when you're on tour like that.
But we've got four more episodes of this season coming out. I'm excited for every one of these.
I think these are going to be really good. I'm happy with them regardless of what the
reception is going to be, but I think it's going to be pretty good. Alright, that's all. Signing off.
