Also a bunch of basic supplementation.
So how people use protein, how they do their pre-workout,
their post-workout, what electrolytes,
brand chains, et cetera, they're using while they're working
out, basic amino acid supplementation.
I'm going to assume that that's all a given, and if not,
that you've got that covered pretty well on a bunch
of podcasts, and then we'll talk about kind
of more interesting things that would sit on top
of those basics being well covered.
So we're going to dive into the things that you want
to start looking at after you've got the basics down.
Welcome to Barbell Shrugged.
I'm Mike Bledsoe here with Doug Larson,
and we have a special guest today.
We have Daniel Schmackenberger.
He is the co-founder of Neurohacker Collective,
director of R&D there.
You developed the Kualia product,
which I've been taking for over a year now,
and hands down, favorite supplement.
We have a background in many bioscience fields
with a unique focus on complex systems optimization
through holistic approaches without side effects.
It's a mouthful.
More than the usual guest, mouthful.
Yeah, usually you don't have to write the whole thing down
and then actually read it off.
Usually you kind of just wing it,
but you're like, I got to type this one out.
Yeah, there's a lot going on.
And Daniel is doing a lot, and over at Neurohacker Collective,
you guys are working on a lot of really cool stuff
that I'm, you know, from what I understand
about what's happening, Kualia is just the beginning,
and all the stuff that you guys are talking about
doing in the future is really, really exciting.
So I'm glad that we're here at the beginning
and having this conversation.
Today we were wanting to talk about
how to get all the anabolic effects of, you know,
hormonally, I know everyone gets really excited about that.
How can I improve my testosterone and things like that?
We've had Kirk Parsley on in the past
who taught us how to make some lifestyle tweaks
so we could have more testosterone in our lives
so we get bigger and stronger, faster.
And we're gonna get much, much deeper today with Daniel.
Could you tell us what some of the basics are
that people might, just a quick overview of the basics
in case somebody missed something in regard to lifestyle
that we may glaze over here before so we can dive deeper?
Sure, let's take testosterone and hormone optimization
as a subset of kind of biohacking,
neurohacking, athletic performance as a whole,
which will include cell energy and tissue repair
and adequate focus and pre-workout and all those things.
So we'll kind of do a high level of as many of those
as we can cover today.
And I'll just reference briefly what we'll call the basics.
I'm gonna assume that most of your listeners
understand the right ratio of macros
for the phase they're in and the focus,
whether they're in a bulking phase or a cutting phase,
et cetera, they understand ketosis,
they understand intermittent fasting
and carbohydrate cycles and protein fasting
and they understand blood sugar optimization,
the need to get enough sleep
and how to optimize quality of sleep, at least basics there.
All of those kinds of things, right?
And there's obviously also a bunch of basic supplementation,
so how people use protein, how they do their pre-workout,
their post-workout, what electrolytes,
brand chains, et cetera, they're using
while they're working out,
basic amino acid supplementation.
Gonna assume that that's all a given
and if not, that you've got that covered pretty well
on a bunch of podcasts.
And then we'll talk about kind of more interesting things
that would sit on top of those basics being well covered.
So we're gonna dive into things
that you wanna start looking at
after you've got the basics down.
Cool.
What are some of the deeper things we can get into
when it comes to hormones
that goes beyond getting sleep and eating the right foods?
Well, so you mentioned you've had people come for
and talk about testosterone optimization.
Testosterone is obviously the first hormone
that most people, especially men,
think about when it comes to athletics.
And the primary lifestyle things
are gonna make sure that they have the right nutrients
to make testosterone.
Do they have enough zinc?
Do they have enough magnesium?
Do they have enough of the right fatty acids?
Are they sleeping enough?
Are they not in adrenal fatigue, et cetera?
Are they avoiding xenoestrogens from plastics and like that
and other kind of estrogenic foods?
Factory farmed meat or dairy that is estrogenic,
all those kinds of things.
The importance of getting body fat percentage down
for how that influences testosterone aromatizing.
So we'll call that all the lifestyle stuff,
the foundational stuff.
Beyond that, let's talk about different categories
of hormones and to begin with,
we're not gonna talk about how to have hormones
outside of their normal range,
but how to make sure that they are in their normal,
optimum range, which is very commonly not the case.
So that if people are having difficulty losing weight
or gaining muscle or repairing
or they're not doing it as well as they were
when they were younger,
very likely they're actually in suboptimal ranges,
some physiologic optimum range.
This is a place where I'm gonna recommend
actually finding a really good integrative doctor
who you can work with to run some labs
and kind of optimize based off of labs.
You can do it based off of symptomology,
but it's much harder to differentially tell
is this a thyroid thing or an adrenal thing
or an androgen thing or an et cetera.
So let's go through some categories.
The first thing with regard to hormones
that I would have anyone address as adrenals
before testosterone or anything else.
I actually focused on some,
I was taking some supplements for adrenal support
before I started taking qualia.
And I noticed there were a lot of things
that were fixed, I guess you could say.
I was waking up with,
oh, should I just say on the show, yeah,
with a raging boner.
Yeah.
Day after day and I was like, oh, this is,
oh man, I remember that was happening in my early 20s
and that you forget because it slowly subsides over time.
And I always associated that with more testosterone
and of course it's all tied together, all your hormones.
One drops, it's pulling some other ones down
and things like that.
But I remember focusing on adrenals
and not really thinking much about it when I was younger
and then all of a sudden it felt
like my entire system was improving.
Yeah, so let's talk about adrenals for a minute.
Adrenals do lots of things.
Produce, give or take 300 different hormones
that all have key purposes.
Let's kind of primarily focus on two major hormones
and the ratio of them that is the first thing
that people would want to dial in,
which is cortisol and DHA.
Cortisol is produced by the adrenal cortex.
It's related to sympathetic nervous system functioning.
And DHA is produced by the adrenal medulla related
to parasympathetic functioning.
The ratio of cortisol to DHA has a lot to do
with sympathetic overtone and the overarching relationship
between sympathetic and parasympathetic as it's translated
into the endocrine system.
So that ratio of cortisol to DHA affects everything
from lean muscle mass and fat burning to bone density
to genetic transcription, right?
It affects a tremendous amount of things.
And it happens to me that cortisol and DHA are both made
from the same precursor hormone, pregnenolone,
which is kind of the rate limiting factor in the equation.
So when there's increased stress
that needs increased cortisol production,
the body ends up shunting the pregnenolone to cortisol
and that ends up leading to not enough pregnenolone for DHA.
So the cortisol to DHA ratio goes up
and that leads to a whole host of imbalances
across everything regulated by the ratio of those two.
The ratio of those two is a very key thing to look at
as is the circadian rhythm of cortisol, which is,
so the basic test here is a four point adrenal lab
where you're looking at early morning,
late morning, afternoon, night on cortisol
and then an average DHA, usually DHAs,
and looking at both, is your cortisol doing the right thing
at the right times of day?
So is your circadian rhythm well balanced?
And then cortisol DHA ratio.
So if that ratio being off is a very big problem,
but why is that happening?
Yeah, so anything that causes increased stress,
and I mean stress from an adrenal glands point of view,
meaning increased need to produce cortisol,
which pretty much means increased ACTH levels,
adrenocortocotropic hormone, which is the brain hormone
that'll be stimulating cortisol production,
is going to cause that issue.
Now, that's emotional stress, and this is anything
from stressing over finances to relationship stuff
to work to anything, right?
Well, that's ubiquitous.
It's much more ubiquitous than it was
in evolutionary environments,
then also physiologic sources of stress.
So blood sugar imbalance causes cortisol spikes.
Any source of ongoing pain, so physical, structural pain
from injuries, from poor biomechanics, et cetera,
inflammation, not enough sleep, infections, toxicity,
all of these can cause those dynamics.
So we're talking about physiological
and psychological stress causes.
And so the real key there is to actually identify
and address the causes of stress
and support the adrenal glands and what they're doing.
So you can support the adrenal glands a bunch of ways.
You can just give DHEA, which is a generally valuable thing
for lots of people to do.
There are a few contraindications
regarding particular kinds of endocrine cancers,
which is why I say I like to have,
and there's controversy around that.
Some people think DHEA is fine in all cases,
but DHEA is the precursor hormone to testosterone,
but which also then means to estrogen.
And so one does want to pay attention
to that whole process, that whole chain.
But when you look at standard hormone optimization programs,
you look at somebody like Centagenics or any of those,
it's testosterone, HGH, DHEA is always the foundation of it,
and then other stuff on top of there.
And DHEA does have effects on testosterone
to the degree that it's low.
Going beyond low is not really gonna have that effect,
but it does have anti-aging effects
because it decreases with age,
largely because of accumulated stress over time.
So the things that you can do for adrenals
is identify the causes of physiologic and psychologic stress
and work to release them.
Have better stress support processes.
That means sleep more, meditation, psychotherapy,
whatever it is that's gonna help with not being bothered
by the things that were bothersome.
And then physiologic support for the adrenal glands.
This is the minerals that they need
and the vitamins that they need.
So B5 is a big deal, panophenic acid, magnesium, sulfur,
both very important.
The right pregnenolone is made from cholesterol,
so the right healthy fats are gonna be key here.
Oh, I wanna talk about the vitamins and minerals real quick
is we were looking at some products one day
and you were talking about some ingredients.
It's like, yeah, they've got this vitamin listed,
however, that vitamin in the form it is
in that supplement is not really that bioavailable.
Sure.
So what should people be looking for in that?
It's not a simple topic
because it depends on the nutrient
and the intent of the nutrient, right?
So if we're talking about magnesium,
there's a lot of different useful forms of magnesium
for different purposes.
Magnesium III and VIII is very useful
for crossing the blood-brain barrier
and affecting central nervous system magnesium levels.
Topical magnesium is great for not having to absorb
through the GI tract and for a number of purposes
that it has, especially with local application,
magnesium, citrate, et cetera.
So you've got maybe 13 interesting forms of magnesium
and then you have plenty of just not that interesting forms.
So the topic of right form of nutrients
is beyond the scope of what we could do here
because we'd have to kind of go through all of them.
We have to go down a rabbit hole.
We could do that sometime.
But there are good resources online
where people can study this.
So I guess, yeah, one thing we should just point out
is that before you're taking any supplements,
you can research to make sure
that you're taking the right types of B vitamins
or magnesium for what it is you're trying to get out of it.
Bs are particularly a big deal
because should this B vitamin be methylated,
should it be phosphorylated,
that ends up being a big deal
and it ends up being not the same for everyone
based on genetics.
So someone can have issues with methylation
and actually do better with different forms of B vitamins.
Fullic acid is famous for that,
but also B12, also B6, also B1, yeah.
Got it.
What else should we be looking at?
Are we still in adrenals?
Yeah, we didn't talk about adaptogens yet.
Okay.
So adaptogens are generally herbs.
We could also think of some mushrooms
as being adaptogenic that are not specifically
going to raise a level or lower level something
but have some kind of support to increase
the adaptive capacity of that organ or system.
Adaptogens are usually HPA focused
and adrenals as the core of that,
but they can be focused on a number of systems.
So what does adaptive capacity of an organ really mean?
So say we're talking about the adrenal glands.
Do we want to lower cortisol
or do we want to raise cortisol?
Well, it depends, right?
We can have issues of cortisol being too high
and that's usually going to be in response
to causes of stress, cause of inflammation
where we need to actually deal with the underlying cause.
But we may choose to want to keep the levels lower
while we're dealing with the underlying cause
so that we're just not dealing with a cortisol DHA imbalance
and all the things that come down line from there.
So you can use things that will actually lower
cortisol levels and you can use anything
from holy basil to phosphatidyl serine
to, you know, there's a number of things that can do that.
But you can also have cortisol that's too low.
The most common reason is it's been too high
for a long enough time.
You actually just fatigued the adrenal glands capacity
to produce it and you'll know that
because cortisol is low and DHA is low,
but ACTH is still high,
meaning there's still a impetus for cortisol to be produced,
but the capacity has just worn out.
And then you can do things that will extend
the half-life of cortisol like licorice
and more precursor like pregnenolone
that will help start bringing it up.
An adaptogen would be something that could help
the adrenal gland just do a better job identifying
what it needs to do and being able to respond to it
either way.
So rather than inherently lowering it
or inherently raising it, it's simply adaptive.
So, rhodiola, cordyceps,
Jin saying most summa, kudzu,
most of these fit into that category
with various degrees of research backing up
how well they work.
It seems most of those things,
if you ask the average person,
they wouldn't know much about them
and then a lot of people may have tried those things
and it didn't work until they think it doesn't work.
How would someone know they would need
cordyceps and ushrims or any of these other licorice
you mentioned or how would you know
which one of those things were gonna help you
with your performance to get bigger and stronger
and perform better and be a better athlete
or just have more energy?
How would you identify any of those things?
So there's, let's say three different ways.
Ideal, as I'm suggesting here,
work with an integrative doctor,
run labs and optimize based on labs because...
This is getting your blood work done,
look at your numbers.
Yep, yeah.
Because getting, say you have a pretty big range
for total test, for free test, for DHT,
for the cortisol DHA ratio.
Really being in the optimum part of that range
makes a huge difference from still being quote unquote
in range but in a suboptimal part of that range.
But then you can have downsides from being, of course,
outside of the range even on what you'd consider
the positive side.
So there's really nothing better
than lab based optimization at this point.
So if someone is interested, can afford it,
I recommend that you can go find docs who specialize
in that from the Institute of Functional Medicine
or places like that.
And particularly people who do bioidentical hormones
and other therapies like that for athletes
is gonna be very useful.
A lot of them will also know antibiotics
if someone happens to be using those
or is interested in, you know,
SARMs or other kinds of beyond just
normal bioidentical hormone support
and will know how to interface with that topic.
So you can do it based on labs.
You can also do some labs on your own.
So you can, there's a few companies
that will sell lab tests that you can either,
so Wellness FX is a classic example.
I'm sure your listeners know.
Lab tests direct, you know, it's another one
where you can go to LabCorp, get your blood ran,
get the results back yourself
or do salivary urine stool labs
that you don't even need blood draw for
and you can just learn a lot.
And a lot of people become kind of serious biohackers
and do that.
That's another fine way.
You can also just understand the symptoms
of various biochemical imbalances
and work on it there, that's sketchier.
But to the degree that the intervention you're using
is generally safe, then it's okay.
And then you can just use interventions
that are generally safe enough
that it's not even really symptom based.
It's just I'm willing to throw some money at it and try
and it seems like a safe, good idea anyways.
And so a lot of nutrients and a lot of adaptogens
would fit into that category.
Some things definitely wouldn't.
I'm not gonna eat too many reishi mushrooms.
You'd have to eat a lot of reishi mushrooms to have a problem.
Yeah, yeah.
It seems like method three was more your style.
Like, I'm just gonna try this out and see what happens.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I'm really big on trying something
and comparing how I felt this hour versus last hour
or today versus yesterday and things like that.
So we wanna talk about delayed causation here.
So this hour versus last hour,
if you're doing something that's going to affect
a neurotransmitter or a hormone
or something that you'll really subjectively notice
in short term, you'll notice it.
If you're doing something that's gonna have an effect
that's cumulative over a longer time
or it's going to prevent some aspect of aging
or help some slow aspect of tissue regeneration,
you don't go to the gym and get buff quickly either, right?
So how do you know if it's working?
Well, you've actually got to be measuring
because if you weren't measuring that you could lift more,
you wouldn't fucking know if you were increasing or not.
And if you're only looking for gains
you can see in the course of an hour,
you're probably doing the wrong thing.
So you have to pay attention to delayed causation as well,
which is important.
Right, I remember I had a lot of adaptogens to my diet,
specifically with a lot of different types of mushrooms
last summer and about a month later
I noticed that my joints felt way better
and I was just leaner.
Now of course another way to look at this
is you can look at what lots of people
have already figured out meaning look at
all of the peer reviewed research on it
and also look at the kind of field of the body of practice.
So examine is not a perfect website
but it is a pretty good website
for looking at nutrients, supplements, et cetera
and looking at the collection of clinical data.
So it's a good place to start
and then kind of Google deep dive from there.
PubMed has a lot of stuff
that you can at least get the abstracts on
and then the forums are great places, right?
And whether you're talking about forums like Longest City
or subreddits or steroids.com
or there's a bunch of shit in bad bro science
and then there's some gems of great stuff
and so if you have time and you're interested
you can find stuff there.
Yeah, nice.
Actually I'm gonna do a show with exam.com founder, right?
The guy who's running it right now, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, cool.
So I got a quick question.
So a lot of people they get the blood work done
they see their testosterone is low
free testosterone is low and they just go,
well I need testosterone.
I'm gonna go get my TRT, inject testosterone,
get my number back either into an optimal range
or in some people's cases way beyond an optimal range.
What are the downsides of just fixing a single hormone
when that's the only thing that you really know to fix?
Okay, so let's talk about,
so we were talking about hormones
and we just did adrenal so far, right?
So now let's talk about sex hormones.
So when-
The thing we're all interested in.
Yes.
So you wanna, if you're running a panel
to look at sex hormones and you just look at
total and free testosterone that's a close
to worthless panel because if total is in a good range
and free isn't, you don't know why yet.
Is it because too much of it is converting to DHT?
Is it because too much is aromatizing into estrogen?
Is it because it's bound up in sex hormone binding
globula and you don't know
because you don't know the things yet.
So at minimum you wanna run total test, free test
and DHT and see the ratio of those.
Now a deeper test where you look at
all of the androgens is great, right?
24 hour urine collection to do a traditional kind of
male endocrinology, super valuable.
And you can see Andrastine Dio and Andrastine Dio
look at all the ratios, super valuable
but at least those three because the relative ratios
of total test, free test, DHT, very important, right?
DHT too high or too low are big problems.
And so you don't just automatically wanna use DHT blockers.
Everybody who's used Propecia has then noticed
that their sex life sucks or that some aspects of life
suck, people who've used DHT boosters notice other things
that suck, right?
Whether it's increased cancer risks or hair loss or so.
Dialing those ratios in is important.
Also the ratio of testosterone to estrogen.
And so you can just do estradiol
or you can do a deeper estrogen panel
and look at all three primary estrogen types
to see how much aromatase transition is happening.
And then you can use natural blockers
if too much of your testosterone is aromatizing
into estrogen, you can use DIM is the primary thing
people will use and calcium, glucarate
there's a handful of things have some indication
or people will go up to an astrosol
and use a pharmaceutical aromatase inhibitor.
Sometimes a little bit of an astrosol upfront
to bring it back into range and then be supported
ongoingly by DIM and typically,
especially if people are gonna take testosterone
or even if they're gonna take DHA,
if they're gonna take anything that boosts testosterone
and they can see that they have a propensity to aromatase
that'll be one of the things they'll pay attention to.
Getting body fat down will also be a big part of that.
Paying attention to other estrogenic things
will be a part of that.
Progesterone as part of this panel is also quite important
for the ratio of progesterone to testosterone
into estrogen and sex hormone binding globulin, SHBG,
which is if your total test is pretty good,
your free test is low, your SHBG is high,
a lot of it's bound up in sex hormone binding globulin,
there's oftentimes underlying health issues
that are causing that.
Infectious, toxicology, and I'll just preface again,
and I hope this is on the show everywhere.
I'm not a doctor, this is not medical advice,
I'm not treating prescribing, diagnosing,
none of us are, et cetera.
This is just general educational info,
go talk to a doctor and find out more.
But oftentimes if you see something like sex hormone
binding globulin being high and then you explore
and you find a mucosal infection or dysbiosis in the gut
or some other condition like that
and you address it, then that will auto correct,
which means if you are going straight to test injections,
one, you might not be looking at why it's low to begin with
that is affecting other systems,
it could actually be affecting future disease states
that could be affecting a lot of other hormones
and important pathways in the body,
and creating external dependence
and all the side effects associated
that are not fun side effects.
And so I'm not saying TRT is bad,
especially as people are aging
and you just do have natural drop-off,
it's a reasonable thing to think about.
Young people should really exhaust all other options
before going there.
Once you start injecting, if you ever stop injecting,
now you have to go through this whole other protocol
to get back to normal and now you're dealing
with the same problem in the beginning.
You probably have some people who are in bodybuilding
or came from bodybuilding and they know a lot
about cycling and so they would come off a test cycle
and they would do an HCG cycle, HCG and then Astrosol
and some other stuff and you don't,
if you've been on test for a long time,
getting your base levels back up fully is really hard to do.
A lot of people can address underlying causes
like we're talking about,
like getting their adrenals in good shape,
getting their causes of stress in good shape,
getting their mineral levels up,
getting their estrogenic processes down
and then doing things like,
that's a good time to do an HCG round, right?
To induce lighting cell upregulation,
there are interesting things to do there
and I would say any doctor who's worth working with
would understand these topics well.
So that's a little bit on test.
Now, there are, this is just what you'd call
kind of natural hormone optimization
and so everyone knows that if they're healthy
and they're 20, building muscle, losing fat, repairing
is very different than when they're 40 or 50
and that's just because of,
they weren't on steroids at 20, right?
They were just on endogenous steroids
that were actually well-balanced.
So being well-balanced is a great thing.
There are things someone can do
beyond just basic endogenous optimization
now that are, have many of, not all of,
but many of the upsides that previous antibiotics had
with a lot less of the downsides,
the science is advancing, right?
And so if someone's really interested,
it's definitely an area of study
and probably SARMs are the most interesting topic
to start with here.
There's a number of peptides that are interesting
for tissue regeneration and other purposes
and we haven't got into neural hormones
and HGH, IGF1 ratios and we'll get there
but Ostrane is a very interesting SARM that has-
What was the SARM again, sorry?
It's a selective androgen modulator,
so androgen receptor modulator
and so it's going to increase the effectiveness
of androgens for anabolic purposes
with a lot less of the downsides
of taking exogenous test in the effect
that's gonna have on adrenals,
on down-regulated endogenous tests,
testical shrinkage, et cetera, et cetera.
Is it making you more sensitive?
It is making the androgen receptors more sensitive.
Most of them are sensitivity up regulators
of androgen receptors, various androgen receptors
and they are getting to have multiple times
the positive benefit to kind of downside
that original anabolics had,
some of them significant multiple times, so.
So you get the performance aspects,
you get more muscle mass,
easier to lose body fat, more energy, et cetera,
kind of in the performance world and then,
but you're less likely to lose your hair
and to get man boobs and those types of things.
And testical shrink and have increased cancer risk.
Lose sperm count, testical shrinkage is the worst.
Yeah, so this is-
No one wants squirrel nuts.
Well, if you are not needing to produce testosterone,
then you're light excelsshrink, right?
Which is why you hit the HCG round afterwards,
but the longer you're on exogenous test,
the higher amount you're on and the more cycles you do,
the more that's gonna be a real issue.
Gotcha.
So the late excels are the cells in your testicles
that produce testosterone.
Correct.
And so there's some good websites like serotropic.com
is a good website, peptides.com, right?
There's a number of good ones where you can go learn
about a number of interesting molecules
that are research molecules
that if someone wanted to engage with, they could.
And we don't have any business relationship with them.
We just think they, from what we've seen,
share good information and or produce good chemistry.
So like I said, the probably the best starting one
for most people that's currently available is Ostrane.
SR-9009 is a very interesting one
that's very hard to find right now, has to be injected.
It is touted as exercise in the bottle.
That's a little bit too much to say,
but in terms of its anabolic capacity
to very little downside looks profound
from the early trials that are happening right now.
So we'll just say this a very interesting area of chemistry
and I would always start with the basic lifestyle optimization
and making sure that you're working out,
your workout routine is actually good, right?
Then I would look at all of the,
making sure your endogenous levels are good first.
And then if you're still looking for performance
on top of that, then this would be the next category
to look at.
Just hitting on hormones real quick,
addressing the other couple things
that might want to discuss thyroid hormones are important.
And so people can have obvious thyroid issues,
they're obvious, right?
If someone's total, if someone's free T3 is just too low,
if their TSH is too high,
so all the basic thyroid things are straightforward,
then there's also subtler things.
If the ratio of reverse T3 to free T3 is high,
then you're possible to have symptoms like low thyroid symptoms
even though your normal T3, T4 numbers look pretty good.
So I would say again,
if you're going to run a thyroid panel,
run a comprehensive one, run the thyroid antibodies,
run reverse T3, see the whole thing,
work with someone who knows what they're doing.
It's a relatively easy thing to dial back in place.
If there aren't deep underlying causes going on,
can make a tremendous difference,
especially to energy fat loss in,
like fine motor coordination,
all the things that are just part of.
Pancreas hormones, this is huge.
And this is mostly gonna be addressed by diet
and exercise and sleep, right?
Someone can go ketogenic and make a huge difference
to getting their fasting insulin levels down
and their glucagon in good place.
But sometimes they'll do all that
and still have this like,
syndrome X kind of thing happening.
And then it's like, all right, what's going on?
And sometimes it's low levels of vanadium,
low levels of chromium,
some of the minerals that are required
to actually have insulin receptor sites work well.
Or there are some other lying
Krebs cycle intermediaries
that are way too low issue going on.
And that's when you actually have to kind of dive in deeper
to the integrative medicine of it.
But if your fasting insulin levels are high,
fix that first.
Really kind of almost before anything
because that's gonna affect adrenal.
You won't get adrenals in good shape
if your blood sugar is out of balance
and you'll have suboptimal everything else.
And so you can just start with,
you get a glucose test kit for 30 bucks at,
you know, any drug store,
check your glucose levels first thing in the morning
and after food.
If they spike too high after food
or if their fasting levels are high,
then go and actually run some labs,
look at your insulin,
look at your glycomark or, you know,
a whole bunch of, depending upon who you're working with,
different markers and get that dialed in.
And last would be neurohormones.
And there's a lot of things to look at here
that can make a huge difference.
If you're having a hard time sleeping at night
because you wake up to pee,
even though you're not drinking that much before bed,
check your ADH levels, your anti-diuretic hormone.
If that's low, that can be enough
to just fuck everything up.
You have to look at why it's low,
but there are things you can do.
If your doctor wants you to get on Desma Pressin,
that can just instantly get you sleeping, right?
It can make a huge difference.
While you work on regulating it
and it's involved in so many other things,
it usually makes a huge difference.
So lots of neurohormones to address,
but HCH is the big one
that everybody's gonna wanna look at.
And again, as people age, exogenous HCH,
not a bad idea.
Again, do your own research
and work with someone who really knows
what they're doing there
because there are, of course, side effects
that are possible if you're going too high with HCH
or if it's inappropriate.
And there are endogenous things that you can do
if you're young to upregulate HCH, the right amino acids.
I mean, basically get good sleep,
deal with your adrenals,
take some arginine ornithine, basic things like that.
And then if there's still an issue worth working with.
So we could go more into these,
but we'll call all of this Hormones 101.
Gotcha.
We talked about stress early on
and when we talk about disease in the body,
I hear two things brought up
and I used to hear inflammation all the time.
Everyone's saying inflammation, inflammation, inflammation.
And then now I'm hearing stress.
So we talked about stress, what about inflammation?
You should still be hearing inflammation all the time.
Inflammation is never an original cause of illness
because something caused inflammation, right?
There's something that is irritating some tissue
that inflammation is a response to.
So just doing anti-inflammatories
is not going to address the original cause.
So you have to say, is it a structural issue, right?
So you can have inflammation from a structural issue,
meaning your biomechanics off
or you actually have damage in a joint
or your biomechanics when exercising are off.
So you can continue to cause a Tier 1 inflammatory process
because of structure being off.
This is where the right chiropractic, the right body work,
the right surgery if you have to
or addressing joints through PRP or stem cells
or things like that can make a huge difference.
But also people getting their biomechanics down
makes a huge difference, right?
So working with someone who is really good at biomechanics,
really good with kind of the applied neurology.
So if you're moving poorly,
it's been pointed out to you that you're moving poorly,
and you're just like, eh, fuck it,
I'm just gonna keep doing my thing.
I'm gonna keep pushing my squats.
Because I want, my ego is just too inflated
and I don't want to step back.
Your squats are really gonna suck
when you have a knee surgery.
Or life is gonna suck later
when you have a hip surgery or back issues
or you just are always stressed out
or can't sleep that well because of chronic inflammation
or you increase the predisposition for diseases
that have more likelihood when inflammatory molecules are high.
So poor movement can lead to,
is leading to inflammation,
which is then causing a lot of this disease.
This is interesting because especially in our market
and especially crossfit weightlifting,
a lot of us just dose with more fish oil.
Inflammation's high, here's some fish oil.
And so this is probably the first time
I've had this discussion where
what's the origin of the inflammation?
Because inflammation's not a natural state to be in.
Well, I mean it's a natural process,
but it is a sign of something that is irritated
that is signaling some immune,
some repair process in that tissue,
which means there's some tissue damage.
Now obviously you're gonna have inflammation
when you work out an intentionally damaged tissue,
but if you can have excessive inflammation
because you're not just doing micro tears on muscle,
you're actually damaging connective tissue, et cetera.
And then if you have chronically elevated inflammatory markers,
then inflammation's less effective
and you don't heal as quickly.
And then you have the whole host of other things
that can start to be a problem.
So biomechanics being off is a huge one,
especially for people who are working out
and are more interested in the short term metrics
of how fast, how heavy, how hard,
and less in the long term metrics of,
am I gonna be able to do cool stuff at old age
like Jacqueline?
And so that's one.
You can have a similar, a biomechanic one
that's just from posture.
If you're sitting at your computer
in a position where you're getting a sore neck
or a sore back, you can just,
even if you're not moving on it,
just the chronic loading of weight and gravity
over long periods of time can be an issue.
So ergonomics matters.
So those are the kind of structural,
biomechanical cause of inflammation.
And then let's talk about biochemical causes.
So if someone's eating foods
that they have some subclinical allergy to,
you can get inflammation in the gut, very common.
If someone has got subclinical infection,
so they've got dysbiosis in their gut
or other forms of kind of subclinical infection,
and not just in the gut, but any of the mucosa,
the sinuses, the lungs, your genital track, eyes, right?
The mucosa is where the outside world
is actually interfacing with the body
to selectively allow some things in and not other things.
Certain things getting in that shouldn't
can cause major problems,
or the body having to work very hard
to deal with certain things
that shouldn't be exposed to can cause problems.
So again, this is where you start looking into infection.
And other forms of toxins.
So we can talk about mycotoxins from mold,
heavy metals, organophosphates.
There's a lot of things that can cause inflammation.
Also oxidative stress.
Oxidation's a major cause of inflammation.
So the right antioxidants are major anti-inflammatories.
And you can start looking at, well, what's going on?
Because we want oxygen to oxidize some things, right?
We want it to be able to oxidize glucose
in the mitochondria appropriately to produce ATP,
but not oxidize cell surfaces and other things.
So how do we make sure the body has
the right cell energy intermediaries,
which is a topic we can get to in a minute.
It's another huge area of biooptimization,
is ATP, NAD, et cetera, optimization,
while simultaneously making sure
that it has the right antioxidants.
So there's a lot in terms of causes of inflammation
that are worth addressing.
And then there are just anti-inflammatory things
that people can use.
If someone needs for pain,
I would recommend ibuprofen above acetaminophen
many, many, many times in terms of side effects.
And I would recommend neither of them very often.
And so, like you said, fish oil,
your omega-3 in particular,
your longer chain omega-3 and curcumin
are obviously the two most famous
and well-researched anti-inflammatories.
It's a good starting place.
Then you've got black cumin seed oil
and actually the anti-inflammatory effects of green tea,
of course, a tin of some antioxidants
that are affecting that cause of mucosal support.
There's lots of things someone can get into.
That's interesting.
I know quite a few athletes that pop ibuprofen frequently
and I've always kind of been like,
and that's such a good idea.
And I think people know that unless you're just completely
shining off your intuition,
but it's like, oh, maybe I shouldn't be taking this.
But I think most people who are focused on
the short-term benefit of that
because there's even research to show
that it can improve tissue repair,
like muscle growth with the use of ibuprofen.
But that's a study focused specifically
on the muscle belly repairing,
not necessarily what's happening in the rest of the body,
which is what you're concerned with.
Well, as your muscles get bigger,
your liver and your kidney and your intestines
don't get proportionally bigger.
They just have more to process,
more metabolic waste to process more.
And so damaging those organs that are going to be dealing
with allowing the muscles to work is just not that smart.
So if you think about five or 10 years ago,
it's almost hard to care about what you were doing.
You're like, whatever, it's about now.
And yet back then you were making choices
that were all focused on optimizing now.
And that's partly why today,
some stuff might suck for you, right?
You're in debt or you have bad relationships
with certain people or you have physiologic issues.
We're like, man, I wish I had paid more attention back then.
But then it's so easy to just keep perpetuating that.
And to think about how many decades of older age are real
and unavoidable and that when you're there,
what you're doing right now will be almost hard to remember
as having mattered.
So say, let's pay attention to what we're doing now.
Let's optimize it.
But let's optimize it in a way that optimizes next year
and next decade and 90.
Yeah, definitely.
Going into tissue repair, what are some things we can do
to optimize that outside of hormones
and keeping the inflammation down?
Those would be two of the big ones, right?
Having your anabolic hormones in place,
not having catabolic hormones too high
and having inflammation in place is huge.
Making sure you have the right amino acids,
you know enough protein, the right amino acids
and the right minerals.
Trace minerals, especially this is another thing.
As an athlete, you're sweating more.
As you're sweating more, the benefit is you detox things
that are, you know, water soluble chemicals
that can come out through sweat
and they don't all have to come out through the kidneys,
which a lot of them can be damaging to the nephron kidneys.
But you're also releasing more minerals.
This means electrolytes, but also means trace minerals.
Probably replace your electrolytes,
you might not replace your trace minerals as much.
And so when you see young, healthy,
prime athletes who have a heart attack
or, you know, have other diseases come up,
one hypothesis is, you know, selenium is a trace mineral
and you look at its effect on the heart
or vanadium or chromium's effect on diabetes
or, you know, so many trace mineral effects
on key enzyme or other processes.
So if you're eating a diet that has lots
of organic vegetation in it,
you should be in pretty good shape
and trace minerals are deficient in almost all topsoil.
And if you're sweating more,
then supplementation is a valuable thing in that place.
Pay attention to making sure you're getting trace minerals
from sources that don't have heavy metals
and toxic load and et cetera.
So it's worth learning a little bit.
I'll just kind of do a high level flag on that in a moment.
Sleeping enough is key for tissue repair.
It pretty much only happens when you're sleeping.
It pretty much only happens in delta sleep.
So if you're not getting enough delta sleep,
you are not doing tissue repair well.
You're also not doing cognitive repair well.
You're just not, you're not gonna be doing repair in general.
So that's, you can't prioritize that highly enough.
Let's talk about tissue repair on joints.
If you have a ligament or a tendon
that is fully separated, you need surgery.
If it's not fully separated,
there is good evidence of the effectiveness
of both PRP and stem cell therapy in joints.
Some people will say,
and PRP more than prolotherapy otherwise,
but limited effectiveness there.
People say, hey, there's not much
in the way of good double blind placebo controlled trials.
Well, it's not really fun to do double blind trials
on putting needles right into, you know,
big difficult needles into difficult areas
and, you know, drawing blood with big needles for PRP.
And because part of the effect is mediated
through inducing very localized inflammation,
even just putting a placebo thing in there
has some of that effect.
So I would say as you're doing the research on it,
factor anecdotal research that doesn't make sense
that it would be placebo mediated, right?
So if you see pre and post ultrasounds
where there's a tear in a ligament
and there's no tear afterwards,
placebo shouldn't do that.
If PRP or stem cells are making that happen,
even if it's not a large double blind randomized
crossover trial, pay attention to that
and then find doctors who are good at that.
So that can make a huge difference for people.
We already mentioned hormones, but again,
having your test and your HGH in place is huge.
There are some peptides that make a huge difference
to tissue regeneration.
And again, I'll just reference the sources earlier
that we mentioned for looking into research chemicals
and peptides.
There's more, but that's a good intro for tissue healing.
Oh, a couple of other things, medical laser works.
So cold laser and hot laser, different frequencies,
but laser does have clinical trials
that are meaningful for upregulating local ATP production
helping with scar tissue, helping with repair, PEMF works.
There's again limited trials, but there are good trials,
post electromagnetic field therapy,
particularly very high amplitude.
And so this can help increase healing time
from both surgeries and injuries and just training.
The right frequencies of light work.
So near-infrared therapy and the kind of LED beds, et cetera,
these things do increase effectiveness.
Cryotherapy helps.
You can do cryotherapy in an ice bath.
You can do cryotherapy in liquid nitrogen cryo,
which is much, much easier.
It is easier.
And probably more effective.
I've done ice baths and cryo.
Cryo's three minutes, three, four, five minutes of,
that's not so bad.
Ice bath is...
Terrible.
Well, the first 30 seconds.
Exactly.
And then we acclimate.
Can we take a break?
Let's take a break and then we're gonna talk
about how we can live forever.
Sounds good.
Hey guys, Mike Bledsoe here,
and I wanna tell you a little bit about qualia.
Daniel Schmackenberger came to me over a year ago
and was telling me about the product that he had created.
I actually didn't believe that it was as good
as he said it was, and he handed me a month supply anyway.
And I started trying it.
And one of the things I noticed is when I looked
at the bottle is that it had a ton of ingredients
that I was already taking with a lot
of other supplements already.
So one of the initial benefits of taking qualia
was I was able to take less of other things.
So some of the things I was taking was,
I was taking an adrenal support supplement.
I was taking a no-tropic as well.
And by implementing the qualia product,
I was able to ditch those other two supplements
and just do the one.
Additionally, after taking it for a little while,
I'm not real big on the pre-workout stuff normally.
And I do take it on occasion.
One of the things I noticed is this performed,
or outperformed, any pre-work that I was taking.
So if I was taking a pre-workout in addition
to the qualia product, it was just too much.
So if you follow the show, if you've been following the show,
you know, in the last five years,
we really haven't done sponsors.
We haven't really promoted a lot of products super heavy.
And so this actually says something special
about what's going on with this
because it is something that I really believe in,
Doug really believes in.
A lot of the team in Barbell Shrug takes the supplement
and we really like it because it's not just
about performing better today.
It's about increasing your longevity.
It's about becoming better over time.
It's not a quick fix.
You will notice the effects immediately,
but you are going to, it is about the long game.
And as you can tell, you're listening
and watching this show with Danish Makenberger now.
He has really thought about the entire system
on how to improve the human experience as a whole.
So if you want to try this product out,
go over to neurohacker.com
and use the promo code BARBELL15 for 15% off.
Again, neurohacker.com and use the promo code BARBELL15.
If you go over there right now,
there's some really cool videos and blogs.
If you read a little bit, I think you're really gonna fall
in love with what they have going on over there.
So check it out.
And we're back with Daniel
and we were talking about tissue repair.
We're talking about hormones.
And I think that if you're not quite 35 yet,
this might not be on your radar,
but I know that for me as I've gotten older,
the anti-aging thing starts looking a little more attractive.
Can you speak about that?
Sure.
First thing I would say for anti-aging is
all things general health optimization
because aging is really,
a lot of what we call aging is accumulated damage, right?
We're looking at senescent cells,
but that's micro damage from inflammation,
from toxins, from nutrient deficiency,
from pathogens, from stress,
from insable glucose levels, from et cetera.
So simply having more stable and robust health
from all the basic things is the foundations of it.
Then again, you can build on top of foundations.
It's an area that is being researched
very actively right now.
You can look at organizations like Senes and Rad
and Calico and HLI that are all focused
on kind of radical life extension,
biologic methods of radical life extension
and other kind of technological methods.
This is where we upload our brains to a computer.
So that's transhumanist beyond biologic life extension.
Let's just talk about biology here.
And let's talk about two things
with regard to life extension.
First is just living to your genetic maximum.
And then the next thing is
how to live beyond genetic maximum.
So far, nobody has verified consistent good answers
for number two, but we're getting close.
But almost no one lives to their genetic maximum.
We'll say the oldest people are always
in the 100, 110, a little bit older than that range,
but not much.
And let's assume that most people's genetic maximum
is over 100.
So avoiding dying of illness
is the first part of life extension.
So that's gonna be cardiovascular disease first,
then it's gonna be cancer, then it's gonna be diabetes,
and it's gonna be Alzheimer's.
So you look at how you decrease
the likelihood of all those things.
And that basically means support the health
of those systems.
We could do a whole show on that, but I'll just say that.
And then in terms of just like short little hacks
that can help.
So there's a few drugs, pharmaceutical drugs,
that have some good research showing an effect
in various aspects of life extension.
The most famous one is Metformin,
which is a diabetes drug.
Again, this is because blood sugar
and then cell energy processes make a huge difference.
This is largely gonna be working through,
blood sugar stability, but also through the sertuin genes,
which are some of the primary genes
that get activated in caloric restriction.
Caloric restriction is the biggest thing
that we know of so far for life extension.
Nobody wants to do it, because it's miserable.
Well, it also, I mean, for me,
I remember reading research that was saying,
caloric restriction is a great way to live longer.
And here I am trying to get as big and strong as possible.
So we're at odds.
So the way you put those two together,
for most people, is intermittent fasting.
Which is you try and get as big and strong,
you're taking in more calories,
but you at least drop your calories acutely
for periods of time.
Now, and again, and in doing so,
you can get elevation of AMPK levels,
you can get elevation and activation of sertuin genes,
some of the key mechanisms that mediate life extension
through caloric restriction,
without having to live on 30% reduced calorie all the time.
And where does protein fasting come in with this at all,
or is that a completely different topic?
Different topic, but heavily related to inflammation.
So protein fasting is,
Dave Asprey talks about, well, the difference between
and the benefit of intermittent fasting ketosis
and protein fasting in bulletproof diet.
So I would recommend that,
I think it's a good resource for people.
And just fasting from all protein for a short period of time,
a day or two days, some periodicity
to kind of deplete amino acid pool
and have a anti-inflammatory effect,
that's kind of what you're looking at there.
But the intermittent fasting is total fuel,
right, total calories primarily.
There are, besides metformin,
there are herbs that look like they do similar things.
So the famous Chinese herb, gynostema,
up regulates AMPK levels, activates sertuin genes.
There's some evidence that oxaloacetate
also has this effect that extract from rose hips does,
that the herbal extract called berberine does.
So if you want to kind of dive in,
there's a whole lot of things.
And the company Life Extension is a good company
for taking the research that's happening at universities
all around the world and kind of bringing it
into the supplement market.
As far as just like general early introduction
to the field goes, I think that's a good place to go.
Other drugs, deprenel, seligelene,
it's a selective MAOB inhibitor.
There are herbs that will do this,
the harmala alkaloids, barley grass extract,
and then not just seligelene,
but seligelene, you have a handful
of selective MAOB inhibitors.
For the most part, monoamine enzymes go up with age,
and that ends up affecting lower neurotransmitters
across the board.
And so being able to work with that,
but again, this is something where really like
to work with a doctor who knows what they're doing
because you can also have your MAO inhibitors be low,
in which case taking a, I mean, your monoamine enzymes
being low, in which case taking inhibitors is problematic.
If someone is under dopamine, under catecholaminergic
in general, then MAOB inhibitors are usually quite helpful,
deprenels are starting place, or other herbal processes.
Need to be very careful of stacking that with monoamines.
Then there are some drugs that have been prototyped
just for life extension that were not really
for something else, and we found off-label purposes.
Epitalon is one of the most well-known, well-studied.
This is injected in typically, you know,
intermuscular injections on rounds every six months.
There are a lot more human trials that need to go,
but the trials that have been done so far, very low,
what looks like very low side effect,
very high incidence of up-regulation of telomeres
and a few different interesting mechanics.
So what, so this would be injected every six months,
at what point in somebody's life would they be interested
in this, or is it so new that it's kind of like a,
not that new, could start, realistically,
the earlier one starts focusing on life extension,
the better, because if they start once they've already
had damage, reversing damage,
it's much harder than preventing it.
So if you start when you're 20,
and you are just kind of preventing damage
from ever happening, you're gonna be much,
much, much better off.
Most people won't, because they don't get that it matters.
They're pretty sure they're Superman,
and they wait until they're 30, and realize they're not,
and then they start, and then it's harder.
Yeah, that's when you usually figure out
you're not Superman.
Right.
Round 30.
What was that?
You're just saying that, because you're 35 now.
You're gonna say, oh man, 40 was the worst,
and 50 was the worst.
Well, I-
It's all downhill.
But I look at a very specific moment in time
where I'm like, oh, this is real.
Yeah, I'd go along with that.
27 to 30 was when I was like, okay,
I'm not a teenager anymore.
Like, I'm starting to sense the decline.
Yeah.
So I would say that exponential tech
in the field of biotech is changing this.
And over the next few years, we'll change it.
Meaningfully, this shouldn't be an excuse for people
to be dumb and say, well, we'll figure out
how to radically upgrade me with stem cells in the future.
But there are already a lot of things
that are meaningful, that are hard to get funded
because they are not treatments for disease.
And so they kind of have to be explored right now,
at least partially, through citizen science,
which is why people getting engaged,
doing quantified self-measurement,
sharing them is actually part of how the field itself
is evolving, because medicine,
the way we do medicine legally, is disease model-based.
And so when we're looking at optimization,
we just don't have the same kind of funding
available for that, which is why so much of what's
been learned about steroids, about athletics, et cetera,
happen not through formal clinical trial science,
but through biohackers sharing information,
advancing a field until it got interesting enough
that then people started advancing the field
with clinical research.
Earlier you mentioned PRP and prolotherapy,
which are relatively easy to come by,
but you mentioned stem cells at the same time,
which seems to be much, I don't know if it's harder
to come by, or it's just less researched,
or if there's still legality issues there,
or what have you, but it seems like it's higher potential,
but it still seems like it's not as common.
Why is that the case, or is that not the case?
We had a very sad and silly freeze
on all pleomorphic stem cell, i.e. embryonic stem cell,
research for quite a long time here,
which means that China and Japan and India
and other countries are much further ahead
than we are in this topic.
Many people who are getting stem cells
for spinal cord injury or other things like that
are flying to China or somewhere to get the work done.
We are starting to do more embryonic,
pluripotent stem cell studies,
but even your own adult stem cells from fat
or from bone marrow can be used very meaningfully
for tissue types that are somewhat similar, right?
It just means they can't change into all cell types,
but only into adjacent cell types.
But that ends up being enough
to have really meaningful effect on things like joints
and connective tissue and things that are meaningful there.
You also have new drugs that are coming about
and even supplements that increase
endogenous stem cell production.
So if you think about aging,
we're mostly talking about a cellular phenomena.
So cells start to get senescent, right?
These kind of age cells, so their mitochondria is off,
some of their organelles are off,
so now they produce too much histamine
or they produce whatever, so they produce some wrong things.
So you get a biochemical cascade of problems.
And so what we wanna do to deal with life extension
is we want to prevent cells from senescing in the first place.
So that means the right antioxidant protection,
the right excitotoxic protection, right?
Like just protecting cells from all things
that would cause senescence.
That's one category.
We wanna be able to purge senescent cells
so they don't create a problem, right?
They don't create cascade problems, senescent mast cells,
senescent all kinds of immune cells, brain cells, et cetera.
So we wanna be able to trigger autophagy,
the natural process of cell death
and then not just getting rid of the cells,
but just also cleansing out all those old structures
that otherwise cause problems.
Because the shed receptor sites
can themselves be inflammatory
or problem-causing of different kinds.
And then you want to help create new cells, right?
So you want to increase stem cell production
and differentiation into tissues.
All of that's being explored
and great work is being done.
It's very interesting.
You've got like the company Neural Stem
is in phase two clinical trials
on a protocol to NSI-189 right now,
which they were originally doing
Neural Stem Cell Research for ALS
and for spinal cord injury.
And they found some small molecules
that could actually up-regulate
your own endogenous Neural Stem Cell generation
in the hippocampus.
And so people started getting huge benefits
in these kinds of actual neural damage dynamics
from a small molecule
rather than actual stem cell injection.
I think their chance of getting approved as a drug,
they're going for major depressive disorder first
is very high, in which case it's across applications
to neuropathy, to retinopathy, to ALS Parkinson's
will be very high.
So I think they were going to start to see a lot of drugs
and botanicals that are working on all of those aspects,
autophase, G, senescence protection,
and stem cell progeneration.
There's, I want to move into,
maybe I don't know if stimulants is the right word,
but pre-workouts-
Anti-aging, one more, just very easy one
that's more available than all the ones I mentioned.
TA65, it's an astragalous extract,
has pretty decent clinical trials
showing effect on telomere elongation.
There's pretty good reason to think
that telomere elongation is a good thing.
And the meaningful thing in being able to do that
without injection or prescription or whatever is meaningful.
So that's a very basic supplement
that people can start with that has,
I would say pretty close to no side effect profile
that's meaningful.
So, and you can correct me on,
this is how I understand telomeres right now,
is as your cells replicate, they're getting shorter.
And when they get to a certain length,
then we see cell death.
Something like that.
Yeah.
Is that over-simplified enough?
The genome has these things called telomeres at the end
so that as you don't get perfect replication,
what is being cut off,
what isn't replicating perfectly
is not actually coding regions of the genome.
But when you run out of telomere,
then you start getting into coding regions of the genome
having problems, which means mutation.
And so having the telomeres longer
means that you can have some error more times
before problems occur.
And you have mutations which...
No good.
Cancer and rate, all sorts of other things.
Awesome.
Stimulants are big in our field.
Most people would just,
I think the number one one that's being used is caffeine.
And then, we used to take it at one point,
was it dimethyl tryptamine?
No.
We took it every day.
DMT trips every day before we train.
DMA and you're thinking.
Oh, what one now?
Dimethyl amylamide, yeah.
That's right, that's the one.
Yeah, it was in Jack 3D and Oxy Elite Pro
and things like that, yeah.
It worked very well if you were wanting to lift heavy weight.
I've been reading that one more
than I've been reading the other one.
Yeah.
Yeah, DMT is a very interesting molecule,
not particularly good for athletics,
but interesting for other purposes.
So stimulants.
So we can talk about,
maybe we can just talk about
the whole field of pre-workout supplements,
of which stimulant is gonna be the main category, right?
There's, I won't talk about pre-workout
from the point of view of what someone's doing
with carbs or protein or whatever,
because that's gonna depend on the kind of workout
they're doing in the phase they're in.
The biggest thing that people do pre-workout
is some kind of psychostimulant.
Caffeine is by far the primary one.
Some people are just drinking coffee.
Some are doing energy drinks of various kinds
or pre-workout supplements that have caffeine in them.
Some people are doing ECA stacks,
which are very popular,
ephedrine, caffeine, aspirin.
And then some people get into more potent things
like clenbuterol,
DMAA, et cetera, et cetera.
Plenty of good illegal ones in the category.
And some illegal for dumb reasons.
Some illegal for good reasons,
meaning some of them are actually really dangerous.
Ephedrine shouldn't be illegal.
It should be used responsibly.
Shouldn't be illegal.
That's a dumb regulation decision, in my opinion.
Meth is, I actually don't think any drug should be illegal.
I think legalization of all of them
has very good evidence from Portugal in many places
that their use drops and we can regulate them better.
But I don't recommend meth as a pre-workout supplement,
even though for very short term it works.
I think during the break,
we were saying meth is a great way to lose weight.
Well, I mean, it used to be-
Out of restriction.
It used to be so commonly prescribed, right?
By doctors.
It was like an OTC thing for a long time for these purposes.
And I will say there are OTC and prescribed things right now
that are similarly dangerous that in the future
will be like, really, we gave people benzos.
Because they're bad news.
It is interesting how many things are illegal
that really aren't bad, I guess.
They're not having negative impacts on the body
and how many things are legal.
They're just being prescribed very freely or over the counter
that have negative impacts.
I would urge people to try to separate their mind from
what they've been told is legal, illegal,
or what your parents told you
and kind of just see things for what they are
and look at the research
and try to make decisions from that perspective.
All you have to do is compare pot to alcohol
or pot to cigarettes to realize that regulation is stupid.
The way that it's happening is stupid
in terms of how many people have had auto accidents
from pot versus alcohol and their general availability.
This is, the regulation is not based on science.
It's based on other stuff.
It's not hard to figure out what the other stuff is.
So, back to stimulants.
Caffeine, one of the world's favorite molecules
for obvious reasons, is caffeine bad for you?
It's an important question.
Yes and no.
If you take caffeine when you are tired, it's bad for you.
If you take caffeine when you're not tired
and you take it in appropriate amounts and you cycle it,
it can actually be good for you.
Good for you meaning longest lived industrial nation
in the world is Japan.
They drink green tea all day long.
It's obviously a lot of antioxidants
and theophylline and other interesting things,
but the Hunza's drink coffee,
a lot of the Blue Zones drink some kind of good coffee.
So, the fact that some stimulants,
xanthines in particular, caffeine in particular,
can up-regulate metabolic process, they look pretty good.
The evidence seems pretty good on them.
The problem is, if you are trying to use it
as a replacement for sleep, it doesn't work.
And so, the time that people are most tempted to take it
is when they're tired because they haven't slept enough,
now you're gonna cause adrenal stress.
It doesn't replace sleep.
If someone is already in a physiologically viable place,
their normal cortisol levels,
their norepinephrine levels, et cetera, in a good place,
then caffeine can enhance that.
If they are not, it should not be used.
So, that's one thing.
Total dose is also important.
People doing several Red Bulls a day, not a good idea.
People using an appropriate amount of caffeine from some form
can be quite responsible.
And then, I recommend cycling everything.
I don't think anyone should be on anything all the time.
Any supplement, any mineral, anything.
And caffeine is the same.
How often you have to cycle it is based on
how quickly you get down regulation.
Caffeine can have a much longer cycle
than almost any psychoactive thing.
So, what I recommend is for people to do,
if they're using caffeine daily,
every three months, every quarter, get off for a week.
First two days, if you get a headache, use ibuprofen.
Two days per quarter is not gonna hurt you.
And it just makes it less miserable.
Take this time to sleep extra.
And catch up on wherever you did.
Not sleep enough, come back on.
Some things, we were talking about on the break,
chemicals that shouldn't be used more than once a month.
Caffeine is when you can use pretty often.
But do pay attention to, if you've got adrenal fatigue,
if you're taking it when you're tired,
if you haven't cycled, then you wanna pay attention.
All right, so that's just caffeine.
Now, beyond that, there are other stimulants
and there are blends of stimulants
and there's even forms of caffeine, different caffeine salts
and caffeine bound to different things
that have different peak plasma times,
different pharmacodynamics,
that start getting much more interesting
than just straight caffeine.
And then there's beyond the Xanthines,
there's whole interesting types of stimulant molecules.
Again, if somebody wants to go research bromentane
or there's lots and lots of interesting,
more potent ones people can use in stack,
but at your own discernment, study, et cetera.
So for pre-workouts, some kind of stimulant,
when the body's in the right place for it,
can be meaningful, everybody knows that.
People will use NOx enhancers.
I'm not gonna really speak about that very much
because they have benefit for some things.
The ratio of arginine to lysine
is actually pretty relevant for things like immune system,
viral immunity, human immunity.
If someone is doing a lot of arginine for a very long time
that can get off and if they have
any underlying subclinical infections,
there can be effect on it.
It's complicated, so I just say,
I'm not gonna really talk about that one right now.
Adaptogens as pre-workouts can be useful.
And then notropics can be quite useful.
And there's different kinds of notropics.
If someone takes cholinergics,
things that are affecting acetylcholine,
they can get faster muscle firing,
they can get faster response time,
faster sensory acuity.
You can get over-cholinergic,
in which case you'll have a tight knack or a tight job.
You saw it's not really problematic,
but if you notice those symptoms, over-cholinergic.
And you can do that regularly or just when you want
those effects.
There's a bunch of different things
that one can do for the choline system we could talk about.
And then there's other things one can do
to really increase focus.
So that they can kind of go into a flow state
more reliably and have all the things
that come with being in a flow state, right?
Better emotional resilience, better drive,
better focus, better follow through, less distraction,
the ability to access the best performance
that you're capable of without having
head trips get in the way.
And so you can create interesting kinds
of notropic stacks with rastatams, with ampikines,
with psychostimulants, with cholinergics, et cetera,
that can have a really meaningful effect there.
Yeah, I think I've probably, no, not probably,
I've taken stimulants on and off since I was 15,
pretty much since I was training.
And after, in my 30s, I dialed it back considerably.
And then I started, I'm fairly sensitive myself.
I take a little bit of pre-workout, you know,
I dialed it back and I was just taking just enough
to feel good in the gym.
And then I started playing around in the tropics
and I know, and then I was able to dial
the caffeine back a little bit even.
And I noticed that my training changed,
and specifically with Qualias,
when I was taking that, started taking that last year,
I noticed that I didn't even wanna touch
other pre-workouts when I was on that.
And I didn't need to take it right before I train.
It would be, I would take that in the morning
and I was just working and then I would go training.
If I added a pre-workout on top of that,
it was way too much.
It took me out of the place I wanted to be.
And I noticed that a lot of the ways my training changed
is I became, I didn't want the music so loud.
I wanted, I preferred the peace and quiet
and or, you know, just lighter music.
And then I also noticed a lot of attention
going into my movement versus, and a lot less,
I would say I was actually able to check my ego
a lot more easily in that I stopped caring so much
about how much weight was on the bar
and I'm much more focused on performing the movement
as well as I possibly could,
which then in turn helped me build
a much healthier, stronger body.
So, but it didn't give me where I'm at now
when I take no tropics and Qualias specifically before I train.
Everything feels much better.
I don't feel amped up.
I don't feel like I'm raging and going crazy.
And my overall performance specifically
with my breath as well is much more tuned in.
I noticed if I get overstimulated,
that I think anyone who's lifted is like,
knows the rah, get crazy and lift as much as you can.
And then if no one's paying attention
to their breath in that moment,
and I've noticed that my breath has become
much more synced into what I'm doing.
And overall, I feel like I'm gliding through my training
versus, you know, having to force everything.
Yeah, it's fun hearing your experience.
Many people have reported similar experiences.
Ben Greenfield and the guys at Aresfit
and the bunch of crossfitters and bodybuilders
and sharpshooters and whatever.
We didn't actually develop Qualia for athletics originally.
We had that in mind and we will develop more things
for that application.
We're developing it for cognitive enhancement
and really kind of cognitive psycho-emotional enhancement.
When people wanna be in creative states,
creative productive flow states,
there's a whole set of things that they're looking for
and it has to do with cognitive metrics
like short-term memory and long-term memory
and degree of concentration and duration of focus
and task switching and all those things, right?
It also has to do with emotional metrics
like drive and presence and empathy, interpersonal awareness
and emotional resilience and so we looked at
how do we address the underlying physiological mechanisms
of all of those processes simultaneously
where we're working to up-regulate the capacity
of those systems rather than just exogenously override them.
You all exogenously override them
and you get side effects and dependence.
If you up-regulate the regulatory mechanisms,
the side effects are positive
and you can get lasting benefits, right?
So that's our design criteria
and it's a very different notropic than most acts
because you're not just working with one part
of the acetylcholine pathway,
you're working with comprehensively
the whole acetylcholine pathway
and then the whole catecholamine pathways glutamate
many neurotransmitters from the synthesis
of raw ingredients into the neurotransmitter,
the transport across the synapse, the receptor site,
cell energy dynamics, the metabolic waste product
afterwards, as well as things like neurogenesis,
synaptogenesis, phospholipid membrane integrity,
so a lot of things we're working on together
but like you're mentioning as far as workout goes,
if you're really stimulated,
your proprioception might be fairly low, right?
Your body awareness might be fairly low,
your presence and patience are fairly low,
which means risk of injury goes up,
likelihood to perform well
in terms of micro movements is gonna be much harder
and so we were actually really not surprised
but happy to see the kind of response people mentioned
with weightlifting and fitness
but athletics particularly,
the benefit they were getting
where they had very clear quantifiable metrics
with their athletics because of,
I mean this isn't a surprise,
everybody knows how much of any athletic is a mental game.
So if you're optimizing the biochemistry
of the organ systems that mediate your mind,
that's a big deal.
Yeah.
I feel like this would be almost more effective
for any athlete that has complex decision-making
as a part of their sport.
If you're a distance runner or a cross fitter,
you kind of know what exactly what you're gonna do.
You're gonna go squat and then you're gonna do your pushups
and then you're gonna do your pull ups
and then you're gonna do as fast as you can
as many times as you can and then you're done
and it's not really a mystery what's going to happen
as opposed to someone who's like a linebacker in football
where you're having to read and adjust
and there's more things happening
where there's just more to process during your experience
compared to being like a distance runner
where it's just like run from here to there
as fast as you can.
I would even say in cross fit,
that may be true with individuals
but anyone who's competed on a team before,
you watch the teams even at the games
and you can see people arguing with each other
and going there's a hesitation
and in that hesitation they lose whatever it is
they were going for
and it can get fairly complicated
in a team environment in that case too.
It's an interesting hypothesis
that the more decision making,
the more executive functions involved,
the more it would help.
Could very well be we don't have data to back that up.
What I can say that's interesting is that
even in so far as just things like
how many push ups can someone do before failure
or how many dead lifts at a particular weight,
we've had a lot of people report back to us
all time highs on very simple activities
because if you are decreasing stress
and decreasing distraction
and decreasing some of the mental interference
that's in the way and for many people
the actual straight benefit on sensory and motor nerves
that can be very interesting.
Earlier you were talking about
affecting the entire pathway
and not just kind of like siloing one thing
like when we mentioned testosterone doing injections
and just focusing on one hormone
that can be problematic.
And so many other new tropics and or disciplines in general
generally you're taking kind of one
maybe if it's proprietary blend
there's like two or three or four
different things mixed together
but the quality is unique in the sense that
I don't know how many you're in there
but it's gotta be dozens
there's gotta be 20 or 30 or 40 ingredients
in this one supplement
and that's because you're trying to affect
the whole pathway.
We're trying to affect many parts
of a pathway synergistically.
So if you look at any pathway that is
there's a natural regulatory process
you can see what are the rate limiting factors?
What are the rate limiting factors on ATP production
or ATP is actually one we didn't get to yet
that's a really big one.
I imagine actually a lot of your people do things
for ATP like carnitine, acetylcarnitine, right?
CoQ10, PQQ basic things like that, all great.
Some of them might do more advanced things
like methylene blue or mild granate
which are very interesting.
If not, they're worth looking into.
We do have some elements of cell energy
both ATP and NAD, NAD plus NADH ratio dynamics
built into CoQ and we will have more
in the upcoming future.
And so yeah, but let's take something like acetylcholine,
the most common no tropics are racitams
which have many effects but are primarily affecting
acetylcholine uptake on receptor sites.
The NMDA receptors in particular
upregulating acetylcholine uptake
in the postsynaptic neuron.
So you usually stack them with some choline donors
and there's a lot of different source of choline donors.
Some of them just suck.
They're not particularly good ones
or they have meaningful side effects.
Some of them are pretty meaningful
but they have different peak plasma times
and pharmacodynamics and kinetics.
So they'll be acting for a very short period of time
or over a long period of time
where they act more in the peripheral nervous system
or the central nervous system.
So we worked with what choline donors,
choline pneumometrics we want for all of those reasons
for immediate effects, for longer term effects,
for peripheral and central nerves,
for many different aspects of conversions.
We've got urodine converting to CDP choline,
converting to phosphatidylcholine,
converting to alpha GPC, converting to acetylcholine
and there's meaningful aspects in each of those transforms.
You have what other molecules are needed for the transform.
You need enough acetyl group with your choline
to make acetylcholine.
You need enough B5 to mediate that process, et cetera.
Then once you have the acetylcholine,
the presynaptic neuron to get across the synapse,
you might need acetylcholine S-rays inhibitors.
You need to make sure that you're not having
too much enzymatic breakdown.
And then the NMDA modulation that occurs
and then enough cell energy to process that, right?
So, and then you need to balance that whole thing
with what you do to glutamate
and balance that whole thing with the relationship
to histamine, with dopamine, et cetera.
So we factor all those things more deeply
than most people have had the opportunity to factor
applying system science, complexity science,
bioinformatics to how we formulate.
And my physiology from grad schools is fading these days,
but if I'm not mistaken, acetylcholine,
as the central nervous system fires towards a muscle
to contract, acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter
that is kind of the primary one
that facilitates that process.
Is that accurate?
So acetylcholine's involved in most all motor nerve function,
most all sensory nerve function,
major part of most synaptic communication
with other neurotransmitters involved.
So, speed of total synaptic communication,
it's why it's such a key place to start neurooptimization.
The, I was hanging out with my friend, AJ Roberts,
who's also in, you know, he's in the fitness field
and we were talking this weekend about one of the things
that he's noticed is mindfulness and meditation
is the largest growing niche within the fitness market
that's growing right now.
It's really becoming popular.
And for me, when I think about no tropics
and mindfulness and meditation,
I feel like it's all tied together.
It's all, it's not all directly doing the same things,
but where I'm trying to go,
it all helps me get to that place where I'm going.
And Ken, I know that you studied meditation
and things like that.
How is, how can meditation plus no tropics
and all this benefit the athlete?
We could get quite deeply into this topic
and since I know we need to wrap up,
I'll just say something briefly and closing.
So beyond the effect of decreasing just stress
and distraction and being able to increase focus
and presence and flow, which is huge, right?
The psychological effects on physiology are huge.
We also remember that every muscle that you're firing
is controlled by your nervous system
and increasing your nervous system's top-down
regulatory capacity for all the other systems
and not just your muscles, but your immune system,
all your physiology systems,
they have their own bottom-up cellular control,
but then they have major top-down control.
So to the degree that you can help the health
and the integrity and the evolving connectome structures,
et cetera, of the nervous system
and the neuroendocrine system,
you positively affect every other system.
Meditation, mindfulness processes can help,
specifically tuning into your body
and noticing body sensations.
You're activating your proprioceptive nervous system.
This will start making meaningful differences
to your own subtle sensing as you're using your body.
Exercise will bring more mindfulness to breath
and will allow you to get into parasympathetic states better.
Which will have effects on recovery and stress
and many things.
There's a lot one can do here.
There's really interesting studies
on athletics and visualization,
using CBT, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy,
to deal with anxiety, performance anxiety stuff.
I would say one thing that everyone should explore
if they haven't already in this space
is EEG neurofeedback.
Because this is a way that your nervous system
can get feedback about itself.
It doesn't even have to be mediated
through your conscious awareness
and very quickly upregulate its regulatory capacity,
which can help psychological issues,
can help PTSD, can help nightmares,
can help stress, can help lots of things,
but can also really help physiologic performance.
Many groups working on this that are doing great work.
Dr. Andrew Hill, the Peak Brain Institute
has done work here for athletics in particular,
as well as other topics.
I'm actually connecting with him soon.
Great, so ask him about EEG neurofeedback for athletics.
We'll do, yeah.
Excellent, thanks for joining us, Daniel.
Anything else you wanna say?
If there's anything that's particularly interesting
to your listeners here regarding either
understanding the tropics in more depth
and stacking them or the hormones
or life extension or whatever,
if there's a lot of requests on particular topics,
I'd be happy to dive into those
at greater depth in the future.
Excellent, and do you make any post to social media
or anything like that,
or should we just send people to Neurohacker.com?
Neurohacker.com is good for if people wanna research quality
or research what Neurohacker's about,
get a sense of our approach.
We'll have many more products
and different product categories coming out
over the next year, all focused on mind, brain optimization
and we're on social media as well.
You can check us out on Facebook.
Excellent, thanks for joining us.
Thanks for having me.
