Who really runs the world today?
Is it politicians or multinational banks?
Or is it social media and tech giants?
In this conversation, I speak with economists,
politician and author Yanis Varoufakis,
who served as the Greek minister of finance
during the 2015 Greek credit crisis.
We discuss how economies crash,
the winners and losers of bank bailouts,
dysfunctions within the EU,
and the real power that politicians have access to
in the face of their political rivals
and the rising influence of social media and tech monopolies.
I'm Shane Farnsworth,
and this is the Escape Sapiens podcast.
These conversations are supported
by the Andrea von Braun Foundation.
If you enjoy what I'm doing,
please consider subscribing,
liking and sharing this content.
And now, here's Yanis Varoufakis.
I hope you enjoy.
Just to make this more pleasurable though,
would you like a little bit of an overview,
or are you just happy to jump in?
Let's go straight in.
Let's go straight in.
Because I was originally going to ask you questions like,
what's the best place to go?
You ask me any questions you want.
Just don't give me any advance warning.
Feel free to ask anything you want.
I don't mind.
So what's the best place to go swimming in Greece then?
There is a cove on a barren island of the island where I live,
which is where I've asked my wife to scatter my ashes
when I'm done.
I don't even know what it's called,
because it's a barren island.
There's no name, at least not that I know.
For me, that's the spot.
But I'm not going to tell you how to find it.
I'm not going to give you the coordinates,
because it's a very well-kept secret.
But why?
What's the beautiful thing about the island?
What draws you to it?
Well, look, we live on an island about a stone's throw from Athens.
And because where we are, it looks to the other side of Athens,
so you can't see the aggliness of the cement blocks.
And we can see the beautiful mountains of the Peloponnese.
It feels as if we are a very, very long way from civilization.
But we're not.
We're only one hour's ferry, right?
And then on our little boat, we sail to this tiny island,
which is 20 minutes away, at 15 knots.
And on the other side of the island,
there is this little cove with deep blue waters
and pine trees coming all the way down to the sea.
And that's like being a million miles away.
And it's the human scale.
The trees are my height, a bit taller, maybe double my height.
The stones, the rocks, the fish, they're all, you know,
as I said, they're the human scale.
They're no sharks.
They're no cairns.
It is just like it was designed by some divinity for us.
So that's the best I can do.
So when you're dealing with politics and the economy all day,
just getting back and being a human.
It's all those old ways.
I just go there, put some music on, and I am away.
I'm in paradise.
And also the proximity, the fact that it's so close,
I can do this every day almost.
So let's do it in theory.
Well, especially when you're not anywhere and you agree,
so you can't do it.
But let's jump into the economy and politics then.
There's two real questions I want to ask you,
and they're very basic.
I basically want to ask you what money is
and who holds power in the world.
So these are the two questions.
And I thought I'd start off at a very basic level.
You used to be, oh, you've worked as an economics professor.
And so what I want to know is, in your mind,
is economics more like the study of psychology
or more like, say, physics in your mind?
Okay, big questions.
What's money?
The best definition of money I've come across
is by Karl Marx.
He defined money as the alienated ability of humankind.
I think it's such a poetic and accurate description
because money, you see, is a bit like in physics,
since you are a physicist.
It's a bit like light.
For centuries, there were deep divisions between scientists
on whether it's a stream of particles or a wave.
So you had huge disagreements.
Newton thought it was particles.
Maxon thought it was waves.
Democracy thought it was particles.
Pickle thought it was waves.
Antiline Stein comes on and says, guys, it's both.
Which is very difficult for the human mind
to wrap itself around the idea that it can be both
two things that are contradictory.
Now, in physics, you can actually prove these hypotheses.
You conduct experiments under controlled conditions,
and you can actually prove it.
Money is very similar in the sense
that it's got two different,
natures that seem absolutely incompatible with one another.
And yet, money is both those things.
The equivalent of the particle theory of light for money
is that it is a thing, that money is a thing.
It's a commodity.
You have wheat.
You have corn that can be used to eat.
It can be used to plow the fields.
And the form of seeds, that's capital.
But it can also be used in order to exchange.
So you exchange a pound of corn for a bundle of butter or something.
So there is a tendency to think of, especially the gold bugs,
those who believe that money has to be something tangible,
like gold, like a metal.
It must be substantial.
Not the figment of our imagination, like digital money, or paper money.
They tend to think of money as a thing, a commodity, a tangible.
And then there is a completely different view,
that money is nothing more than a transferable form of debt.
So, you can see that there is a big difference
so if you look at archaeological evidence, there is plenty of it,
that money did not emerge as a thing, but it emerged as a form of debt.
In Syria, in the Mesopotamia, we have evidence that the first form of widely, widely, widely
used money, were shards of clay with number zone.
And the idea was that the hedgewam, the landlord, the king, the tyrant, whatever,
would use these pieces of clay with number zone
to pay advanced payment of the wheat, the corn,
that had not already been produced, that would be produced after the harvest, to workers.
So, workers would go home at the end of each day, every week,
with one of those pieces of clay, with a number, and that's how numbers were invented.
That's how accounting happened. This is how writing was discovered or invented.
The first instances of writing had to do with these payment systems.
So, if it had the number two, it meant two pounds or ounces or something of wheat was owed to you,
because you had worked in the fields, so you'd have to wait for it.
Now, the beauty of it was, of course, that you didn't have to wait to cash it in for wheat.
You could use these pieces of clay to go to your next-door neighbor and say,
listen, you've got a goat, can I have some of its milk?
And here is a piece of clay that is like a tidal deed to an ounce of wheat in three months' time.
So, what is money? Is it a thing? Is it a promise?
Dead? And the answer is that it is both, in the same way that light is both.
So, that's the best I can do in order to introduce our audience to the complexity of money,
and why I love the definition of Marx, that it is the alienated ability of humankind.
It's been alienated from us, it's been abstracted,
but it reflects our ability to do things individually and collectively.
Your second question, I forgot because I'm getting old.
Well, we'll get into that towards the end of it. So, ultimately, we'll touch on
that's where we're going to end up.
Hopefully. We may not, but it depends where we take things.
So, this abstraction then, this is how I picture money as a shared fiction,
and I guess the next obvious question that I want to ask is,
when our economy crashes, when we go through some turbulent economic times,
what's happening there? Is it that the abstraction is breaking down,
that our shared fiction is breaking, or is something else going on at the lowest level?
Well, the shared fiction breaks down because promises have been made that cannot be kept.
That's what's going on. That's what the crisis is.
So, to the extent that the liquidity of an economic system
is a form of debt that is transferable, what's debt? It's a promise.
You give me the pint of milk, and I promise you something at the end of the month,
some wheat or pounds or sterling or whatever.
Now, in the old epochs, eras, you would have war, you would have pestilence,
you would have bad weather. That was the cause of the crisis really, earthquakes.
You didn't have a collapse of economic forces feeding into a kind of domino effect.
There were occasions when poverty or overextending a military effort, kings that
made too many promises to their people and to their soldiers as to how much loot they would get
if they pursue a war together and then if the war didn't go well, all these promises broke down.
But this was not an endogenous economic crisis. It was not a crisis of the economy. It was a
crisis of politics. It was a crisis of the weather. It was a crisis of a military campaign gone wrong.
It was the advent of capitalism that gave rise to purely economic crisis. The reason for that is
there's been a great transformation somewhere around the 18th century when we moved from
feudalism to capitalism. Because if you think about it, under feudalism, the order of play
was rather straightforward. First, you had production. The peasants toiled the land.
They produced goods, agricultural goods. That was the production phase. Production came first.
Second came the distribution phase. The lord would send the sheriff to the peasants,
armed and dangerous. The sheriff would steal a percentage of the harvest on behalf of the landlord.
It was just pure theft on behalf of legalized theft. That's what feudalism was, right?
So you had distribution. This second phase, violent phase, at least potentially violent phase,
determined how much of the produce would stay with the peasants, how much would go with the landlord.
And then the third phase was financialization. The landlord could not eat all that stuff.
So the landlord would sell it in rudimentary markets that were marginal to production,
but nevertheless important, get cash and use that cash either to arm his soldiers or to build
a better castle or to found a church or to lend it. Because the lords were the money lenders as
well, because they were the only ones who had money. So you had production, distribution and
financialization. In societies like that, it was impossible to have an endogenous economic crisis.
But with the advent of capitalism, the transformation, when the peasants were expelled from the land,
they were replaced by sheep in England, in Scotland, in Wales, because wool was an international
commodity by then, due to the discovery of international trade rules and the creation of
international trade rules. You have the creation of a working class, which is landless. They've
been evicted. They live in slums now, outside the land. The land now is commodified. It is leased
to former peasants or to the sheriff or whoever, who now becomes a proto-capitalist who hires laborers
now and pays rent to the landlord. But these proto-capitalists, to make business work,
to start production, first they had to borrow, because they had to pay wages up in upfront,
so that the workers would not die of hunger, not because they were nice people, but because
otherwise they wouldn't be able to get them to work. And also they had to pay the landlord
rent before the harvest came in. So suddenly what you have is a complete reversal. It used to be
production, distribution, finance. Now it's finance, distribution, and finally production.
And this reversal unleashed tremendous productive powers. Workers were forced to be far more
efficient. The entrepreneurs, the proto-capitalists, because they were struggling themselves to keep
their nose above water, they had to improve efficiency. They had to invest in machinery
in order to enhance labor productivity, because they were in competition with one another and
anyone who didn't do it simply went bankrupt. So because finance now is at the beginning
of this production process. Finance is the linchpin for this new system called capitalism.
Bankers begin to emerge as the liquidity providers of this system, the lubricants,
the lubricators of the system. And the more this system becomes efficient, the greater the cut
that the bankers retain. So the way I've described this is in a book a few years ago,
was to say that it is a bit like bankers had time traveling hands. They would push their hand
through the membrane of the timeline and extract value from the future that has not been created
yet. Bring it to the present to fund the production that will produce the values of the future.
And that of course made them central in this chain and allowed them to become very rich.
And the more they lend, the more value they extracted from the future to bring to the present,
the richer they go. But that meant that at some point they extracted so much value from the future
that the present could not be delivered. The present could not repay the future.
And that's when promises are broken. Debt are issued that cannot be repaid. And when those
accumulate at some point, like grains of sand that you lay one on top of the other at some point,
there's going to be an implosion. And that's an economic crisis. At that point,
you have a situation where the alienated ability of humankind is in crisis,
it's in a vortex, and you've got unpayable debts. And that's when you have the eradication of debts,
because debts that cannot be paid will not be paid.
So in 2008, where we had the bailout of the banks, I want to understand how dirty this
process was. Because if I follow what you're saying, what I understand is happening is that the
banks have a whole bunch of assets that have accumulated that are not good, they're toxic
in some sense, like loans that will never be repaid, this sort of thing. And so then the
central bank steps in and buys them all out at some price. That's sort of, in some sense,
if I understand you putting the hand into the future, I want to understand.
Ah, no, no, it's not the same thing. Because you see, when you put your hand into the future,
you extract value to bring it in to produce new value. What happened with the central banks was
none of that. It was simply printing money to make failed bets all. Not the same thing. There
was never any productive benefit from doing this. They salvaged the banks by creating money to replace
their busted flushes, their busted wages, their busted bets.
I guess then the question that I have is, ultimately, who wins and who loses? Who is it
that's paying to buy out those busted bets, the toxic assets?
Well, it depends on what's happening in the rest of the economy as well. I'm quite relaxed about
you know, forgiving debts and writing them off. You have to do it. As I said, an unpayable debt
will not be paid. So you need to write it off. There are two ways of writing it off. One is to
just write it off. Really, very simple. Say, okay, this IOU is going to be torn up because it
cannot be paid. That, to me, is the honest and uncomplicated way of doing it. But if you want to
pretend that the debt is sacred and it will be repaid, then the only way of pretending that an
unpayable debt can be repaid is by constantly rolling it over, lending the busted entity,
the failed banker, for instance, money, continue to give him liquidity in the form of, you know,
short-term, medium-term, long-term debt, so as to allow him to pretend that he is honoring the
IOUs that he's issued. Now, again, it really is no skin of my nose whether you excuse him the debt
or whether you roll it over. So the question is, what else is happening, however, around this little
drama? Because the tragedy of 2008 and beyond was that while we had socialism for the bankers,
you know, the central banks were printing state money to give it almost philosophically to the
bankers, they were imposing harsh austerity on the innocence of the people who had not done
nothing wrong and who had not benefited for years and years and years through financialization, through
betting on impossible horses in the financial sector. So when you have socialism for the
very few who happen to be the financiers and austerity for everybody else, you end up with a
catastrophe that we've experienced over the last ten years, because the financiers get their money,
there is the ethical question as well, right? The people who created the crisis
get power and money. And the people who suffered the crisis and who never benefited from the
makings of the crisis, the many, are suffering austerity, they can't put food on the table.
They can't go to sleep at night because they are so surrounded, so much in the clasps of angst
about how they're going to make ends meet by the end of the week. But besides the ethical
point, there's a macroeconomic point as well, because the industrialists, the people who benefited
from socialism for the very few for the oligarchy, look at, you know, they have all this money which
is being printed by the central banks and given to them, right? But they're never going to invest it,
because not because they don't want to invest, they would like it, they would like to invest it,
but they look out there and they see the masses, the multitudes being impecunious and finding it
very hard to make ends meet and they think, I'm not going to produce snazzy expensive products
for them, they won't be able to afford it. So if you're Volkswagen in 2009, you're not going to say
I'm going to produce an alternative to a Tesla, an expensive $100,000 electric car,
because who the hell is going to buy it? Look at them. I'll make little golfs with stupid little
polluting diesel engines, as I was doing before. I will fake their exhaustive measurements as well
and, you know, make money out of that, out of the little people with, you know, small dirty little
cars that sell to them. So you've got very low levels of investments and that also augurs really
badly for the green transition, because for 13 years we have not invested in the green transition
as we should have and we can see the effects on the environment now. You can see it on electricity,
I mean, we have under invested for 13 years. So the tragedy, the crime of the post 2008 period
is not just that you have excused those busted wages of the finances and that you have printed
money as if in the context of socialism for the rich to give to them. It's also that the austerity
you've imposed upon people in the European Union, people in the United Kingdom, people in the United
States, I mean, here in this country where the champions were stated, world record record holders
when it came to state, to idiotic austerity, self-defeating austerity. And the result is that
you have very low levels of investment. And when you have very low levels of investment,
what does this mean? It means that demand is low and it means that the only way you can keep
finances in health, in better commerce or alive or zombified, call it what you might, may
is to keep printing money to give to them because they're not going to get it from the
little people because the little people don't have any and because there's no investment to produce
new wells for the bankers to benefit. So for 13 years after 2008, we have had rude health
in the financial markets, which was, however, driven by state money that was printed and printed,
to keep the finances, boisterous, while the rest of the economy was shrinking.
So how long can you push this for? There's sort of two questions I want to ask. The first is,
what would you have done instead? What's the alternative? Did you have to inject the money
up to the level of banks or could have you given money to the people who made the,
you know, did you have to inject money at the level of the banks or could have been at the
level of the people? And what is the long-term impact if we continue to do quantitative easing
and we continue to give austerity to the people and not the banks?
Well, the first question that came out of your mouth was, how long can this last for? The answer
was until the pandemic, because now it's all collapsing around us. We can see that.
But before I explain why that is happening, let me answer your other question. What could
we have done instead? And I think you already embedded into your question the proper answer.
The first thing you do is, of course, you save the banks because banks are not like other businesses.
If a bike shop shuts down, okay, you don't have bikes. But a bank, for better or for worse,
I think for worse, the banks own the payment system. Forget credit. You know, whenever you want to buy
coffee these days or buy a book or go to the movies or whatever, you need to make a payment.
And you make a payment using your debit card or credit card or even some ATM from which you
withdraw money. And that's all owned by the banking system, by the early gobbling of the banksters.
So you need to save those banks. You can't allow the ATMs to shut down and the payment system to
collapse because then you'll have another great depression like we had after 1949.
And only monsters, Nazis and fascists emerge from that. But it's one thing to say you should save
the banks. It's quite another to say that you must save the bankers. So what I would have done,
I would have picked up the phone and called them and say, I've got some good news and I've got
some bad news. We will save the bank. That's a good news. The bad news, we're not going to save you.
You are out. So shareholders are wiped out. Board of directors are fired.
They are nationalized and they're saved. And this is not buying the sky stuff.
This is precisely what happened in 1998 in South Korea. The Korean state got into the
failed private banks, took them over, drove out the board of directors. I remember I was having
a very intense conversation with the finance minister of South Korea. And I asked him, how did
you do that? Because we are having such difficulty. I mean, you know, bankers are so powerful people.
So powerful people. I mean, they have more powerful than they have more power than us
ministers of finance, you know, they can fire us. He said, well, we'll use them in a very,
very good institution in Korea. He said, what? He said, well, the Marines. I said the Marines in
and had them leave the building at gunpoint. I thought, that's a very good idea.
So they saved the banks and within a year and how they had sold them back to the private sector,
because they were not Marxists, they were left wing lingers like me, but they didn't save the bankers.
So the message to bankers was, if you, if you steer your bank onto the rocks,
and it starts sinking, we will save the vessel, but not you. So big.
Okay, that was number one thing that I would. Can I ask just quick quickly, did that have
a lasting effect? So what happened in 2008 and later on, did Korea have a sort of softer journey
as a result of that prior policy? Absolutely. Look at the data Korea had next to no crisis in 2008.
What had happened in 1998 shielded Korea from the vagaries of Wall Street, the city of London,
what's happening in the European Union, come from, from strength to strength.
And it wasn't just South Korea, it was six years before South Korea, it was Scandinavia.
The Scandinavian banks in 1992 went bust, all of them that made some stupid decisions,
and they all went bust, Swedish banks, Danish banks, Norwegian banks, Finnish banks,
and the states back then, they were social democratic back then, no longer, they,
they bailed out the banks, got rid of the bankers, nationalized the banks, and then sold them off
in within two years back to the private sector to different bankers. And they didn't have the same
problems in 2008 that the Anglo, the Anglo sphere had, as well as the European Union.
So that's one thing I would do, save the banks, not the bankers. The second thing I would do,
and you already foreshadowed that in your question, if I wanted to boost demand,
I would not give it to the financiers, I wouldn't print money to give to the financiers,
I would give it to the little people. I mean, Donald Trump did it, and then Joe Biden continued
with the checks in the mail too little bit. The Australian government did it in 2009
under Kevin Rudd, and the result was that Australia did not have a recession in 2009,
because every household, you probably recall that, got something between 10,000 and 20,000
Australian dollars. It missed me, unfortunately. I was a little bit annoyed about that.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, all my friends got the, yeah.
So, you know, even during the pandemic, when the central bank of Europe was printing,
as if there was no tomorrow, I was warning them, I was saying, you're creating a gigantic bubble
in the real estate, because the money will go from the central bank, the financiers,
from the financiers to their mates, their mates are going to take the stock exchange
or buy flats in Berlin. Asset prices will go through the roof. That will create asset
price inflation. That will increase the shortfall, actually reduce further investment,
and that's going to shrink aggregate supply of goods and services. And then at some point,
some of that money will leak into the economy, and there's going to be inflation,
and then you'll be stopped, which is where they are. So the alternative proposition was,
why don't you just send some like 500 euros I proposed, or 1,000 years, or 2,000 years,
depending on the length of the pandemic, send it to people's bank accounts. And the most astonishing
answer I got from German colleagues, politicians and bankers and so on, is you can't do that.
So why can't you do it? He said, we don't have the know-how. So what? Because our social security
numbers are not connected to our banking system, and therefore technically we cannot even send
them money. We can't do what Trump and Biden did. And I thought, my goodness, this is the state of
Europe. The great German efficient state cannot even find its citizens and give them some money.
They can take them, they can't give it. Okay, so this makes me think of something else that
I'm quite curious about, which is that in Europe, we don't have big tech competitors. So for example,
there's no, you know, French Twitter. There's no, why is it that on these technical grounds,
people seem more competent in the United States? Why is it that you have these,
you know, blossoming tech companies that are missing here?
Well, the hegemon always produces cutting edge technologies. Before America rose,
almost every important technological breakthrough was made in Cambridge, Oxford,
the University College of London, in Britain. Britain was the empire. It produced the technological
advances. Before that, it was Rome. So there's nothing terribly surprising about that.
Size also matters. You have a very large economy in the United States. You've got English.
You've got the size of America. You've got English. So if you were going to start Twitter
in France, it wouldn't really go that far. Twitter went far because from day one,
it was used by us Greeks, by Australians, by the Portuguese and so on and so forth.
And first mover advantage is everything. So once you created Facebook, there can't be another
Facebook even in the United States, even in the United States. If you and I had a much better
software for a Facebook competitor, it wouldn't matter because if anyone wants to join
something like Facebook, they will go to where their friends are. So there is the first mover
advantage, which is really very strong. Now, the only country that has developed competitors,
real competitors, substantial competitors, very strong competitors to big tech is China.
But that's because there was a political project to do so. They understood really very well that
if the whole of the Chinese political economy and society enter Facebook, Twitter,
buy everything from Amazon.com and so on, any possibility of autonomous growth and development
in China is gone. Europe never understood that. And we now are in this kind of
semi-war between Europe and America over social media. You've got the European Commission
constantly sniping at Twitter, at Facebook, at Google, at Apple, imposing fines. Ms. Westager,
she does well. I mean, she's right on many of the issues that she's got. But as you pointed out,
this is just a defensive war. There is no attempt or capacity of the European Union,
despite the fact that we are more than the Americans put together. We're richer than the
Americans put together. We have a lot of technologies. We cannot bring it together
and create either competitive to Amazon.com or to Alibaba in China.
So with every crisis and every technological advance, Europe falls behind both China and
the United States of America. It still surprises me that you say this because
we had, for example, MySpace, which was taken over by Facebook. And I guess now Facebook shares
are really tumbling in the last weeks. And I guess TikTok is sort of rolling over YouTube.
So there are examples of other tech companies rising up.
Do you think the EU is taking appropriate steps then to break up these monopolies?
No. You think they should go further? Or how should they help companies in their own sort
of domain develop competitors? How about having a lobotomy to begin with and start in a fresh
because the situation with the European Union is beyond a joke. They have completely failed
to rise up to the great challenges of the time. And what are the great challenges of the time?
The banking crisis of 2008, the European Union made a complete and utter mess of it. The result
now is that we have 13 years of centrifugal forces tearing the European Union of Art.
And that has never subsided. They just threw a lot of printed money on the problem
under Mario Draghi. But without solving the underlying centrifugal forces that are tearing
us apart. So banking crisis, disaster. Green energy, catastrophe, catastrophe. I mean,
think about it. We have something called the European Union, but we do not have
an energy plan for Europe. Germany has its own plans. And we saw how great those were
when put in invaded the Ukraine. France has its own polyonic nuclear based plan.
Half of the nuclear power stations now that they're necessary because the
height and price of natural gas are now defunct. They're out of commission. Greece has its own
plan. It's pathetic. I wish we had a European Union. We do not. We have something that
pretends to be a union. Artificial intelligence, nothing, zero. There's no plan for artificial
intelligence. There are pockets of AI here and there. But nothing like the concentrated
investment on AI that the Japanese have, that the Koreans have, that the Chinese have. Of course,
the Americans. You've got a lot of rent seeking in Europe. There is hardly any entrepreneurship
happening. They're all, you know, the big wigs are simply trying to extract whatever value has
already been created without producing new value. And we do not have a government. We have a bureaucracy
whose job in Brussels is to behave like the bureaucracy of a cartel. The nearest
parallel analog to the European Union Commission is OPEC, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries. They have a bureaucracy. Their purpose is to coordinate the activities of the different
countries with a view to simply maximizing the extraction of ransom on the rest of the world.
But this can never be the source of innovative thinking about creating new values. It's only
innovative thinking about how to corner existing markets. That's what the European Union Commission
is. And whenever they have a good idea, because there are some good ideas that come out of the
commission, since I remember in the 1990s, they've all been vetoed by Berlin, all of them,
every single one of them. In some European Union Council has been vetoed by Berlin. And if not
by Berlin, by one of the 100 maidens of Berlin, because sometimes Berlin doesn't want to be seen
to be the bad guy or girl in the case of Berlin. So they asked the Slovak or the Dutch to veto it
on their behalf. So then what does the US have that the EU is lacking? What is it that makes
the US function, which doesn't allow the EU to function a similar way?
Common debt, treasury bills. You know the treasury, the US treasury. We have a central bank here in
Europe and they have a central bank. But if you think of how we constructed it, it was as if
constructed by morons in order to serve slaves. Because what we did, we created the central bank
without a state behind it. There's no state that can have the back of the European central bank.
And you have 19 states, now it's 20 states that use this central bank for the money, but cannot
rely on it in case there's a banking crisis to bail them out. Because by its constitution,
it's not allowed to bail them out. So they had to bend the constitution of the ECB,
the charter of the ECB in order to bail them out. But to do this, they had to get the permission
from Berlin to do it. So it's a catastrophe. It's exactly what Alexander Hamilton in the United
States was trying to avoid and succeeded in avoiding. Situation where you have different
states, different formal colonies, supposedly one country, but without common debt. Common debt is
everything. It's what binds states together. What binds the British together is not so much,
you know, the Royal Family. It is the bound and the fact that the north of England and the south
of England share the debt, the national debt. That's what gives substance to countries. How long
with languages and traditions and conventions and all that jazz, as they say?
I don't want to sound too conspiratorial. You mentioned the system is created as though by
morons. But could it be that it was constructed in this way to force federation further down the
line? Is there some sort of intent behind a system which seems not to work currently in your mind?
Look, there were some smart people who thought of the Euro and the European Central Bank in those terms.
And one of them was President Mitterrand of France, François Mitterrand, in the 80s and 90s.
I have done good authority, I've written about this. I put a friend of mine who was in the room
in 1992, when the Maastricht Treaty, which is the foundational treaty of the Euro,
and the European Central Bank, was signed. There was a discussion between the President of France,
François Mitterrand, and the President of the European Commission at the time, Jacques Delors,
who was a friend of Mitterrand and who had been his finance minister many years before,
with a friend of mine in the room. And Jacques Delors, representing the European Commission at
the time, was trying to convince the French president that it is important to have two
pylons, two legs for the Eurozone. One should be the Central Bank to guarantee monetary stability,
and another one should be something like an investment ministry or a treasury that would
borrow on behalf of the whole of the Eurozone area in order to invest, so there would be the
stability leg and the growth or development leg, which of course meant a political union.
It meant that if you have a common debt, you have to have common rules, who borrows,
you need to have a common parliament or parliamentary process to approve the common debt.
And François Mitterrand turned around and said what he said. He said, listen, Jacques,
that would be great to do that. We can't do it. We don't have the political clouds to do it at the
moment. What we can do is we can create a monetary union, and this is where the old fox, François Mitterrand,
proved yet very clear vision of the future. He said, when the next large financial crisis comes,
our successors will have to choose between letting this whole thing collapse or federating
or doing what you're suggesting. So this is precisely what you're saying. However,
he was wrong. And he was wrong for reasons that a British Cambridge economist
had foreseen in 1971, in April 1971, Nicolas Calder was his name, a well-known economist
of the Cambridge tradition, who was actually Eurofiled. He wanted the European Union to come
together, and he was writing that paper as somebody who's worried about the future of the
European common market back then, the European Union today. So this is now April 1971, just before,
a few months before the collapse of the Bretton Wood system and the fixed exchange rates, when the
Europeans could see that it was happening, that the exchange rates would no longer be fixed. They
needed the exchange rates to be fixed because the European Union was a cartel. They were trying to
sell, to fix the price of coal, to fix the price of steel, to fix the price of cars. If exchange
rates between France and Germany and Italy and Holland go up and down, it's very difficult to
fix prices. So they needed the fixed exchange rates that the Americans were providing under
the Bretton Woods. And they could see that these fixed exchange rates would blow up. So they were
already planning a common currency or fixed exchange rates in Europe as a prelude to the
Euro back in 1971. And Caldor in the news statement said this. He said it would be a gross mistake.
I don't have his names now, his words in my head to tell you about, but I can assure you,
you can look it up. I've republished that paper as well in my books, in a couple of my books.
He said, if we make the mistake of thinking that through a monetary union,
we create a stepping stone towards federation. We will have killed off, maybe that was not
the words used. We will have annulled the possibility of a political union. Because he explains,
a monetary union without a political union is like putting the cart before the horses.
A monetary union without a political union in common debt is going to create a gigantic financial
crisis by itself. And when it hits, we are going to suffer massive centrifugal forces,
politically, socially, at the level of discourse, and the Europeans will not be able to politically
to unite after that. And I think that this is exactly what happens.
I suppose you're alluding to the rise of sort of right-leaning politicians and...
Not just. After, you know, when the banking crisis happened, it started in Wall Street,
as it usually does. Like 1929, it started in 2007, 2008 in Wall Street. Then very soon after that,
we realized that the French and the German banks were kaput, gone. Okay.
A domino effect starts. Once the German and the French banks are bankrupt, they can no longer
roll over the Greek government debt, the Italian government debt, the Irish government debt,
because they were the banks that were lending those dates. And then there is, of course,
a feedback loop, because once the front page of newspapers is full of news of the Greek
state's bankruptcy, and everybody knows that the Greek state owes 120, 130 billion euros
to the German banks and another 100 to the French banks, then that makes the position
of the French and the German banks even worse. And then what happens is, then politicians start
pointing accusatory fingers at one another. The German politicians are pointing their fingers
at the Greeks. You messed this thing up. It is because you were so spendthrift and because you
sung and played the Buzuki under the sun in the summer and it didn't work. And then the Greeks
turn around and the pointing accusatory fingers at the German in the beginning, you're Nazis.
You've never been anything other than Nazis. That's it. It's finished. At that moment,
you have centrifugal forces at the cultural level, the political level, the ethical level,
the every level. And you go now to any German or any Greek, any Dutchman or woman or French person
and say, do you think it's a good idea that we should federate in Europe? They say, bugger off
immediately, which would not be the case before 2010. So I think that Nicolas Calder was
completely present. So sort of shot ourselves in the foot. I noticed that so in respect for the
time, we're going to have to wrap up fairly soon. Can I just ask with a few and with a few quick
questions about power? So the main one is who holds the power today? Is it Musk? Is it Biden?
Is it the head of the IMF or Goldman Sachs? Where does power really reside today?
The hardest aspect of contemporary society to comprehend
is that we live in a capitalist world or post capitalist world,
where power has been concentrated tremendously
inside the confines of a new form of capital
without any human being, Musk, Biden, whoever, being in command of it.
If you look at Musk on a minute-by-minute basis, if you actually watch him work,
you can see that this is a driven man who's got enormous resources at his disposal,
but given his ambition and his different projects, he's very constrained. He feels the pressure.
He doesn't feel like somebody who can do anything. He doesn't feel like God. Similarly, Jeff Bezos,
he's got hundreds of billions stashed away in terms of wealth, but he too feels constrained.
So this is a great tragedy and a great paradox. It's like an ancient Greek tragedy.
If you're watching or Shakespeare, if you're watching a Shakespearean play,
this is the third. What do you see? You see powerful men on a stage who nevertheless,
their great tragedy is that the more power they have, the more powerless they feel,
and it's the nature of the game which extracts power from the many,
concentrates in the hands of a few who are tragic figures and therefore powerless.
This is how I understand the capitalist post-capitalist system we live in,
and that's why I continue to be a leftist who thinks that capitalism is neither natural nor
pleasant or stable for that matter. In the end, we've created magnificent machines
that had the capacity of being our slaves. I'm a tech enthusiast. I love machinery.
I love technology, but in the end, we become the slaves of the machines, and that is not
simply to say that this is the rich versus the poor. There is, of course, the rich versus the poor.
We see this on a daily basis, but in the end, even the rich, even the Elon Musk's of the world,
the Jeff Bezos's of the world, they are also victims of this enslavement of the whole of
humanity to our artifacts. A kind of Dr. Frankenstein who created the thing, this capitalist thing,
which has taken over and is threatening our very existentialist condition.
Did you also feel that at your core, in the place of the finance minister of Greece,
did you feel that you had less or more power than what you anticipated when you entered the role?
Oh, I had exactly as much power as I had anticipated, precisely zero.
I knew I would have none. I knew I would have none because, remember, the only reason why I was
elected was because we had a massive bankruptcy, and I had become the finance minister of the most
bankrupt state in the world after Puerto Rico, maybe. I knew that I wouldn't have any power.
The only power I had was the power to say no, not to put my signature on another credit card
on behalf of my people. That's why I was so demonized and so despised by the powers that be.
They could not believe that I had the audacity not to take their money. Okay, guys.
So let me end by asking you. I mean, you took the job.
I didn't take the job. I mean, you're a moral imperative.
Yeah. So let me end by asking, it's actually two questions. How do you decide,
as a Marxist or a socialist, which trenches to die in? So for example, do you buy shares? Do you
shop in Amazon? Where do you decide on moral or ethical grounds? No, I'm not going to go down
that path. So that's the first question. And to wrap up, let me answer it because I won't
forget it. Firstly, I don't buy shares. I have a natural and antipathy and ideological opposition
to share markets. That's why my last book, which was a science fiction novel and other now,
where I try to imagine a different world, there are no share markets. So no, I don't believe in
horse races. I don't believe in the stock exchange. I hate derivatives. I don't do it.
Only, you know, everybody shares indirectly when I can't stop it due to the super valuation fund
buying shares on my behalf without asking me, right? But I would never buy consciously and
purposefully shares. Do I buy Amazon.com stuff? Of course I do. Because we live in capitalism.
I'm not going to survive if I simply eat and consume products produced under socialist order,
which doesn't exist. When do I choose to do something like, for instance, accepting the
Ministry of Finance? Well, that election in January 2015 was the election of a political party that
had a reason from 4% to almost 40% in two years as a result of a popular rebellion against
the dead bondage of whole people. The reason I said yes was because for four years I was
criticizing what the parts that we were doing. My proposals, similar to what I was discussing with
you about what to do with the banks, what to do with furlough wages, how to empower the many,
these proposals were accepted and embraced by a young man who's going to be prime minister,
very improbable prime minister, because as I said, up until two years before he had 4% of the vote.
And people were eating out of rubbish bins. As a result of this enslavement,
dead bondage, it was like, Greece had become like something like a Victorian workhouse.
And I was elected. I didn't think I was going to, you know, affect the transition from capitalism
to socialism or anything stupid like that. I had one task that I wanted to accomplish.
And I was planning to resign the moment that task was accomplished or the moment I realized
I could not accomplish it. And the task was to haircut the Greek debt so that we no longer
took more credit cards on conditions of further austerity that forced more people to eat out of
rubbish bins. So that's when, you know, my ethos tells me, do it. This is a job that you should
try to do, even if the probability of success is low. So let me finish by just asking you simply
what makes you happy and what makes you look forward to the future? What is it that really
drives you and gives you hope? Well, besides being with the people that I love and listening
to the music that permits me to forget who I am, for me, good art, good music, good cinema,
must help me forget who I am. But I need to lose myself in this. So when I lose myself in good
stuff, stuff that other talented people have created, I'm at I think at my happiest. That's
why I'm married to an artist as well. But more generally, I'll give you the answer that Captain
Picard gives in the next generation of Star Trek, which is of course a major source of
philosophical insights for me, because I'm a trekking. I don't know whether you know that.
When he's asked, so they find in space in one of the episodes in the very last episode of Season 1,
they find some frozen people from the 20th century, industrialists, who froze themselves and had
themselves their bodies covered in space in case they're rescued and fixed and cured in the future.
Of course, this happens 24th century. And one of these unfrozen businessmen from the 20th century
says to Picard, so you have no money here. There are no markets. Everybody gets what
their basic needs covered. So what do you do? What's the point of your existence?
And Picard says, my friend, to improve yourself. I think anything that you're doing to improve
yourself in a self-motivated way, you play the piano a little bit better. You write a better
article, a better book. You learn how to appreciate a beautiful sunset more maturely than you did
the previous day or the previous year. That's the stuff of life.
You make the world just that little bit more beautiful. Yanis, it's been an absolute pleasure.
Welcome back anytime. Thanks for coming on. Thank you, Shane. That was fun.
