my intuition is that in order to understand quantum mechanics, you have to understand that we live
in a complex world but are only able to perceive real things.
And that particles can visit the complex world and come back out into the real world and so on.
But I don't know, I can't give you a serious answer about how to approach this problem.
Okay, I just, I don't know enough and I mean, it's a really, really hard question and I wouldn't
even begin to fake it. In the following conversation, I speak with one of the world's most creative
and renowned applied mathematicians, Carl Bender from Washington University.
Carl was also one of my own favorite lecturers. I invited him on the podcast because he has a
unique talent for making complicated mathematical ideas, not just understandable, but conceptually
beautiful. In the following, we discuss the history of imaginary numbers and how they fit
in with reality. We also discuss Carl's interactions with Richard Feynman and his own
research in quantum mechanics. I'm Shane Farnsworth and this is the Escape Sapiens podcast
supported by the Andrew von Braun Foundation. If you value this content, you can have a direct
impact on its success by liking, subscribing and sharing. And now, here's Carl Bender. I hope you
enjoy. Escape Sapiens. So let's start with some philosophy of mathematics. Is the effectiveness
of mathematics in describing the natural world in some sense unreasonable or mysterious?
Now, that's an interesting question. Mathematics is a subject in itself. It's a contained
subject. It's internally self-consistent or not. The question is, can it be applied
to describe the real world? And that's a very interesting question because it isn't obvious
that mathematics has anything whatsoever to do with the real world. And it's an extraordinarily
amazing thing that it does. And the recognition that mathematics, in some sense, describes
what's going on in the real world, that took centuries for people to become aware of that,
right? I mean, orbital mechanics is a typical example. When you can predict the positions of
the planets or you can predict an eclipse, that's extraordinary because there's no obvious reason
why nature should obey any kind of mathematical formula. So yes, that's a deep question. Why
should mathematics have anything whatsoever to do with reality as we perceive it? And of course,
in a dream, if you can distinguish reality from a dream, but in a dream, you look around and things
are happening without cause. And they do things that are unpredictable. You could be floating in
the air. You could be whizzing through the air and so on. And mathematically, there's absolutely
no possible way to explain that. So what's the difference between dream and reality?
Is mathematics an essential description of reality? I don't know. It appears to be,
of course, and people have been able to predict mathematical consequences and observe them in
reality with incredible precision. So the bottom line is that mathematics appears to be a complete
and total description of what happens in the real world. But I have no idea why.
I don't have a deep explanation of why. I mean, I can walk into the laboratory
and show you experiment after experiment where I make a prediction about what's going to happen
and measure it with great precision. And what I predicted really happens.
But I can't give you a deep, deep reason why it should.
Do you think there might come day where we hit a limit? So for example, at the moment,
we're trying to reconcile quantum mechanics with gravity. And that's the biggest, I suppose,
most difficult question that physicists are currently working with. And here I'm thinking
along the line of Goethe's theorem or something like this. Do you think there's going to come a
time when really everything breaks down and we can't go any further?
Actually, yes, I do. Yes, I do. There are now amazing experiments where you can measure
extraordinarily short times, phenomena happening on extraordinarily short times.
But if it happens on a short enough time, then quantum mechanics comes into play.
And if we're talking about times of order 10 to the minus 20 seconds,
how does a particle move over a time scale that short? And it isn't at all clear.
That is, if you are making measurements of a millionth of a second, now you're still talking
about motion on the distance scale, say, of a bacterium or something. But when you're talking
about 10 to the minus, that's 10 to the minus six. But when you get down to 10 to the minus 20,
the uncertainty principle comes into play. It's not at all clear what is happening.
It may actually look like a fantasy world on that kind of a time scale. So you ask,
will mathematics continue to apply forever? I have my doubts. At very, very short time scales,
things may just look like a soup and they may be undescribable. That's a very interesting question.
Do you think perhaps in those cases, it could be the case that we just need a different set of
mathematics doesn't break down, but we're just using the wrong axioms, but potentially.
I have no idea. It could be that in extreme physical cases, the current theories of physics,
how physics works, may no longer be valid. And it's conceivable that there's a new physics
that happens at a micromicroscopic level, very, very short times, very short space distances.
But maybe it just is sort of looking at a bowl of jello and that what we're seeing
is in some sense an average of all of these microscopic things all happening together.
That could be. That could be. It's not at all, I wouldn't even guess what's going to happen
as you make finer and finer measurements. That's a really good question. I just have
absolutely no idea. I don't even know whether I should formulate an opinion because it's not
based on anything. But it is clear that there are many things that happen,
and already it's very hard to describe the process. When a particle tunnels,
what is happening while it's tunneling? Where is the particle? You make up a word
if you're a physicist to cover up the fact that you don't understand.
Like dark matter or dark energy. That's right. And in this case, when a particle is tunneling,
you call it a virtual particle, but that doesn't explain anything. It's just a word.
So the question is, how does, if there's a potential hill, the particle strikes the hill,
classically it would bounce back. Quantum mechanically, every once in a while,
the particle goes through whatever that means and reappears on the other side and keeps going.
But then here it seems like this is not a case that fits what we're talking about exactly,
right? Because we can predict to extraordinarily high precision the tunneling rate, for instance.
So that seems to be something that does fit within the realms of what mathematics can describe.
That's right. That's a quantity that you can
calculate, such as the tunneling time. However, you cannot predict whether or not a given particle
is going to tunnel. And if it does, while it's tunneling, so we have this vision of continuity.
We live in a world where things are continuous. So if I throw a baseball,
that baseball is always visible to me. And it's moving in a continuous way through a medium.
Okay? But when a particle tunnels, you can't say where the particle is as it's tunneling.
So I lose sight of the particle on one side of a potential hill. And then I see it again on the
other side. And I don't even know if it's the same particle. If it's an elementary particle,
if an electron strikes a potential barrier, and an electron comes out the other side,
is it the same? Or is it a different electron? And where was the electron as it went from one side
to the other? Okay? And so we have this, in our world, we see things happening continuously.
We don't pick up a rock and throw it. It disappears from view, and then it reappears,
you know, 10 feet later. It doesn't do that. But in quantum mechanics, it seems to. Okay? Now,
I would argue that that thing, that tunneling object, that tunneling particle, is actually going
through the complex plane. But that may just be a mathematical description of this tunneling phenomenon.
This might be a good point, I think, to jump in. Because the complex numbers are going to be
appearing throughout the discussion, it might be a good opportunity to introduce them. For the
person who has no physics background, no mathematics background, are you able to describe,
I can remind you of the list, but what are imaginary numbers? What are complex numbers?
And how do we first come up with them? Right. So when numbers were first invented,
that is, you know, you were counting your toes or counting your fingers, it's clear that even
some animals understand small integers, one, two, three, four. Okay? But it eventually became
clear that there were other numbers, because you could add one, one, and get another number.
But if you subtracted one from one, you got a new number, which was zero. And it took a while
to to absorb the fact that zero is also a number. Okay? But it wasn't what we're not done yet,
because although there's no problem with addition now, you know, if you start with one number and
add it to another number, you get a third number, no problem. One plus two equals three, and three is
a positive integer. But now subtraction gives us a problem. Okay, because two minus one is one.
And that's fine. But one minus two, what do we mean by that? Okay. And so we need to append
the negative integers, just because we understand that we can subtract as well as add.
Okay, I can give something away, as well as taking something in. Okay, now multiplication is fine.
Also, I can multiply, I can say two sets of five is 10.
But division again, gives me a problem. So just the way the inverse of addition,
which is subtraction, gave me a problem. The inverse of multiplication, which is division,
leads to a new problem. Okay, what is two divided by three? And that's no longer a number. And I'm
forced to append the rational numbers. Okay, so every time I have a new mathematical operation,
I may have to extend the number system. And this is worrying, because I may think of an
operation and then have to make the number system bigger and bigger and bigger. So for example,
the operation of taking a square root. Okay, so if I take the square root of four, I get two.
And if I take the square root of nine, I get three. But if I take the square root of two,
it isn't a fraction. It isn't a rational number. Okay, so I have to append a new set of numbers
called irrational numbers. And then of course, I can take other roots, I can take third cube roots,
fourth roots, fifth roots, and so on. And these, fortunately, don't generate new kinds of numbers.
But we have both rational numbers. And now we have irrational numbers. And eventually,
we have transcendental numbers. Okay, these are new kinds of irrational numbers, like pi.
Okay. But we're not done yet. And this is the really interesting case.
One kind of mathematical operation is to solve an equation. So I can write down an equation
like x squared equals one. And I can say, what's x? And the solution is either plus one or minus one.
And you come to realize that if you have an equation that contains a square, there are two answers,
which might happen to be the same. But they're not more than two. And if I have a cubic equation,
there are three answers. But so I have a new mathematical operation called solving an equation.
But what about the equation x squared equals minus one?
Okay, so what number when you square it gives minus one? And it was recognized very early
that there must either we can't write down that equation.
Or if we want to be able to solve the equation, we have to invent a new number.
And this is a very strange number. And it's called I for imaginary. Okay. And I is a number
by definition, whose property is as one property that I squared is minus one.
And so I can solve the equation x squared equals minus one by inventing one new number,
just one. Okay. And now we have to, it took a long time to agree that I is a number.
Because it doesn't look like other numbers. Okay, it's imaginary. But it was accepted after a while.
But the first, and it was recognized that when you write down a quadratic equation,
like x squared equals minus one, a root can be imaginary. Okay, or it can be complex,
that is, it can be a combination of a real number like three, and an imaginary number like say six i.
Okay, so that we'll call, we'll call that a complex number. Okay. But now we're not done.
Because now a miracle happens. Okay. This was back in the 1500s, or somewhere around 1535 or 1540.
So imaginary numbers were already being accepted. Okay. But Cardano realized that you could have,
you could write down a cubic equation. And once again, not all the roots of a cubic algebraic
equation can be, it's not obvious whether or not those roots that are not real,
are also complex in the sense that those roots are combinations of a real number and an imaginary
number. They may be, they may require a new number yet. And the miracle is, they don't.
And that's an amazing fact. Okay. It's, it's amazing. Now, he was very interested in cubic
equations. And, and he spent his life thinking about it many, many years. And he understood it.
He came up with a cubic formula, like the quadratic formula that you learn in high school.
And then later on, shortly thereafter, it became clear that higher degree equations, like
quartic equations and so on, don't have, don't require new numbers. In other words, it appears
as if you have filled out the number system. And there aren't any ways of generating new kinds of
numbers. Okay. Now there are new kinds of mathematical systems. Okay. There are systems of matrices
and so on. But in terms of numbers, just numbers, and I'll say what, what I mean by that in a second.
Um, but the, that these numbers are now complete. But the real numbers, which includes the positive
numbers, the negative numbers, the irrational and irrational numbers. And then this, those real
numbers multiplied by I together. So A plus I times B, where A and B are real numbers.
Those numbers fill out the complex number system. And it's remarkable that there aren't any operations
that force us to bring in new kinds of numbers. There are new kinds of number systems that exist
with, with, with even more advanced kinds of numbers belonging to those systems. But this system
is complete. And this is a beautiful, beautiful result. And the complex number system
needs to be there. Okay. It has to be there because what is happening
in the, in the complex, in the system of complex numbers is connected to what is happening
just on the real, just for the real numbers, we would say on the real axis. So the real numbers
are on a number line, a one-dimensional number line. The complex numbers lie in a plane. This is
the imaginary direction, the I direction. This is the real direction. Okay. And any point in the
plane has the form A plus I times B. A is how far you are in this direction. B is how far you
are in the imaginary direction. And you multiply that by I to keep track of that. So A plus I,
B is a point in the complex plane. In order to describe, to understand what is happening with
the real numbers, you need to know what is happening in the complex plane. There are all kinds of
phenomena that cannot be simply described just in terms of real numbers. And that's remarkable.
Could you give an intuitive picture of how these are actually used in engineering and science?
So what sort of scenarios arise where you might need them?
Well, first of all, in mathematics. Okay. So if you take the function one over one plus x square,
okay, one divided by one plus x squared, if you plot that function, it is a very smooth
function on the real axis. So a kid in junior high school can make a plot of the function
one over one plus x squared. The plot looks like this. It has a nice smooth bump in the middle.
It falls off to zero as you go off to infinity. Could it be smoother?
Okay. And if you know calculus, this function can be infinitely differentiated.
So it can be differentiated an infinite number of times. It has no discontinuities. It is perfectly
smooth. However, if you expand this function in a series, just by expanding it in a geometric
series, you know, one over one plus x squared is equal to one minus x squared plus x to the fourth
minus x to the sixth and so on. That series diverges if x is bigger than is one or more.
Why? Why does the series diverge? Is it one over one minus x squared?
No, that has a place where it's infinite. One over one minus x squared becomes infinite
when x is plus or minus one. So you could say, oh, I know why the series for that function diverges
is because the function becomes infinite. Okay. So the series for that function converges until
the function becomes infinite. Okay. I can buy that. But what about one over one plus x squared?
That function is perfectly smooth. It doesn't ever become infinite. And yet the series that
represents that function ceases to converge. It becomes infinite when x equals one or when x equals
minus one. Why is that? And the answer is that there are places where that function does become
infinite, but not on the real axis. It becomes infinite in the complex plane. And in the complex
plane, it becomes infinite at x equals i and x equals minus i. And that's because i squared is minus
one. So one over one plus x squared becomes one over zero. And so it blows up. So the function
is becomes singular. That means infinite in the complex plane. But the fact that it is
infinite in the complex plane, one unit away from the origin in the vertical direction,
apparently affects what is happening one unit away in the horizontal direction.
That is incredible. So what is happening on the real axis is controlled by what is happening in
the complex plane. So there is a connection. So we live on the real axis. Everything that we
perceive is real. When you look in your wallet, you have a real number of dollars. Okay.
When you measure your IQ, it's real. Okay. When you measure a quantity of anything, you count it
in terms of real numbers. And indeed, if you ask how many spoonfuls are there in this container here,
it may be a rational number, but it's a real rational number. Okay. But the complex numbers
do affect how the real numbers behave and how operations on the real numbers
are performed and how effective they are. Okay. So when you represent a function by a series,
that series may cease to converge. And when it does, the explanation has to do with what's going
on in the complex plane. Okay. And there are interesting physical examples of how the complex
plane is affecting the physical behavior of objects. Okay. So that's quite subtle and quite
interesting. And we can see it even in elementary, we don't have to go to quantum mechanics to see
problems like this. We can see it in the case of classical mechanics, just simple classical
motion. We can see things that are happening that are very hard to explain with real numbers alone.
But there are also real problems that we cannot understand without using complex numbers.
So if a student who is just learning about imaginary numbers came to you and asked,
are these things real? Or are they just a mathematical trick? I suppose then your answer
would be, we can measure it, right? We can go ahead and there are functions that we can calculate
and they behave the way they do only because of the existence of the imaginary numbers and
their behavior can only be explained by the existence of the complex numbers. So in that sense,
there is real as real numbers. There is measurable as real numbers.
What I'm arguing is that the complex plane is not just a beautiful mathematical construct,
but starting in the 1920s, which is very late, people began to realize that the complex plane
is necessary to describe some physical processes, namely microscopic physical processes.
Macroscopic physical processes don't seem to require the complex plane, although
complex mathematics is very useful in understanding equations. So you understand,
so all of the classical theories like classical mechanics, astronomical motion, orbital motion,
and so on, fluid dynamics, electricity, those are 19th century theories.
I mean, we're developed to a very high level by the 19th century and even in the 20th century,
relativity, special relativity and general relativity, gravity, don't seem to require
complex numbers. In fact, later on, it was discovered that they do, but before the 1920s,
nobody had any idea that you were required to use the number I. But even in special relativity,
you do need to use the number I, and I can talk about that later. But what I'm saying is that
you can't avoid it. The complex number system is actually, I was going to say really,
but I shouldn't do that. That's a pun. It's actually present and determines not just the
behavior of mathematics, real mathematics, but it determines the behavior of real physics that
we are measuring. And that is what quantum mechanics does. So one scenario that immediately
pops into my mind is electrons bound in an atom, right? When you first learn about quantum mechanics,
we learned that electrons can't take any sort of energy with inside the atom, but they exist
in sort of quantized states, and that they transition between these states. Do you have
a picture for what happens as they're transitioning between the states? Is that similar, where there's
sort of a complex space in which they travel through? Yeah. So a long time ago, when I
wrote my thesis, I began to realize that this picture that we have of what you're describing
is the quantum mechanics that was being developed in the 1920s and later in the 1930s. And we say
that a particle in a potential, so this time it's a right-side-up potential,
so if you had a classical particle in a right-side-up potential,
it would be a particle that's rolling back and forth in a potential hill. And
classically, you would say you can give this particle any amount of energy that you like,
but quantum mechanically, we learn that only discrete energy levels are allowed.
Could I stop you just for one second? So there will be lots of people who don't understand the
connection between the potential and the atom scenario, where you have an electron that's
bound. Could you just say a few words there for just to clarify for some people?
Right. So a potential is described using units of energy. So in general, a particle has a certain
amount of energy. It has kinetic energy, which is energy of motion. If it's moving faster,
it has more energy. And it also has potential energy. So if it is subject to forces,
such as the force of gravity, a particle, if you raise it up, has more potential,
because it's higher up in the gravitational field. So it's not moving, but it has more energy.
If a particle is moving in a gravitational field, some of the energy of the particle is
the energy of the motion called kinetic energy. And some of the energy is potential energy,
which means how high the particle is. If the particle goes lower, it will be going faster.
And if it's higher, it will be going slower. If you throw a ball up into the air, at first it's
going fast. It then goes higher and higher and higher. And some of its energy, its energy of
motion becomes potential energy. And that potential energy is being stored in that particle.
Eventually, it may stop and then start falling down again. And as it falls,
it loses potential energy, but it gains kinetic energy. In an atom, you don't have gravity,
but you have electrical forces that are holding the electrons in the vicinity of the nucleus.
If you think of this as a classical system, you might think of it as a solar system, where the
planets that are far from the, all the planets are held together by the force of the sun,
the gravitational force. The planets close to the sun are moving very quickly. The planets far
from the sun are moving slowly, but they have a lot more potential energy. So if you think of an atom
that way, which means classically, you would say, I can put a planet in any orbit I like.
It could be at a radius of 1 mile, 2 miles, 3 miles, 7.9 miles. It doesn't matter, okay, but
quantum mechanically, that's not what happens. It's very interesting that planets,
which are acting classically, can be any distance from the sun and they can have any amount of
energy you want them to have. But in an atom, an electron can only be, can only have a given
amount of energy and that can be demonstrated in the laboratory, okay. So the naive picture,
if you want to think of the electrons as being, as moving in a real
sense, that is, you know, moving about back and forth inside the atom, you have some sort of
fog of electrons that are moving around. You don't know where any of the electrons are,
but a given electron cannot have, is not allowed to have any amount of energy at once.
I can't do that. It has discrete energy levels and these are called, these are called energy
levels or states and the electron can be in a state of this much energy, this much energy,
this much energy, and so on. Okay, those are energy levels and you can see those energy levels
when, when you allow the atom to interact with light and you can see, you know, when you look at
a spec, you do a spectral analysis, you can see the specific energy levels, okay, they're very
visible. Okay, now, and furthermore, you can predict them mathematically. But what is very
very interesting is that the picture is more complicated than that. So, you can,
instead of studying the atom on the real axis, you can study the atom in the complex plane.
And in the complex plane, you can see that the electron is moving in a certain direction,
in the complex plane. And in the complex plane, the, the possible energies for the electron
are continuous. They're not discrete. Okay, that's an amazing result. This is
the work that I did in my thesis, in fact, a long time ago. And
so why is it that they look discrete? And that's because we live on the real axis. And so when
we see an electron, it can only have this much energy, this much energy, and so on. But, but
in the complex plane, the electron can move, can have any energy, as it moves off into the complex
plane. But when it crosses the real axis, it can only have these discrete energies. So what
with continuous is actually, what, what is discrete is actually at a higher level at the
higher level at the complex level is actually now continuous. The way I describe this, if I'm giving
a lecture on this, is I say, imagine a parking garage. Okay, you enter the parking garage,
and you see that the parking garage has distinct levels, it may be the five level parking garage,
you drive into it. But in fact, you can continuously drive from one level to the next to the next to
the next. Okay, but if you were to take a gigantic saw, and cut the parking garage, cut right through
the parking garage and pull it apart, what you would see is discrete levels. But the complex
plane says that there's something much more sophisticated going on. And that the levels
in this parking garage are continuous. Okay, and you can go continuously
from one level to the next to the next, just by moving through the complex plane.
And does the dynamics in the complex plane also work, the calculations you can do?
Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. You can look at the motion as the particles are traveling in the
complex plane. And if you want to understand motion on the real axis, you look at the limit
as you approach the real axis. And the complex motion is very complicated. But as you approach
the real axis, it becomes recognizable as what we know and love. You know, what happens when you
throw a baseball. Okay, but in the complex plane, you have more interesting motion.
So famously, quantum mechanics has a number of different interpretations. There's sort of the
Copenhagen interpretation and pilot wave interpretations, many worlds and so on. Does
this shed, does this sort of idea shed any light on which of these interpretations may be correct?
Or are you able to say something deeper because of this insight, this analytic continuation?
So when I was a graduate student, and I was getting ready to begin my thesis work,
you have to take a qualifying exam to demonstrate that you are qualified. You've successfully
passed all of your required courses to go on to a PhD, to write a PhD thesis that you've sufficiently
mastered what you've learned in your courses. This is a qualifying exam and it can be a very
difficult exam. It may be an all day exam, maybe an oral exam, maybe a written exam and so on.
In my case, it was an oral exam, very frightening because the first time I ever stood up in front
of a committee of people who were throwing questions at me, very hard questions. My friends who had
already passed the exam, of course, gave me some advice. And the advice was, if you don't know
the answer to a question, don't try to fake it. Say you don't know because if you try to fake it,
they will ask you harder and harder and harder questions until they show that you don't know
what you're talking about. But if you honestly say, I don't know, let me think about it.
You don't back yourself into a corner. And indeed, when I had my exam,
I was asked a very hard question and I said, I don't know. And one of the people on my committee
said the answer must be this. And another person on the committee said, no, you're wrong. And my whole
committee started arguing with each other because nobody was certain about what the answer was to
the question. And I felt great because they were ignoring me. Well, you've asked me a very hard
question about the, I mean, quantum mechanics is not, it depends on how you approach quantum
mechanics. If your approach is that of a mathematician, and you'd like to solve the
Schrodinger equation, for example, as a mathematical problem, that I can do. But if you want to go
into deep philosophical interpretation, and there are many different interpretations
about quantum mechanics, many worlds and so on. I would say my intuition is that in order to
understand quantum mechanics, you have to understand that we live in a complex world, but are only able
to perceive real things. And that particles can visit the complex world and come back out into
the real world and so on. But I don't know, I can't give you a serious answer about how to
approach this problem. Okay, I just, I don't know enough. And I mean, it's a really, really hard
question. And I wouldn't even begin to fake it. Okay, I mean, I can, I can tell you about solutions
to equations. But when it comes to a very high level philosophical interpretation about what
quantum mechanics is very strange. And there are these different interpretations of quantum
mechanics. What should I say? My choice is not to say anything at this point. That's a long answer.
I'm not, I'm not trying to evade the question, although that's exactly what I'm trying to do.
Okay, I also don't know the question. I also don't know the answer. So I'm like one of the people in
your one of the examiners. But yeah, yeah, there was a very, very hard question. And you can see
people arguing about, you know, what is quantum mechanics? Okay, I mean, quantum mechanics goes
beyond our perception of the world. Okay, because it's what happens in
to very, very small masses. And what happens over distance scales that are very, very small.
And there are now people are doing macroscopic quantum quantum mechanical experiments.
But quantum behavior is, is described in the small, okay, and it's different from our perception of the
real world. What is also happening is that there are now strange things that are happening in the
large, okay, that is, gravity may be repulsive at gigantic distances, which is very interesting. Okay,
okay. And, and so is this, is this PT symmetric conformal gravity type directions or
I can talk about that. I mean, it would be, it would be more of a more discussion, but I'm happy
to chat about it. I think, I think that would be a mistake for the scope of this interview,
because I think it will, I think it would take too many steps to get there. But what we can do
is we can talk about your research more generally in PT symmetry. Because I think, I think that is
something that's very interesting that people will be able to follow in a confined bit of time.
So, so let's do that then. If you're happy with that, let's jump into with just very the basic
question. What is PT symmetry and what does it mean conceptually? Yeah, so P, the letter P stands for
parity, which means reflecting space. Okay, so it's what you see when you look in a mirror.
When you look in a mirror, your left hand becomes your right hand and so on. So it is a
spatially reversed picture that you see. Okay.
So, so that's parity. Okay, and it refers to space reflection, reflection through a mirror.
Okay, T means time reversal. And we can't physically reverse time. But mathematically,
we can imagine time flowing backward. Okay, and in fact, Wigner showed that time reversal
corresponds to changing the sign of I in the complex numbers. Okay, so there's this deep connection
between time reversal and complex number theory. Okay. And so PT symmetric quantum mechanics,
what is that? Before I say anything about quantum mechanics, let me still
remind you about classical mechanics. Okay, so, you know, Einstein's gigantic breakthrough
at the beginning of the 20th century was the discovery of special relativity.
Okay, it's a fantastic discovery. And what he basically said was that if you do
a Lorentz transformation, which means that you go from one dynamical system,
okay, to another dynamical system, moving relative to you. That's why it's called relativity.
It's moving. So you're moving through space like this. Another system is moving at a greater speed
through space. Okay, they can look at each other. And the question is, what about the relative
physics between, you know, what is when one person in one space looks at a person in the other,
in one platform that looks at a person on the other platform, what do they see? And they see
time dilation and space contraction and so on. They see things that are that are relativistic.
Okay. At a slightly higher level, you describe how one person looks at another person or how
one person is related to another person in terms of a mathematical object called a group.
Okay. And they talk about the Lorentz group. So when you perform a Lorentz transformation,
you go from one object floating through space to another object flowing through space. Okay. So
you transform from here to here. Okay. Is that clear? So Einstein gave us something that we
didn't have before. He pointed out that, and this is not quantum mechanics. This is classical
mechanics. That classical mechanics, in fact, is, doesn't behave the way you think it's behaving,
because all of your, your world experiences are connected with slowly moving things.
When I say slowly moving, I mean much slower than the speed of light. And he shows us,
Einstein shows us that the speed of light is the fastest you can go. And as you go faster and
faster and faster, new effects come into play, which you could never have imagined. Okay. Namely,
time dilation, Lorentz contraction, and so on. So the Lorentz group is all possible ways
of transforming, of performing a Lorentz transformation, transforming from one frame of
reference to another frame of reference. Is that clear? I can show on screen as well some aides.
Okay. Good. So what's an example of a Lorentz transformation? So one, the simplest possible
transformation is you don't do anything. You just stay in your same frame of reference.
So that's unity. You don't do anything. Another Lorentz transformation is to,
suddenly, is to jump onto a platform that's moving five miles an hour faster than you are.
Okay. But another very interesting kind of Lorentz transformation would be to reflect space.
Okay. That's a transformation. So what is happening is now a mirror image. So you're
moving this way, and you jump onto something moving at the same speed, but going that way.
That would be, that would be a possible transformation.
And even fancier transformation would be to reflect time.
Okay. So after the discovery of the Lorentz group, which is the set of all possible transformations,
infinite numbers of possible transformations, it was believed that if you had a laboratory that
was going forward in time, and another laboratory that was going backward in time,
and they each did an experiment, they would always get the same result. For example,
if they measured how long it took for a radioactive particle to decay, or they did a chemical
experiment or someone, it would be the same. And it was also believed that if you reflected a
laboratory through a mirror, you looked at a mirror image. Okay. And you did an experiment
in this reflected world, things would be the same. Now, in fact, we don't experience this because
there are, you know, proteins are in the shape of a helix, as you know, DNA is in helix.
And there is a left-handed helix and a right-handed helix going in opposite directions.
And we only deal with proteins that spiral one way, not the other way.
Okay. However, in principle, you could have left-handed life and right-handed life,
but we don't see that. And it was believed that a reflection in space and a reflection in time
are to be included in the set of all possible transformations. Okay. And it was believed for
many years. So Einstein is at the beginning, you know, 1905, right? But much later, 50 years later,
more than 50 years later, it was realized that space reflection is not, in fact, an allowed
Lorentz transformation. Because if you do a space reflection, you get different physics.
And that's unbelievable. I mean, it's amazing. I would never have believed it. And that, of course,
was, you know, Li and Yang, and they won the Nobel Prize for it.
So could I stop and sort of reiterate what you've said, just to make sure I understand exactly,
and that others are following? So you have this symmetry group. You can change your frame of
reference. You can do rotations of your reference frame, for instance. But you're talking about
discrete transformations, like reflection symmetry. So you turn a right-handed frame
into a left-handed frame. And it was believed that those were also symmetries of nature, just like...
Because they are elements of the Lorentz group, as it was mathematically formulated.
Okay. But then you do an experiment. But then you do an experiment, it's not.
To put it differently, there is a light cone, which basically says that the speed of light
is a unique speed. A particle moving it, if we were moving at the speed of light,
would satisfy an equation called the light cone condition. And that says that x squared plus
y squared plus z squared minus t squared is a constant. And a space reflection means x goes
to minus x, y goes to minus y, and z goes to minus z. But they're squared. So the minus sign
doesn't make any difference. So it's obvious that parity should be a symmetry. Why should it be that
if you look in the mirror, there's a different world. And nobody imagined that possibility.
But it is different. They are not the same world.
So through... This is the weak force, right? Which is chiral.
Right. Right. Very, very good. So strong forces.
So do you mind if I pause? Sorry, because I think this is a topic that will confuse people.
So what you're saying very basically at its core is physics shouldn't depend on the way that you
look at it. It should be invariant under Bob or Sue looking at it from different directions.
And so you can change the frame at which you're looking at the physics. And so that includes
rotations, these sort of things, as I said before. And we assumed a different way of looking at things
that wouldn't change the physics was just doing one of these inversions sort of in space,
this sort of changing from a left frame to a right-handed frame. But in experiment, that's not
true. We find surprisingly, amazingly, that this is not just a different way of looking at nature,
but that it really is different physics if you change the frame.
Right on. Right on. Now, there's a second discovery that happened after Lee and Young,
which was verified by experiments that Madame Wu did the year later. So they did the theory and
Madame Wu did the experiment. It was realized by Cronin and Fitch, who also won the Nobel Prize,
that time reversal changes the physics. That is, a laboratory going backward in time
will get different experimental results than a laboratory going forward in time.
Okay. So the group of Lorentz transformations is much smaller because it cannot include the
element P or the element T. Could I ask you just, sorry, this is something that people are going
to wonder about. How on earth do you set up an experiment that's going back in time?
Oh, of course, you can't. But you can have such a laboratory. But you can interpret
a particle spinning one way as a particle that spins the other way, but is going backward in
time. That sort of thing. Okay. So you can spin it up this way and you could spin it up that way.
And so it's the motions of the particle that are reversed. But of course, you can't go backward
in time. You can't directly do that. So yes, the experiment is inferential in that sense.
Okay. But it is a clear experiment. Okay. So physics that is time reversed is different physics.
Okay. And this raises a very, very interesting question. What happens if you reverse space
and time? Okay. So, you know, the point about the Lorentz group is that we're talking about
space time. And if you want to be mathematical about it, we don't want to distinguish between
space and time. It's simply four dimensional space. Okay. And if you reflect part of it,
that's no good. And if you reflect the other part of it, if you reflect the three space dimensions,
no good. The one time dimension, no good. But what if you reflect all four? That seems to be
much more symmetric in a way because we're talking about four dimensional space, change the sign of
all four dimensions. Okay. Now, there is a theorem, a very famous theorem called the CPT theorem.
And what it says is that if you reflect space and you reflect time and you change
particles into antiparticles, then you will get the same result. Okay. Now, not everybody
believes the CPT theorem and people do experiments to see if they can find violations of that theorem,
but they haven't been found. So there's something very special about the product of P and T.
Not P separately or T separately, but PT. Okay. And what we were talking about very early about
the classical physics and infinity and complex motion and so on,
those are PT, we did PT reflections. I didn't call it that, but those are PT reflections. So
let's put it this way. What would PT symmetry, what is PT symmetry? Okay. So imagine that I have
a pail and I'm pouring water into this pail. Well, the pail will be filling up with water,
so the pail is not in equilibrium. There's more and more water all the time.
Okay. And suppose I have another pail over here and there's a hole in this pail and the water in
the pail is draining out. That pail is not in equilibrium because it has less and less water.
This situation, however, is PT symmetric. Okay. In the following sense,
if I reflect space, then the pails are interchanged. But if I reflect time,
the water going out becomes the water going in and the water going in becomes the water going
out. It reverses direction. Now it's the same. So if I switch the buckets and reverse time,
the image remains the same. Right. So that's an example of a PT symmetric reflection.
And it's the same. Okay. Now we can do something else. We can connect the two pails with a pipe.
And now this system is a very strange system because water is flowing into one pail.
It's now flowing through the pipe into the other pail where it's flowing out.
Okay. This system is in dynamical equilibrium. So the water level in each pail
stays exactly the same. It's not changing. Why? Because water is flowing in. It flows to the
other pail. It flows out and the level of water in each pail is the same. Normally physicists
would say that there are two types of physical systems. There are systems that are isolated. So
an atom sitting all by itself, not interacting with a beam of light or x-rays or it's completely
isolated from the rest of the world. This system has a given set of energy levels. Okay. And all
those energies are real. Okay. But there's another kind of system which is interacting with the outside
world. Stuff is going into the system and stuff is going out of the system. Okay. And that is a
system in contact with its environment. Okay. And this system may not be in equilibrium because
you may be putting more stuff in than you're taking out and the system is filling up with stuff,
with whatever the stuff is. It could be energy, it could be number of particles,
it could be the amount of water. It doesn't matter. Okay. But PT symmetric systems are systems which
are similar to both. Okay. In the sense that they are in contact with the environment,
stuff is going in and stuff is going out in a balanced PT symmetric fashion. Okay.
But at the same time, they are in dynamic equilibrium. Okay. So these are special new kinds
of systems and they behave very much like systems of one type, isolated systems,
and systems of another type which are not isolated. They're in contact with the environment. So
in what ways are they the same? Well, they have real energies or they may have real energies to
be more precise. Can I ask? Okay. So the pitch that you paint is sort of, it's very intuitive
and because I can imagine a system which is in this sort of dynamical equilibrium,
I can imagine closed systems which have no energy or other things coming in and out,
and then I can imagine open systems or systems that are in contact with the external world,
whether it's a flow of energy or temperature or heat rather, or particles. It doesn't seem so
crazy to consider these three options, but yet when you first started playing, it was around
the year 2000, right? When you started playing around with PT symmetry and quantum mechanics,
why? Yeah, it was just around 2000 and it was shocking, right? I was completely shocked and
appalled. I was completely thrown by this. So this is a picture that I want to somehow paint
for people. Why was this shocking? Why? Because of course, you've given us this nice intuitive
picture. Can you sort of reel us back and explain why that somehow wasn't expected,
that you would find these three sorts of systems in quantum mechanics?
Right. So this isn't easy, but let me try. So when you take an elementary course
in quantum mechanics, your very first encounter with quantum mechanics,
what you learn is that the very first thing that you study or among the first things that you study
is a simple atom, like a hydrogen atom. And you learn that the energy levels of a hydrogen atom
are all real and all real energies. There is a ground state and there are various excited states
and these energies are real. Of course, that's an isolated hydrogen atom. If you connect the hydrogen
atom to its environment, the energies are not real. Why is that? Because if you have a hydrogen
atom in an excited state, what can that atom do? The atom can drop to a lower energy state
and radiate a photon which carries away some of that energy. Energy is conserved,
but a photon, a tiny burst of light will come out. When we look at a neon light at night,
and street signs, especially a neon light or an argon light, what you're seeing
is electrons in excited neon atoms dropping to lower energy levels and giving off light,
characteristic color of neon light. Since those systems are not stable,
we interpret that as meaning that the energies are actually complex. In any case, you take
your elementary course in quantum mechanics and the very first question, kind of question,
that arises is, when are the energy levels real and when are the energy levels complex?
There is a condition, a very famous condition, called hermiticity. You say that a hermitian
system has real energy levels and you learned this at the very beginning.
The reason that ptsymmetric systems are shocking is that they can be systems that are not hermitian
but still have real energy levels. In the sense that in that funny classical model I had of a ball
rolling up the hill and going on and then coming back from infinity, it continues on. It's not
changing. It's in a fixed state. It's in a fixed energy level state and yet it's connected to its
environment because stuff is going out to infinity and coming in from infinity. It should definitely
not have a real energy level. What should happen, you would think, is that all the stuff
runs off to infinity and it's gone. It runs downhill and there's no more energy. All the
energy has radiated out to infinity and it's gone. That's sort of our intuitive picture.
If you have something hot, what does it do? It radiates energy. The energy flows away off
to infinity and it's gone. The state was not in a stable state. Yet what I've argued is that if
you include the complex plane, now you can have states that are connected to their environment.
Particles can flow out to infinity and come in from infinity and the state is stable.
It's in dynamic equilibrium. It can radiate. It can be connected to its environment and yet
not change. I'm not going to give you the mathematical condition, but this is a state
that violates this elementary condition of hermiticity and yet has real energies.
As I say, when I first took my quantum mechanics course in the first week or two,
the professor said, the way you know if there are real energies corresponding to states that
are stable, unchanging in time and equilibrium. If the energy is real, the states will not be
changing their physical properties. This is the condition of hermiticity. Here,
I am talking about physical systems that are not hermitian and yet they're not changing in time.
This is a whole new class of quantum mechanical and classical mechanical systems,
like the pales of water that shows classical physics, which are connected to their environments
and yet they're stable. This requires the use of complex variables.
The mathematical underpinning is based on complex numbers, but we know that complex numbers are
really there in physics that are required. At the very beginning of quantum mechanics,
you have complex numbers. It's funny. I should point out that when I went through my physics
undergrad, this condition, this hermiticity condition is still hammered into you. The
quantum mechanics grates Heisenberg and from there onwards, I suppose, this has been hammered
into person after person after person. It's so heavily ingrained that it really is shocking.
There are physical systems. You can go away and you can do an experiment. This has quite wide
applicability. Let me say it just to make sure. Let me say it right. I'm not saying there's anything
wrong about hermiticity. The statement is, if you have a physical system that is described
as a Hermitian one, that is the equations for the system are Hermitian,
then the energies will be real. I'm not saying there's anything wrong about that.
What I am saying is that if the system is not Hermitian, which means that you are working in
the complex plane, the energies can still be real and the system can still live in a stable state.
That's the surprise. What it means is that there are huge numbers of new physical systems
that we can study. If you want a serious example that has been performed in a laboratory
to verify the equations that we have written down, here it is. Here's an example. Imagine you have
a fiber, a very thin fiber, and light is flowing through the fiber. This was the earliest
example, an incredibly beautiful example of a non-Hermitian PT symmetric system.
Light is just traveling down this fiber. We have a second fiber and light is also traveling down the
fiber. You put light in one end of the fiber and it comes out the other end. Is that clear?
So we have two fibers. Now, it's a physical fact that if you put two fibers close to each other,
light can leak out of one fiber into the other fiber. For example, if you have a fiber with no
light in it and a fiber with light flowing down the fiber, and the two fibers are in contact,
then light traveling down the blue fiber here will wind up in the black fiber. So no light
is going in at this end in the black fiber. Light is going into the blue fiber at this end.
But because they're near each other, most of the light is coming out of the blue fiber,
but some light has leaked into the black fiber and is coming out. That's just
straightforward optics. What I can do is consider an equilibrium situation. Remember,
we had an equilibrium situation with gain and loss. So imagine we have these two fibers.
Let us remove light from the black fiber. So how do you remove light? How do you absorb it?
Well, one way is to plate the fiber, to cover the fiber with metal. So you just put a little chromium
on the fiber and the light energy will be sucked into the chromium and the light will disappear.
Okay. How do you put light into a fiber? Well, you shine a laser on it and that introduces
light into the fiber as it's flowing. So not at the where the fiber begins or where it ends,
but you just shine a laser light, say midway down the fiber and that will induce light to flow
down the fiber. So these are the two pales of water with loss and gain.
Okay. And a pipe between them is simply that the fibers are touching each other.
Okay. And there's light leaking from this fiber into this. So this system is PT symmetric because
light flowing in and light flowing out, if we reverse time, it looks like this.
But if we reverse space, it looks like this. So you recover the original situation.
Okay. So that's an example. That was the very first experiment verifying the mathematics behind a
PT symmetric system. And since then, there have been countless numbers of experiments, many,
many, many experiments, mechanical experiments, electrical experiments. And these systems
have remarkable properties. They're new. They're very interesting. I mean, now there are something
like they're approaching 10,000 papers have been written on systems with PT symmetry. Okay. The
citation, you know, I mean, we're talking about published papers. By the end of this year, there
will be it will exceed 10,000 papers at the rate that it's going. So lots of people are working on
this. This is a very busy active field. Can I ask what makes a good quest? What makes a good question
physics to study to work on? Let me tell you about me and my life at my university. So I love solving
problems. As you might guess, I love mathematics, I love solving problems. And there is an exam called
the Putnam exam, which is taken by college students. These are the Putnam exam is a six hour
mathematics contest. Okay, at the top, top, top mathematical, mathematically inclined
college students often take this exam every year. Several thousand students take the exam.
Okay, and the exam is six hours long. And there are 12 problems on the exam.
So you, in fact, the exam is three hours long in the morning, a two hour break for lunch and then
three more hours. So you have to solve six problems in the morning and six problems in the afternoon,
if you want a perfect score. Essentially, nobody gets a perfect score. Okay, solving one problem
means that you're pretty much in the upper quarter of the people taking the exam. It's a very, very
hard exam. And if you solve two problems, you are doing spectacularly well. I mean, it means that
you're very, very talented. So it's rare, but the, you know, the top person in the country,
there's there are big cash prizes and scholarships and so on. But the top person in the country
may solve typically nine problems, maybe even 10. In the past, it has happened
that someone has solved all 12. But basically, it's virtually hopeless to be able to do that.
Okay, so they give you a feeling. Okay, so I love solving problems. And when I began
my teaching here at Washington University, I noticed that nobody was coaching kids to prepare
for the Putnam exam. And I announced that I was the coach. I just said, I'm going to teach,
I'm going to have practice sessions to prepare you to take the Putnam exam. And lots of kids
were interested in mathematics, and they attended the practice sessions, and we learned how to solve
problems. Okay, which is an important aspect of being a physicist, you have to the theoretical
physicists, you have to learn how to solve problems. And this was very effective, because
that year, out of the hundreds of schools, who they're there's something like 400 and
over 400 schools, 425 schools, something like that, colleges, participated in the exam. Washington
University came out second. I mean, it helps to learn how to solve problems, hard problems,
really, really hard problems. And the year after, in fact, we came in first in the country,
top team in the country. Okay, and we were virtually always in the top 10. And it's because
the students are bright, but also the students learned how to solve problems in these practice
sessions, which is really good. Okay, and they really, it was wonderful, they did very well.
You would think that when they went on to become, if they became theoretical physicists, you might
think that these kids all became professors of physics, but they didn't. And that's because
there's another aspect of science, which they were not prepared for. And that is that in physics,
not all problems can be solved. But on the Putnam exam, every problem can be solved. That is,
it may be very hard, but you know, before you even see the problem, that there is a solution.
And that typically is beautiful. Okay, you know, you can do it. And that gives you a leg up.
Because knowing that there is a solution is the first step in being able to solve a problem.
I mean, it's what generates your, it's what brings up your intuition. It gets you into the right frame
of mind. The problem with physics is that not all problems can be solved. And if you're going to
be a successful physicist, you have to know how to pick a problem. So some of the top kids
in the Putnam exam never go on to a career, a scientific or a mathematical career, because
they don't have an intuitive feeling of how to pick a problem that you can solve.
It's not just solving the problem is that you have to find the problem. Okay, so there are
there are two ingredients to being a successful physicist or a mathematician. You have to pick
a problem that is hard enough to be deep and interesting. You know, you don't say, I'm going
to publish your paper on how much one and what is that stupid, right? So you have to pick a problem
which is deep and subtle, but still within the realm of possibility of being solved.
And finding a problem is a rare, a very rare ability finding an appropriate problem
to make that is it's a big enough advance in physics to be significant,
but a small enough advance that you can solve it. Because I can add, I mean, I can pose for you
a very hard problem in physics, but I have no idea how to solve it. So I wouldn't attempt to solve it.
Okay, there are lots of these problems. Okay, I mean, for example,
the nucleus of an atom contains protons and neutrons, but they have different masses.
How do you calculate the difference in the mass of a proton and a neutron? And why is the mass
different? And can you quantitatively calculate that amount of mass difference? They don't weigh
the same amount. Okay, that's a very, very hard problem. And at this point in my life,
I wouldn't try to solve that problem, because I don't know how to begin. And I could waste a lot of
time trying to solve something that I'm not equipped to solve. Okay, so I've learned, so
the most brilliant problem solvers don't necessarily become effective physicists,
effective physicists, or scientists in general, know how to pick a problem that they can solve,
but will still be significant. That's a very hard thing to teach. I don't know how to teach that.
It's something that you have to have a tremendous amount of experience,
but it's not something you can teach as a rote piece of information in a lecture. This is
how you behave as a physicist. Okay. It's a little bit of a shame that there's no pathway to couple
those students that are really good at solving problems with those students that are really
good at picking problems. In fact, that does happen. There are sometimes groups of, I mean,
this is why physicists are very sociable. I mean, they don't work alone. And they talk. This is the
reason why physicists talk with experiment, you know, theoretical physicists talk with
experimentalists. This is why we have seminars and colloquia, so we can learn about problems
that are interesting and important. And then if we're a good problem solver, we might focus on
maybe not the whole problem, but an aspect of the problem. For example, although I don't know
how to solve the question I just asked about a proton and a neutron, I can make a model
okay. So instead of taking a proton and a neutron in our four dimensional space,
what about a proton and a neutron in one dimensional space? That's a much simpler question.
And I can solve that problem. Okay, so I can simplify the problem by making a model
and develop, learn about aspects of the problem without
doing a complete solution. I mean, if you solve that problem, you're going to win a Nobel Prize,
right? In general, if you solve a really, really hard problem, that's very rare,
but you still have to earn money, you know, so you pick a problem that's not so hard,
but it's still interesting.
There's a famous saying from Feynman. He said a lot of things, but one of the things he said,
every physicist has heard this shut up and calculate mantra, right? Can you say,
what are your thoughts then on that way of thinking?
Well, let me tell you about Feynman. So to begin with, Feynman, so my uncle was a high school
teacher, a high school physics teacher, in fact, and he was Feynman's high school physics teacher.
Feynman in high school was very, very smart, and my uncle just put him in the back room and said,
here's a book, read this, but you don't need to sit in my class. Okay, so I had a lot of interaction
with Feynman and also his sister, who's very smart, and so I and two colleagues worked on
some papers over the summer at Caltech where Feynman was, and we used to eat lunch with Feynman.
He happened to be around that summer and we ate lunch and we, and he would always say,
so how's it going? In fact, he didn't say that. He would say, how's it going?
Okay, and the three of us would say, well, we showed this and this, and we were able to
calculate this and we established this. And he would say, very good, very good.
And then he would say, BS, except he would say that word right away. And he would say, no,
you're wrong because of this and this and this and this is inconsistent and it's not correct.
And we would be stunned because Feynman was very, very smart and very, very fast. In fact,
he's the fastest guy I've ever known. And the three of us didn't have an answer. I mean,
he had picked apart our calculation because he looked at it not in a technical way,
but he looked at it from above and he brought to bear some basic physical
theorems and questioned our assumptions and so on and found what was apparent. He found apparent
violations of sensible physical outcome. And we would go back to the office and work together
with the three of us all afternoon arguing with each other about what to do and why this happened
and what was the violation due to. And much more often than not, we found that there was a flaw.
There was an assumption that Feynman had made in his argument that we couldn't catch
on the fly sitting and sitting around a cafeteria table. We couldn't do that. But
we saw through it and we would include this take account, this fact. And we got it to work again.
And the next day at lunch, Feynman would say, so how's it going? And we would say, well,
you assumed that this and this were true, but they aren't because we made this delicate assumption
at the beginning, which forbids this possibility from occurring. And so there is no contradiction.
And he would say, oh, very good, very good. And he was never, by the way, he was wonderful
because it was never a destructive criticism. He didn't benefit by putting us down. He was
only interested in physics being done right and things being done logically and correctly.
And if he saw that it was working, he would say very, very good. But very often it would turn out
that he would say, ah, but you're wrong because of this. And once again, we'd have to go back to
the office to repeat the process over and over and over. You can imagine by the end of the summer,
boy, did we have a fantastic piece of work. We published four papers at the end of the summer
on our research effort. And that was wonderful. That was an incredible experience,
okay, because physics is a very social endeavor. It's not sitting in your room alone. It's
interacting with people and bouncing ideas off each other. And it's because physics is not
entirely rigorous. It's based on certain assumptions. The mathematics can be a little bit vague.
And making precise statements is very difficult. So physics is interesting because of that, right?
It's not, it's not like a dry axiomatic mathematical system. So it's very mathematical
and you have to be very careful. So I would say this is sort of care, great care, but not necessarily
rigor. Okay, and physics has something that mathematics doesn't. Because after you come
up with a finished product, you can test it in the laboratory and see if you're right.
Okay, and mathematics is mathematics. It's either rigorously right. That is, it's in agreement with
your axioms or it conflicts with an axiom. So physics is very similar, but it isn't rigorous.
Okay, and in physics, you can make approximations. So long as they don't destroy,
they're not in conflict with your assumptions. Okay, so this is a distinct field. You know,
it's an interaction between what you see in the laboratory and what you do on paper.
Okay, mathematics doesn't have a laboratory. You are the writer wall.
So in some sense, you can, you can run much faster by dropping rigor,
because at the end of the day, you can do the experiment.
Yes, you can, I don't know if you say run faster because there are times when you're really
slogging along at a slow pace. But yes, you can, if you drop rigor, it is true
that you can get lots of results that appear to be correct, but have to be verified.
And some of them will in the end not be valid. And that's because your experimental test
is violated. And it, your conclusion is not correct.
That's just not jumping off the cliff and building the bridge underneath yourself as you go,
in some sense. Yeah, it's, it's, it may be that you're, that one of your axioms is seriously an error.
Um, so as far as PT symmetry, it may be that the assumption of PT symmetry, which is more general,
is that there may be something flawed about it. Of course, that's not going to happen because
there are already many PT symmetric systems that have been studied and the predictions are correct.
But it could be that down the road, we will make wrong assumptions about how the world is
supposed to behave and it doesn't behave that way. So far, things are going very well, however, which
is nice. So let me just ask in brief detail then, we've already discussed the role of rigor in physics.
What role does beauty play or what role should it play in solving a problem?
Beauty, of course, is in the eye of the beholder. Different people
see beauty in different, I mean, you may see something as being beautiful when I don't think
it's beautiful at all. Um, beautiful, I think for me means that it's a result that it's deep
and unexpected and surprising. Okay. And beautiful also means that there is an extremely clever and
unexpected argument for producing that result. Would you like an example of something beautiful
and unexpected? I think this is actually quite important because for non-mathematicians and
people who aren't doing mathematics regularly, I imagine it's quite difficult to understand
what physicists and mathematicians mean when they say that a set of equations is beautiful or that
some system is beautiful or that, you know, you have these situations where you're solving something
and it just sort of leaps out at you. I'd like to somehow give that feeling to listeners.
Right. So I could give you, I could give you an example of a problem with a, what I would regard
as a beautiful result, a beautiful answer. I could even give you a simple problem,
I mean, sorry, not a simple problem, but a simple sounding problem, which I would say is beautiful.
Okay. I don't know which, maybe I should do both because they're very different, but
here's an example of a problem from the Putnam exam, which we talked about before.
Okay. It's a very, very hard problem and it's a yes or no problem.
Okay. So you have a plane. Okay. And there are an infinite number of points in the plane.
And the question is, can you color all of the points in the plane
assign a color to each point in the plane, assign one of three colors to each of the points in the
plane. So you could color this point red and this point green and this point blue. And so
you walk around in this infinite plane and you assign a color to each point in the plane,
red or green or blue. Okay. And the question is, I mean, you can do that. You're going to
assign, you know, if you have a point at this location, it's blue. The question is, can this
be done in such a way that if two points are one inch apart, they do not have the same color?
So the criterion, do you understand? So the criterion, this is, there's also like a
cartography related question like this, right? Yes, it's a little bit, it's a cut down version
of the four color theorem, if you like. But this is, if you can call it the three color theorem.
So if, if two points are one inch apart, they may not have the same color,
they, but they could have different colors, of course,
can you assign a color to every point in the plane such that this is true? This is a very,
very hard problem. But the solution is what I would call beautiful, because it's so simple.
But you have to see your way through the solution and I can give it to you if you like.
Sure, please. Okay, I'll get a piece of paper.
So,
so here are three points,
and they are all one inch apart. So this is one, and one, and one. Okay. Now,
they're, this is an equilateral triangle here, they're one inch apart. So they must all have
different colors. Okay, so if this point, for example, is red, this must be blue or green.
So, so for example, if this point is red, then this point would have to be different from red,
so it might be blue, and this might be green. Or this might, these two guys at the bottom
could be switched, but they can't be red. Okay, so we already now know the answer to the problem.
So the question is why? Okay, so what I'm going to do is draw another equilateral triangle back to back.
Okay, so if this point is red, these two points must be blue and green,
but since these two points are blue and green, this point must be red again.
Right? So now we know that if two points are the square root of two inches apart,
they're the same color. Right. So therefore, and it doesn't matter,
square root of two, square root of three, who cares? But we can clearly see that this
distance is bigger than one. It's one point something. Who cares? It doesn't matter.
So we'll just say that this distance is D. There are D inches from here to here,
and those two points have to be the same color. And the point is that D is bigger than one,
and you can just see that from the picture. So therefore, all I need to do is to take a point
in the plane, which is red, and draw a circle about that point of radius D.
So there's a circle of radius D, and every single point on this circle
is D distance away from this red point over here. And therefore, every single point on this circle
on this entire circle is red. So therefore, I will simply draw an arc
a chord, I don't need an arc, a chord in the circle that is one inch long.
And these two points are both red, but there's a one inch separation between them.
That's not possible. So the assumption is not possible that you can't do it.
And that's the proof. And that proof, in my opinion, is beautiful because it is so elegant.
It's so clever. And that's an example of something that I regard as beautiful. It was the
it was the elegance of the argument that I gave to prove bid. The simplicity,
the argument made, didn't make use of any other extraneous clever things about mathematics. It was
simply cold logic that led to the answer. It was sharply directed toward getting the answer.
And I didn't say anything irrelevant. A high school student could have come up with it if
they were bright. Of course, of course, of course. In this case, what was what made it beautiful
was the technique of proving it. The actual answer is not so interesting. I mean, do you really care
whether or not the answer is yes or no? So here the beauty lies in the proof,
much more in the proof than in the answer, because, you know, saying, okay, so you can't do it. So who
cared? I mean, that I wouldn't say that's beautiful, but the proof is beautiful. But let me give you
an example where where the answer is beautiful. Okay, where the proof is more elaborate.
But the answer is astonishing and surprising and incredible. Okay, so here's here's a favorite
problem of mine. It's a game. It's just a very simple game with incredibly simple rules. Okay.
And the game the rules of the game are this. You have an opponent who and you're not actually
fighting your opponent, the opponent is just your, your, your double who's setting up a problem for
you. That's all. So what what this guy does is he takes a bunch of slipped pieces of little pieces
of paper. And on each piece of paper, he writes a different number down real number.
Okay, for simplicity, we can assume all the numbers are positive, but it doesn't matter,
they could be positive and negative. I don't care, but they're all different. Okay, and there are many
pieces of paper. Okay, and he writes a number on each piece of paper and he puts it in a box.
And the game is that you have to figure out what the biggest number is.
You have to find the biggest number. Okay, now this, this is, this is how these are the rules.
They're very simple. You pick the piece of paper out of the box. Okay. And you open it up and you
read the number. And now you have two possibilities. You can say, I think this is the biggest number.
And if you're right, you win. And if you're wrong, you lose the game.
Okay. Okay. However, if you're right, if you say, I don't think this is the biggest number.
And if again, you're wrong because it was the biggest number, you lose the game right away.
If you say anything wrong, you lose the game. You don't get a second chance.
But if you say, I don't think this is the biggest number, that's a correct statement.
So you're allowed to proceed. So then you pick another piece of paper out of the box.
Okay, another piece of paper, you look at it and you once again, you say,
now I think this is the biggest number. If you write, you win. If you're wrong, you lose.
But if you say, I still don't think this is the biggest number, then you can play again.
If you're right, if it was the biggest number, you lose. Okay. Now the question,
do you understand the rules? It's very simple. So the question is,
what if there were 100 pieces of paper in the box?
What do you think your chances are of winning this game?
So you would look at a bunch of pieces of paper and eventually you would get more and more nervous.
And eventually you would say, well, I think maybe this is finally the biggest piece of paper and you
guess. So what do you think the chances are of winning the game?
Well, of course, it depends on your strategy.
Well, that's right. You're right. There is a strategy. And the question is, what is the strategy?
And the numbers don't have to be regular. They're not like in order. One, two, three,
four, five. One number is 1.6 and the other one is pi. The other one is 3,048 million and so on.
So there's no regularity in these numbers. I would say that if I was going to give a solution
without thinking too much about it, I would say this probably, you probably want to
turn over a certain number of cards to a certain point and then the next biggest one that you find,
it'll be something like this. But I don't know where that point would be though.
Okay. So that's absolutely correct. You're absolutely right. There is a strategy.
It's so simple. I mean, it's almost trivial. Of course, we use this process all the time.
How do you find the person that you're going to marry?
Okay. You date somebody. You say, nah, you date another person. You say, nah,
you date another person. Nah, eventually you come to a person who's better than all the previous
people and you say, this is the one for me. Now, it's the best I'll do. Well, you could be wrong
because if you intended to date a hundred people, you might have picked a person who was like
number 10 in the list and you didn't get the best person. So the question is, if you were going to
date a hundred people, how many people should you date before you decide to take the next
better one that comes along? And what's your chance of, in the end, the question really is,
what is the chance of winning the game? So would you give me one out of three odds that I can find
the best person in a hundred? Probably not, but I imagine I'm going to be proven wrong.
Well, okay, let's make it a harder game. What if there were a million
numbers in the box? You're going to date one million people before you decide. What's your
chance of finding the best one in that one million? Would you say that, would you give me
one in a thousand that I might get the best person in a million? Or would you say I have a
better or worse chance? I mean, that's the question. Yeah, so let's say we start with one box,
one piece of paper in the first problem. Right, so it does depend on the number of
pieces of paper to a certain extent, right? It does. To an extent, it does.
But I don't think I'm going to be able to work this out on camera.
No, don't even try. What is amazing is that this is a way of defining a transcendental
number. Okay, so a very, very famous transcendental number is E. Okay, E numerically is
a little bit smaller than three. It's 2.718281828. Something, something, it goes on.
So it's roughly 2.7. Okay, so one over 2.7 is about 37.37. Okay, so now I'm going to tell you
the strategy for winning the game. You should date 30% of all of the girls that you intend to date
or boys, whatever you, okay, and don't choose any of them. The next bigger one that comes along
is what you pick. So to optimize your strategy, you should look at 37% of all of the numbers.
And your chance of then winning the game will be 37% again.
But shouldn't it be the percentage of no, no, it's not. And that's,
I mean, this is a mathematical calculation that I can show you. It's pretty easy,
but it involves Taylor series. But the point here is it doesn't matter how many numbers there are,
there can be a billion numbers. But what you do is you look, your strategy is to look at 37%
of a billion, which is 370 million. So you look at the first 370 million numbers
and you say, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, this is not the biggest number. No, no, no. And you keep
saying that 370 million times. Now, of course, you could be wrong, in which case you'll lose the game.
Okay. But you may be right. And then your objective is to take the next bigger number
that comes along. Yeah, yeah, no, I mean, it could be, of course, that the next bigger number
that comes along is not the biggest number, in which case, once again, you'll lose the game.
But the chance of you winning the game is also 37%. So it's better than one out of three.
And if you don't believe me, you can try it at home. Take 27 numbers, different numbers,
have your friend write it on 27 different pieces of paper, pick the first 10, say no,
no, no, no, no, 10 times, and take the next bigger one that comes along. And you could make a,
if you do this over and over and over again, you'll see that your history, your probability of
winning the game is 37%, which is extraordinary, right? So 37% of 27 is about 10. So you look at
10 numbers and then you take the next bigger one and better than one out of three times,
you will win the game with that strategy. Okay. And as far as anybody knows, that's the optimal
strategy. That's the best possible strategy you can use. So you want to always win,
but you'll win more than one out of three times. No matter how many numbers there are,
that is beautiful. And it's not beautiful. It's not the argument so much. This is different from
the other example I gave you. It's that the answer is beautiful because it's amazing,
because it's so counterintuitive. Who would have thought that who could possibly have imagined
that your chance of winning the game, it doesn't make any difference how many numbers there are.
Your chance of winning the game is better if there are many numbers, of course. So it is very,
very slightly, as you pointed out, dependent on the number of numbers because if there's only one,
the chance is 100%. But as you get more and more numbers, it drops down to
1 over E or 37%. So for anyone out there who is on the dating scene and they think they're going
to be dating from, say, 20 through to 40, those are the years they have available,
and they date, say, one person a year, then after eight years of being frivolous with their dates,
they should then settle down for the next best person. Pick the next person who's better than
everything they came before. The problem is, there may not be. It may be that you've passed
your optimal mate. That's entirely the chance of screwing this up or choosing too early.
That is, you might pick the next better one that comes along, but there's an even better one.
So let's finish on... That's a very powerful strategy, don't you think? That's beautiful.
As you said at the beginning, this is what people actually do to a certain extent.
They date around when they're young, and then at some point,
they do settle down when they're... I don't know what the average is,
average marriage age. It might be about 30. So it sounds about right, actually.
Right. But the divorce rate is roughly 50%.
So both numbers work out.
Yeah. I mean, they're pretty close, right? I mean, if you just say, this is the one for me.
Okay. Of course, that person may look at you and say, well, you're not the one for me.
But of course, you could have numbers that are very close together.
So the next best number might not be so bad.
Right. That's right. And that's the human
feature. I mean, there may be lots of people who in the end would be a perfect mate,
or not a perfect mate, but an excellent mate. And maybe we could define an excellent marriage
as one that doesn't end in divorce. Now, that may not be the right way to define a good marriage.
I mean, it may not be a happy one. But the chance of a happy marriage is not zero.
So you date a bunch of people and then you take the next better one that comes along.
That's the strategy that people basically tend to use. Sometimes they circle back to,
you have that option. In this game, you don't have the option of circling back.
Maybe the fact that the divorce rate is 50%, not 67% or something,
is the fact that people are allowed to circle back after they realize that they're screwing up
and they missed out. And sometimes you can fix the problem, right?
So let's end on, this is sort of a combined question.
But I'll put the combination of questions together. In 1900, Hilbert came up with his
famous Hilbert problems. There are these 23, some say 24 Hilbert problems, depending on how you
count. I would say just right away, this is a crucial turning point in the development of
mathematics. Because by doing this, what he essentially did was to split the field of mathematics
into two fields. What he said was that mathematics is beautiful, and that we solve problems in
mathematics not because they're going to be useful, but because they're just beautiful.
Okay. And there's a very elaborate way of defining beauty, as we know.
But he said mathematics certainly doesn't have to be useful. So if you want to know
how many six-dimensional balls, what is the optimal number, the maximum number of
six-dimensional spheres that will fit into a six-dimensional box?
You might say, who cares? And furthermore, even if I knew the answer, I couldn't test it in the
laboratory. Okay, that's how a physicist would respond. But more importantly, it wasn't important
if mathematics could be used by other branches of science. So that mathematics community, two
thirds of that community, followed Hilbert and said it doesn't have to be useful. It doesn't have to be
applicable. Roughly one third, or at least that's what the count is today,
have stayed in the, with the point of view that it has to be useful. It has to be relevant,
meaning it can be built on and eventually have a connection with reality, because we do know
that the physical world obeys mathematics. It really does, really seems to.
So these mathematicians are now called applied mathematicians,
and Hilbert's mathematicians became pure mathematicians, and mathematicians didn't have that
distinction. It was just mathematics. Okay, I am definitely of the one third variety.
And so to me, mathematics is a tool, and it is a lot of fun, and it's beautiful.
But ultimately, it should be useful. So for example,
a lot, my, one of my expertise, you know, in mathematics is the idea that, that although
almost all equations are impossible to solve, you have to learn what the answer is like.
What are the properties of the answer, even if you can't solve the problem exactly. So you have
to learn how to do approximate mathematics. And approximate mathematics, again, is something
that requires great care, but not rigor. And that's what I do. Okay, and that's the kind of
mathematics that's relevant in physics, because if you are, if you encounter a new physics problem,
you can't solve it. There's no chance that you're going to find the answer to a physics problem.
I mean, essentially, all of the problems that you can solve exactly have been solved.
And they all involve systems that are too simple to be realistic. Okay, so life is complicated.
You know, how do you predict the weather? Well, you can't predict the weather exactly.
But the question is, what is the best approximation that you can make? And probably there's an
upper bound. You can't, you can't give better, maybe then a 80% accurate approximation, if you
want the weather two days from now. But how do you get the optimal approximation? Okay, this is
applied mathematics. And that is my, that is what I love to do. I love to be able to solve a problem
approximately and understand what the answer is like, to a high degree of approximation
without solving the problem exactly. If you had to pick your Hilbert problems,
what would you choose? It's, I could make up problems, but they wouldn't really be
of interest to me. They just wouldn't. I mean, you know, an example.
Oh, I meant for physics. I meant the ones you're interested in.
Oh, in physics.
I mean, your Hilbert problems.
Oh, oh, oh, Hilbert problems in physics. I don't think there are any.
No, no, I mean your version. Like, so, so Hilbert gave his 23 that he thought that were the most
important for mathematics to him personally. I mean, if you had to pick, you had your pick,
and you're now going to influence the, you're going to split the field of physics, you're going to
influence the future of the field. You don't have to pick 23, but there might be one or two
that you think are particularly close to your heart.
Well, there's certainly a bunch of problems that I would love to see answered.
Um, uh, one of them has to do with the acceleration and the expansion of the universe.
The reason that I think this is such an interesting problem is that it may be an example of a problem
where, uh, where PT symmetry comes into play. Okay. Um, and the point is that, um,
you know, this goes under the, under the heading of alternative theories of gravity.
Okay. Because we know that gravity is attractive.
Okay. But the universe is expanding and accelerating.
So isn't gravity pulling back on it and stopping it from accelerating?
And the answer is that, um, not the answer. Sorry. Be very careful. Not the answer, but a possible
answer is that, you know, in electrodynamics, a positive and a negative charge attract.
And they attract just as if there were, they were attracting gravitationally. They both have a one
over R, uh, force. Okay. Or one over, I should say one over R potential. Okay. One over R squared
Newtonian force. Okay. And a positive and negative charge attract. But you can make
a PT symmetric theoretical model of electrodynamics. Okay. Where the electric charge is not a real
number, but it's an imaginary number. Okay. But everything else is the same.
And now you can ask, what happens? Well, what you find is that a positive and negative charge repel.
Okay. So one interesting possibility is that gravity at short distances, where short means on
the scale of a galaxy at short distances, way out on a galactic scales, galaxy gravity is attractive.
But on the scale of the universe, on very large scales, gravity is repulsive. So you can imagine
a theory of gravity, which is where two masses attract. And all you need to do is to look at
this theory in the complex plane. And now two masses repel. And if we have a bridge over
distances shorter than some characteristic distance, gravity is attractive, but larger than
this characteristic distance, it's repulsive, then we can understand something about the structure
of the universe. And I think this is an example of a very hard, but very interesting problem.
And so the idea is that PT symmetry is then broken at short distance scales and then not
at long scales or right out. Okay.
That's exactly right. So if you imagine that you begin with a universe that is PT symmetric,
but it has a broken PT symmetry, that is, it has the symmetry, but it's not, it's like the water
pales that are not connected with a pipe. Okay, it's PT symmetric, but it's still not an equilibrium
because one pot is filling up and the other one is emptying out. So that has broken PT symmetry.
But if you connect it with a pipe, it's unbroken PT symmetry. So therefore,
you imagine the universe at great distances being somehow connected by a pipe, sort of.
Okay. Well, we can imagine it being broken or unbroken, but the point here is that
depending on the separation, it either is repulsive or it's attractive and there is
some change over distance. That's the idea. So that's, I mean, that would be an example of a
beautiful, wonderful problem. If you could solve it, of course, it seems to me you would deserve
a Nobel Prize and that's a very, that would be a beautiful
application of the ideas of PT symmetry. Okay. And use of the complex world to understand what
is going on. This is work with Philip Mannheim, is it? Philip and I have done some work with
of course, with that objective in mind, Philip is very smart, and he's very knowledgeable about
ATG's, alternative theories of gravity. He's worked on conformal gravity and so on. In fact,
I'm in discussion with a guy in London where I'm going in a few days, whose name is, he's actually
in Greece, but he's coming to London, a guy named Marvo Matos, who is very knowledgeable about
modern physics and gravitation. And we've been talking about this problem for a long time.
I mean, this would be a wonderful application of PT symmetry.
Well, Carl, it's been an absolute pleasure having you on the podcast. Thanks for coming along.
Pleasure to chat with you. I had lots of fun.
