What's going on everyone? Today we're talking about regular expressions. I know some people
watching this video are thinking, engineer man, every time I try to do regular expressions,
it just melts my brain. And I'm going to prove to you today that it's a lot easier than it looks.
You just have to be explained it correctly. In this video, I'm going to teach you just enough
to be dangerous. And I think you'll find after this video, you're going to walk away being able
to do a little regex. So that'll be great. Let's just jump in. Well first, what is regex?
Regex is basically just text based syntax that allows you to define a pattern. And with that
pattern, you can use it to say find text, or you could also use it to find and replace text.
Before we start matching text, I just want to describe this interface that I'm using. So this
is a tool put out by debugx.com. And there's a link in the description for that. And basically what it
is is the second box here is the text that we would like to match. So for instance, I can put
engineer man. And then this box is the actual regex that we'll write. And then everything up
here is going to be a visual representation of the regular expression. And that'll be great
because I'll be able to show you exactly how a pattern is processed by the regex engine.
What if I told you the most basic regex is just a bunch of characters? Would you believe me? How
about this? When I write engineer man, it says matches. So basically what this says is this
regex will match, for instance, any string which starts with the capital E is followed by an N is
followed by G, and so on all the way to the end. So of course, there's only one string like that,
and it's engineer man. So imagine we wanted to match one name or another, say we want to make
a regex that matches either engineer man or Superman. So what we could do is use the pipe symbol
and write Superman. So now this regex matches either engineer man or Superman. And to read
this visualization, this basically says you start here, and the regex will either match
engineer man, or it'll match Superman. You can see now if I delete the N, now it doesn't match.
I can write anything here, dog cat, something man, and it doesn't match. But if I write Superman,
now suddenly it matches. Now I can make this a little simpler, because both of these names have
the word man in it, I really only have to match the first word, and then I can just say well man
occurs in both. So if I wanted to simplify this, I'm going to use what's called a group. And that's
by putting parentheses around a set of things. So when I do this, I've made a group out of those
two words. So now what this says is this will match, this regex will match any text that is
either engineer or super, but then also man at the end. Okay, so let's match something else and
we'll use some different syntax. So now we're going to build a regex, which matches one, two,
three, four. Now of course, we could just put one, two, three, four, and that would match,
but that's no fun. So we'll do that another way. Now you may have noticed that when I put say one,
two, you'll notice that it still says matches. And you might be wondering why that is. Does 12
match 1234? Well, no, it doesn't, it doesn't match the whole thing. However, it does match
a portion of it. You got to remember that the pattern looks anywhere in text. So because there
is a 12 in 1234, that means that there is a match. There is a syntax for you to use to make it match
the whole thing. And that's going to be the carrot and the dollar sign. So basically the carrot
matches the beginning of the line. And you could see it still says matches because one,
two is at the beginning of the line. However, when I put the dollar sign at the end,
now it does not match. And that's because what this is saying now is this regex matches any time
it is the beginning of the line, there's a one, a two, and the end of the line. So because there's
a three and the four, this pattern does not match. You'll notice if I put 34 after the one, two,
now suddenly it matches. Because it's easier to explain this when we match entire things,
I'm going to leave the carrot and the dollar sign for the remainder of our matching. So I'm going
to change this a little bit. I'm just going to make it any, what we're going to do is we're going to
make a regex that matches any, any five random numbers. So eight, four, seven, six, five. So
to do is we're going to introduce new syntax and that syntax is going to be the square brackets.
What square brackets are for is it allows you to put characters or a range of characters inside
there and it'll match any one character. So for instance, I could say 1234567890 if I wanted it
to match any one of those digits. However, recall that I said it can do a range of characters as
well. So I don't have to write all these out. I could have just done zero to nine. You know,
notice it says does not match. That's because this regex currently, it basically says this will
match any string that is beginning of the line, one of zero to nine. So one, one digit, just one,
and then the end of the line. So we have five digits. So that doesn't work. So the next piece
of syntax is the curly brace, and that's the quantifier. And you can put that after the square
brackets. So I put curly braces. And in here, I can do a number, a number comma, or a number comma
another number. And basically, if you put a number, that says match exactly, you know, whatever you
put in the curly brace. If you put a comma, it means match that number or more. So in this case,
this is saying match five digits. If I do five comma, it's match five or more digits. If I do
five comma eight, it's saying match five, six, seven or eight digits. And you can see up here,
we can read what this is saying. This is saying match any string that is the beginning of the
line, one of zero to nine, five times. So this loops around five times. So it could be 000, 000.
It could be 12345. If any five digits doesn't matter if it's repeating in order, it doesn't
matter. And it looks for the end of the line. So in this case, we have that we have five digits.
If I take away, if I take away one digit, now it doesn't match. If I add another digit, now
it doesn't match. So what if you just wanted to match a string of digits that are, that are just
of any length, one, two, 50, 100, whatever. Well, you can do that. I will introduce a new symbol
here. So rather than curly brace five curly brace, you can simply use a plus. Now what that plus says
is match one or more of that character. So that's why up here in the visual, you can see that it
it matches the beginning of the line, one of zero to nine, and then it just keeps looping.
It can loop as long as it wants. It can loop to 500. I can put, I can put any number of digits here
and it'll just continue matching forever. So in these character classes, which is this
square bracket, zero to nine square bracket, I can also match the opposite of that. So if I put a
carat in the very beginning, what I'm now matching is the opposite of what I have in there. And you
can see again in our visual, it says this rejects will match the beginning of the line, none of
zero to nine, one or more times, and then the end of the line. So here I can't have numbers. I can
have letters. Letters are all good. Symbols are all good. But as soon as I add a number,
suddenly it doesn't match. So let's put we've learned in practice and let's match a phone number,
for instance. So I'll write a sample phone number, do a 505551234. So we'll just delete
this and we'll start from start from blank here. So let's just talk out what we're looking to match.
So we have a 505551234, we don't just want to match that we want to match any telephone number.
So what does a telephone number look like? Well, we have a group of three digits,
which could be any digits, we have a dash, and then we have another group of three digits
of any digits, and then a dash, and then we have a group of four digits. And then that's it. So to
match three digits, we have to use the character class, and then zero to nine, curly brace, three
curly brace. So that matches that first group of three characters. Now we simply add the dash,
and then just going to copy and paste this a second time. So that matches our second group of
three characters, and then a dash, and then copy and paste it one more time, but then change this
three to a four. And then now you see it matches. So let's read the actual visualization. This
visualization now says this regex will match any string that is the beginning of the line,
one of zero to nine, three times 123, a dash, one of zero to nine, three times, and then a dash,
and then one of zero to nine, four times, and then the end of the line. So you'll see now if we
change this number at all in any way, it no longer matches. Take out a number, it doesn't match.
Add a letter, it doesn't match. Add another letter, it doesn't match. Take away a dash,
it doesn't match. Anything you do here besides an actual phone number will no longer match.
What if you wanted to make the dashes optional? Maybe you want to allow people to put phone numbers,
but they, you know, you want to match it with or without the dashes. So in this case,
you would use the question mark, the question mark identifier, it's technically zero or one of the
element that's, that's before it, but I like to think of it as the optional, you know, optional.
So if I put a question mark after the dash, and then I'll put after the second dash,
now it's going to be optional. And you can see it represented in our visual thing here. Now it's
beginning of the line, one of zero to nine, three times. But then now you see this line where it
can just skip over the dash. And that's because it's zero or one, zero is, you know, it's skipping
over it. And then one is, you know, the dash being there. So now you can see if we delete the dash,
then it's perfectly fine. It still matches. So let's match one more thing, let's, let's try to
match emails. So I'll put a sample email here, we'll do like bob.smith at example.org.
Now for the purpose of this exercise, email matching is actually kind of complex business,
but for the purpose of this example, we're going to assume that a valid email address is
letters numbers underscore and a dot at letters and numbers dot letters. So first let's write the
first piece that matches the basic of the bob dot Smith part, everything to the left of the
outside. So in this case, we use a character class to square brackets. And then in the square
brackets, we're going to put the characters that are allowed. So we said we're going to allow
letters. So a to z, capital A to capital Z, zero to nine,
will allow the period. And we'll allow the underscore. And then we'll use our plus sign
to say that there has to be one or more of those characters. So now we have to match the at sign,
which is just as simple as putting the outside. So everything to the right of the at sign,
we know that there must be a dot before the actual extension for the domain name.
So we need to first match everything between the at sign and the dot. So we said that only
the letters and numbers were allowed there. So we use our, use our square brackets, a to z,
capital A to capital Z, zero to nine. So now that matches from the at sign to the dot. And of course,
we want to match one or more of that. Now to match the dot, we can't just put a dot because
a dot is also the character for any character except a new line. So we need to do backslash
dot. And what that says is actually look for the dot without a backslash, the dot would match an A,
a one, a five, anything, except a new line. So now all it's left to match is the domain extension.
So the rules here, we're going to say it can be letters, and it has to be either
say two or three characters long. So we do our square brackets,
our range of characters, a to z, capital A, capital Z. And then we use our curly brace,
two comma three, curly brace. And you can see now it says it matches. So let's review the
visualization. So this says this regex will match the beginning of the line. Any one of these
characters, one or more times in a loop, the at sign, any of these characters, one or more times,
a dot, any one of these characters, either two or three times, and then the end of the line.
And that's exactly what we have. And just like the phone number, if I go changing things, if I
take out the dot, it doesn't work. If I take out the at sign, it doesn't work. If I put a special
character here, which is not allowed, it doesn't work. There was a couple of ways to simplify
our regex. And I want to go over a couple, actually one of the last two things. Now it's the backslash
D and the backslash w. So the backslash D is kind of like the zero to nine, it says match any one
digit. However, the one thing that backslash D does that zero to nine does not is backslash D
will also match numbers like in foreign languages. So if you had like an Arabic one,
then a backslash D would match that whereas zero to nine only matches our zero to nine.
The same thing is true for backslash w. So we can replace this with backslash w,
replace that with backslash w, replace that with backslash w. And we're done. That wasn't so bad,
was it? Make sure you use a tool like debugx.com to visualize how your regex works. It makes it a
lot easier to understand exactly why it's matching what it's matching and why it's not matching
what it's not matching. I sincerely hope I was able to help you overcome your fear of regular
expressions. Please tell me in the comments if you thought this was helpful and you feel
more comfortable with regex now. And as usual, see you in the next video.
