Salutations, listeners, and welcome back to Glitch Bottle, the podcast where we uncork
the uncommon in magic, mysticism, and the generally misunderstood.
I'm your host, Alexander F., and today, as usual, we are so excited and honored to talk
about decrypting the Stegonographia with international author and scholar Dr. Steven
Skinner.
Now, listeners, I know you might be asking yourself, why is the Stegonographia the most
notorious work of the German Benedictine, Abbott, and polymath, Johannes Tritemius?
It was written in the year 1500.
Is the Stegonographia a text about the evocation of spirits?
Is it a system of cryptography where information is secretly encoded or both?
Internationally acclaimed author, practicing magician, and scholar Dr. Steven Skinner
is the perfect person to ask as he returns on the podcast.
Dr. Skinner has again collaborated with Daniel Clark in an upcoming publication where all
four books of the Stegonographia are being published in English for the first time with
extensive explanations and commentary.
It sounds like it is just going to be so vital and so excellent as usual.
This upcoming edition of the Stegonographia contains the remaining parts of books one
and three with detailed spirit registers covering 32 spirits, but it also features a full translation
of book two, which contains another 25 spirits and book four, which relates the Stegonographia
to Paracelsus, the Almadel, and the Shemham Farrash of Solomon, Adam, and Moses.
So this looks to be absolutely an excellent collection and a scholarly and important restoration
of the grimoire tradition of the magical tradition broadly speaking.
And with all that being said, Dr. Steven Skinner, thank you so, so much for taking the time
and stopping back on the Glitch Bottle podcast today.
It's always my pleasure and I do enjoy talking to you.
And you just summed it up perfectly.
I don't really need to say anything more too high.
Well, yes, sir.
But I will, because you can't shut me up anyway, nor would I ever want to.
I was going to say no comment, please.
So I could just mention, first of all, what does Stegonographia mean when it comes as
Alex has said it is sometimes seen as a cryptography manual and sometimes seen as a magic manual.
So I have to admit upfront, I know a bit about cryptography, but I'm not a cryptographic
expert.
But I do know a little bit about magic.
So the focus of this book is primarily in the magical direction rather than the cryptographic
direction.
But I'll explain all later.
So what does the word Stegonographia mean?
Well, it's made up of two Greek words.
And the usual translation is that it's secret writing, Stegopo secret and Graphia writing.
But if you look at the Greek properly, Stegano actually means watertight and Graphia is writing.
So it's actually a book of watertight writing.
And we may come to that a little bit later.
At least people now have heard of it and they stopped saying, is it a book of shorthand
or stenography?
In fact, I've had arguments with people about the spelling of it.
Oh, it should be Stegonographia, shouldn't it?
No, it's Stegonographia.
Okay, so who wrote it?
Well, the Abbott Trasimius.
Now, this is an amazing thing that an Abbott, well-known in Germany, actually wrote books
on magic and the Inquisition didn't turn up on his doorstep or drag him off in chains
because he had powerful friends like Maximilian, the Emperor Maximilian, etc.
But you had to do a little bit more than just have powerful friends to avoid the Inquisition
and their pals.
So the question is, was it a book on stenography with a bit of magic thrown in or a book on
magic with a bit of stenography thrown in?
And you have to ask yourself, if you were an Abbott in the year 1500 in Germany, which
of those two things would be the most inflammatory?
And the answer is, you're more likely to be done for magic than to be done for writing
secret messages.
So my conclusion from a long time is that it's a book on magic with cryptography thrown
in so that Trasimius had deniability.
If he was ever grabbed by the Inquisition, he could say, no, it's a book on secret writing.
Can't you see that?
Are you stupid or something?
And it's not, it's a book on magic.
And in it, there are, what was it, 57 spirits with full details, 25 plus 31, I think.
So that's 56 spirits.
And it's practical.
Now, how did Trasimius get into trouble with it?
Well, he sent a copy of it to his friend who was in Ghent and who was a Carmelite monk.
And he knew this guy was okay talking about magic.
And when he sent it, because the mail was not perhaps as fast as it is today, his friend
in the Carmelite monk had actually died.
So when it arrived, the head of the monastery there opened it, looked at the book and was
completely shocked because what is one of the church senior members, an abbot was a
fairly senior title, were doing writing a book on magic.
And that unfortunately for Trasimius is where his reputation as a magician began.
And he spent the rest of his life fairly cleverly sending it off and explaining what it really
was.
Anyway, so Trasimius was an abbot, a historian, a magician.
And a monk.
And how did that happen?
Well, I'm sure everybody said this story, but I'm just going to tell it because I like
this story.
He was coming back from having visited his family in Trittenheim and he was stopped by
a snowstorm.
So he pulled in, as it were, if he'd been driving, it would have been, to the local monastery
which put him up for the night.
The next morning he set out again, where the looked okay.
He didn't go very far and then a huge snowstorm came again.
And so he was forced to go back and plead, do you mind if I stay the night again here?
And I think he probably privately thought that it was the hand of God telling him this
is where he was supposed to be.
So instead of moving on on the third morning, he decided to join the monastery as an ordinary
monk.
He was in his late teens, but being an incredibly intelligent man who read and spoke a number
of languages, definitely Latin, definitely German, probably a dash of Hebrew, et cetera,
and some Greek.
The monks realized what a powerhouse intellect he was.
And when he was 22, maybe 23, they elected him as the abbot of the monastery.
And from then on it was up and up until the point where he sent his, unfortunately, deceased
friend, a copy of the Stegonographia.
One minor thing that people probably never mention is that his original name was Heidenberg
which literally translates from German as from the pagan mountain, which I think is
a lovely way of looking at his name.
But he took Trusenius to celebrate the fact that he was born in Trittenheim.
So it was a man from Trittenheim who became his name.
He was also the teacher of a gripper and to a lesser extent of Paracelsus.
But the gripper utilized his huge library of magical books to learn about magic and
then finally to write about it.
And I think nobody's going to argue if I said that a gripper's three books of occult
philosophy is probably the main text of Western magic.
So you could see Trusenius as being, if not the fountain head, at least a fountain head
of European magic and the actual fountain head was his library, but I'll talk about
his library a little bit later.
So Dr. Skinner, given all of that historical background with Trusenius, can you share about
what differences did you find between the printed Latin text and the manuscript that
you worked from?
Right.
So when I started this project, I was looking around and I saw that Adam McClain had actually
made a decent English translation, but he only translated volume one and volume three,
leaving volume two and volume four untranslated.
If anybody wonders whether there really was a volume four, then you just look at Culliana's
book, Eros and Magic in the Renaissance, where he confirms that there were actually
four books originally.
Anyway, so I was lucky.
In fact, it was Daniel Clarke, my co-author, who was lucky because he uncovered a manuscript
of the Stegonographia, which was not as old as the German manuscripts, but much more detailed.
So it was obviously translated at the point before people started losing or destroying
manuscripts.
And so as you can see on this picture, the illustrations were a bit sketchy.
This one just shows a few of the directions.
And people mostly thought, well, it was just an example of some directions, but no.
In the original manuscript by Josemius, which we don't have to hand, he showed all the directions.
So in the manuscript I worked on with Daniel, you can see much, much more detail.
So realizing that this manuscript that Daniel dug up had two more volumes and a lot more
detail and illustrations, which were much more complete.
I thought we got to translate it.
So and that was a mistake.
I mean, if I'd realized how much work had to go into this, I would not have made that
decision.
But anyway, I did make the decision and we went for it.
Well, that that is so lovely, Dr. Skinner.
And I think it actually follows a really interesting point that you made sharing many years ago
that when you first came across text.
So for instance, I remember a story and I forgive me, I'm going to butcher some of the facts,
but you were very young and you went to the local bookstore and you were trying to, I
believe it was the LeMegatins' Goat Asia or Crowley's.
It was. Yes.
And I love that when you would you win in and said, I would like to I have an order for this.
And the person up front said, oh, no, no, he's much too young.
And then finally, I think it was the manager that came front forward and said, oh, Steven,
he's he's fine.
It's OK.
You know, and I thought, what a what a powerful story about, especially at the time, you know,
discovering a text for the first time.
So to that point, Dr. Skinner, can you share with us when did you first come across this
specific text, the Stegonographia?
OK, but just to add a little bit to the anecdote you told there, the bookshop manager, it was
the Adiar Bookshop in Sydney and the manager was Cecil Novi, who has very sadly passed away
very recently, but she was a lovely lady and she was aware of the fact that it was fairly
safe to leave the Goatia in my hands.
And thank God she did because an awful lot of work came out of that.
Anyway, when did I first come across it?
Well, I'd been interested in Dr.
John Dee from way back.
And we're talking 13, 14, we're talking pretty precocious.
And in it, the reading about Dee, I heard that Dee had once copied by hand the whole
of the Stegonographia, sitting somewhere in, I guess, Germany, working from a Latin manuscript.
And I thought, well, if Dee thought it was that valuable, that it was worth the considerable
effort of copying by hand.
And here you can actually see a copy of that copy.
You can see that Dee had done a lot of work and his his illustration there is much more
complete than the printed one.
So I figured that the printed copies, even in German, were not as complete as some of
the manuscript copies.
So that was my first desire.
Wow.
If Dee thought it was good, it's got to be good.
And then Adam McClain, who is a guy who's very famous for his knowledge of alchemy,
arranged a partial translation of Volume 1 and 3 in 1982.
And by comparing it with the Latin, I realized that books two and four were missing.
So that gave me more reason still to produce a complete copy.
I decided to translate all four books into English, again, a foolish decision.
When I was convinced that there actually were four books and not just that three that
people had mentioned.
Ah, there you go.
Well, I believe and I try not to speak for the listeners, Dr.
Skinner, but your foolishness and the foolishness of Daniel Clark and everyone else has
certainly been to the to the boon of pushing the boundaries of understanding of the
Grimoire tradition.
So I must say, it certainly is a wonderful thing.
And speaking of Daniel Clark, actually, Dr.
Skinner, can you tell us this is several times now you have collaborated with Daniel
Clark.
How did how did this process work?
You know, you have two great minds tackling this text.
Can you tell us about that relationship?
Well, I have to admit, I've never met Daniel.
It's all been online communication.
But the communication has been very good because Daniel has got an amazing
brain.
He's located down in Tasmania, and I was originally located in Malaysia and then
Singapore and now London.
But Daniel has his hand on where all of these manuscripts come from.
More than anybody else, I know he has an insight into which collections have got
which manuscripts and how to get copies of it and has a huge digital
collection.
And he was very generous from day one in lending them to me if I wanted to work
on them and finally I decided, well, let us work together.
He's a delightfully clearheaded guy and he doesn't take any kind of bullshit.
He's just does what he needs to do.
So we worked on it together and Daniel's many skills included dealing with these
libraries who hold their own manuscripts, but also research and repairing, digitally
repairing the manuscripts so that you go from something which looks appalling to
something which is actually very clear.
And if you can see here one that of the same picture that Daniel has restored,
so we've used his restorations in the book, it's so much better than trying to
look at the original.
We don't redraw them, no, we just take the original and clean it.
As well, Dr. Skinner, something you touched on at the beginning of our chat is that as
Joseph H. Peterson says, quote, the Stegonographia is Trithemis' most notorious
work. In private circulation, the Stegonographia brought such a reaction
of fear that he, Trithemis, decided it should never be published, end quote.
So Dr. Skinner, can you share with the listeners who might be hearing
about this for the first time?
Why was this work so notorious, if you will?
Well, I suppose the first push at being notorious was the
the Carmelite head of the monastery opening somebody else's mail and reading it
with horror, because he didn't just then put it on one side, but he sent copies
around and told other people about it.
Not very reasonable of him, but so that started off and people then sort of took
up, oh, this arbiter is doing magic, he's invoking spirits because here are all
the details in this book, blah, blah, blah.
And Trithemis then had a bit of a job tamping this down.
But the bottom line is that in dealing with spirits in this way was not natural
magic. And in those days, scholars, monks, et cetera, use the word natural
magic as defense.
So the church could go, hey, what are you doing?
And they say, no, we're just doing natural magic.
Herbs and stones and the 15 different varieties of correspondences, which
everybody knew about in those days, but they don't know.
And nothing about dealing with spirits in standing in a circle and stuff like that.
But of course, that is not the sort of magic that's in the Stegonographio.
It is spirit-based, evocatory magic.
They go and Trithemis destroyed or suppressed the more extreme parts to
save his reputation.
But fortunately, some of the translations, including the one we work from,
escaped without being too heavily cut.
There is always a possibility that we haven't got the most complete
manuscript in existence, but I can be very sure that it's...
I can't think of a percentage, but it's twice as complete as any of the other
manuscripts wandering around or even the printed version, because the printed
version was from an early Latin version.
One of the first times, Dr. Skinner, that I heard about this debate with
the Stegonographio, is it cryptography?
Is it sorcery?
Was actually, and I'll reach in my bookshelf here, one of my favorite tomes,
the Goetia of Dr. Rudd, the third volume in the Sourceworks of Ceremonial
Magic series, where you and David Rankin explore this issue and you touched
on it just a few moments ago, Dr. Skinner.
So I'll just ask, you mentioned that the Stegonographio is a book about magic,
not cryptography, but what is the relationship between encoding messages
and then the sending of those messages to spirits?
Can you just give us kind of the full picture?
Okay, so this is quite a subtle point, so it takes a bit of explaining.
So first of all, what is the relationship between evoking a spirit and using cryptography?
And there is a relationship, so that some grimoires suggest that the
evocation should be encrypted, or the name of the spirit should be encrypted, etc.
And that always sounded a bit weird to me.
But then if you think about what Aston Aston and Spare was doing, he was taking
the magical result that he desired written in English, and then he was
using cryptography or his own version of cryptography to produce something
which doesn't mean anything, a series of letters and things.
So he was also using cryptography before calling for the spirit.
And one of the things there is, of course, you ask the question, what languages
do spirits speak?
And in the Middle Ages, they would have been assumed to speak Latin and possibly Greek,
which was good because everybody in those days spoke Latin, not the case anymore.
And therefore, what you needed was to focus on the outcome that you're looking for,
or the name of the spirit.
And one of the practices is you could encrypt it, because when you encrypt
something, you have to think about it a lot.
And so this, as it were, underlined the desired results, and it got through to the spirit.
Whereas if you just stand in the middle of the room and quickly read off something you
wrote 10 minutes ago, this doesn't have the same impact.
So it's increasing the impact by encrypting.
Now, sending messages via spirits is a different thing.
But you can still use cryptography to stress it.
So let's stand back from there.
What Christos Emius was aiming at was the 1500s version of email.
He wanted to be able to send messages to monks who knew about magic in other monasteries
on the other side of Germany or Czechoslovakia or in Italy or whatever.
He didn't very sadly have email, but he figured, and it is true, that he could use
spirits to take the message.
So you give the message to a spirit.
You first of all, you've got to call the spirit properly.
Give the message, the spirit, and tell the spirit to deliver it to Mr.
Orwellis in Prague or something.
And the spirit will do that.
But the problem with the message is when he gets there, the recipient will not either
understand the message or understand that something has been sent to him.
So it had to be with somebody who also understood the magic, who knew what the
invocation was to material, not materialize, but to consolidate the spirit and to
get the message.
So it's kind of a complicated procedure, just like with email.
You need machinery at one end to encrypt the message into electrical pulses.
And then you need machinery at the other end to unencrypted, as it were, into a piece
of sensible English.
Dr. Skinner, where have you practiced this?
Have you engaged with the steganographia?
Yes, I have experimented.
And I have to say that unless the recipient is well trained, well versed in the
method, it's quite difficult.
And so I found that sometimes I can simply send the message so that the person dreams
about it rather than the spirit actually explaining it.
But then I thought, well, I don't look going to waste much more time on this
because email is much, much more efficient and much, much more accurate.
But there's a 500 year gap between one method and the other.
So although the objective of a lot of the steganographia is to send spirit
carried messages, there is other stuff in there that's of use to people who are
interested in magic.
Dr. Skinner, as well, something that ties into what you just shared is people
have been wondering for centuries if the steganographia is a book about encoding
messages or summoning spirits.
You just added a bunch of excellent context there.
And to that point, we have a few listener questions for you from Glitchbottle
patron Anna Maddalena.
And Anna is asking her first question is, I'm very eager to know what details you
have culled from the steganographia, Dr. Skinner.
Well, one of the details that I found most interesting is that the steganographia
has across two of its books, two complete spirit registers.
Now, a spirit register will be familiar to anybody who's read the Goetia.
It's a list of spirits with details about what their offices are.
In other words, what it is they're capable of doing and sometimes their schedule.
So that was the first thing.
But in the steganographia, every spirit has its own private invocation, which is
very rare, probably completely unique, because the usual procedure is you have
a standard evocation into which you insert the spirit's name.
But this is somewhat more powerful because you are using an evocation in a
language which I'm not going to specify, but one not very commonly known to call
that spirit and that spirit should get the message a lot easier.
Talking about that, somebody once asked me, what senses do spirits have?
Well, I can tell you that they can hear even at, well, is it a remarkable
distance or are they in fact very close, but in another dimension, but they can
certainly hear and the spirit will recognize its own name, even if you
mispronounce it a little bit.
The other thing they can do is they can smell because the choice of
incenses is critical for magic.
You have different incenses for different planetary spirits, for example.
And spirits actually are attracted by beautiful smelling atmosphere.
So when you say that the spirit is invoked, you can make things convenient
for him by burning or vaporizing a smell that he likes.
So I can say that spirits have a sense of hearing, a sense of smell.
I can also say that their sight is not that clear because I've done certain
experiments and I'll just leave it at that, that they're not very clear with
sight, maybe it's the difference of working across two different worlds.
But given those two things, the sense of smell is the hint why
magicians have to bath or clear themselves immediately before an
operation because they do not like the smell of human beings.
And so in fact, some magicians recommended that you actually
study yourself with some sweet smelling incense or whatever and that works quite well.
Dr. Skinner as well, this just popped into my head.
So let me just let me just ask you between Anna's questions.
But in another one of your tomes, I feel like I'm pulling every book off
of my bookshelf here and the nine Rudian provocations.
The Solomonic Archangels and Demon Princes, one of the pieces of advice
that is given is to never.
It's one of the beneficial aphorisms says never mix experiments.
So you either focus on more celestial operations or more sublunar,
if you will, slash catholic operations for these spirits.
Would you classify the spirits and the Stegonographia as angelic or in the
Theurgia, Goetia, they seem to be these aerial spirits, these dukes that can wander.
Can you share a little bit about that?
They're actually sublunar spirits or aerial spirits.
So they can float around in the atmosphere.
If you get them to materialize, then they will be just floating around
rather than standing on the floor or anything like that.
Subluna is a nice word, anything under the moon,
but it excludes sonic or subterranean spirits,
which are a completely different sort of animal.
Excellent. Thank you, Dr. Skinner.
I know myself and I'm sure the listeners really appreciate that.
Back to Anna's question and his next question.
We broke these up a little bit and is asking and commenting, Dr.
Skinner, that it always struck me as strange that important state secrets
would be encoded by lists of spirit names.
Can you comment on this a little bit?
Yeah, the messages are not encoded by the spirit names.
The spirit names are actually labels for particular encoding messages.
So if it was, say, parmesiel,
this is a particular encoding procedure.
So then they're labels and you could have used animal names.
It could have been the giraffe encoding and the rhinoceros encoding.
But Trasimus has used spirit names,
which is confused a lot of people because they are trying to see some connection
between the encoding and the magic, which I've vaguely explained already.
To Anna's next question, Anna is asking, in particular, Dr. Skinner,
I'm wondering if you agree that the occult aspect of the text
is merely a blind for the deeper cryptographic work
or if it has a double valency as both a code book and an esoteric tone?
Well, it does have a double valency and Trasimus must have been a fantastically
bright guy because he's managed to work both things into the text.
But the cryptography gives him deniability.
If he's brought up before a body of his peers or the inquisition,
he can say, no, you stupid people, you can see it's about cryptography.
And I've just used magic to frighten people away from it
because he knows he can't be done for cryptography.
It's not a crime.
However, evoking spirits might very well be a theological crime.
So when he's got that deniability, it's achieved itself.
But his cryptography is also there and it's not the most efficient cryptography.
So you might need 100 words to just make a very short message.
And there are much better ways of making short messages cryptographically
rather than wasting so many words.
But what do I know about cryptography?
Quite a lot, quite a lot.
And so it seems, Dr. Skinner, that Anna's saying exactly what you just commented on,
which is in some places in Europe, possessing such a book of necromantic names,
those demonic names could get you in as much trouble or more trouble
as passing along state secrets, it seems.
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean, state secrets, well, for example, D was an intelligence for Elizabeth I.
But I'm sure a lot of the stuff that he was sending back to England
wouldn't have got him into trouble.
But having been convicted of evoking evil spirits from the church's point of view,
that would have definitely got him into trouble.
So the necromantic names are much more dangerous than passing on secret information.
One of your primary areas of focus, Dr. Skinner, and it's even in the name of one of your books,
is the techniques, the technological application.
And you mentioned, along with David Rankin in the Goetia of Dr. Rudd, a wonderful tome,
that, quote, the same tables used to encrypt also produced the spirit names, end quote.
So roughly, Dr. Skinner, can you share with listeners who might be hearing about this
for the first time?
How does this whole process work?
Is the practitioner supposed to derive the spirit names first and then encrypt
a message for the spirit?
How does all that work?
No, it's two separate processes.
So you can generate spirit names by using tables of Hebrew letters,
using a sigil to tell you which cell in the table you go to from which cell and on to which cell
you spell out a name, or even the reverse process, you spell the name onto the table
and that gives you the spirit sigil.
Because the ingredients that you need for an evocation are the name of the spirit,
the sigil of the spirit, and then you need to calculate what's the best time to call them,
et cetera, et cetera.
That's using tables to produce the name of spirits or to check the sigil or to reverse
that, but it's not the whole process.
Encrypting the message for the spirit is a separate process.
So you know the spirit name, you call the spirit, you tell the spirit your message in
whatever form, whatever language, whatever cryptographic form, and then he will convey
that more or less accurately, and I can't swear always accurately, to the distant friend or
who is similarly aware of this magical technique, and then he will say the necessary words,
and more often than not, the message will come to him and dream.
The trisimus says the spirit will whisper it in his ear, but my experience is that
doesn't always happen.
It's more likely to turn up in the dream on the following night.
Reminds me, Dr. Skinner, of something you touched on before.
There's a, I believe in the PGM, there's a spell that says that you can have a message
and the deity will appear in someone else's dream as the God that they believe in,
as opposed to what you believe in.
That's a very sneaky piece of magic.
I do know the method for inserting thoughts into other people's dreams in such a way that
they will believe it's their own thought, because you wake up in the morning and not all the thoughts
in your head do you immediately recognize, but a much more effective way is to have
in that person's dream a figure who is their God appear to them and tell them,
you must do this, you must do that, and then they can go, oh my God told you.
If it's a Catholic, it may be a saint.
If it's a pagan, then it may be a pagan God, but to incorporate that God into the
delivery of the message makes it very highly effective.
As well, Dr. Skinner, I think this next part touches on something that you brought up at
the beginning of our chat and also something David Rankin talks about when he, in his
Grimoire Encyclopedia, when he talks about the building of magical momentum or magical tension
and you say, quote, that the mental effort involved in encoding the message to the spirit
is part of the magical procedure, end quote. Can you share why is this so important, Dr. Skinner?
Well, most people take a very casual attitude to magic. I'll just quickly
rattle through the invocation and then I'll tell the spirit what I want. No, you have to use
a lot of, I wouldn't say brain power, but a lot of intention.
People will say that magic is mostly psychological. I definitely don't believe that,
but I know that when you do it, it must be done with intention and carefully and precisely,
which is why three of my books start with the word techniques of.
Technique comes from a Greek word, which means a craft or a procedure. I like to think of
magic as something that is done scientifically, but only scientifically in the sense of
method. So you try something out, you record your results, you formulate series and that,
and then you test the series. Well, it's not quite as complicated as that in magic,
because a lot of the instructions are already available in the grimoires,
and so you use them, but you use them carefully and with attention. Just as if you were driving or
flying a rapid plane, you need attention and intention, otherwise you might come to a nasty,
nasty sticky end. Yes, so you would consider Dr. Skinner this mental technique, this preparation
of encoding the message as just as important as, say, gathering your materia magica, your wand,
your sword, consecrating things. It sounds like it's that important to the technique.
Yeah, yeah, and producing your ray of tools and people say to me, well, why do you need
tools for magic? Why can't you just sit in your arm chair and think about it? That does not work,
but at least it doesn't work for me. There may be people who can do that, but not anybody I
immediately know. And you see the same thing in Chinese magic or even martial arts. I mean,
there's a well-known story of a village which was being attacked by some raiders,
and one of the team masters there tried to contract a samurai to teach them how to fight with
swords and fight these people off who are destined to arrive in the next week or something. And of
course, the master said, you've got to be kidding. I can't teach you what you need to know in a week.
Tell me what you do know. And he said, well, I know how to do the tea ceremony. And I do that
with a lot of attention. And I do that regularly. And I'm really a master of that. So the samurai
simply taught him how to clean the sword and replace it in a scabbard and told him to apply
the same degree of intention to that as he did to the tea ceremony. So when the raiders turned up,
there was the team master pretending to be head of the village,
and laid out in front of him was one or two pieces of equipment. And he cleaned them and
presented them in the way that he would have done for the tea ceremony. And the raiders looked and
they saw this guy treats his tools like this. He obviously knows what he's doing.
We'll go and find an easier village to raid and they left. So the point of that slightly oblique
story is that the weapons and they are called weapons of magical practice need to be treated
great deal of respect and intention. And they need to be exercised and consecrated.
And these actions then give them much more than psychological power, but it does give them
power that then can work. And the spirits can appreciate that. They look at a magician who
lays out his tools properly, leans them, wraps them in the right colored silk and so forth. And
they figure, this guy knows what he's doing. We better not mess with him.
People find it hard to understand when I explain it. But I think the Chinese team master
is a good parallel. Absolutely. One of the ways I've phrased it is,
based on everything that you've shared and Fraterashin Shasan and other guests is,
instead of operating on the laws of physics, many grimoire interactions and evocatory procedures
operate on the laws of meaning and intention and being able to meet them in a specific laid-down
pre-mutually agreed upon terms and a specific ritualistic structure that gets results. I don't
know if that's a fair way to think about it. And going back to previous conversation we had a few
minutes ago, in the Greek magical papyri and in the old Egyptian temples, anybody who had just
eaten garlic or fish was not allowed to come in and was certainly discouraged from doing any ritual
or worship or ritual inside the temple because the spirits do have a great sense of smell.
So the spirits can cotton on to what we're doing, that we're doing the right technique
and that we are masters of what we are doing. And that instills a certain amount of fear and
obedience. Dr. Skinner, in addition to those vital elements, one of the things that you mentioned
that's necessary for the successful completion of an evocatory procedure in the grimoire tradition
is the seal, the sigil of the spirit. And to that very point, the very few number of seals
found in the Stegonographia match exactly to the seals found in the second book of the Lamegaten,
namely the Theurgia Goetia. So can you share, Dr. Skinner, why doesn't the Stegonographia contain
more of these seals? Right. So as I've already explained, to call the spirit, you need its seal
so that it's not sufficient to have the Stegonographia. You've got the evocations,
you've got the spirits' names, you've got the times, etc. But when Trasimius is writing that,
he also composed the Theurgia Goetia, Don't Be Distracted by the Name,
which I think is a later edition. And in that, he had the same spirits, but he had their seals.
And he knew, being a sensible lad, that you should keep these two elements separate. However,
if you're a practicing magician, then you need to bring these two elements together,
and you use the seals in the Theurgia Goetia, which you've got the same spirit names as the
invocations, etc. in the Stegonographia. So I suppose this is a little plug for,
yes, if you're going to do this, you also need to buy Dr. Rudd's Goetia, because in there will be
the seals that you need. I see that Alex is waving it around. Thank you very much. And that's another
coincidence. It's part of my progress through the Grimoires to cover, hopefully, all the bases
by the end of my time. I think historically, the Theurgia Goetia was made at the same time
by Trasimius and kept separate. And its path as a manuscript has been different from the Stegonographia.
But you can now, because they're both in English and they're both published by me,
you can bring them together and make it work.
It's a truly very, very valuable resource for people who want to read about it, for people who
want to practice this. I'm certainly looking forward to it, Dr. Skinner. And just as a brief
follow-up question, do you think the author of the Theurgia Goetia used tables to derive
the numerous seals just as a follow-up to that?
No. You don't use tables to derive the seals. This is a technical area I don't want to get into,
but they were derived at the same time, I think, and then put in a separate manuscript.
Of course, Trasimius, being the abbot, had all these monks in his scriptorium who would write
stuff for him. So this is something I would have loved to have myself,
instead of having to type it. I'm one finger typist, and I just type with one finger,
and it's not nearly as fast as being able to hand some rough copy to a monk and say,
go off and inscribe that on parchment or whatever, such luxury. But on the other hand,
I don't have the inquisition looking over my shoulder or what was left of the English laws
against magic, which I think they abolished in 1951, which is a bit late, but at least they've gone.
So it's a trade-off. So I'm happy.
Yes, those are powerful, motivating forces. And as a fellow one-finger type, or I certainly
sympathize, Dr. Skinner, fully, fully, absolutely.
My mother said, I said, I need to learn to type because I'm going to produce a few, more than
a few words. And she said, no, you don't. You'll always have a secretary. Your father had a secretary.
You'll have a secretary. You don't need to learn it. And then she was wrong.
It's like, right. In addition to being the scholar and translating things and pouring
over manuscripts and the welcome library, in addition to all of that, you also are then typing
through everything, of course. Yes. I've tried one little program where you speak,
and it types it up for you on the screen. But it always gets the technical words wrong.
And so you've got to go back and retype. And in the end, I've timed myself. It's almost
just as fast to type it yourself. Yeah, 100%. Yeah. It would be very hard to tell
Microsoft Word or something to, you know, Bane Chuch or Adonai Shaddai El Chai, you know,
it might, it might not get all the, all of the letters correct. Yeah. So you got to,
you got to go back and rework and see, might as well type it in the first place.
Right. Absolutely. That's just my problem, not anybody else's. Earlier, I asked you if you
practiced the steganography and you shared your answer. But just as a follow-up, since you publicly
shared about experimenting with the LeMegatins Goatia, as you've shared, and also the Arsonatoria,
have you experimented with the Theurgia Goatia? Or, or is there anything else you'd like to
touch on about experimenting with either the steganography or the Theurgia Goatia?
Yes, I have. But because to actually do it right with the steganography, I need to
re-import the sigils. And I thought when I produced this edition, maybe I should sneak
the sigils back in, but that's not, it's not academically acceptable to do that. So you still
got to put two books next to each other and, and work on it from there. I'm still working my way
through the, what was it, 56, 57 spirits. There's some I'm just never going to get around to, but
I've worked my way through handfuls of the more interesting ones.
You were talking about the samurai story earlier, one of your magical colleagues and one of our
magical friends, Frater Ashen Chassan, an excellent grimoire, a traditionalist and practitioner.
He has a question for you, Dr. Skinner, saying, Dr. Skinner, can you please share about how
the angels, or if the angels, inspired the techniques or the technology for the ciphers
themselves, what are your thoughts on the angelic involvement in imparting the knowledge for coded
information found in the steganographia? I don't think the angels taught Trasimius
cryptography. For a start, a lot of Trasimius' cryptography is very, very stalled at having
to translate a large, as I said before, say 100 words into a five-word message or something.
It's just not practical. So I don't think they did. I think that you've got to give
Trasimius' brain the credit for the cryptography. Thank you for that additional context, Dr. Skinner.
And speaking of other guests who have been on the podcast, we have a listener question for you
from Mihai Vartajaru, who is asking and saying, Dr. Skinner, are the 31 spirits listed in the
steganographia actual spirits that may be contacted, or are the spirit names just an
ideal spirit catalog devised by Trasimius as an example of his cryptographical method?
Well, I've sort of answered that already. I can see that Mihai is working from old English
translations, or even from the Latin, because he only mentions what was it, 31 spirits.
Whereas, in fact, when you add in the second volume, you add another 25.
No, the spirit names are real. They do come to you. They will come. And they will do work for
you if you approach it in the right way. They're not just empty counters for his cryptography.
Now, I admit that my bias is biting in here that I'm not interested in cryptography because
there are now programs like some of the cyber currency things with passwords which are, I don't
know, 56 letters long or something, which do cryptography well above anything that
Trasimius could have done. But his magic still works. But his cryptography is still a bit slow.
I don't think the angels provided it to him. If they had, it might have been a little bit more
efficient. Yes, that's one of the things, among many, that I'm so thankful for is your insistence,
Dr. Skinner, on practicality. I remember in a previous interview, you said that,
and I'm inserting the word tortured here, but you even tortured yourself learning Demotic Greek,
not for liturgical or the appreciation of history for practical use. So, you go to very
far lengths to have a practical effect on the results of magic. Yes, learning Greek was just
so much pain, but what worth doing. Absolutely. And you've touched on a few figures here,
Dr. Skinner, historical figures and researchers, practitioners. We have a follow-up question
for you from Mihai Vartajaru, who is asking, is Dr. Skinner aware of the 20th century Romanian
historian, Ioan Petruculiano, who attempted to decipher Trasimius's cryptographic code?
Yes, I'm very aware of Culiano. He's one of the academics who have actually done practical magic,
which means that his other academic colleagues were a little bit wary of him,
because he's not around anymore. And he left Romania and went across the States,
where he finally worked at the University of Chicago. But terrible things happened to him.
He was actually assassinated in the toilet block of the Divinity School of the University of
Chicago. Now, why he was assassinated, I think, in my opinion, is because he kept
abusing the post-Chachescu communist regime and saying bad things about them.
He was certainly disliked by Chachescu. I have another story about Chachescu,
which I probably shouldn't tell. But getting back to Mihai's question, yes,
Culiano's book, Eros and Magic in the Renaissance is full of useful stuff. It's not
greatly arranged. You don't go easily from one topic to another. But there are lots of gems
scattered throughout that book. Shall I tell my Chachescu story? I've been wanting to ask you,
yes, because you've teased it out so well. So please, sir. Okay. I worked for a publishing company,
which was owned by Robert Maxwell. And Robert Maxwell knew Chachescu, because he was involved
with a lot of Eastern European regimes. He also knew Brezhnev. He used to go drinking with him,
which must have been quite the effort, because Brezhnev could really hold his booze.
Anyway, in conversation, Chachescu asked Maxwell once, well, you know, I've got a bit of a bad
image, certainly a very bad image, because he was doing lots of bad things. How do I clean
my image up? And they came up with the idea, well, we should write a sort of vaguely sterilized
biography saying all the great things you did. Of course, then it was up to Chachescu to think of
some of the great things that he'd done, apart from demolishing about a quarter of his capital city
to build one of the largest palaces ever seen. And he must have used an enormous amount of the
country's wealth to do that. But that's another issue. Anyway, I'll not get too personal about
this, but Maxwell hired with a bit of advice, somebody to write this book. And Chachescu provided
tons and tons of information. Most of it had to be adjusted to make it sound good.
And the book was written. And because I was involved, the book was printed. And I can't
remember how many copies. It wasn't a lot of copies, because Maxwell didn't think it was
still very well. But he needed to send 20 or 40 copies to Chachescu to show that he kept his
side of the deal. Let me think, that must have been round about Christmas 1989,
because I was working in publishing back in those days. And just as it was about to be launched,
Chachescu was tried very quickly in one evening, taken out of the back and shot along with his wife
so that the opposition forces then took over Romania. And we were left with the
warehouse full of this made-up story about Chachescu. So I got an urgent message from Maxwell,
destroy it, destroy it. And I did. I kept two copies, which must rank amongst the
rarest copies in the world. And the rest went off. I can't remember whether it was
burning or shredding, but it was definitely completely destroyed.
Just as a quick aside, you've had so many
involvements and fingerprints with other publications. For instance, I'm thinking of
the wonderful Black Easter novel with with Blish and the conversations that you've had.
I'm thinking of that humorous yet very teachable story at university about Alice Bailey and this
person dropping off a truckload of books of Alice Bailey, too. So it seems like you're right that
in this case, I mean, this was a very intense personal involvement and literally being told
to destroy those books. I mean, wow, yeah. Someday actually had to do the dirty work of
destroying them. But the command came down from Maxwell, who I, because I was on his
magazine publishing site, I saw fairly frequently. But that's that's stories for another day.
Given all this, Dr. Skinner, did Culliano deal with Trithemius's system and offered the first
version of an invocation of a spirit prince in his book about magic in the Renaissance?
Well, I have to correct that and say it wasn't the first
version of an invocation of a spirit prince because a lot of grimoires have been concerned with that
over the over the period, because spirits are quite hierarchical, or at least the way we understand
them is hierarchical. So they have princes and dukes, etc., which is mainly perhaps a reflection
of the way society was structured in the Middle Ages, where it could be actually some real
structuring. Culliano's story was not the first, but it was probably the first time
a professional academic had had explained that. Culliano used to make an offer to his
senior PhD students that they could learn magic with him, but only on condition that they did
each of the experiments as was taught by him. So he had a limited number of takers on that,
but he did actually teach practical magic to some of his students. All I can say is lucky them.
When I was at university, I didn't get any offer like that and had to fight my own ways
through the sources to find out how it works. You know, when it comes to technique and the
important elements of magic, you've been tracing this out for years, you've been connecting the
various techniques over, you know, thousands of years, and you and David Rankin in your
excellent collaborations, you mentioned that for a system like the Theurgia Goetia, that of course
is heavily dependent on the steganographia, that three elements are needed, the encoding of the
message, facing the correct direction, and the proper time of the day or the night. So
broadly speaking, do you feel, Dr. Skinner, that all three of these elements are vital to all
grimoireic operations and all grimoireic work? Yeah, basically, yes, but particularly time and
direction, because it's one thing that the spirits understand and we understand. And
regards to timing, although some of the times listed in The Goetia,
which relate to the titles of the spirits, don't actually work that well.
But timing that relates to the planetary hours and the planetary days, that works very well.
And people ask me, well, why should calling a spirit at 8am on a Wednesday, a mercurial spirit,
work better than calling it when it's convenient for me at 6pm on Thursday?
And my answer to that is, well, if you want to talk to your doctor and you turn up this surgery at
3am on Sunday night, do you think you're going to get any help at all? And the answer is that spirits
do have, what do you call it, not a schedule, not a thing, but there are times when it's good
to try and talk to them and there's times when it's not good. You wouldn't invoke a spirit of
Venus in a Saturnian hour on a Saturday, because you're stacking it against yourself if your
invocation is very powerful, maybe. But why make life difficult? And so timing is very important.
The other thing about direction, well, as you can see from one of the illustrations that I showed
earlier, the spirits have specific directions. And if you wanted to talk to somebody and you
walked into their room and you turned your back to them whilst trying to convince them to do something,
they're going to think that's very rude and they're just not going to be helpful.
Now, spirits may not think you're very rude. They may think you're a little bit stupid because
you don't know the correct direction. But I think that, well, I know that invocations,
when invocations, which are done facing the correct direction work much, much better.
So that's time and direction. This bears on the steganographia because the first two books have
got the spirit lists in them. One of the books deals only with direction, which is the first
book. And the second book deals only with time, which is the planetary hours, etc. So there you
are. It's very clear that two different sets of directions. I find in practice, if you get them
both right, then that's even better. The question of cryptographic things is not so important.
Cryptographic is a bit important in steganographia, but there's a lot of magic where cryptography or
messing up the words in the way that AI is spare dead is not so important, but time and
direction are essential. Excellent. Thank you, Dr. Skinner. I know myself and I know the listeners
always appreciate those vital reminders no matter what grimoire direction you are looking at
exploring. That's excellent. We also have a listener question for you, Dr. Skinner, a few from
Andrew Nichols. And Andrew is saying, in the first part of the question, we broke these up a
little bit, I'm not as familiar with Dr. Skinner's work as I hope to be one day. So forgive me if
this has already been covered in his work, but as someone living in Australia, I'm frequently
confronted by the northern hemisphere-centric nature of the majority of the esoteric and
goetic canon. As a fellow, Antipodian, who has spent at least some of his career based south of
the equator, I wonder if Dr. Skinner has any thoughts about how to navigate this.
Okay. Well, this is a very interesting question for me because it is applicable to magic, but it's
also applicable to my other great interest, which is classical Chinese Feng Shui. And I don't mean
simply moving your furniture around or painting a wall red or whatever else. I mean, the really
classical stuff which I have been interested in for a long time. And that question is asked, well,
if all these Feng Shui rules work for the northern hemisphere, what do we have to do in the southern
hemisphere? Should we flip them on their head? Because climatically, the warm bits are in the
north, as is the thing from in Europe, the warm bits are in the south. And the quick answer is no,
you shouldn't. Because although climatically, the two hemispheres are quite different. In fact,
in terms of direction, they're the same because east is the same direction in the northern hemisphere
as it is in the southern hemisphere. West is also the same direction. Even north and south
are the same direction. It doesn't all scramble as you go across the equator. And then further to that,
as I lived in Singapore for 14 years, Singapore is very close to the equator. You could almost
say it's on the equator. And I did not notice walking from one side of the island to the other any
difference. Nor did I notice anything in Indonesia south of the equator that's distinct from Singapore.
And so the short answer is no, you don't have to flip things either for feng shui or for magic.
So also for feng shui, it's much clearer because direction is a very big thing in feng shui.
It's also very important in magic. And no, you don't have to bend it around. Oh, the other thing,
I had a friend who said that if we're doing horoscopes, the seasons are different. So
you should flip the horoscopes as well. So I said, okay, give me a detailed analysis of myself.
And he produced something which was diametrically opposite to everything that I'm made up of.
And that killed it for me that no, you don't need to mess around like that. It's just
perfectly good to use the same rules in both atmospheres.
And this follows Dr. Skinner with materia magica, I would assume as well, because
Andrew is asking and saying, for example, does Dr. Skinner feel it would be more efficacious to
cheat quote unquote by buying a hazel wand online or to experiment with substituting
an Australian tree so that I can cut the branch myself? Okay, the essential thing is it should
be hazel, not that you should cut it yourself. If you've got the hazel and you've bought it
through Amazon and somebody else has cut it on the other side of the world, it doesn't matter.
You still have an hazel wand. And the spirits will know that if you turned up with a eucalyptus
wand waving it around, this is not hazel wand. And then they'll just ignore it.
So you don't need to do a special change. And besides which, if you decided to just
select a different tree, you might have to go through 100 different varieties of tree before
you got one that was even halfway as good as hazel. So stick with the plan. Don't unnecessarily
mess it around. As Frida Ash and Jason once said, you still have to make changes on some of the
some of the magical procedures, but they're usually quite small and they're usually not
to make life more convenient for you so that you can have any old stick rather than a hazel wand.
Yes, it's about putting in putting in the work and putting in the effort. And I very much appreciate
Andrew's question and you sharing your expertise, Dr. Skinner, because those questions, I think
do come up when people wonder, especially in this global chipping world and everything else. So
that is lovely. And Andrew also has a final question as well, Dr. Skinner saying, okay,
while moving from hazel wands to say, with seasonal timings or the dates of pagan festivals that
align with the seasons, which I know is moving away somewhat from Dr. Skinner's area of expertise,
but he's mentioning as an example, can these Dr. Skinner be transferred south of the equator
wholesale or should they also be flipped? Okay, well, we'll start with saying not flipped, but
if it's a cultural thing, then maybe you do have to adhere to its site of origin. So for example,
I can tell you from practical experience that dealing with spirits like fairies
works quite efficiently in Wales or Scotland in Celtic areas. But trying to invoke those same
entities in Singapore does not work or it doesn't work for me anyway. So there is an element of
that, but you don't just flip it, you don't then say, well, we'll invoke a demon of some other source
simply because we're in the southern hemisphere. No. So you have to, for spirits, they are sometimes
located in particular areas and they will not happily go from there. Most demons however,
are available throughout the world. If they're called right, they will come because they're not
culturally embedded in one particular area or another. So following through on cultural embedding,
if you're trying to call an Australian Aboriginal spirit, you will not have much
of a chance outside of Australia or indeed outside of some of the more barren areas of Australia.
Which is the same thing as don't try calling fairies in Singapore.
Yes. And some of the spirits, as you so excellently delineated Dr. Skinner, for instance,
in the steganographia, these are sub-lunar spirits. These are not cathonic spirits,
but it sounds like it would be fair to say that spirits found in the steganographia,
the Lemegetans' Goat Asia, the Ariel Kings and the Heptameron, these are not spirits that are bound by
a specific section of the globe. These can be called pretty much no matter where you are if
you follow the appropriate method. Would that be somewhat fair? Yep. Yeah. That's definitely fair.
I picked two extreme examples which are very culturally connected to the Australian
aborigines and the fairies, but for most other spirits, they are available throughout the world.
Excellent. Well, Dr. Skinner, returning to this theme of techniques, for example,
I've seen this online and I'd just love to run this by you. You see this kind of
general misconception online that, and again, this is a false dichotomy and almost a caricature,
but some people might say, well, solematic magicians, they're purists who want to reduce
the grimoires to only cookie-cutter mathematical steps that are mechanical and repeatable,
and it's sterile. And when I'm online and I say I do the grimoire this way, I have a grimoire
or a purist saying, no, you need to do it this way. But to me, talking with you, Frater Ashton
I mean, so many practitioners, I get the opposite that this is very, very much based on
the methods, the scientific method, but it's also based on developing your own individual
relationships with spirits. So can you kind of share about this conception or misconception
that people might have, Dr. Skinner, about it only being a strictly mechanical process?
So there's several elements there. It is mechanical in the sense that you have to do
the right things to make it work. If you burn tar and stand on a beach without a circle or
something, it's not going to work. You have to do the right actions with the right tools in the right
place. But that's not cookie-cutter, is it? So don't confuse that with my own scientific approach
to it. But with any technique, if you're a brain surgeon, you need to attack the right part of the
brain, not with a spoon and fork, but with the right equipment. And you need to do it at the right
time when the person is under anesthesia. Otherwise, you'll cause terrible problems.
So yes, you need to observe the rules. But that doesn't make you cookie-cutter. Magic is not
simple. You have to work at it quite hard. Ashton Chase initially did a number of operations
where people would have just given up, but he persisted and then he figured out what was the
small change that needed to be done to make it work right. Then the other thing is a lot of
people say that you need to create a special bond with the spirits. That is certainly true
if you're trying to create or encourage a familiar. But if you're just using, and I say
using, because I mean using, one spirit for one particular action and you may not call them again
for a long time, such bonds are not necessary. But the correct procedure is still necessary.
So would it be fair to say, Dr. Skinner, just to button up this topic, if someone's out there
listening, they love your books, they're reading about the Solomonic method, and if they're wondering,
well gosh, why is Dr. Skinner so focused on repeatability and the steps? I think it would be
fair to say that you can easily teach the steps, but it's not so easy with personal relationships
because those are so idiosyncratic. They're based on your unique interaction. Would that be fair?
That's absolutely true. Let me draw one more parallel, which I previously done.
Working with spirits, invoking them and training them, if you like, to answer and do the things you
want, is just like working with a, trying to domesticate a horse. If you get a wild horse,
there are several ways you can do it, you know, but you will certainly need to put a hold on.
You will certainly need to have them in an enclosed space. In this case, the horse needs to be kept
inside the railings of the park, unlike spirits which need to be kept outside the railings of
the magical circle. Then you can't just shout at them in English or Latin or Hebrew. You need to
actually use tools like sugar lumps, or if you're a harsh person, a whip, but you need to have these
tools to domesticate a horse and you need to observe the same rules. There's a fast way to
domesticate a horse and a very slow way. If you make up your own way, it probably will take forever
and it won't succeed, but if you use the standard procedure, you will domesticate the horse and then
you will later ride it safely and you'll need to harness it unless you're very clever at bareback
riding. It's like any task, you need to do it the right way. You don't need to cookie cut it,
but you need to do a method which has been proved to work in the past so that that's all.
David Rankin in the Grimoire Encyclopedia mentions that in his decades of experience with, for
instance, the LeMegatinsk Oasia, and I'm probably paraphrasing or butchering this, but he effectively
said he didn't find he needed to use, in the goetic context, more of the putting the sigil
in the fire and burning specific foul-smelling things, but that over time using the barrel
and ensis conjuration, using certain aspects of the vinculum that he could get those results.
Does that kind of go to what you're saying about, hey, there are various techniques,
there are various paths, but the goal should always be to engage with the spirit so that it
is successfully called and bound? Yes. The procedure is that you should use,
first of all, as close as possible to the standard Grimoire procedure. It's only later when you can
do it and you can call the spirit and direct it two or three times, then you can ask it,
how would it be easier for me to call you if the spirit says, well, if you have a radish
present on the altar, then it will work much better. That's a bad example, but you will get
information from the spirit and then you can use it. As David has been working at this for a very
long time, he has modified stuff, but these people who start and decide immediately they want to
modify it, oh, I'll use a kitchen spoon rather than a wand and I'll do this and I'll do this.
This is not going to work and you're just hobbling your progress.
I should add that since my first evocations, I have now been doing magic for 60 years and
not that I'm 60, I'm somewhat older than 60. During that time, I have had to work really hard to
get the message to work for me, but once they're working for me, then I can make slight changes
in things and then it's repeatable. Because it's a technology, it is repeatable. You don't want to
have to climb the mountain every single time and you can come back and even shorten the technique,
but you've got to do it right first and have it succeed and then after that you can think about
what you might like to change. I can't hack it with pupils who want to change everything to start
with. I want to do it in the weekend and I want to do it without the right tools and I'll use
my brain and none of that works. Right, exactly. Just substituting Thor for every reference to
Adonai in the Hepatameron would not be a good first step in the ritual. I think that's safe to
say, yes. Absolutely. Okay. Well, thank you, Dr. Skitter. So listeners, we just have a few more
questions for Dr. Skitter and a very brief aftershow about some interesting points about
consecration. But before we get there, listeners, I just want to remind you, please check the podcast
and video descriptions to click on the link to pre-order your copy of Dr. Steven Skitter and
Daniel Clark's steganographia. The links will be below. But Dr. Skitter, just as we get ready to
wrap up the main part of the podcast, you're always working on something. I remember you said
that you have a list in front of you of many different projects and as you go through, you pick
and cross some of them off. So can you give us any hints about what other projects you are working on
right now? Yeah, this is my latest project. You only get a quick look at that and you can see my
penciling on the Latin. And it's another book by Etrusemius. And it's to do with the origin of
many of the grimoires. And so it is faintly complementary to David Rankine's fantastic
grimoire encyclopedia, for which there's no replacement at all. This is merely a supplement
that which I hope people will like. And that project is 85% finished,
but it will take a while before it finishes up on bookshelves.
Excellent, Dr. Skitter. I know myself and I know the thousands of listeners are very... We'll keep
our ear to the ground on that, as always. Can you tell us, Dr. Skitter? Of course, listeners can
click the links below and pre-order their copy of the book. And how else can they support you? How
can they check out your other works? Obviously, I'm thinking of Golden Horde Press, but anything
else you'd like to share with listeners, how they can best support you? Well, I'm always interested
in people telling me, you know what you should do next? You should translate. You should do this.
You should do that. Or several people have said, you should catalog your own experiments.
That's a hell of a big task, spread over a large number of years. So, suggestions like that are
always welcome. I may not immediately answer you because I get something close to 200 emails a week.
And so, sorting through it takes a fair slice of time. But if you do come up with a good idea
for stuff which has not been done but should have been done, then I would truly love to hear from you.
That was excellent. So, listeners, make sure to reach out to Dr. Skitter. If you have any
suggestions on upcoming projects, Dr. Skitter is always dealing with a menagerie of different
projects. But if there's any other suggestions, please feel free to send those to Dr. Skitter as
well. Dr. Skitter, I know we have a very brief aftershow, but is there anything else about the
steganographia, trithymias, anything else at all, salamonic, evocatory aspects that you'd like
to leave listeners with? Oh, well, there's always lots of stuff to talk about. But with regard to
trithymias, as a person, he has lost a lot of fame that he was due. It's like John Dee. And for the
same reason that the powers that be depressed the story of their lives. I mean, if you ask the
average person, even involved in magic, what about trithymias? Quite a lot of people won't know. And
if you'd asked people about John Dee back in the 50s, they wouldn't have had any idea either.
So in restoring his work, that has been fun. Well, yeah, and it's got to be into English. It can't
be back into that because there are very few people now that read the classical languages.
My degree was in classics. So I focused on that in Greek. And then I did formal courses in Hebrew
as well, because I realized that that was necessary for magic. But none of those are very good in
traveling around. Certainly classical Greek doesn't work in Greece. And my Hebrew pronunciation is
probably a bit crap and probably doesn't work in Israel, although there are other problems
happening there at the moment. I know Dr. Skinner myself and the listeners truly appreciate your
time. International author, scholar, he's collaborating again with Daniel Clark in this
upcoming tome, all four books of trithymias' steganographia for the first time presented
and translated in English together. Dr. Steven Skinner, thank you so, so much as always for
just taking the time and sharing your wisdom on the podcast today. Really appreciate it.
Well, I do as well, because you do ask the most interesting questions. And you understand the
subject, which is more than you can say for some of the podcasts. But anyway, well, thanks, Alex.
