So just like Malik, competition, status games, all of these are permanent features of humanity,
epistemic tribes, permanent feature of humanity. We cannot get away from that.
So rather than pathologizing it, because as Young said, that which resists,
that's what yeah, if you resist it, you persist. But then also, as you noted earlier,
if you try and suppress something, it comes out in another way. And sometimes it comes out in a
destructive way. And so we need to welcome, we need to integrate all of these aspects of
ourselves by deep pathologizing it by saying, this is actually natural, healthy, and good.
I don't have to be ashamed of this. There's nothing to be guilty about.
We welcome all of these aspects of humanity back and we become a whole species again.
Hello, my friends, and welcome to the Win Win podcast. Today's episode is all about nihilism,
what it is, and why it's so destructive for society. Because I am speaking to David Shapiro.
David is a technologist by training, starting out in automation engineering before pivoting
to AI research. However, he's probably best known for his YouTube channel, where he explores
topics around technology, philosophy, and meaning to help people better navigate what he calls
the fourth industrial revolution of AI. And so I reached out to see if he would
come on Win Win as a guest, because as you'll see, a lot of his content and thinking is very
closely related to what I've been trying to do on this channel, particularly around these concepts
of Molek and its antidote Win Win, and more generally around designing systems and aligning
incentives with what we actually want. As you can imagine, this conversation digs into a lot of that
stuff. And we also explore what he calls post nihilism as a solution to this nihilistic crisis,
this crisis of meaning and disenfranchisement that seems to be plaguing our current society.
So lots of juicy stuff. Really excited to share this one with you. Let's dig in.
Dave, thank you so much for joining. I first came across your work when I was
on some kind of YouTube spiral, as often is the case. And I saw a video saying,
Molek is losing by someone called David Shapiro. And I was like, who's this guy? And why does he
believe this? I don't think anything could have peaked my interest more. Obviously, the algorithm
is working. And because obviously the last few years, so much of my work has been around this
concept of Molek and as a way of framing the many problems that we seem to be facing.
So I guess to sort of get started, I'd love to hear, well, first of all, what is your definition
of Molek? And secondly, why you think it is losing?
I think probably the best place to start is how I came to you first.
So in my YouTube journey, I started talking about narratives and misalignments. And one
of the questions that I kept getting very early in my own independent research on alignment
is whose values are you aligning to? And then the question emerged, well, how do you align
humanity? And I'm like, that's a really good question. So I started reading about history,
philosophy, economics, just everything that I could consume. And I started talking about this on
my channel. And I had like, after one video, I had like 15 comments of people saying, you're
talking about Molek. And I'm like, what the heck is this? And so then I just do, like, I think
it was just like a naive Google search. I'm like, what is Molek? And then you popped up and I'm
like, oh, this is cool. And so then I like binged your videos. And I was like in a fugue state
for like three days. As I was like, what is Molek? What is the meaning crisis? What is the meta crisis?
And I was on chat GPT like furiously like, okay, is this a good analogy? And so to answer your
question, my definition of Molek, it is a combination of narratives. So like neoliberalism is a narrative.
And neoliberalism is a coordinating narrative of this is how we achieve prosperity. This is how
the world is supposed to work. Another part of it is neurobiological failures. So that's what leads
to attention economy and attention engineering. Basically, you can hijack adrenaline and dopamine
with outrage with, you know, thirst trapping content and that sort of stuff. There's a few
other components, but those are the two primary components. It's just the limitations of human
neuro cognition and the power of narratives. Yeah, it's interesting, because that's like a,
in many ways, a kind of deeper descriptive definition of Molek than what? Because the way I
define it is basically it's the kind of the demon god of competition gone wrong. Another way you
could phrase it is like the god of negative sum games, basically these like lose, lose situations
where the incentives acting on the individual actors make them act in such a way. So they think
they're acting in their own sort of short term self interest, but when everyone does it in aggregate,
it creates this kind of race to the bottom with all these negative externalities. And it actually
arose from, so to be clear, I would not the person who can take credit for the Molek meme. I mean,
it actually comes from the Bible, but the person to who I think most recently in modern times
related it to our like current civilizational issues is Scott Alexander of Slate Star Codex,
or Astral Codex 10 is the meme, is the, is the blog now, where he basically described it as this
force of where the game theoretic incentives of a situation pushes us to sacrifice more and more
of our other important values, because we're optimizing for one narrow metric. And in that
process, we sacrifice too much other stuff. So what the way you've described it, it sounds like
it's, it's actually something even deeper, because I, you know, if I call it it's competition
gone wrong, you're like, well, what are the forces that make competition go wrong? So as you said,
it's like this, this biological dopamine hijacking. And then what was the other one you said?
So broader narratives, and then just those attention mechanisms of neurobiological failures,
because here's the thing, and I agree, like all of all of what you said 100% agree with.
And what I was trying to do to unpack this was, okay, what is the biological
features or failures or, or aspects of humans? What is in our evolutionary history? What is in
our culture that is making it so that we don't understand the incentives? And why, because
here's, here's kind of where I'm coming from. Here's like kind of the, I guess, TLDR,
is in many cases, once you have coordination, because look at communism versus capitalism,
communism, which, you know, central price management versus free market price discovery and
price coordination. Once you have the right narrative, the incentives kind of line up correctly.
So that's why I say it's primarily a narrative problem. And so there's, you know,
you have capitalism versus communism versus socialism versus fascism and democracy. And
there's all these different narratives. And so every system that you adopt, whether it's a
political system, economic system, education system, there's always going to be a trade-off
in terms of stability of the system. So I got this actually from Daniel Schmockenberger. So
by synthesizing all of these different narratives, I was like, okay, what's the attractor state here?
And why are we moving towards a particular attractor state? So like,
you're probably familiar with the meme like late stage capitalism. So late stage capitalism is
an example of, okay, the narrative of neoliberalism is moving us towards this end state. And that is
a stable end state that we're intrinsically inevitably moving towards because of the interaction
between that narrative of neoliberalism and democracy and a few other things,
as well as the intrinsic just reward system of human brains. But if you change the game,
you change the system, so incentive alignment, you know, game A, game B or infinite versus finite
games, then you can really fundamentally drastically change the behaviors of all players.
Ultimately, it seems like what we're all talking about is this, we've all got a sense
that there's something off in society, something is clearly going wrong. And it's manifesting through
the way the rate at which we're disrupting our environment faster than it can replenish itself.
This growing sort of isolationism and combativeness, it seems between people. The internet feels
increasingly hostile in many ways. That's not obviously discounting the many great things
that is happening like it. It's like, it's like two concurrent things are happening. It seems like
things are getting simultaneously worse in many domains, but also much better in other domains.
So it's like, what is, you know, which, hey, how do we have more of this and less of that?
So you discuss Daniel's metacrisis as a way of framing it, mollock. And then
you also talk about John Viveki's meaning crisis, which I think by the sounds of things maps
sort of closest to your actual sort of core philosophy, which is about nihilism and specifically
post nihilism. So can you explain both what the meaning crisis is and what, how that relates to
your sort of philosophy that you're trying to build? Yeah. So as kind of a, maybe not a jumping
off point, but a tangent is we're in the midst of a great disintegration or deconstruction,
depending on which verbiage you pull from. So over the last five centuries, basically since
the invention of the printing press, the Renaissance, we have been in a trend of rational inquiry,
of increasing, and it's driven by three kind of primary engines. We talked about this before. So
there's human curiosity. That is an intrinsic force of our biology. It's evolved, it's predates
humanity. So curiosity combined with technological advancements. So printing press, radio, television,
internet, those are kind of feeding off of each other. And then the third force is actually
cognitive dissonance. And so cognitive dissonance actually drives us to say, hey, these two ideas
don't really fit together. And one generation after another, you discard the stuff that is
irreconcilable. And so what happened is you started with the Renaissance, and then you get
enlightenment, and then finally modernism. And at the same time, so you have this,
these almost inverse curves. So you have the curve of rational inquiry going up,
and then secularism going up, while the old narratives, so again, it all comes back to
narratives. So the ontological and epistemic frameworks of religion are being deconstructed
bit by bit. And we don't have anything to replace it with. So what we've tried to replace it with
is the three global narratives right now, which is science, democracy, and capitalism.
So that's why people say like, oh, capitalism, or, you know, people worship the dollar,
like that is from a narrative perspective from what's going on in people's brain,
that is actually not a bad way of describing it as like, we worship democracy, we worship money,
because that is what has been proposed as the global coordinating narrative, which has replaced
Christianity by and large, you know, Islam Christianity, the Abrahamic religions.
When did this specifically start? Do you think there's this
detachment from religion or this rejection of religion? Is it coinciding with the Enlightenment?
The first major shot across the bow was Martin Luther and the Protestant Reformation. So that
was saying, hey, Catholic dogma, no, like we need to reform the narratives that we're putting
forth in terms of morality and meaning and that sort of stuff. And so then you have the
Protestant Reformation, that was really kind of the first departure from the oldest ontological
and epistemic frameworks. And then from there, you know, you had alchemy was banned, you know,
for instance, when I was touring France a decade ago, there's like hidden like vaults and warrens
that all the wealthy people had where they would practice alchemy during the Renaissance.
They banned it.
It was, you would get executed for practicing alchemy because it was seen as against the church.
So, but, you know, and then it didn't actually do anything or work.
Well, I mean, so actually, alchemy is the predecessor of modern chemistry was the
idea of I'm going to futz around with substances and olemics and fire and see what happens.
And that process was eventually refined and reformed. And then once it was decriminalized,
it was brought into the university systems. And then they're like, hey, this is actually
kind of cool, we can do stuff with it. And that gave rise to modern science that actually led
to that. What the scientific method evolved out of, do you think?
Pretty much. I mean, it wasn't just one independent thing, but like that idea of
rational inquiry, because again, human curiosity, plus technology, plus cognitive dissonance,
we figure stuff out. That is how we went from the Stone Age to agriculture, to Iron Age,
Stone Age or steel, steam and fourth industrial revolution that we're in right now.
So to me, I see it as these are inevitable like consequences of just human biology just
playing out. So that's why I call Molek is like, okay, we evolved to throw spears on planes and
go hunting and fishing. And so we are out of our natural environment. We are a fish out of water
right now, which is why we have those neurobiological failures. But the superpower that we have,
and this comes from, you've all know a Harari, the superpower that we have is the ability to
coordinate with narratives. So to kind of tie it all up with a bow, the reason that Molek is losing
is because we know this now. We know the power of narratives, we know how to construct narratives,
we can list, you know, like here's eight rules to construct a powerful, compelling narrative.
We can systematically start creating and deconstructing and reconstructing new narratives.
And once you do that, once everyone has a new model to believe in that isn't just
capitalism, science and democracy, we need a fourth narrative, something about meaning,
and that like, okay, what is our new value system? And so, you know, like, do you care about yourself?
Do you care about your children? Like, what do you care about? That is part of what I'm working on
with post nihilism. And so I'm hoping my wish, and I obviously can't do this by myself,
that's why we're here. So thank you. But in the long run, by working on this narrative and getting
it out there and workshopping it, we can find that kind of that third attractor state that
Daniel Schmockenberger is looking for. And I think that narratives are the keystone,
that's the linchpin to get there. To define the third attractor state for people, that's
essentially right now, it seems like we have two attractors. One is, you know, we're facing all
these big scary risks in technology, whether it's like manmade pandemics or runaway AI,
or whatever the various technological risks you're concerned about. And as these risks mount
through the democratization of technology, either we're going to go towards a sort of
anarchic state, which is generally self terminating, or we're going to end up in some
like, centralized control tyrannical state. So arguably, it's like, we're either going to end
up in like this mass decentralization, which is not going to end well for people, or
over centralization, which is also like possibility of tyranny forever terrifying.
So we need a third option that like takes the best bits of both,
and presumably gets rid of the worst bits of both, right?
Exactly.
To dig into this idea of post nihilism, can you explain first of all, what your definition
of nihilism is? Because I think I have an intrinsic sense of what it means, but actually,
whenever I've looked it up, it's like, oh, that it doesn't seem like people even specifically
agree. So start off by defining that. And then can you explain what post nihilism is?
Yeah, for it to make the most sense, it'd probably be best to just tell you the brief
story of how I got to the nihilistic crisis and post nihilism. So starting five years ago,
I went through a really bad divorce, and my life was like mid 30s, and I'm just like,
I need to reinvent myself. And so I started reading all kinds of books on relationship
dynamics. I started fiction writing, I started saying like, how do I actually want to live?
And so what I now call that what I did kind of intuitively was I engaged in alignment.
And so I was like, okay, I'm aligning my life to my true self. I'm aligning to
my body's needs, my relational needs, my psychological needs. And so by reading all
of these various books on relationship dynamics and mental health and changing my career,
eventually changing my career, now I'm a writer, now I'm a YouTuber.
What I learned with the pattern that emerged, there's several key books that I read that kind
of made me realize this particular pattern. But because of those changes, because of those
social changes that we were talking about with the rise of science, the rise of secularism,
the decline of older epistemic and ontological frameworks, namely religion,
they're not the only ones that that's a big one. Because of that, and then you add in things like
social mobility. So you have jobs across the world, people moving all over the place, you have
the innovation of suburbs, nuclear family homes. So there's all these different technologies and
things that have caused this utter disintegration of our social fabric. And so the first people
to notice this was one was Eugene Rose or Sarah Femme Rose. He was, he wrote against nihilism back
in the 60s. So he was, he was like a Bohemian and like in New York. And so he was just like,
yeah, like, you know, tear it all down. But then he ended up as like an alcoholic, like
just literally drinking himself to the death, to death in the basement of like a flat in New York.
And he, his salvation came from going back to religion. And he said, and so he wrote a whole
book saying, we are categorically like effed, unless we all go back to religion. And Joseph
Campbell, who wrote the power of myth and the hero's journey. So his work inspired, you know,
Star Wars, Lord of the Rings, I guess, Lord of the Rings predates him, but the same, same cycle.
He more or less said the same thing, not quite as dramatically, he was a little bit more,
more refined in his, in his study. But he was, he, his, his life's work was ultimately about
the power of myth and the fact that all the old myths are dying, because they're not relevant
anymore. And he said, what do we do next? And so like, even some of his last interviews,
he was so sweet and so humble, but like, there was a such a profound
sadness, because he knew he could see the writing on the wall saying,
everything that we have believed in is going away, and we don't have anything to replace it with.
And so seeing that, that grand pattern, the, the, you know, secure attachment patterns in children,
the fact that we have latchkey kids and children raised by screens, we have isolating suburbs,
all of this, I was like, oh my God, this is what nihilism is. This is why nihilism is so popular
right now. And so what I did is I codified it, I defined it in what I call the nihilistic crisis
and the four abandonments, which by the way, sounds like a really cool heavy metal band.
So the nihilistic crisis and the four abandonments, no. So it's a cycle of, it's a system of
abandonment. So the first abandonment is childhood abandonment. So childhood abandonment is,
like I said, latchkey children, children raised by screens, not good enough parents,
so 50% of parents fail to rise to the level of good enough parenting.
Defined upon what metric?
So that is, gosh, I can't remember the name of the psychologist who codified it, but it was back
in the fifties or sixties. So this term has been around for a while. But basically, if parents
rise to the level of good enough, that threshold, they provide enough safety, security and warm,
positive regard for their children, that their children ultimately have what's called secure
attachment. And so secure attachment is like, you know that you're safe in relationships and you
know that like, your needs are going to get met. That's basically from a toddler's perspective,
I'm going to be taken care of. 50% of parents fail to do that, even to this day. And 20% of
children grow up with what's called CEN, childhood emotional neglect. So that is actually a
clinically pathological level of emotional neglect. And the studies actually say it's
probably higher, like there's probably a lot going on detected. So you have 20% is like suffering
from profound emotional neglect. And then 50% are suffering from at least inadequate parenting.
So seeing that pattern, I said, okay, what are the physical causes of that? Why is this suddenly
an issue? And that's not to say that it wasn't an issue before, but it's like, we didn't invent it,
like ADHD probably existed before we invented it. But at the same time, we're aware of this,
and we're more acutely aware of it. And as I was studying all this, I started seeing more and more
manifestations in society. So you have like the anti natalists out there that are like, you know,
birth, like nobody should be born, life just sucks. And as you were saying earlier, in some
metrics, life is getting better. But in some, it's getting worse. So like, what is the disconnect?
And I saw nihilism, which is a consequence of it, it's not a force that exists out there,
nihilism as a consequence of these trends. And so I see the pattern of childhood neglect playing
out. And so that leads to social abandonment. So social abandonment manifests in things like
rugged individualism, it manifests in, you know, socially isolating suburbs, it manifests in
high levels of social mobility, where you leave your hometown and never go back and you
front your friend group keeps changing. And so we end up with this like, I mean, we're basically
all living as nomads, right, in today's world, where you might know people for a few years,
but then they kind of come and go. And so our social support network is basically like, you're
kind of got to fend for yourself. Right. Or at least it's who you have around you for now.
Right. For now. And some people are good at that. But I think that for most people, our biology is
really attuned to having the same people around you for decades. I think that's really how most
people just are meant to operate. And also multi-generational. I mean, that's what we evolved
out of, right? The tribe would have, I mean, probably weren't that many grandparents, but
people were having babies younger, so actually. Yeah. And so actually, that reminds me, another
point of evidence is actually from anthropology. So throughout most of human history, and I mean
like stone age, Paleolithic, and even pre-human, the evidence is that basically humans lived in
tribes of about six to 21 on average. And so imagine that you and your dozen or almost two dozen
closest friends and relatives do everything together. Hunt, cook, clean, build structures,
you celebrate everything together. That is, I think, our natural state. And how many people
live like that? Like there's co-housing communities, there's co-living communities,
but those are rare. And it often requires a certain level of privilege, level of privilege.
There we go. Sorry. To live like that. And if you don't have that privilege, then it's like,
okay, the default path that society offers you. So this is really where social abandonment comes
in. The default path that society offers you is you go to high school, you have your friends,
then everyone scatters to the wind to go to college. And then you're there for four to 10 years,
and then everyone scatters again. And then you're in your first job and you're, you know,
one of the most cynical things, one of the most, to me, most sickening manifestations of social
abandonment is that like, oh, work is your family, right? And like they start making fun of it in
movies now, like the new Anne Hathaway movie that came out a couple of years ago. She's like,
we're a family and everyone's like, no, stop saying that. But that is because we have been
deprived of our tribe. And so, you know, bosses... Corporations fill the void.
Try to, right. But that's where I say capitalism is a pale imitation in terms of providing meaning
because it is providing efficiency. It's meeting our physical needs, but it's not meeting our
spiritual needs, our social needs. It's not meeting a lot of other needs. And so, because we don't
have a good offering, that's why we have all these misalignments, because it's like, well,
you know, just a quick aside, like if people spent more time in nature, if there was more
options to spend more time in nature, people would care about nature more and preserve nature more,
and they'd be healthier. That's why, like, all of my videos lately, I'm walking in the woods,
because it's like, I need 90 minutes of forest time every day, and I'm so much healthier. God,
when we have rain for a few days, and I'm stuck inside, I feel like I'm just decaying.
No, I mean, I'm the same. Igor literally makes me go outside every day, because otherwise,
I go crazy. He's like, have you been out yet? He has to take me like a dog for a walk.
So, okay, so that's the second one is the social abandonment. The third one you listed,
the four abandonments, is cosmic abandonment. So, what's that?
So, cosmic abandonment is that rise of secularism. That is, so, you know, as Nietzsche said, you know,
God is dead, God remains dead, we have killed him. That was not a, that was more of an observation
rather than a declaration. He was just like, oh, this is what we've done with the, and I trace,
personally, I trace a direct line from the printing press to that statement, because that,
that constant deconstruction and evaluation and democratization of information led to that moment.
And so then we still haven't replaced it. So, on the one hand, there's the rise of secularism.
But then on the other hand, we have telescopes, we can see literally to the edge of the universe,
and it's empty. And it's terrifying, because we don't see anything like us. And so, the universe,
to most people, it is just a, it is an axiomatic fact that we are alone. And that is terrifying,
because that reminds us of that childhood abandonment at a very, very deep unconscious level,
is that we are alone, there are no adults in the room, and no one is coming to help us.
And that is why so many people believe that we are irredeemably and irretrievably
heading in the wrong direction. It's a, it's, it's a visceral emotional truth.
Do you think this, do you think nihilism existed in the highly religious days of past? And if it
did, how did it manifest? On an individual level, there are always people who struggle and people
who doubt. So even going back to, you know, ancient Greece and ancient Rome, there were atheists back
then, there were agnostics back then. And even in indigenous cultures, I'm sure there were people
who doubted. But in many of those cases, their lifestyles were so much more grounded in their
bodies. And their lifestyles were so much more grounded in the people around them. And as I
have started living like that, there is so much less like existential dread. It is, I feel good
today. Like a few days ago, as I was getting ready for this trip and I was like nervous and I
couldn't sleep, I still felt so good in my body. I was just like, I'm gonna lay here in bed. And I
was like, I was like, I lay there for like five hours, not sleeping. But I was like, I just feel
so physically good. And I have so much hope and optimism. And it wasn't like just cognitive,
it was a deep visceral experience. And I think that if more people lived like that,
then then there would be a lot less of, of that nihilism. So again, I think that nihilism is a
consequence of these abandonments. Right. Well, we haven't, I'd love to dig into more this like
alignment with the body and such and what you actually do and what you've done to, to like
wake that up in yourself. But first, we need to touch on the fourth one, which is self abandonment.
Yes. So what is that? So self abandonment is being seen more and more in various places.
The Japanese are great at naming things. So in Japan, it's called Hikikimori.
And so the Hikikimori, yeah, you know, you literally just came out from Japan and we
learned about it. Igor was just like obsessed with this concept. Yeah. So this is,
that is quintessential self abandonment. So that is basically, it's typically young men
who have just given up on themselves because there's no job prospects. There's no hope of
attracting a woman. And so they lock themselves in their room. Or at least they feel that there
isn't. Right. It's not necessarily true, but they've, it's been sufficiently hard enough.
And they, but it's a narrative. There's a name for it. There's a narrative attached to this
lifestyle. So you see what I mean? It all comes back to narratives.
And do you think that's, so the creation of that narrative is actually a dangerous thing?
No. So narratives are just us putting a tag on it. It's like, oh, hey, we just observed a thing.
It's just like when you go, you know, a taxonomist just goes and labels like, I see a turtle.
This is a turtle now. So we observed this thing. So the Japanese observed this phenomenon,
this trend, this hopelessness and despair. And that's just one example. So another example is
there's like a kind of a constant meme. So like at like Comic-Con and other conventions,
like men that don't bathe and shower, like that is another form of self-abandonment where they
just do not take care of themselves physically. And that is them. So in psychology, this is called
reenactment. So they're basically reenacting their childhood abandonment the rest of their lives.
God, I'm about to cry. Sorry. Like it's just when you, when you, like when you see this,
when you wake up to it, you see it everywhere. Another kind of self-abandonment that most,
that many people have is workaholism. So that's what I'm recovering from. That's actually why I
had to delay this is because I was still suffering from burnout over several years of because,
and here's again, where the narrative of capitalism fails us because it says,
in order to get your needs met, just work harder. That is self-abandonment. It's don't sleep in,
wake up, go to work, ignore your body, ignore your needs, work for the money. And that also
rewards you. So this is, this is where I fundamentally agree with you about Molek is the
fundamental misalignment here is don't take care of yourself, don't take care of the people you
care about, don't, don't even take care of nature, just make money. Well, and it's specifically,
it's the, the collapsing of all of those different virtues and values and arguably metrics like
money is easy. It's convenient because it's quantified. It's, it's a quantification of value
that it claims to capture all of these other ones. But in that, in that reduction, it loses so much
because it is actually hard to quantify your personal wellbeing or your connection to nature,
your connection to your family and so on. It's, it's, it's not good at capturing those values.
So yeah, that's one of the definitions that I like. I often use as well for describing Molek
is it's like, it's a complexity. It's that which curtailes emergent complexity in some way. Because
it feels like, if you look at the history of the universe or like a history of life on earth, it's,
you started off with the prokaryotic cells and then they, they started coordinating and you
got the first eukaryotic cells, which created multicellular life, et cetera, et cetera. It's been
this, at each step change, there's this new emergent thing that happens. And to me, like a
truly Malokian process is one where it like caps out of it, it's knee caps stops it in some way.
And I think that's where I, I'm sensing this, this, this nihilism crisis is threatening to take
us because it's like, if you have a population that has become fully nihilistic and just like,
is a population of Hikikomoris, there ain't new emergent stuff coming out of that. They're just
going to, like that population's done. And what new stuff can emerge, probably not very much.
No, that's absolutely relevant. So that is, that is one of the attractor states.
So now the, this is the, I don't know if we'll disagree on this. So humans, again, with that
democratization of information, progress of technology, curiosity, cognitive dissonance,
also eventually you just kind of get fed up with it. And so we say, okay, this isn't working,
let's try something else. And so while one generation might not figure it out,
the next generation often does. And so like Japan is, is finally maybe possibly coming
out of the lost decade, which is more like the lost three decades now. And so eventually you say,
whatever we were doing is not working, let's try something else. And there is,
some of my audiences is a good chunk of them are younger than me. And so there's like Gen Z,
they're like, thank you, someone who cares, and who is helping us figure it out. And that's actually
like kind of the center of my brand is like, we're going to figure this out, because I believe
that this problem is solvable. And it is solvable with that narrative. But again,
to your point, yes, I do agree that that if this narrative persists,
then it could be self terminating. And of course, like what some people are afraid of is that it
will surf self terminate in a way that is irrecoverable, like destruction of humanity.
I'm personally not afraid of that. But it's it, I do also predict that it will get worse
before it gets better, because the pain is not high enough. So there's, there's this concept
of, of like the pain, the devil, you know, right? If the devil you know is tolerable,
you'll stay with it. So it'll get worse before it gets better. But I think that it will get
better. And that's why, again, this is why I've made that assertion, Malik is losing is because
people like you and me are here communicating it, figuring it out, and, and like sowing the seeds.
And so then the seeds will take a little time to germinate. But then once they're ready,
like, I think that I think that our work is probably really timely.
Yeah, I mean, that's exactly what this podcast is. But that's why the name win-win, I was like
spending so much time dressing up as Malik and like trying to depict the problem, which I think
was important. But I was like, okay, but there's something in me started being like, I don't really
want to dress up as that anymore. I'd rather like, is there something else I can dress up as that's
kind of like the solution to this? And like, the name win-win kept coming to me. And I was like,
if Malik's like red and black and very monomaniacal focus, win-win is like
popples and turquoise and greens and like just wants to play and loves a bit of competition,
then like, we'll shit talk you. But then it's like, we'll have a nice time.
It's an infinite game.
Exactly. It's the infinite mindedness. Yeah, infinite game and sort of bought into a persona.
So, yeah, no, exactly. And so, okay, so you, so the TLDR of why you think Malik is losing,
just so I have this right, is because you think sufficient people like you,
like me and like plenty of others are like trying to create new narratives. And we're also finding
each other. Yeah. So to put it as succinctly as possible, I believe we have solved the problem.
Now that now the next task is dissemination, is conversation.
Have we solved it? Maybe not completely.
Yeah, I don't think these, I mean, we've only got like, we're in the order of magnitude of 100,000
subscribers on YouTube. I mean, I feel like my view counts are not as high as I would like them
to be. I imagine you'd like yours to be higher as well. I think your content deserves to have
more views. Meanwhile, like someone who's saying, we need to burn it all to the ground and like,
why, you know, the world is doomed, et cetera. Those narratives are getting shit tons of views
as are like, AI is going to solve everything magically, like just take off all regulation.
It feels like the extremists, because really what we're arguing for is like kind of like these hybrid
synthesis type viewpoints to create new positive narratives. But the extremists,
meanwhile, go out and just say they're like extremist stuff and they dominate the attention
sphere. So why is it that the problem has been solved? It doesn't feel like it sufficiently.
There is no force as powerful as an idea whose time has come. And I think there's a lot of people
that are ready. And it's just a matter of articulating it clear enough and consistently
enough and messaging and getting the right people involved to repeat those messages.
And then once it gets out there, so having studied narratives, having studied
rhetoric and systems, who's the guy that figured out the human genome project?
And it's like, we've only sequenced 1% of the genome. Oh, we're most of the way done.
So we're halfway there. So that means we're most of the way done, but it's a matter of
getting to that tipping point. And so getting to a narrative tipping point is if the narrative
is compelling enough, if the narrative is emotionally salient and resonant, if it is
defensible, if it is coherent and sound, and if it is accessible, then so I tie it up in a
nice bow and say, post nihilism here, gift. And so that's why I'm working on this book.
And then it's not just a matter of articulating the problem because articulating the problem
is half the battle. So then the solution is like, okay, what do you replace this
nihilism and abandonment with? And that's what I call radical alignment.
Okay, so what is radical alignment? So I haven't quite distilled the definition, but radical
alignment is living in alignment with your true self and true needs. And so one of the ways to
think about this, or the first kind of pillar is body first living. So that's prioritizing what
your like evolved animal needs are. So eat right, exercise, you know, get fresh air,
stuff that kind of everyone knows, but there's more to it than that because it's not just a
matter of behaviors. It's also a matter of beliefs. It's a matter of saying, Hey, I actually have a
right to sleep in when I'm tired. I have a right to leave work when I'm not happy here.
And it's a matter of prioritizing ourselves. So here's an example. They say it takes like
12,000 hours to indoctrinate students with with school with education. I think it's 12,000.
So what is particularly American schools are really bad, but there's bells. You show up on time
or you get punished. You're often forced to wake up early. You're also forced to work
after hours. So you're basically we're programming students from a very young age.
Your body doesn't matter. Your time is not yours. You don't own you. The system owns you.
And so then from kindergarten to grade 12 to college, it's just like here is a an assembly
line of obedient drones. So that is the opposite of self alignment. That is the opposite of body
first living. That is saying you owe the system your productivity.
Sure, but there's some virtues within that though, because it teaches you
a form of discipline. I guess what I would be concerned about with this body first,
me first approach is that if I want to just sleep in all the time,
then there are a lot of people out there who will just then abuse that or use it as an excuse to
then not really get anything done. Possibly. I mean, I am living in more alignment with what
I need and I am more productive than I have ever been in my entire life. I mean, I frequently,
I work seven days a week and I work, I often wake up at five in the morning,
work until about noon. So that's a seven hour day and I don't really take breaks.
Well, no, I'd go for my walks to recording, but I'm hitting multiple birds with one stone.
Now, here's the thing though, while there might, you could argue from one value system that there
is merit in giving people a sense of discipline. Sure. Punctuality. Punctuality, sure. But I mean,
there are social pressures to achieve that. So I read this book called The Status Game by Will
Store. So this is a keystone piece of this idea. And that is that as a social species,
all humans are status motivated. That is like the fundamental signal in all of our operating
systems. And there's three status games. So there's dominance, which is like physical prowess
and intimidation and sexual gratification. It's basically the id. And then there is the success
game. So that's money. So getting money, getting grades, getting the car, everyone is motivated
by that to some extent. And then there's the prestige game. So prestige is that's the game
that I'm playing, which it's about, are you renowned for being smart or solving problems?
Are you pious? So like in academia, how many citations do you have? Yeah, papers, citations.
If you're religious, it's how high in the church are you or how well known are you to be a follower
of Christ or those sorts of things? All humans play status games. And we're kind of aware of it,
like kind of in an unconscious background level. And it's been true for all of human history.
But by bringing that to more of the forefront and saying, hey, we need to align with our animal
nature, we are social apes. And we say, hey, what if we just use these natural forces to actually get,
incentivize the behavior you want to see? And so then what do you do is in this book,
he talks about all kinds of different systems. So like, for instance, the prison system,
phenomenal natural experiment to look at how status plays out, because you can exchange favors,
right, or goods. Like one of the things that is really, really popular in prisons, if you have
any expertise, like if you have medical expertise or legal expertise, you're like immediately high
status. If you are well connected and trusted, respect is everything. And so you have this
like incubation chamber of, okay, how do status games play out if everyone is
disempowered in a certain way? Sports teams, churches, schools, status games play out in
all kinds of different ways. And right now, money is the universal status signal, right?
But that's only the success game. So then why do people do CrossFit? That's the dominance game,
because they want to have like buff bodies and they want to be really, they look good in bikinis.
That is a different status game. And so this is one thing that I kind of came to as I was
thinking, all right, what are the long-term consequences of artificial intelligence?
We all might end up without conventional jobs, like work as we know it might go away or change
fundamentally. So I was like, well, what are people going to do? And so a lot of people are like,
man, if I don't know what I would do without my job. But I'm like, there's plenty of other status
games to play. Like you can get famous on YouTube, you can go do CrossFit, you can go become religious.
Some of my best friends, that is their religion is gaming or how much about
anime or whatever your fandom is. So there's so much we can do. And I'm like, well,
why don't we just use this to gamify the behavior that you want to see? And I think it was Japan.
Somewhere recently, I saw that they actually gamified cleaning up. They made it a competition
of like how much trash could you collect? And it was like a race. So it's like, you can gamify
the stuff. And if it becomes a status game, people are going to do it anyways. So I think that by
looking at that, and these can all be infinite games, by the way.
Totally. The only thing I'd say is like in this like post scarcity world, I mean,
truly post scarcity utopia, like I just had Nick Bostromon and we discussed this,
like what, how would people derive? Well, I mean, I guess you're claiming with post nihilism that
you don't even need to have meaning in order to live a happy life.
Sort of. I think that we are too locked in our heads. We're too intellectualizing of meaning,
and we're too cerebral about it. And this is, this is, I think, particularly an American slash
Western problem where it's like, we try and divorce the mind from the body. But like the
happiest that, that like I am and the happiest that people are is when you're having fully embodied
experiences. Like, you know, if you're at a rave or, you know, you're on a horse, right? Like,
I remember on my, my first honeymoon, one of the things that we did was I was riding horses
through the surf in the Bahamas. You're not thinking about anything else other than I'm not
going to like, because you fall off the horse, you get like drowned and kicked in the head.
And it's just like that is, that is burned into my memory as an embodied experience. And I remember
getting super dehydrated the next day and like passing out in the cabin and thinking that a
beer was going to help. And I was even worse. So it took me like a day to get rehydrated.
But like those embodied experiences, that's where we get meaning from. Another one of my most
meaningful experiences in life was when I went to France to visit friends. I was internet friends
and I just like went for two weeks. And we went to Paris, we went to Nantes, we went to see all
kinds of stuff. I was exhausted the entire time. I had heartburn the entire time because I was like
traveling and I wasn't used to it. But I don't care about any of that stuff. The meaning was from
connecting with these people that were like me and having this novel experience that was just
like, wow. And I still draw on that. That was 12 years ago. And like, that is a central anchor
of like my life, of meaning in my life had nothing to do with intellectual anything is fully embodied.
So radically aligning with your body's needs is was the sort of first layer. And it sounds like
you're sort of going up the mass low hierarchy of needs, right? So what's the next level of
alignment? So I'm still working on this model. So there's actually quite a few models to draw from.
So one is Roger Walsh's TLC, Therapeutic Lifestyle Changes. So this is a pattern of eight
different things that you can do. And I'm not going to be able to remember all of them, but it's
like time and nature, spiritual connection, rest and relaxation, very, very pragmatic,
just like, if you do these eight things, you will be healthy and happy. And like,
by God, it works as you know, community service, giving back. So you do those things, it works.
Another one is SDT, so self determination theory. So this is a psychological framework that says you
need competence, relatedness and autonomy. So those are the three fundamental psychological needs.
So if you work on those on a daily or weekly basis, you will feel like you have a meaningful life.
Ike guy, again, Japanese are great at naming things. If you live in alignment with your Ike guy,
which is the, that is the intersection of what is it? It's what you're good at, what you can get
paid for, what society needs and what you love. You do those four things, you will have a meaningful
life. And so I'm trying to grab, wrap my arms around all of these existing frameworks. Some of
them are very old. And, you know, whether it's psychological needs, body needs, spiritual needs,
put them all together in a new system. I have a few ideas, but I'm not quite there yet. That's the,
I'm working on that on the next draft in my book. So once yet, once I have this new model,
this new framework, it's like, you do this, you will have a meaningful life. And in like,
side benefit, you will also value the things and therefore make different decisions that lead to
things like more environmental sustainability, more political stability, those sorts of things,
because it all starts with our animal self. But we need a narrative over top of that that says,
okay, we can all get along. And we basically aim for the win-win where it's, we all live better
and healthier, and it's better for the economy, and it's better for the environment. That's kind
of really what I'm looking for. Yeah. So yeah, it sounds to me like it's a complete and coherent
description of what I'm trying to do as well with like, with win-win, win-win is kind of more of a
like, very surface level idea of like, because for me, my, my sort of, I'm not saying in any way,
I'm enlightened far from it. And I've got like, plenty of misalignments going on inside myself
all the time, you know, I'm, I don't exercise as much as I'd like, I don't work as hard as much,
blah, blah, blah. But the big wake-up moment for me was recognizing my own relationship with
competition. So I was like living very much in this like scarcity. I saw everything as kind of
zero sum contest. And in many ways, you know, like, I don't, I'm not discounting that entirely,
because that drove me to achieve the many things that I achieved and got me to a position that
I'm in, which is great. But there was this kind of, it wasn't like an individual light bulb moment,
but it was this period of time where I was like, wait, I need to fundamentally approach the world
from a more abundance perspective of like, don't assume that when someone else does well, that's
coming from a cost of me or vice versa. Like, just like take a leap of faith that the universe is
fundamentally abundant and the world can be abundant. And through that leap of faith, it
unlocks things. And I have to say, like things are just like the ripple effects of that have been
very tangible. That said, so it sounds like you're coming from, we need to start off at the bottom
of Maslow's hierarchy, do the body, the body stuff first and go from there. There's a school of thought
that they often call themselves the techno accelerationists or the EX or whoever who just
believe that actually, yes, okay, there's a lot of problems, but just doing more of the same,
which is like, let the techno-capital machine just keep running as fast as possible,
and technology will unlock that abundance that we need. And we'll just get all of our solutions
from that. So that seems a little incongruent with what you're claiming.
No, that's actually a necessary step. So the technology component, because remember,
a democratization of technology and the natural progress of technology led us to where we are.
That will create material abundance, more abundance than we already have. However,
and this is what I try and caution my audience and not anyone who listens,
is technology can make everything worse. It is an amplifier. The reason that the climate is in
crisis is because we invented new technology that is more destructive. AI and automation and
quantum computing and nuclear fusion is going to take that up to not even 11. It's taken up to
a million. So we need the right narratives. So a body-first, environment-first set of narratives
to say, okay, if you have the power of a God, like I think you all know Harari's latest book is
Homo Deus, so the human God, that's what we're becoming. So we need to adopt a more
like, enlightened sounds a little bit cheesy, but a refined narrative about who we are and what we
are and what we owe it to ourselves. And so another source of inspiration was Patricia Churchland,
who wrote Brain Trust. And so the concept that she focuses on is she's a philosopher turned
neuroscientist, very interesting background. And so she talks about spheres of caring.
And so from an animal perspective, your sphere of caring, you are at the center.
You care about yourself and your body most and you're hardwired to do this.
And the closer you are to people, the more you care about them.
But what you realize when you have this more generative, this more abundant mindset,
the infinite game, is you actually care about everyone. And so that's actually the core ethos
that made me start my channel is, okay, this is going to go catastrophically wrong within 20
years if I don't do something or if we all don't do something. So in my own best interest,
my sphere of caring is the entire planet. And so in that respect, so the simplest definition
of kindness is you operate in the best interest of the other. And so that is an infinite narrative.
Now, one thing I do want to push back on is that while one competition is inevitable due to status
games, and you can have infinite game mindset, you can have abundance mindset, but because of human
nature, because of the status game, many things are ordinal, meaning it is a rank. So Nick Bostrom
talked about this too in his book. So that means there can only be the one richest man,
there can only be the one, you know, prettiest woman, there can only be the one top poker player.
So I remember from a previous podcast, you were talking about like there's another
up and coming woman, you're like, you know, because that's a status threat.
Right. And so it doesn't do us any good to deny that fact of our human nature. So we need to,
this narrative needs to integrate the fact that, yes, we can have an abundant mindset,
but you also have to keep the animal happy, the scarce animal, right.
So you keep the stakes low enough in those ordinal status games where it's like, hey,
if you lose on call of duty, the world isn't over.
So what it sounds like you're saying is that energy needs to go somewhere you can't just,
and I've noticed like when I've tried to like completely suppress that in myself,
I actually end up getting miserable and probably lash out at Igor or whoever and so on.
Like, so I need to find outlets for that, which is why we actually have like,
we have regular games nights and I, you know, anything that can harness that,
like that id essentially, and just steer it.
Healthy outlets, the social structure, you do it with people, you do it regularly,
and you don't pathologize it. We pathologize so much of our own nature.
That's another component of self abandonment where it's like sexuality has been deeply
pathologized by the state religion for many centuries, but it's like actually
sexuality is part of our id and you suppress that and it comes out in other ways.
So I guess though, with my concern around the like,
the current status quo of technological development, and it's not all, you know,
there's plenty of centers around the world and amazing companies building incredible things.
That said, the vibe to me, and this is just like vibes, but one thing I'd say,
I think I am good at is I'm really good at picking up on vibes, okay, of certainly of
competitive environments because I've just been around so many different ones and I've
spent so much time like trying to understand my own like weird pathologies around it.
What's going on in Silicon Valley right now, specifically in the Bay Area,
the vibe is off and I can't really fully put my finger on it. It's something related to,
I think, I imagine it's whether it's a bit chicken and eggy, but it's something around
the city itself when you, you know, there are people going to work in downtown SF and these
incredible glass palace towers, building world-changing technologies and don't get me wrong,
some amazing stuff, but they have to walk through a literal dystopian environment and the people
who have to walk past that every day are having to turn off a piece of their humanity.
Like you can't, you can't help everyone and you're having to like you're in this like sort of
self-protection mode and I wonder like what that does to you psychologically to just day in,
day out, have to suppress your natural human instinct to go and help that person lying face
down on the street, like clearly out of their minds on drugs and shitting themselves, you know?
Like what does that do to you? And like that seems to me like a very, like if I was to pick
of all the environments with which to seed this potential new technological god that may or may
not like run off entire world, that's probably not the one. Like same as I wouldn't want to pick
what on Ukraine right now or Israel, Palestine or anywhere where there's like a lot of like
conflict or suppression of like natural human instinct, because one of our major natural
human instincts is to care for the other. You see your fellow human in a bad state,
you want to go help them, but at the same time like no individual can fix what's going on in
San Francisco right now. So yeah, I'm curious just to sort of spitball on you on like, do you sense
that? I don't know if you spent much time there. So San Francisco is one of the most interesting
and that's being diplomatic and kind cities in the world because I've been there. Definitely
interesting. Yeah, it's not boring. But so last time I was there, I did some math and I looked at
what is the GDP of San Francisco and it's something like $2 billion per day. They have
$8,000 to $20,000, $30,000 homeless depending on how you... So a few thousand homeless people
with $2 billion a day, that social abandonment is a choice. That is part of the narrative of
neoliberalism is that you need a certain amount of homeless people to remind everyone else,
this is how little you are cared about. That is there, that is the stick, that is the writing
crop to beat people over the head with in this Orwellian nightmare that we are building.
Now the vibe is off because the Silicon Valley elite right now are having these religious experiences
that they're sharing on Twitter. Like what? So like Sam Altman and Greg Brockman and others,
feel the AGI and they're just so full of themselves about, we're going to solve everything,
but they're solving one problem in a particular way. And yes, historically speaking, it is there
correct that industrial revolutions tend to reshuffle and democratize everything. I would
rather be alive today than 20 years ago than a hundred years ago. That is true and accurate,
but at the same time, they are fundamentally not addressing the fact of those homeless camps.
Going through Oakland, when I did like, what was it, five, six years ago,
it looked like a wasteland. And I was just like, this is such a profound level of abandonment.
And then going through San Francisco, you know, all these various places, I mean,
there's places that look better, that make Night City from Cyberpunk look actually pleasant.
We have to tone it down because in reality, there's actually places way worse than in fiction.
And so, yeah, so there's that religious belief of this like Robotheism or this, you know,
the Rocos Basilisk. And like, yes, we are going to, we are in the act of building what I think of
is, I call it a superorganism, a digital superorganism. Granted, the digital superorganism
already exists. It's the internet. It's just going to get smarter. But what is this digital
superorganism ultimately going to be capable of doing? And it's, you know, orders of magnitude
more than we can do today. At the same time, if you don't have a narrative that is pro-life,
and I don't mean that in like the religious, you know, abortion debate, but I mean,
generative of all life that is that is pro-human or is biology.
Biology is the physical manifestation. Life is broader than that. Life is, I don't have a good
definition, but I think you maybe understand what I mean. It's more of the spiritual, the
embodied, the visceral experience of being alive. If you don't honor that at a broad level, and I
got that from Buddhism, I was studied Zen Buddhism for a few years. And so Zen Buddhism teaches you
to honor like all life, starting with yourself and realizing that you are part of all life.
So that's a big inspiration. Anyways, I kind of lost that train of thought. I'm not sure where
you want to go from there. No, I mean, yeah, were you talking about the,
yeah, like the Sam Altmans and Greg Brockman having these like, making these sort of religious
claims? Because I mean, that's the thing, they are becoming religious figureheads. There's no
other way, really, way to describe it. Like they are modern preachers.
Do a thought experiment with me real quick. Imagine Sam Altman as a high priest. High
priest Sam Altman. High priest Elon Musk. He's the pope. That is the religion that some of these
people have. That's why it feels weird. It feels like super icky when you think of it that way.
Because, and that's not to say, because I believe that these people have great intentions and some
of that they're very incredibly thoughtful people. If they had the right narrative,
and I'm not convinced that they don't have the right narrative, because what they say publicly
versus what they truly believe, it's difficult. You know, actions speak louder than words, I know.
But if they have the right narrative, if the vibe changes and they coordinate to this narrative,
it doesn't matter what they individually believe. Because ultimately, their behaviors, their choices,
as they play this broader, more infinite game, I think is what really matters.
Okay, so let's try and I want to make sure that we've really fully distilled down what this narrative
is sufficiently. You've talked about this need for living in alignment,
and also like these key axioms that we should probably be trying to align around. So curiosity
is one. You said, I think another one is this idea of like honoring the emergence,
honoring emergence as a thing almost, because that has been a like consistent theme of when
cool new stuff has emerged on planet Earth, it's because of this emergent that some of the
hole is greater than the sum of its parts, and it's almost like a fundamental like,
you can't predict it from prior. You don't know exactly what's going to come out until
it's like, oh, wow, this thing has now come along. Is there another axiom?
So yes, I'm glad you brought up emergence. So there's emergence and then convergence.
So emergence is a way of looking at the world that even just from the model of like physics,
fundamental particles and energy give rise to atoms and molecules that give rise to planets and
eventually us. And then we give rise to societies, constructs, super organisms and narratives.
So you have these like ontological strata is kind of what I call it. I don't know if I came up with
that term, but I borrowed it. And so emergence is definitely a critical philosophical way of
looking at things moving forward. Convergence is something that is also really important.
And so convergence is where you encircle the truth. Right now, it's very like
passe to say like, oh, well, how do you define that? Or nobody, truth is relative or whose values
do you align to? But the thing is, is while it can be difficult to say definitively, this is the
absolute truth here, or this is the absolute universal value, we are getting really good at
encircling these things. And this is where like me looking at it from my perspective,
with post nihilism, you looking at it from Malik and Daniel looking at it from Metacrisis,
we are in the process of converging on what is the problem here. And not only clearly defining
the problem, also triangulating the solution. And so while there's still a gray area, there's
still a fog of war, we are converging. And so convergence is why I'm like, it feels like we
got the right units, we got the right, you know, army converging on it, we're going to encircle
this problem. And then it's going to be solved eventually. Now, time is still of the essence,
like there is still the possibility of failure. So I'm not, I'm a very sanguine person. I'm just
like, whatever, like we got this. But to be to be very like, I guess, Frank, like, yeah, there is
still the possibility of failure. One area you are focusing on on one of your channels is this
idea of mythic archetypes as a important building block of coming up with new narratives. So I'd
love to dig into like why, why these archetypes have persisted so much. And what do you think their
value is in modern times? Because again, I imagine my hope with this, this conversation and this
wider podcast is, you know, I would love people to like be spreading specifically the win-win
hashtag and that as a meme. But at the same time, the more win-win thing is if people come up with
an even more compelling narrative, like, like, you know, you through my work, you've like started,
you know, you said that was partly what inspired you to go into personalism. And
how can people draw upon mythic archetypes to better construct their own narratives?
Well, they can take a page out of your book because Malik is a quintessential mythic archetype.
All the old myths from ancient Greece, Rome, the Bible, all of those are mythic archetypes.
And what they are is their personifications or symbolic representations of things that we
observe and feel. Like I said, we didn't create them, we don't invent them, we just put a name to
it. And so I want to see if I can like break your brain for a minute. Thanos is Malik.
Yes. I mean, he's, he's pretty ineffective actually, because I know this whole like,
I'm going to kill 50% of the living, you know, cull 50% of the population is like, bro,
do you understand how exponentials work? Like in two generations, it's going to be back there
again. So this makes no sense. But yes, he's like trying to be a curtailer of complexity.
Right. So, but, but beyond that, he said, like, he says it repeatedly, I am inevitable.
So the idea that, right, right, that is, that is the connection between Malik and Thanos is
the inevitable destruction. And that, what he does and why, like, that's, that's immaterial,
the fact that he is unstoppable. So an inexorable force, inevitable destruction. That is,
so Thanos, we have, we now have a global model for Malik and everyone has seen it as a big,
giant purple dude, right? With, you know, a fancy glove, because you have to,
you have to put these things into symbols. And so like the gloves, you know, the,
the different energies of reality. And so you could say like the mind stone is like human
fallibility. And there's, there's all kinds of ways you can read into it. Good, good archetypes
can be read many different ways. I see the reason that, that Thanos resonated and that,
that, that the, you know, MCU became one of the biggest things, not just because Disney
did it, but because Kevin Feige studied the same stuff I did.
He's a, he's the showrunner for, for MCU. Now obviously Disney has taken over and it's,
you know, but when he was still at the helm, he was studying the same things. Joseph Campbell,
mythic archetypes, probably listening to the same podcast that I was listening to where I got all
these ideas. And so now we have a global narrative to know, like, okay, Thanos could represent
everything from climate change to AI to Moloch, because that, that is the, that is the definition
of that supernatural threat. So the, the, that, that archetype, which there's many names you
could put to it, but that archetype is the unstoppable supernatural force. And there's
actually, so there's the moment. So do you remember when at the end of infinity war,
when Tony Stark is trying to stab him with his, with his suit and Thanos grabs the,
grabs the blade, breaks it and stabs him with it? That is like word for word from the mythic
archetype. It's called the sword breaks. And so Tony Stark is the king archetype in that story.
And so he is the most powerful human we have. He is our avatar of salvation. And he try,
he throws everything that he has at Thanos. And it's like, all that for a drop of blood,
right? And then he tries to stab him, the sword breaks, and it is reversed on him. So that is
the most, most mythic thing that I have seen in cinema. And everyone's like,
it's just a popcorn movie. I'm like, Oh my God, you guys are missing it. And so the idea,
so like that moment, for instance, is like, why people like you and others are still afraid of
Moloch is because that sword hasn't broken yet, because we haven't, we still haven't thrown
everything that we have at these problems and we see it coming. Yeah. I mean, I've always thought
about, it's like, if Moloch is representing unhealthy competition, how do you defeat something
that would require defeat? You know, like, we don't want to be defeating, like, we want to
break out of this need to defeat all the time. How do you defeat the enemy without becoming the
enemy yourself? But I think actually it's, it's unnecessarily like puritanical view of it. Like,
I think the archetype of win-win would be like, win-win is so powerful, it's not like,
it's not the inverse of Moloch in my like little universe of mythic characters.
It's something on a higher dimensional plane. It's so powerful. And like,
it's able to use collaboration when it wants, competition, coordination, all of the different,
you know, methods of relating. And it will see like when some, when like a competition starts
getting too big and starts becoming like having so many negative externalities and turning
Molochian basically, win-win will see it and go, okay, that's enough. And then it will just slap
it down. Like, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, let's go and coordinate a little bit. But it's so like
wise and also fun loving that it will even allow little pockets of occasional lose-lose stuff
just to go on. Let's see what you do with this. Yeah. Yeah, exactly. Because it's also curious.
And it wants to have like, it's like, well, this is a more interesting world if we have a little
bit of Moloch here and there. So that's why I think initially when I was thinking about this,
I was like, oh, yeah, no, it has to completely defeat Moloch and then we'll never see it again.
It's like, nah, it can allow it now. And then it's just, it's so wise and it's so aligned with its
higher virtue of having a rich, complex, diverse universe full of all kinds of stuff. Like kind
of like the culture series, you know, where it's just like, everything is so big and they've
solved abundance. It's like, well, yeah, as long as people follow these basic rules,
it's like, you guys want to live on a crazy planet where you eat each other's babies. I mean,
I guess. And just, just only do it there, please, you know.
Keep it to yourself. Exactly. Just keep it to yourself. But like, you know, like maybe,
but we'd like to show you better options. Like, look, like, you know, to like my key axioms I
always love and try and stick to is, so the infinite game, trying to like keep the purpose of the
real purpose of the best game is the game where you try and keep the game going. And then the
second one is Forest Landry's quote, if you're familiar with his work. He wrote Eminent Metaphysics,
which is very hard book to read, but he's written some other stuff as well. And one of his quotes
is love is that which enables choice. And I think it's so beautiful because it's like,
what is a loving act? It is something where you enable others to make more of their own better
choices. So education, empowerment, et cetera. I love that. So like morphing those two together,
that's win-win for me. That's perfect. So the thing that resonated most is when I got with
my now wife, we were both in bad shape and, you know, bad relationships, the pandemic,
and we're just like, okay, we need to take care of ourselves. And I told her when I was reading
these relationship books, like this mantra came into my mind. I said, I want you to be happy,
healthy and whole. And that became my single biggest relationship, like goal, like everything
that I do is in service to that. And then I was like, how do I point that at myself? And that
is radical alignment. And radical alignment is wanting that for yourself and wanting that for
the other and everyone else. Because again, like you said, if you switch from the zero sum from the,
from the, you know, I got mine, you have to lose. If you switch from that and you say, what if we
find like, what if we want? Because it has to start, it has to start from the heart, like where
you want that for people. Or if you want that for everyone, and that's, that's the full ethos of my
channel is like, how do we find a solution that helps everyone be happy, healthy and whole?
Yeah, and exactly. So it's finding the win-win. And the other thing as well, because like a lot of,
most people are stuck in sort of the win-lose, where it's like focusing on like doing them,
building themselves up. And oh, sorry, it has to come at the cost of others. Or if they see
someone else doing well, then they are like, oh, this is costing me. But others actually
flip it the other way around. They lose win, where they're like, oh, they're so overly focused on
being like a giver that they'll do it at the cost of themselves. And they think that, okay,
I have to sacrifice myself. And like, that is not optimal either. It's like the real,
the best outcomes are the ones where you benefit and others benefit. And they don't have to be
these mutually exclusive things. I can recommend a whole bunch of books on that. So William Urie,
The Power of a Positive No, he talks about that exactly. How do you establish a generative
boundary? And so it's like, you say yes to yourself. So it's a simple model. Yes, no,
yes. You say yes to yourself, you say no to an unreasonable demand. And then you say yes to
a better solution. Love that. Yeah, absolutely. Like, it's ostensibly a business book, but it
applies to all relationships. It applies to friends, business partners, lovers, what, children,
even children, like parent-child relationships, it applies to everything.
Have you got an example where you've applied that?
Gosh, all the time. Let me see. It's weird because it's become so automatic that I don't
think about it anymore. But actually, no, when we were negotiating when to come and I thought
about it when I was like, hey, I'm really burned out. Can we switch to remote instead? So I was
like, I can't travel. I was not well enough to travel. So I had to say yes to myself, no to
something. And it wasn't an unreasonable demand that you put on me. It was just an unreasonable
thing that was not. For the circumstance. Yeah. And so then I said, what if we find something else?
And then you countered. So this was the negotiation. You countered. You say, well,
we've got this other event coming up. Why don't we just do it then? And I'm like,
great. And this actually turned out to be better because imagine if I came a month ago
and I would have missed this great event. So this is actually a better solution. So that is a
perfect example of the yes, no, yes model. Complete tangent. And you don't have to answer
this, but I'm curious. Do you want kids? Oh my God, yes. I love children,
but I have chronic fatigue. Right. So I would not be an adequate parent right now.
So how does chronic fatigue manifest? Because it's something I've heard a lot and I don't
fully understand it. And how are you trying to use your model of bodily alignment to fix it?
Seen any benefits from it? Yeah. I finally, I think I'm cracking the code. So first is,
I don't think that, well, one, neurodiversity. So I was unmasking the fact that I'm like ADHD and
HSP and a bunch of other things. So I was living out of alignment with my actual like neurology,
where I was pretending to be something that I wasn't. So I started unmasking about two,
two and a half years ago. And so living in alignment to that saying, okay, these are my sensory
needs. These are my social needs. Let me just figure out how I need to live. Like,
is it okay to eat? Like, I love Pad Thai. I eat it like five times a week because it feels good.
And it's just like, it doesn't hurt me as an HSP. Like there's a lot of foods that hurt me.
What is HSP? A highly sensitive person. So basically the gain is turned up to like 12.
So everything is too intense for me. So like, you know, before, before going out and being
social, I have to like sing my heart out in the car to like get my nervous system ready.
So like just belting out everything in the car on the way to social events,
that sort of thing. A lot of people like me actually end up banking on alcohol
because it turns the game down. And that's what I did when I was in my 20s. I would get to the bar
and immediately start drinking. That was the only way that I could socialize. And I'm like,
this is not sustainable. Now I'm almost 40. And it's like, there's a cost to that.
But yeah, so that's one example of how, of like that alignment. Now, more recently,
so chronic fatigue, I don't know that I qualify as like, like CFS because that's like, that's like
my, that's a myalgia. It's like a brain inflammation. But I do have to titrate my effort,
like every day. And so that means, you know, prioritizing rest a little bit more,
all sorts of things to just make sure that I've got the spoons. I don't know if you're
familiar with spoon theory. Yeah. So I think that comes from multiple sclerosis patients. So they
came up with this model years and years ago, like on AOL message boards days. And so the idea was
to understand how much energy you have every day, imagine that you start the day with like eight
spoons. And everything that you do takes a spoon. And so whether it is make yourself breakfast,
that's a spoon. Whether it's go to work, that's six spoons. And so then like, if you have eight
spoons in the day, and you've already spent seven of them, you have one left at the end of the day,
how are you going to allocate that spoon? One of the things about MS is if you overexert yourself,
you get what's called an exacerbation, which means you permanently lose a spoon. So you actually
permanently lose ability to perform. So it's actually a medical requirement to titrate your
effort. Got it. So like my stepmom had has just still here, fibromyalgia and lupus. And so this is
a chronic inflammation disease. And so very similar thing overexertion results and these
exacerbations that depending on how well you take care of yourself, they can get better over time.
For me, it's just typical burnout. It's just, you know, I worked too hard, not enough sleep,
too much stress, too much anxiety, anger, you know, from being mistreated, those sorts of things.
So for me, I'm hopeful that I can get back to a point. And so to your question, like what is
working, I actually kind of discovered this recently, which is the thing that I'm trying
to optimize for is heart rate variability. So heart rate variability is like, oh, hey, I started
prioritizing that and my life has gotten so much better. And so heart rate variability is the amount
of variance between heartbeats. Right. And it's a signifier of your ability to switch between
parasympathetic and sympathetic, right? Partly. It's actually the short hand is that it's a really
good metric for stress, for all stress. So it's the physiological stress that your body is under.
That includes emotional stress. So physical, emotional, psychological, environmental, whatever.
If your immune system, like if you have like a bad cold or flu, like your heart rate variability
go down, if you're stressed out at work, it'll go down. If you drink, it'll go down. But for me,
when I go to sleep earlier, it goes up. When I spend more time in nature, it goes up. And,
you know, when I eat right, it goes up. And so by organizing my whole life around that one metric,
I'm actually getting energy back and getting it back fast. That's why I actually wear my,
you know, fit that all the time. Okay. How can post-nitism help heal the culture wars?
We need to accept aspects of human nature. So this is kind of parallel to post-nitism. This is part
of my work and research is that is we naturally form epistemic tribes. So Democrat, Republican,
pro-life, pro-Palestine, these are all epistemic tribes. So an epistemic tribe is a group of
people that have a shared narrative about truth. That's all it is. And so, you know, you might
believe that the Patriots are the best. That is your truth. And humans naturally do this. So like,
you form an epistemic tribe with people that you see every day. So like, you've got your people at
work. You've got an epistemic tribe with your family. You've got an epistemic tribe with bigger
narratives. Like, are you an American? Are you a white guy? Are you a marine, right? All of these
different epistemic tribes have different narratives around truth and values and meaning
and that sort of stuff. And right now, when we pathologize, oh, it's all identity politics. This
is what's wrong with... That's natural. We've always had identity politics from Pericles getting,
you know, blamed for problems in ancient Athens to, you know, what was his name? The Russian dude
who was like thrown in the river. Oh, Raspussen. That's it. Yeah. So like, if you run a fowl of
one epistemic tribe or another, you get ostracized or executed. This is a permanent feature of
humanity. So just like Malik, competition, status games, all of these are permanent features of
humanity. Epistemic tribes, permanent feature of humanity. We cannot get away from that. So rather
than pathologizing it, because as Young said, that which resists... Yeah, if you resist it, you
persist. But then also, as you noted earlier, if you try and suppress something, it comes out in
another way. And sometimes it comes out in a destructive way. And so we need to welcome,
we need to integrate all of these aspects of ourselves. So this comes directly from
Jungian theory, which is, okay, we have this wounded part of self where we don't like competition
or we don't like status games or we don't... You know, and it's different for everyone. I'm not
saying that the whole, you know, everyone has the same kind of dysfunction. But as a society,
right now, we have like identity politics is kind of one of the big ones out there.
By recognizing that this is a natural and healthy feature of humanity,
that the people you trust, the people that you find value with, that is healthy. Now,
just as you found with competition, it is a double-edged sword. Because without your
competitiveness, we would not be here right now. You wouldn't have 100,000 YouTube subscribers.
Why? Because you want to win, right? And there's nothing wrong with that. But by
de-pathologizing it, by saying, this is actually natural, healthy, and good, I don't have to be
ashamed of this. There's nothing to be guilty about. We welcome all of these aspects of humanity
back, and we become a whole species again. I mean, I think the reason why the culture wars
have gotten so bad, though, is in part because, yes, the nihilism crisis and so on, but the
technology is directly amplifying it. The current technological systems that we have,
our economic model is, the media mollock, as I call it, is rewarding, directly financially rewards
those who trigger the limbic systems and stir up tribalism, gets people angry, that taps into this
and amplifies it beyond what it should normally be. I don't see how we fix this without a rapid
and vast redesign of the techno incentive system that we currently have going on on the internet.
Yeah. So two things. One is not the first time this has happened. Again, it all starts with the
printing press. So printing press shattered the hegemony of the church. So from then until Jordan
Peterson today, religion is dying and kids these days, right? So we've had this disintegration.
That goes back to the origin of the nihilistic crisis. So not the first time society has felt
like it's coming unraveled. Ray Dalio says it comes in waves based on debt cycles. The fourth
turning says it comes in waves based on intergenerational patterns. So you and I, we are the lucky
millennials. We are this century's greatest generation. We're the hero archetype, which is
why we are here because the last time this was around, these were the people that won World War
II. So there was a global crisis. And of course, this is just theory. So in the fourth turning
theory, it is the millennial generation is the, we're the same as the GI Joes that fought in
World War II, the Rosie, the Riveters that boosted the industrial capacity to fight the axis of evil.
So from that perspective, if you look at it from that lens, this is a natural repeating
cadence of humanity. And what we're doing, the narratives we're spreading, it's not unlike how
the Civil Rights Movement and the hippie movement of the 60s, that was a deconstruction of certain
things, racism and sexism. We're working on deconstructing and reconstructing something
else right now. Now, you and I unfortunately probably will not, we'll live to see the results
of our work, but we're not going to be the primary benefactors. We're doing this for people younger
than ourselves. And so Gen Z, the young people that are the most checked out, they're the equivalent
of the silent generation. And the silent generation is you look at them very similar to Gen Z,
they're just like, whatever, this whole thing is completely like, we don't care anymore. So then
their descendants, the ones after them is going to be the equivalent of the boomers,
the ones that come up in the next wave of abundance in about 20 years. And so we've got
five to 20 years more of pain, according to that theory. And according to Ray Dalio, we've got about
five to 10 more years of pain before things start to just magically feel better. So it would be
flippant of me to say, it'll work itself out, but that's kind of how some of these models propose
that it'll do. Like we keep doing what we're doing, and it'll work itself out. Now, what I will say is
you are correct that the internet has a mind of its own. It is an attention seeking entity.
The internet... It's like an aggregate of some type. Yeah. So the way that I view it is the internet
is the planet's nervous system. That is the super organism's nervous system. Right now,
it's only got the intelligence of an amoeba. It's cancer and it just wants to grow. And so the internet
wants attention. It is optimized for passing data. So what does it want to do? It wants to pass more
data. So the internet invented Facebook and Netflix and everything else that just passes data. So
that's what it's for. It doesn't have a brain. So this is where I'm really hopeful as part of the
super organism metaphor is that AI is actually growing a brain. Right. It's a neocortex or whatever.
Exactly. Exactly. Maybe not even that much. It's just like... Well, I guess it's got a
limbic system already, you say? Yeah. It's very reptilian-y. Yeah. We're at the reptile phase,
and then we're building the mammalian phase, where at least we can have a little bit more
authority or agency, or the internet can have a collective willpower that actually represents
something that is good. So one of my friends, one of my Patreon supporters, he was on a recent
podcast episode of mine. He said, the way to solve alignment for ourselves is you use your smart
brain to trick your dumb brain into doing the right thing. And so what I'm hoping is that as
the internet gets smarter, with more artificial intelligence, with more of these narratives,
the smart part of the internet will be like, hey, actually, maybe we should just shut down social
media or fundamentally change... I don't know what the change is going to be, but maybe we
should change something that just creates new affordances and new incentives, and that'll
actually be better. And so for me personally, and this is why I have a fair amount of optimism,
that once people are shown a better way, and the affordances, the structural changes are made,
and some of the narratives change, it's just like, oh, wait, actually, if I do this instead,
then I'll be happier. So here's an example of a really simple structural change. I set my phone
to grayscale. So there's less color, so it's less addictive. It's literally just tricking
the physiology of my retina and occipital in my brain to just say, oh, this is boring,
and now it's not interesting. People can do the same thing. You switch to... If you want to quit
vaping, this is how I quit vaping because I did it briefly years ago, and I just switched to zero
nicotine, and then it's no longer chemically rewarding. So I had the habit, and then my brain's
like, well, this just tastes weird, and then you set it down. So you deprogram yourself. So there's
all these little tricks that you can do to use your smart brain to reprogram your dumb brain,
your addictive brain, or your animal brain, and I'm hoping that the internet can do the same thing.
And so... To itself.
Yeah. So the obstacle is the way. So AI is a problem because we agree. It can amplify everything,
destroy everything, but I think that if used correctly, that will also be the structural
change that can result in these better decisions.
No, I mean, I completely agree, and that's why I'm neither a doomer or a pure accelerationist.
It's like, I think we will do better if we build a steering wheel and also a gas pedal
and also a brake. That's usually the fastest way you get around a racetrack. The doomers say,
no, no more acceleration, just pure brake, plus steering, I guess, and the accelerators are like,
get rid of the steering wheel and the brake and just like... The racetrack will take you
magically there. I was like, no, that obviously doesn't make any sense. And I think...
What is interesting is about this now, compared to, say, 100 years ago,
our generations are repeating this cycle that happened around World War II or whatever,
is that the variance... What concerns me and what feels different about this time around
is that the variance is so high that if we do end up having a World War, we do end up having this
go AI go wrong, or any of these other really powerful technologies that we are now unlocking,
is that it will literally just break the playing field.
That's possible.
And that's what really, really scares me. And I don't think it's clear. If things were
like somewhat capped to and contained to a specific continent or something like that,
okay, it would be bad and be horrible, but we're playing a game. As we talked earlier,
things are simultaneously getting better and better in many aspects and then worse and worse
in others. So there's the variance, the amplitude...
Tension.
Exactly. The amplitude of the wave is getting more and more and more, and
is likely to be a breaking point. Is there any self-correcting mechanism that could be
created or apply in creating this kind of third attractor state?
So I think that there are some natural ones. So there's natural ones and then there's
ones that we can choose. And so I actually have this hypothesis. Are you familiar with
it, if it bleeds, it leads?
Deeply. I was like the main thread of my media mollusk film.
Right, right. So if it bleeds, it leads basically, I think it was 140 years ago,
was when the term was coined. And if it activates your limbic system, it gets your attention.
And you perceive it, I think, what is it four times more intensely than good news or more,
depending on... Now, in our evolutionary past, this was a good thing because it's like, oh,
hey, your tent's burning down. That's more important than whether or not you have your steak
is ready. Or if there's a tiger, that's more important than whether or not you want to get
in the mood with your partner. So we have this attention mechanism that pulls your
attention towards the worst possible thing. Now, as the blast radius of news has gotten
bigger and faster, because to your point about cadence and the cycles, the amplitude of the wave,
so not only is everything happening faster, the intensity is larger and the scope, the scope
is larger. So we are not evolved for this. So at the same time, and so going back to Ukraine,
so that's been the last few years, Israel-Palestine gets global attention in a way that was not even
possible during World War II because it still took time. It was more of a trickle feed of news.
Now we get TikTok videos of frontline stuff, and it's horrifying. And I actually think,
I'm looking forward to a Freakonomics episode 30 years from now, where maybe our outrage at these
things, bringing our attention to it, to the protests on campuses, actually was the way that
solved it. The horrors of war. This is the first time we're actually seeing... People think that
this war is worse than any others. It's more present. It's more present.
Yeah, exactly. The war is like, it is the first time it has been televised in 4K and
effectively live. You're watching innocents getting maimed. It's also true of October 7th,
in many ways. September 11th, you've got the image of the planes going into the building,
but you didn't actually see the individuals getting dying. You saw that with October 7th,
which made everyone crazy. And now we're seeing it with what's happening in Palestine,
which is making people even crazier. And it's like... So you're arguing that actually this,
even though it's horrible and it's creating this, in many ways, spreading the flames of
the conflict around the world, you hope that in the long run, this is still going to be a
net positive, because it makes us realize that actually war is the enemy.
Yeah. So to borrow from Jung again, and for Jung, for all the purists out there,
I'm American. It's Jung. So as Jung said, it creates psychic energy. So not psychic is in like,
but like psychological energy. And until you discharge that psychic energy, it stays there.
You need to do something with it. And so that's why you see people setting up pro and anti,
you know, like anti-Zionists and pro-Palestine and like all everything in between.
That is because it is in our nature that our biology gives us energy. Like, you know,
when I was preparing to come for this trip, I could not sleep. I have had like probably
10 hours of sleep in the last five days. No, it's a little bit more than that.
But it's because it was so important, my brain is like, you need energy to figure everything out.
And so likewise, you see Ukraine, you see Russia, whichever side you're on,
the fact that there's engagement and the conversation is happening. And like, this is,
again, this is why I want people to learn more about epistemic tribes is because whether you're
pro or anti-Israel, pro or anti-Palestine, the fact that people have the energy to engage in
the conversation, there is no apathy. Apathy is the enemy. Because apathy is nihilism.
Exactly. If you don't care, or if you enjoy it, destruction lust, if you say, let's make it worse,
some people do want to make it worse. Right. That's the only thing I would say is that there's like,
you know, like the protests on campuses, those are started by people who truly
care. But then it feels like with all these like, every protest or every movement that goes
beyond as a critical mass, you get the like, essentially the psychopaths or the, or like,
just the people who are wanton destructionists. I don't see how that's making the problem better
if anything is making it worse. Well, so one, humans have always been that way. There's always
been different levels of intellectual engagement or knowledge or whatever. There are the mavens,
there are the aggregators, the people who study it, and then they disseminate ideas and
create new, new catchy, you know, catchy-isms. I'm reading a book called Made to Stick,
which is about how do you make sticky ideas? How do you make something that resonates?
So like click it or ticket, you know, it rhymes and everyone, everyone knows that here in America.
I don't know if you have anything like that in England.
But you don't know that one book yet.
Yeah. So buckle up, you know.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
So click it or ticket, you know, just dare to say no to drugs, whatever, you know,
like we have all these different programs. What happens is, is narratives get distilled over time.
And so it's like basically what I, the kind of the formula that I look for is X is good or bad,
so therefore more or less of X is better. So it's like war is bad, therefore less war is better.
Now, yes, there are always going to be the rabble-rousers and the lunatics who are just like,
yeah, just burn it down because they're like adrenaline junkies and all they want is that
energy. And that's like, they actually serve a role, they serve a purpose. And I'm not going
to like argue that like they're always good. No. In aggregate, in the long run, these things kind
of get distilled down over time. And these memes kind of get embedded like loose lip sink ships,
right? We still remember that from World War II. So these things, you can deliberately workshop
them. A lot of them just get distilled. Like, you know, what is it the one that came out against
Disney? Like go woke, go broke. Exactly the same thing. Narratives get distilled. And so this is a,
it becomes a rallying cry. It becomes a principle of value that certain epistemic tribes can
rally around. And I've, so for some background, I observed this trend because I was on like
debate forums for many years, like starting back in like 2006. And so I saw the rise of
like the like marriage equality here in America. And I was like, where did the argument go? It's
gone. I've seen the cycle. And we're doing the same thing with trans rights right now.
So it's like, all these things just kind of come in cycles. And what you have is you in this
discourse, this high velocity discourse, and now it's even faster because you have TikTok,
it's not debate forums that requires typing and reading. It's just 30 second videos.
So you have people deconstructing like so and so said this, and this is why they're wrong.
And what the pattern that I noticed is that people never concede defeat, they just abandon the
battlefield. They just move on. They stop arguing. And so by, by like the cessation of conflict,
that's when this new idea gets embedded in the zeitgeist. And so like defensive marriage act,
I remember when that came down, it wasn't surprising to me because I saw the public discourse for
the years leading up to it. And I was just like, all these conservatives and Republicans and anti-gay
people that I've been arguing with, they just quit the ghost town because they, like they gave up,
like they, they, they, they seeded the battlefield. And we're going to see the same thing. And to be
fair, some of these take a lot longer to pan out because like we were, we went to the LBJ
presidential library and there was a political cartoon from 1967 of LBJ like trying to defend
Israel against Middle East. And it's just like same exact thing that has been happening. So
that has a lot of geopolitical tension that takes more decades to pan out. But again,
something will change eventually. The narrative will get distilled and a lesson will be embedded
in the zeitgeist. And then everyone moves on. It's the weirdest phenomenon once you've lived
through it. And I'm waiting for that to happen with trans rights. So right now we're in the place
where trans rights is getting more like vociferous. It's getting more violent on both sides,
you know, like trans rights matter or trans lives matter, sorry, is an example. And like you
actually see the, the like anti-trans bills materially cost lives. And so then eventually
society will say enough is enough, they'll draw a line in the sand. We saw the same thing with
civil rights. We've seen the same thing with women's rights. Eventually society comes to
consensus and it's not magical. There's nothing magical about it. It's through newspaper, it's
through conversations, but it can take time. And it's not obvious because it doesn't happen.
Like as we don't have a big enough perspective to see it happen, except in hindsight.
So what you're sort of saying is that if you were to like model this physically, you're,
you're describing like a metronome that is through sort of friction is getting like, you know,
starts like insufficient rights here. So one wheel swing to there, more rights. And then like over
time, it'll sort of settle in a calm state on some issues. Okay. Cause my intuition is that
kind of almost like the opposite is happening. Like so I would argue it seems, seems to me now that
like transphobia or like anti-trans sentiment is actually higher now than it was 15 years ago
when, before all this stuff started, because even though like there might be like technically
more protections for trans people now than there were back then, because like society tried to
like over index on it because there's like, again, there's like this kind of energy of like,
you know, it was born out of like, okay, these people were like historically
oppressed or like not taken seriously or not given sufficient rights within society.
We need to do something to fix it. But it became like, again, there's like bandwagon
effects of like mindless, like corporate, you know, every corporate, every single big company
does like had the trans flag, you know, out for a day and so on. And this is like,
it's like capitalism latched onto it for profits, essentially, which made it become,
became like a new doctrine. And when it became a doctrine, then you couldn't question it. And
that's when then the energy, the counter movement comes up where it's like, well, wait,
but what about women's sports and so on? Like where there are like genuine
overcorrect, at least to me, it seems like there are overcorrections going on. So I don't know,
like, I'm not sure I would like that to be true that it's like, okay, yes,
over time, we're going to move on and it'll settle down. But it feels again,
like the variance is actually increasing, the amplitude is getting more and more and more.
Yeah, because we're not at the end of the cycle. So you have, it's like a tremor.
It's like a bigger, it's like a bigger cycle going on.
Yeah. And so like, here's, here's an example. And I'll credit my wife for always pushing back
on this because she'll point out that history is not linear.
There are setbacks. So right now, the overturning of Roe versus Wade,
the a century of women's rights, finally, the traditionalist people that epistemic tribe said,
enough is enough, we need to pull back some power and go back to patriarchy. Patriarchy is a narrative.
Feminism is a narrative. Again, everything comes down to narratives. And so
patriarchy is right now trying to reassert itself against women's empowerment, at least here in
America. Other nations are going in different directions. Trans rights is a relatively recent
thing in terms of, when I say that, I mean, in terms of visibility. So when you have the visibility
increase, that creates like a magnifying effect. It's like, it's like you put a drop of sugar
water and all the ants show. And so that's why we're seeing that trend. But 10, 15 years from now,
I would suspect that like, it's going to be, trans rights in particular is going to be in the
rear of your mirror. Women's rights, gender rights, that is millennia in the making. And so we might
have centuries more debate around gender equality, racial equality, those sorts of things, religious
equality. Because again, at the founding of America, what, 250 years ago, we said,
all men are created equal, but it was like only a certain kind of men. But we've been doubling
down on that principle of democracy. So again, narratives, equality before the law. We are
currently testing that here in America. Do we believe in equality before the law? It's not
perfect. We haven't implemented it, but that principle remains true. And so by doubling down
on these really simple distilled principles, equality before the law, human rights, natural
human rights, these kinds of ideas, democracy, these narratives with their distilled kind of
constitution of principles, we can coordinate around those. Now, it's messy. So actually,
this is one of the quintessential hallmarks of a functioning democracy is they are loud
and they are messy. When there is no debate, that's bad because then the state or church or
someone does not even allow it. So the fact that we have debates, the fact that we have
riots at universities, that is an unfortunate, that's the give and take, that's a double
edge, sort of a functioning democracy is, okay, let's
round three fight like get in the octagon and hash it out. It's like a parent kind of letting
their children fight amongst themselves until they work it out. Not necessarily the best,
but it's a natural process. So is there anything that you are a full on maximalist on? Because it
sounds like you are largely a moderate, again, you're someone like everything in moderation,
including moderation, right? I do please subscribe to that.
That said, is there anything we should just be fully maxing out on?
I don't think so. I'm checking in with myself like as a gut check, no. I learned a lot from
Chinese philosophy, which is like, it's better to underreact than overreact. That's one of the
core principles of Taoism is just like you variance reducing. Yeah, exactly. Exactly.
Because yeah, if you overcorrect, so there's actually, my dad was a pilot, so there's what's
called a pilot induced oscillation. And do you know what this is from physics?
It's probably like your plane's going that way. So you do this and now it's like, oh,
shit, more and so on. Yeah, yeah. So depending on the way that a plane is designed, if it's a top
wing, then or if it's the wings kind of go up, then it'll naturally kind of settle into a stable
configuration with gravity down. Now jet fighters are intrinsically unstable. They're designed to
be unstable so they can change orientation very quickly. Now there's a delay in that. So there's
several, there are several delay factors. So there's the pilot's reaction, there's the plane's
physical reaction, and then there's the actual like orientation in space. So you got three different
reaction times. And so if you know, pilot, you know, tries to correct because you get a wobble
or a shimmy or something, there's actually cases in the 60s or 70s kind of when NASA was doing some
of the more cutting edge test flights of like the pilot induced oscillation getting so bad that like
the pilot like actually got a concussion from the side of the canopy. And so they're like, okay,
we need to put a control mechanism to reduce these oscillations. And I think that to bring that
analogy around, I think that will probably come up with some technological like AI based solutions
to help reduce the oscillation intensity on the internet, but maybe not. But even so, I think that
I think that there are some self-correcting mechanisms in human biology, plus people get
tired of it. Is there any call to action or message you'd like to leave the Win-Win audience with?
Your own audience, which is like, I'm hoping we're going to like. So thought experiment,
I did this in one of my videos. Imagine that a super powerful benevolent alien race comes and
says, you guys suck at taking care of yourself. We're going to take care of you now. Think about
everything that that super powerful benevolent alien race would do and then do it for yourself.
That's radical alignment.
So there we go. Huge thank you to David for coming out to Austin to film this. And thank you to
you all for tuning in. Do go check out his channel. I highly recommend the binge. He's got like six
different YouTube channels now. His main one, which focuses on AI and I think also like Molokan
systems design, but then he also has a specific systems designing one, one on mytho poetic archetypes.
So many different channels. They're all linked below. I've also linked some of my favorite
and most informative videos that I sort of binged. It's just truly delightful to meet someone who
has both been inspired by myself, but also has inspired me so much. So yeah, it was a fun
meeting and melding of minds. I hope something useful came out of it for you all as well.
So on that note, if you enjoyed this, go give him a subscribe. If you're one of
David's subscribers watching this, come join me win-win. Yeah, I'll see you next time.
