Jim Stockdale is Admiral Stockdale, he was the highest ranking POW in Vietnam.
The Stockdale paradox was he noticed that in those North Vietnamese POW camps that the
pessimists didn't live, he said, but the really interesting insight was the optimists didn't
live either.
Because what happened is they'd be like, we're going to get the boys home for Christmas
or Easter or July the 4th, and those dates would come and go.
And then they would just collapse, they would lose all ability to maintain hope after their
hope redemption came and went.
And he said the paradox was the people who survived were ruthlessly realistic about short-term
realities while remaining relentlessly optimistic about the long-term possibility.
I don't know when we're going to get out, but we're going to go home.
And that is, to me, is sort of all of us right now.
Hello, everyone, and welcome back to the Win Win Podcast.
Today, I am speaking to someone who truly synthesizes both the physical and intellectual
sides of life, Jamie Weill.
I got to know Jamie originally through his work on the Flow Genome Project, which is
essentially a movement that seeks to understand the nature of peak performance, and specifically
this thing known as the flow state, which is, you know, those moments when you are playing
an incredible sport or you lose yourself in a conversation, those moments where the world
sort of melts away.
So we dig into all that juicy stuff.
But also, Jamie is a prolific writer and thinker on the broader topic of humanity's
relationship with meaning.
He recently wrote the book Recapture the Rapture, which seeks to understand what he
calls the meaning crisis that particularly Western civilization is currently going through,
which affects our relationship with the natural world and also with each other,
and of course, competition.
So he has this really interesting lens of seeing the world through his backgrounds in
psychology, neuroscience, but also spirituality.
So a really fascinating conversation.
I hope you enjoy it.
Let's dig in.
Jamie, were you much of a games player growing up?
And if so, which was your most formative game in your childhood?
No, I'd say I was generally a terrible games player.
I would get bored or disinterested.
I think Backgammon is kind of where I gravitated.
And then for a brief summer, Dungeons and Dragons.
But I realized instantly after my first time playing that I was like, oh, wow,
this other kid, the Dungeon Master is just making all this shit up and we're at his
absolute mercy.
So the next week, I got the little book on being a Dungeon Master and then made my own
campaigns or whatever they were and had little treasure maps and put them in the oven with
lemon juice to make them all old and that kind of thing.
And so for a brief, brief stint, I was into Dungeons and Dragons.
But I realized, and in fact, I think most of my friends and colleagues now that are in the
ex-risk space or the civilization redesign space, there's a statistically significant
correlation where they were Dungeon Masters when they were kids as well.
So the idea of like building worlds that are more interesting than the worlds that
others would subject you to, I think that kind of definitely carried over in some way.
Designing the rules of the game as opposed to
maneuvering the existing rules that were passed down on them.
Were you competitive at all?
I mean, I feel like yes.
Obviously, like always was excited and interested in
winning up to but not past the point that it got ugly or scrappy or you had to
degrade the spirit of the game in order to win.
Then I would sort of lose interest or back out.
So I got to know your work originally through the book Stealing Fire,
which is about harnessing the power of the flow state and ecstatic states in order to sort of
unlock not only peak performance but maximum enjoyment out of life.
How did you get to that point where you were like, I want to
hack this very niche particular thing?
Because you were a wilderness guide, right?
This wasn't through necessarily the lens of sport that led you to peak performance.
Well, how did you get to that?
Well, I mean, it was a couple of distinct insights.
The first was, I am a lazy, unmotivated bastard unless it's really fun.
So for instance, going to the gym.
Just I mean, my hit rate on that zero, two out of a thousand tries.
But then if it was mountain biking to the top of a mountain or back country skiing
to the top of something to get there for the sunrise, and then the fun turns,
I would be endlessly motivated.
And so I was like, what is the difference there?
And as I started studying that, and as my wife Julie is a Montessori director,
so she had deep training in Montessori pedagogy and education.
And we were also raising our own children.
I was like, okay, so what is it?
What is that big huge variance about?
How can I have zero motivation when it comes to grinding things out and nearly infinite
motivation when it's connected to play or joy or exploration or discovery?
And wouldn't you know it?
The name for that general field is flow states.
And the technical term is auto-telec behavior.
And auto-telec just means it has its own intrinsic reward for doing it.
So I don't do push-ups in order to get fit for spring break.
I go skiing because the sensation of turns is delightful.
I'll say surfers, surf bums, ski bums, climbing bums.
The whole reason that bum is at the end of their name is because they've basically
chucked all social compliance and respectability to pursue that thing full time.
And so my sense was, okay, now I'm super interested in human development.
How do humans grow from infants to toddlers to children to adolescents to adulthood?
And through all the subsequent potential steps in adulthood,
it seemed to me that we're sort of drowning in information and starving for motivation.
It's not that we don't know better.
It's just we often, we can't figure out how to do better.
And what if we could connect those two things?
What if you could connect that auto-telec rocket fuel of like,
I can't help but want to do this thing, right?
Because it makes me come alive.
It's intrinsically rewarding.
And then connect that to the project of human development.
So that was really the beginning insight into why do flow states matter?
Or what is the actual potential benefit beyond just having a neat experience here and there?
It's actually, oh, if this guilt and vanity, right, don't work.
You know, most people try to get in shape because they feel bad about being lazy and putting on
20 pounds or the vanity they want to fit in their high school genes, right?
Or look great for spring break.
And neither of those, all the research shows those fizzle over time.
That's why our news resolutions tend to peter out and all that kind of stuff.
So what if we can harness all of the positive projects of human development and growth
and impact in the world, two things that are intrinsically rewarding.
And our colleague at Deloitte's Center for the Edge, John Hagel, has gone on and, you know,
validated this, you know, outside.
And by the way, Montessori classrooms were actually one of the places that the original
researchers found were most deeply immersive and generative of these flow state learning experiences.
And then John Hagel at Deloitte found that teams that spend the most time
in a collective group flow experience.
So they're not just each individually, you know, with their headsets on at a cubicle,
but they're actually collaborating and relying on each other in order to generate the things.
So much more like jazz, right?
That those teams consistently outperformed other teams that weren't and also, you know,
even benchmark market competition.
Why do you think that is?
Because is it because some kind of emergent property when there's a collective action going on?
Yeah. I mean, Keith Soy, who's at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
has, he's probably the sort of preeminent researcher.
And he's literally written a book called Group Flow.
And his studies have found, and with, you know, some of his graduate students who have now gone
on to do their own projects, they've actually found that, you know, if I am just me in an
individual flow state, a little kid playing with Lego blocks or whatever it be, that's sort of good
for 100 points. If you and I are in parallel play, like we're both playing with our own little
piles of Lego blocks, then that's good for, that's twice as much fun.
But if we are actually an intersubjective or interdependent group flow, so we're building
a castle together, we've pooled our blocks, right? Or a basketball team, you know, who was relying
on each other, or a jazz band or whatever it would be, then that's 300% more rewarding
than just doing it in isolation. So it is arguably the most intrinsically, you know,
magnetic thing we can possibly do. And then obviously, there are enormous
indicators that a group flow state does, you know, to your question, is there some emergent
property? I would say it's almost a subtractive property, which is you don't have isolated,
fragmented egoic drives and will, and you end up with a coherent collective concerted effort.
So in crew or rowing, right, they actually have a term for that when everybody in an eight-man
shell, right, is together, they call it swinging, which is literally where all the blades are
moving together, and you just feel like you're slicing through the water, which is funnily enough,
the same term that jazz musicians use, right? What does that mean? Well, it's a swing, right?
Like that idea of what is that effortless thing. And I think there's even
some jazz albums that have been called like Round Midnight is a very famous
jazz album, because that was the time, right, around midnight, first sets already happened,
the band has had their set break, they're back there, smoking reefer and whiskey, right, whatever
it's going to be, they are absolutely in the groove and they come back out. And around midnight
is where you really drop into jazz. So that what I would say is, absolutely not only is it rewarding,
it's also incredibly high performance. And you do end up with, you know, sort of via negativa,
you end up by removing individual motives and agendas, getting to some high shared goal,
where all effort is multiplied instead of canceled out.
So what's going on? You mentioned about removing the ego, essentially. Is that more just sort of a
term of art, or is there like something actually going on in the brain that is
neurochemically changing, where people get into this state?
Yeah, I mean, a couple of examples. One is the Sade Business School in Europe.
They did studies on, you know, within the business school on leadership teams trying to solve
complicated ethical problems. And it was literally, I think it was the scenario was
Levi Strauss was opening up a sweatshop in Bangalore, and there's this blowback and how do
you manage it? So there's kind of this multi variable business ethics PR question. And then
they ranked and evaluated all of the participants with one way glass and hooked up to biometrics.
Who was the most effective? And what teams and groups came to the highest quality solutions,
right? And what they found was, is that there was no correlation between how much a given person
said, how loudly they talked, so sort of airtime didn't matter, volume didn't matter. So no kind
of like monkey primate stuff of dominance or assertion, what mattered was which leader was
the most coherent on a neurophysiological level. So respiratory rate, pulse arc symmetry, galvanic
skin response, vagal nerve tone, EEGs and just kind of brainwave states, and how effectively
were they able to entrain the rest of their team into that state? So it's a little bit like the
old thing of like Galileo walking into the clockmaker shop and noticing that all the clocks on
the walls all swung to the one that had the longest pendulum. All right. And the one and
the clock. They all go into this like synchronicity. Yes. And the clock with the longest pendulum
would end up then synchronizing all the others, right, into swinging. I didn't know that was
the thing that happened. Yeah. It's a thing. And I think actually they traced it back. So
there's not some metaphysical thing. I think it was literally like micro vibrations between
the studs and the walls and this and that, but it's, you know, it's always physical, mechanical,
but there was a, there was a harmonic convergence, right? So just, just that metaphor of the longest
pendulum, right, or the most potently coherent human ends up setting the tone, right? For
it that everybody else coordinates with. And so that's one example, right? If like what's
actually going on, what you could say quite clearly is a synchronization of autonomic
nervous response, right, into a collective resonance. And that makes sense as far as,
you know, we are tribal primates, right? So a mother and child, you know,
infants are absolutely indexed to look at each other, look at their mother and cue off
micro muscles of the face and all those kinds of things, an adaptive survival mechanism.
We are in a workplace. You look to see who does the boss, who does the ranking alpha,
look at, sit by, talk to, make jokes with, go out for lunch with, you know, we're all
looking at soft power and how do I navigate and negotiate it. And for most of us, that's all
fragmented and chaotic, right? But when groups can drop in, that's when you end up with massively
heightened performance. And Tom Brady, the Patriots, and then, you know, Tampa quarterback,
subject to much, you know, adulation and scorn, depending on whose team you like.
Anyway, you slice it. I think you could say that he was a master at in chaotic conditions,
especially like Super Bowls and that kind of thing, being able to create coherent group flow
in his offensive line to then do these crazy rallies and turnarounds. And there was one
particular game where, you know, the Patriots did a ridiculous come from behind sort of 25 or 30
points in the fourth quarter alone. And they just sort of, once they locked in, they didn't drop it
again until they won. And that was, you know, Brady was the longest pendulum there. So you see
that and you think, okay, so now what are the neurophysiological correlates or drivers of that?
So without a doubt, some version of mirror neurons, like the idea of I'm looking at and
imitating or calibrating to another person, there's also a theory, Stephen Porges, who,
you know, was a sort of trauma specialist and quite well known of polyvagal theory. So to
establish that as an idea, I wouldn't say it's established scientific consensus, but his theory
is that, again, as primates, we're highly indexed to is someone safe or not, basically, you know,
friend or foe kind of thing. And then we do an awful lot of decoding of safety, security,
trustworthiness, intent via vocal and vagal tone, like my ability to speak that the literally the
tension in my vocal cords, the congruence of mannerisms affect all of these things.
Well, then, you know, if you assess and then judge this person is safe, your vagal tone goes up,
your sympathetic response, a kind of vigilance decreases, right? So you've got mirror neurons,
you have vagal tone, you have, you have, you know, I'm sure although there's again,
and our buddy Andrew Huberman has talked about this like pheromones, is that really a thing? Or
is it does it quite behave the way people have said it does in pop science and that kind of thing?
Open question, but for sure, scent and calibration, all those things stack up to being where we are
both either sort of incented, invited or encouraged, depending on how we're reading each other, to
drop in more reasonably. And that can get weaponized, right? You have marketers and
neuro linguistic programmers and folks like that, like model body language. If I'm doing this,
then you do this, say my name and repeat it, you know, all those kinds of things where people try
and hack that for other motives or agendas. But in general, it feels good to be part of a collective
and it feels really good to be in that emergent space that no one could have predicted beforehand,
where, you know, you're going up into a minor seventh or you hit that solo note, just as I
change my chords and the whole thing takes off, you know, or, you know, here's a no look pass
and you're right there before the goal or the basket. Like that is arguably the reason why all
of us want to play these games together in the first place. Does that always have to be a longest
pendulum for this to the best results? Are there instances where that doesn't happen, where everyone
is like truly sort of equal? That's a great question. I mean, the nice answer, the idealistic
answer would be hopefully. Yes, of course. And in fact, those are even better. But if you take
something like drum circles, like hippie drum circles on the beach kind of thing, right,
you can run that experiment. Because in fact, that we used to live in Santa Barbara and one of our
music teachers was one of the linchpins of this Sunday. It had been going on for decades. It was
sort of a Sunday afternoon, evening drum circle on the Santa Barbara Beach. And usually he would
set up with himself and they were, you know, professors at Cal Arts or this amazing music
academy, you know, school in California, they had world-class Afro-Caribbean drummers,
sitar, tabla players like pros. And they would set up three, four, five of them at the nucleus,
right? And then you could have 200 dreadlocked hippies. And they would all sound amazing with
those guys at the core. But then there was an afternoon where they couldn't make it. They were
traveling with their own tour or something. So it was just the hippies and no true musicians. And
the thing was just noodley and muddy for the entire duration. And so there's that concept of
like it takes a field to hold a field. There has to be a nucleus that is coherent as a seed crystal
or a metronome or whatever metaphor you want to use in order for the other things to coalesce.
Is it possible for a completely flat, non-hierarchic emergence into a more ordered
higher energy pattern? I would say hypothetically for sure. Realistically, I wouldn't bet on it.
And I mean, that seems to be the case with almost all evolutionary things. It's the little
differences that give rise to novelty and therefore complexity and more opportunities
to emerge. If it's a completely homogenous situation, it seems to take at least a lot
longer for something interesting to emerge out of that. But yeah, I agree. Ideally, it would be
nice if everyone could get a go of being the leader. So is that what you guys try and do
at the Flow Genome Project? You try to train people how to be the longest pendulum,
or is it more trained to be able to join, to become a pendulum yourself in the first place?
I mean, sort of it's equal parts. So the first one is yes, like basically here's the
neurophysiology of optimizing your own nervous system for recovery and resilience
and state management. So can you tune yourself to be in the right state, either alert or rouse,
soothing, inspiring, whatever it might be, angry, calming, whatever it would be,
for the actual conditions you face across a broad spectrum of life.
How do you go about training that? Biohacking 101 to start with, which is
sleep more, move often, eat well, practice gratitude, make love, get outside, sunlight,
all the just obvious, obvious stuff that's hyper commodified and sensationalized. But like,
on the other hand, don't skip it, don't make it more complicated than it needs to be,
and you definitely don't need to buy a bunch of shit to get it done, but do that.
And then you kind of go from once I have my personal self-system more or less optimized,
or at least doing solidly. Now, what are the software? What's the interpersonal software
that we need to be running to not get wrapped around the axle? Because most of the time,
and most of us these days, are focused on individual optimization. So I'm crushing it,
right? I'm doing all the hacks, and I've got my ice baths, and I've got my infrared,
and I've got my ring, and I'm doing all those things, right? But then we run smack down into
the wall of how on earth do we coordinate and collaborate as tribal monkeys? And then you
get into all the power games, you get into all the passive-aggressive stuff, you all get into
all the differences of opinions and the breakdowns in, agreed upon modes of discourse. Like, how do
we even collectively agree to talk about the things that we're getting bogged down in? So that's
the other element that we teach, which is just what are the half dozen or so tools and models,
you know, A, to interrupt victimhood culture and endless tribal politics. How do you actually
say no? This is Bill Urie's work at the Harvard Negotiation Project. How do you actually
say no and establish and reaffirm boundaries while deepening versus threatening relationships?
How do you notice competing commitments, which is like Bob Keegan's work at Harvard's
Adult School of Development, like, hey, we say we want to change, but we also have this
homeostatic system that doesn't want to change, and why is that? And let's understand what those are.
Polarity is management, where you're like, oh, binary solutions, we pretty much all solve for
everything we're facing today that's worth either getting paid for or fixing on behalf of humanity
is a complex, wicked problem, right? And none of them submit to binary solutions. So Democrat
versus Republican, is it all moral failings that the poor are poor as the Republicans would hold,
or is it all social structures, right? And, you know, and we need to address systems. So the
answer is obviously it's a balance between both. And if you ignore one at the expense of the other,
you'll always get partial and ineffective solutions, just simple things like that, that you're like,
oh, once we sort of upload that software collectively together, we can have, it's basically
like the Vygotsky and scaffolding. So Vygotsky was this Russian educational theorist, right? And
his whole notion was, if you scaffold people's experiences, so just training wheels, right,
basically, you can raise the level of their capacity and their performance above and beyond
their innate capacities. So a mutual friend of Daniel Schmockdenberg, who's in Jordan halls,
and I was Zach Stein, as a Harvard psychologist, very thoughtful guy. And his, he was working
with an organization, his whole dissertation was on standardized testing and how whacked it is,
right, and how the inequities it bakes into the system and that kind of thing. And they did studies
where they would have somebody, you know, fundamentally on an intelligence or cognitive
capacity assessment, right, make sense of your life, make sense of the world, make sense of this
word problem, whatever it would be. And then, you know, and then someone would score, you know,
a 60% or a three out of five on a Likert scale, right? But then they would teach them how to
mind map, right, a tool scaffolding, right? And they'd say, okay, so now everything you just said
there, now literally draw connections, draw bubbles, draw dotted lines, like sort and
establish the relationship here about what you were thinking, and then retested them. And they
would score a five out of five. So there's sort of up to this 40% swing in someone's intelligence
or cognitive capacity, just based on did you give them a tool, right? It's like Steve Jobs saying,
you know, that a computer is like a bicycle for the mind, right? And you're like, oh, okay,
so how many bicycles for our minds, right, can we share and create such that we can all pedal
faster? Because you wrote a book recently called recapture the rapture, which is trying to address
the seeming sort of psychological ills of our society. Can you try and sort of summarize
what your thesis is on why it seems like victimhood culture has become so dominant?
Disconnection, general malaise people are having, is it, is it a function of, you know,
fear of the future? We've been hearing, you know, doom and gloom from climate change and all these
other growing risks. Or is it something more fundamental going on inside us psychologically
that is giving rise to this? I mean, I think without a doubt, like, what on earth is going
wrong these days? And why are so many people sad, suffering, disconnected? I think that's just a
massive multivariable situation. But one of the things that I mentioned in that book was just
things are getting exponentially better. And things are getting exponentially worse
at the very same time. And trying to map two intersecting, contradicting, overlapping exponential
curves. It's confusing. Beggars the imagination. I mean, right, the whole three body problem in
physics, which I know you must be deeply aware of. It's very hard to be like sun and moon and stars,
you know, like you get you. And we are eight billion bodies all with volition, you know,
and pesky human nature. So trying to map what is going on as things are simultaneously
Steven Pinker and Hans Rosling and all the lot of like, if it bleeds, it leads, you've been
massively misled, the world is safer, better, cheaper, more prosperous than it's ever been.
And you're like, Oh, thank God, you know, and then you click over to polar bears and, you know,
thwaites glacier and, you know, all of these things, you're like, Oh, no, which is it?
Right. So as we have that initial experience, which naturally triggers hypervigilance and
threat response, oh, shit, right? Are we, are we coming alive? All this wonderful stuff,
my own personal life, my personal growth, my relationships, my career, where am I coming
alive? That's the inquiry I'm in, or are we staying alive? And I need to be practicing triage,
right? And in a threat response, and toggling back and forth between those two is crazy making.
So what will we do in that situation where you'd be like, this is above my pay grade,
who do I turn to for advice as to what's going on and what should we do? And that's where we
can have then hop over to the meaning crisis. So if you've got the kind of a poly crisis or
whatever word you want to use for a whole bunch of things are going, you know, are going into the
critical red zone from geopolitics to macroeconomics to ecology to, you know, you name it, all of
those things are happening. And at the same time, we've had a concurrent collapse of the
pillars of truth that we used to look to, which, you know, I loosely just call meaning 1.0,
which would be organized religion, which for 99% of all of human history was where you look to do.
Who am I? Where am I from? What is this thing about? How ought I act? And who are we? And that's
collapsed in the last 50 years, quite solidly to the point where, you know, now as most people
are familiar, Pew Research Foundation and lots of others have found that, you know, I don't belong
to anything, I'm spiritual, but not religious is now the largest and the fastest growing category,
which when you think of, you might just be like, oh, yeah, no, okay, sure, that's fine.
But then you think back to all of human history. What did it mean if I had identified as spiritual,
but not religious? I would have been a heretic, an apostate, a pagan, and I would have been run
out of town, burned at the stake, thrown in the prison, whatever it would have been,
it would have been a death sentence. So it's super unusual that we've just broken with lineage
tradition, lineage wisdom traditions of our culture and tribe. So that's step one. But we've been
doing that for a while. And then you had the Sam Harris's and the Christopher Hitchens and those
folks, the new atheists, who a decade or more ago were saying, sort of tap dancing on the grave of
right, the death of the church. And they're like, you know, good riddance to bad rubbish, superstitious
claptrap, opiate of the masses, all of that kind of thing. And here we're all going to move into,
you know, what is nominally meaning to point out, which is basically just the modern,
rational, liberal scientific experience. And I mean, capital L, liberal, not lefty Democrat,
liberal, right? And just that sense of, you know, reason and purism, scientific method,
you know, rule of law, all of those. Enlightenment values. Yes, all the enlightenment values.
But that's been taking a beating as well lately. And it sort of went into overdrive during the
COVID years, right? The whole epistemic collapse of weight, you know, the Ivy League schools,
half of them have been in the tank for pay to play, you know, kid placement. Oh,
shit, you can't even trust those guys. The Lancet is in the tank for some super shady
publications that they rushed to judgment. What's going on with the CDC, International
and NGO organizations, WHO? Can we really trust them? You've seen the shattering,
looking at the banks, looking at McKinsey, looking at Goldman, all of these folks
getting caught with their hands in the cage are all of these folks clearly going above and beyond
following the science, which created this totally understandable backlash in both the far left and
all right, where you now have these entire spun up cottage industries of saying, we've been sold a
bill of goods and we can't trust anything that any authority is saying to us. So now we're going to
do our own research and make stuff up and then fragmented into the echo chambers of, you know,
cheap to publish. You know, basically, everybody's got their own public access TV
station now. And so unsurprisingly, the quality and the consistency of any shared
truth claims have gone out the window. Because it seems to, I mean, your friend Jordan, he
tweeted a year ago that really resonated me. He's like, everyone's talking about its left
versus right, conservative versus liberal, etc. He's like, no, no, no, the real generator of these
culture wars is the tension between centralization and decentralization itself as two sort of
forms of societal structure. That's where this is, this is where the, this conflict is coming
from. It's these two forms of governance themselves trying to find a way to either coexist and,
and well, not trying to coexist, trying to both dominate how things are done.
Would you agree with that? Yeah, I mean, I can for sure see the truth in what he's pointing out
there. For me, it was, it's a, it's a similar delineation, but slightly different, which is
my sense is, is that we're waging, there, there's a literally sort of a pitched battle
for the future direction of humanity, which is, can we level up into playing an infinite game
where sort of, you know, all humans are created equal and entitled to life limiting the pursuit
of happiness in our, our, the objective is fundamentally carrying on the enlightenment
experiment with, you know, tweaks, modifications, upgrades, true ups, you know, truth and reconciliation,
whatever needs to happen, but still fundamentally that project versus the smash and grab down into
finite tribal win-lose dynamics. And in that way, right, you get the, let's just take sort of the
proud boys on one side as like militarized alt-right and, and Tifa as militarized far left, right?
And they, not surprisingly, would think they are sworn enemies of each other, but if you
actually bucket them as, oh, you're all playing finite game, win-lose, tribal, right, versus
stepping up into collectively figuring out the infinite game, you're actually on the same team.
Can you give a definition of finite and infinite games?
Sure. I mean, that's James Cass's original terminology, sweet, you know, fun and interesting
little book. He was a theologian and a philosopher, but basically a finite game is win-lose and it's
sort of you're optimizing to win or lose, presumably to win, within the boundaries of the game,
right? And your goal is to end the game by winning. And the infinite game is, the, the
intention is largely to continue playing indefinitely and to include as many people in the play as
possible. And that's fundamentally the modern Western democratic project. How do we, how do we
incent income and innovation, but also tax, you know, that, that productivity to create a safety net?
How do we create education and programs and rebates and incentives in order to
hopefully inspire and lift people up? Now, that is always, that sounds wonderful in the abstract
and on a drawing board. It never ends up that way. You have rent-seeking behaviors. You have all
sorts of people coming in to put their thumbs on the scale, right? But that is the game.
And the question is, is how well can we play it together?
Yeah, Western democracy tries to be a win-win game as best as can. And it's been,
arguably, the best example of that, certainly beyond the Dunbar number in, in history. But
it seems like it's going wrong. My definition for that, that, you know, the thing I would
sort of point a finger at to say why it's going wrong is this thing called mollock, right? Which
is the god of lose-lose games, essentially, unhealthy game-theoretic incentives, where the
outcomes in aggregate of those individual incentives acting on, on the, on the players
create outcomes that are bad for the whole. Do you have a similar definition of mollock?
Because we've talked about this a little bit before. How would you define it?
Now, I mean, I think that's, that's a solid working definition. It feels like it's, you know,
it often gets conflated with capitalism or markets and market incentives. And it does
feel like it's, you know, we're talking mythopoetically, so we kind of have license, right?
But I mean, it's, it feels like it's something almost bigger than that. It may well be that in
its current expression, you know, market capitalist dynamics are one of its most obvious, you know,
places to see it in action. But it is something, I mean, in some respects,
what's the spooky or sinister part, right? Because this goes back to Ginsburg and everybody
else, right? And, you know, and the ancient Babylonian stuff. But basically, the multi-polar
trap notion, right? Which is kind of a subset of all this, which is sort of if, if there's a
almost certain likelihood that someone is going to do the shitty thing, then it might as well be me.
Because otherwise, I'm the patsy, right? Otherwise, I get left behind. My company fails.
Yeah. So if it's someone violating tax law or environmental regulation, or who's going to
fish the, who's going to collapse the last fishery or chop down the last redwood, if it's
definitely going to happen, it might as well be me and mine. And I think that the, what that does
is it basically indexes that we are now going to justify our behavior based on the near
certain likelihood that there are sociopaths or psychopaths in the mix.
That's essentially making ourselves sociopaths.
Yes. And there doesn't actually have to be a psychopath in the mix to incent all of us to
act like one. It's inclaim self-defense. So that to me is almost the essence of Moloch.
The fact that then that's the sinister evil part. You're like, how the fuck did we get into
this pickle? I thought we were halfway decent humans. And the reality is, is I just have to
suspect that it's like that game Mafia or whatever. Like I just have to suspect that someone in the
room is a killer. And then I will act like one in order not to be killed.
You know, but Moloch is, in essence, it's a coordination problem. It's getting everyone to
agree to not do the selfish short-term thing for the good of the long-term whole,
even though it puts them at a short-term risk, essentially, short-term disadvantage.
Is there a way to sort of like inculcate that into people's minds and nervous systems so that
they can stay more resilient to that through training, essentially?
I mean, I'd love that. I'd love to be able to say yes to that. I'm massively under convinced.
I'm not convinced that simply seeking interesting or peak states necessarily has a one-to-one or
even one-to-three or seven correlation with development of moral and ethical behavior.
And in fact, particularly in the extended psychedelic renaissance, Burning Man,
transformational culture, Tulum, Ibiza, circuit, you can actually make a fairly strong case that it
has fuck all to do with what people, the states that people are seeking. So that's the sort of,
that's the skeptical side of it. The optimistic side is if people are in a place of
abundance, safety, security, concern, your connection, and compassionate care,
yeah, I think we behave better. So if we are under resourced, then that's going to lead to
more reactive, more trauma-informed behavior. And if our tanks are full,
right, we potentially have a little bit less clutch and grab and a little bit more willingness
to share. But that sort of brings us to that question as to whether or not
win-win games are possible, desirable, et cetera, versus win-lose games? And how do we kind of
find our way through that landscape?
So can we, or even should we, be trying to transition society from what is fundamentally a
win-lose game into an omni-win, win-win game?
Aspirationally, win-win, where we all get to expand and, you know, expand the game,
play for as long as possible, include as many people as possible, is, you know, in a nutshell,
the Enlightenment experiment, right, buggered up and bastardized along the way, but still I think
really viable and worth protecting. But I think paradoxically, in order to get there sooner,
we actually need to figure out how to play win-lose games better, right? So rather than
paying lip service to the ideals of win-win, but when push comes to shove, everybody's got the
knives out, right? And you can see this in utopian counter-cultural communities. We're all one
loved one, but who's going to get the nice house, who's going to get the lot, who's banging the
leader, who's going to get the money, all of those things, right? All of those things happen,
and they happen because at the deepest structure of biological life forms, it's one up, one down,
it's life or death, eat or be eaten, right? And that's not to say that is the only option we have,
it's not to get all Jordan Peterson, the about lobsters and things like that, it's just to say
that is a deep root structure. And so my sense is, is that we have, that we earn the opportunity to
play collaborative win-win games when there is a, basically a surplus or abundance of energy
in the system, right? But if it comes down to vital thresholds, right? And either I live or
die based on whether I get that next energy credit, photon or calorie, right? Then it is elbows out,
and that's okay because you could say, oh, well, win-win, we have to expand our consciousness,
we have to level up, you can't solve the problem, the level that created it, all those kinds of
things. And then you're like, yeah, and that's fine. If I as an individual get in touch with my
inner saint or bodhisattva, I say, in fact, my life is no different than your life, I am you,
we are all one, here's my lunch, right? That's beautiful, individual sainthood. But that
mother becomes a martyr, right? She chooses that becomes a murderer, if she says, yeah, and my kid
too, for the stranger, for the strange kid halfway around the world, right? So we can have an
individual mutation of consciousness where we're like, I'm willing to sacrifice myself for a win-win
or so that the least of my brothers and sisters can eat, but we tend not to be willing or able
to do that to our offspring or descendants that violates a deeper level of code. So you're sort
of like, okay, so what is it like to play win-lose games and actually commit not that win-win,
because that only works with a surplus of energy, then we can afford to be generous,
then we can play for the long term. But when it comes down to true binary, down to survival,
by the way, all the games people play, that famous book in the 60s, that pop psych transactional
analysis book, was basically like, here's all the games, there's money games, there's power games,
there's sex games, and certainly money, power, social status are all versions of survival.
If I lose my social status, I'm the outcast in my tribe, it's a social death, potentially a real
death. If I don't have enough money, there's energy credits and coin of the realm. And sex is,
if I lose in the sexual politics game, I don't get to reproduce and effectively, even if I live,
my gene, my downline dies. So all of those are still expressions of binary life-death games.
Right? And so the question is, how do we treat the losers better?
So how do we redesign the game so that the losers don't lose so much?
Yes. And, and or you're decent to them, and or you provide off-ramps, you defy, you know,
you defy the whole classic thing in, you know, what the world was, is defeat with dignity,
right? How do you offer?
Provide your opponent with a golden bridge to retreat across.
Yes. Any number of those things and including, you know, and if we think about, you know,
this is almost helpful in the negative, where the atrocities that we remember through history,
or that you see in films and stories, the absolute bad guy, bad guy is the one who breaks
parlay, right? Or, you know, the right to truce. Like if the guy comes under a white flag and you
cut his head off and send him back, you are the absolute bastard.
The ultimate defection.
Yes. We have all of these symbols and cultures and norms and customs about how can you, I mean,
it's the idea of, you know, in England, the idea of like, that's not exactly cricket, right?
To say it's not cricket, right, doesn't mean it's not the bat and ball sport. It means
you're violating the spirit of the game.
Right.
So there can still be win-lose games where you uphold the spirit of the infinite game,
even as you need to, because of resource constraints, collapse into win-lose.
But you do still acknowledge the spirit of the higher game, right?
And so, and again, we notice those in the violations when people break truces,
when people murder all the women and children in a seized city that surrenders,
versus saying you can go free, we're just going to execute or imprison the potential combatants.
Things like the bombing of hospitals and schools and burning of churches, you know,
when people seek sanctuary in a religious structure, that's supposed to be off limits.
I mean, it sounds like you're referring to just sadism, essentially.
You know, or just scorched-earth competition.
And the, you know, right, and the same thing with Walmart squeezing out mom-and-pop hardware shops
or whatever it would be like, is there a place where enough's enough? Is there a place where we've won?
Right? But we are still allowing for the ecology and the humanity for variants to persist,
versus winner takes all, winner takes everything.
What's your leading contender for the way to do that? Is it just better regulations?
Like, you know, because clearly social norms don't always hold true.
You know, most 99% of people don't, you know, when someone waves a white flag,
they go, okay, I've won, you've lost, great, and that's it.
But there's that 1% that will just for the sake of it.
You know, it's very rare in nature, but you get the cat that does torture its animal.
You know, it's prey before it dies. It seems like social norms will not be sufficient to just
prevent those from continually happening, even though they're so damaging when they do.
Yeah. I mean, this is just a tiny cut at it, right? This is infinitely complex.
I would say tops down and bottoms up. Bottoms up.
I think that we need to actually re-institute the notion of healthy cultural shaming.
Because, and I came across, there was a really interesting, but called enchantment and exploitation,
and it was basically a story, a very detailed analysis of northern New Mexico, sheep herding,
and then cattle raising in like the late 19th century.
And basically the Hispanic communities that had been there for ages, for centuries,
since original Spanish settlement, were sheep and goat herders.
And then you kind of had the Eastern, you know, East Coast, capital-backed cowboys and ranchers
with the barbed wire and all the range wars, like who got defense in, what stuff,
and claim the commons, right? And the idea was that in the Hispanic sheep herding communities,
there was a natural checks and balances. If one guy got greedy and started growing his flock
and all those things, but they had to migrate their various flocks through the same valleys
and same watersheds and this kind of stuff, they would get teased. They'd get ribbed, like,
hey, what are you getting a little greedy? Getting a little gordito over there, buddy,
like what you doing? Or the aunties and the mothers and the grandmothers would kind of
weigh in. And there would just be this social calibration, right, of what was good for the
commons, right? And I think Brene Brown has maybe used these terms exactly opposite than the way
I've come to understand them. But my distinction between guilt, right, which is I am unworthy,
right, or bad, we definitely want to minimize guilt. But shame, I have transgressed the norms
of my tribe, right, is actually an essential tool of governance and correction from Dunbar.
I use them the other way around as well, actually.
Okay. So yeah, however we would want to do it, the idea of-
One of them is useful and one of them is very destructive.
Yes, a natural check and balance when I transgress the norms of my tribe.
That's important, right? And we've diminished that in the whole, you know, no fat shaming,
no selection, no blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, all the things that we've said these days
lately. But the actual thing is like shame is an essential corrective when somebody gets overly
agentic, egocentric, and extractive, right? So that's one thing. And then tops down would be
probably the two policy decisions would just be massively strengthen the antitrust, you know,
prostitutes and prosecution. I mean, Peter Teal famously said in zero to one, like the best thing
to have as a monopoly, because you basically set rates and control terms, you're like, yeah,
that's the best thing for that guy, and it sucks for everyone else. So I think trust busting, whoops,
trust busting is an essential skill. And then really the only way to kind of
muter mollock, right, is to go at the Milton Friedman precedent of the
singular and exclusive legal and fiduciary responsibility of a board of governance of
a corporation is to return maximum shareholder value full stop. That is the toxic cancer and
legal precedent that forces even otherwise well intentioned people into the zero sum games
that we all live and die by. You wrote recently about the issue with the 14th amendment,
which I assumed was just a uniformly good thing. Yeah. It forced into law the idea that
a corporation is a person with personhood, and therefore its rights cannot be,
they cannot be diminished or threatened in any way. And that has meant that we,
essentially humans are in service to corporations as opposed to the other way around.
Yeah, it's absolutely, it's the craziest story I couldn't believe I'd never heard before. And so
the truth is, yeah, the 14th amendment was famously the 13th and 14th were at the end
of the Civil War and are about freeing the slaves and granting citizenship and status to
former enslaved persons. Right, good stuff. Great stuff. But, and this is the weird thing,
because even what you said isn't true. It's not that the 14th amendment guaranteed those
same rights of personhoods to corporations. It wasn't until 10 or 15 years after it was
passed in like 1866 or whenever it was that there was a different completely freestanding
lawsuit on behalf of Leland Stanford, who's the founder of Stanford University. He was the
robber baron railroad guys. And, and there was going to be a tax on his railroad. And basically
this guy was a judge supreme was going to be in the Supreme Court ended up just being a lawyer
and arguing for him. I took on the case and then said, Oh, by the way, you know, 10, 15 years ago,
when that Supreme Court passed the 14th amendment, I was the clerk. So I was there. All those other
guys are dead now. But here's the deal. Let me tell you what they meant when they said persons,
what they meant, they changed it from individuals or people to persons, because what they meant
was to include corporations. And since, since the railroad, the Stanford railroad corporation
corporation is a person, we're subject to the same rights and protection. So you can't tax us.
He fudged it. He even produced a little black book saying, see, this is in my diary. It says,
so it didn't. And they ran him out of town. They said, you're, you're an absolute bunk guy.
But the law clerk recorded it, even though he didn't even work as legal precedent 12 years later,
the law clerk recorded it as if it had. And then that recording got dredged up
another 10 years later. So now you're into like the 20th century, you're like 1910, 1920.
And the Supreme, the Supreme Court held 32 cases or something like that on the actual
14th amendment informing the rights of free black persons to have better treatment under the law.
They, they sat 247 defending corporations with the rights of personhood.
So you're like, wait a second, the entire thing about court, you know, and then even today,
citizens united, right, which was the, which was the Supreme Court decision on dark money
into politics, which basically has just blown up the last decade of American politics, because now
any fat cat corporation, any pack can just fund infinitely and don't have to say who we are
as we buy the votes of American democracy, because our free speech as a person is protected.
So you're like, oh, shit, this has had some gnarly knock on effects. And it wasn't even
the judicial intent at the time, it was a lie on top of a lie on top of a typo
that then just got picked up and run with and given us not only American case law,
corporate case law for the 20th and 21st century, but really now the precedent
for the entire world's protection of corporations. So it's the most upside down thing you could
possibly imagine. Right. Are you concerned about the direction of AI specifically? Are you,
where do you lie on the doomer to rapid accelerationist curve?
Yeah, I mean, I mean, my sense on that is I only, I mean, I allow myself a handful of things to go
deeply on and then I just tend not to get cluttered. So I don't,
I don't read papers on CRISPR weaponized bio weapons, you know, bio weapons, I don't read,
you know, there's just stuff. I'm like, yep, it's out there and someone's thinking about
this, just not me. And so the thing that consents me the most debate about AI is the least sexy
case, right? Because if you, you know, you talk about, oh, is it going to be Skynet? Is it going
to take over? Is it Hal 2000? All the science fiction and, you know, pop culture references
we grasp for to make sense of it, right? But the one that terrifies me is just that,
you know, that documentary and I forget what it was called, but it was basically on the Cambridge
Analytica scandal. And it just went behind the scenes as to how the term crooked Hillary got
workshopped by their data and analysis. It was the dark marketing agency that was affiliated
with Steve Bannon and Cambridge Analytica. It did not spring out of nowhere. It was workshopped
with quantitative analysis. They came that out. They sewed it. They pushed it out through all
the interconnected media outlets. And then that became the crooked Hillary locker up emails.
You could make a case that that single quant AI enabled decision broke Western democracies,
you know, the knock on effects that we are still living through, you know, everything from
Erdogan to Orban to Bolsonaro, like all of this was made possible because that meme
was seeded and sown and took root. And you can be on the one side cheering at one side,
you know, lamenting, but that's how it happened. And so you're like, oh,
shit, when we talk about can AI, you know, what could it possibly do to us other than
becoming a sinister, self aware thing that's secretly launching nuclear codes? You're like,
we could just get much better slash worse at that weaponized memes.
Just weaponized memes and the collapse of
informational weapons of mass destruction. Yeah. Yeah.
To me, so that's such a low bar. I mean, the answer is sort of, we're already there.
There's no avoiding that. And who knows what will happen. And obviously,
Jonathan Heights work, you know, specifically concentrating on adolescents who have,
who are basically super digital natives and coming up. I mean, he said,
I don't think on the record, but to a mutual friend of ours, he said, look, basically
any girl that has gone through adolescents on Instagram and TikTok is
developmentally damaged by that experience. And you're just like, that is heartbreaking.
You know, and they just released his research organization just released a piece I was looking
at before coming here today. And it was just these two great, it was just different age cohorts.
So sort of 18 to 24, 24 to 30, 30. And basically the, if you were 18 to 24,
you were in either of those cohorts, you were in hockey stick increases for anxiety, depression,
self-harm, those kinds of things. The 35 and older was just trundling along. It wasn't great,
but it was baselines. And you just, and you could just see it. And you're like, oh my gosh.
So like, we will be reaping that harvest as they marry or don't, as they settle into careers
or don't, as they have children and raise them or don't. So, you know, just as a citizenry,
you know, we have all of these toxic inputs already in the bank. And then to your conversation
with Daniel Schmacktenberger about, you know, the fact that AI is just a force multiplier on top of
all the existential risk challenges. And this is going to make all of the bad things,
as well as the good things, you know, but certainly all of the bad things as well,
that much more possible by more and more, less and less skilled or malicious people
to have the kinds of impacts that could tip the scales. Those are concerning. So I almost
feel like it's the sort of, it's the statistically incremental and damn near inevitable stuff
that if I was going to be a betting man, I would say those are quite likely to happen
and can have, they're not sexy. You're not going to make a mini series about them,
but they are the ones that could potentially undo us. Whether or not the big time, you know,
more cinematic, epic ones ever come to pass.
Where do you think we should start from in terms of inoculating us ourselves? And I mean that
from an individual perspective, all the way up to sort of families, businesses to societies,
from these kinds of malevolent forces, let's say, you know, people who are intentionally
trying to create either self-serving or just straight up, you know, omniscient or memes,
what are you personally doing to inoculate yourself from those kind of things?
Yeah, I mean, you know, this is obviously a ludicrously large and impossible
situation for all of us to be in. Simply the things that I'm actually doing. So never mind
grand philosophies, just I remember Yuval Harari a few years ago, I just read something where he
said he just, he doesn't consume content that isn't in a book. He doesn't read anything online?
No. Basically, he's like, if it's worth reading or learning about, I will buy the
best book I can find on it and read that. And I just thought that's a phenomenal,
that's kind of like slow data, you know, like slow food movements, all those kind of things.
You're just like, that is good. And I literally feel different and I feel better
when I'm reading stuff in books, even if they're topical, you know, it just feels soothing. It
feels more measured. It feels more, it feels often more detailed. I get the gist of a full idea or
concept or framework. So while I violate that rule all the time every day, as I scroll my news
feed to see what the hell's going on, I'm aspirationally in that direction of just unplug
and go into the slow thinking movement, right? Another is, particularly with
that crazy making overwhelm, right, of things are exponentially better and worse and do I,
you know, plan my, how do I plan my day? I did notice, and I've noticed this in a lot of our
colleagues and friends, that the people I know that are sort of quote unquote fighting the good
fight, right? They're out there in the front, in the public, they're out there drawing attention
to critical issues, those kind of things. They're often getting kind of spun up and burned out
themselves, right? It's a lot to hold and to hold the urgency and the responsibility is more than
most of our psyches and nervous systems can handle, right? And I thought, good Lord,
if I had a terminal diagnosis, right? Like if I knew I had a year to live the classic kind of
thought experiment, how would I act? And then, and the simple answer is that for most of us,
we would be more free, we would be more courageous, we would be more truthful,
we'd be more heartfelt, we'd be more adventuresome, we'd do all the things, right?
Be outside more, we would travel. Yeah, yeah. Hot thoughts and bucket lists and you name it,
right? And I thought, okay, well, let's say that 30 years from now, we really are in that
totally bleak wheels off situation. But I look out my window today and it's actually pretty
beautiful. Sun is still coming up, the moon is setting, there's waves to be served, there's
powder skiing to be had, there's music to listen to or share, there's people, there's
loved ones in our lives. If we pissed away these days, bringing our hands about what might yet
be but isn't, I mean, it's the old Mark Twain thing. He's like, I'm an old man and I've experienced
a great many sorrows, only some of which actually ever happened. We're kind of in that
neck of the woods. And I sort of felt like, okay, so the simplest is for me, it's almost the
hospice tour of the world and life. Like about six months ago, I just kind of set down the
super intense urgency that I had been feeling for several years, including the writing of that
last book where I was like always looking for the solution, always looking for the way through,
right? Where was the gap? Where was the seam and the climbing that crazy mountain that would go
and then we can make it through? Because every single one of them that I tracked pinched out
and it was almost always Malik, right? It was like, you basically, his fingerprints are everywhere
where you're like, oh, fuck, that's hypothetically possible, but we're just not going to do it,
are we? We're not going to do it because of a perverse incentives. We're not going to do it
because of greed or, you know, all of the things you're just like, fucking goddamn, why? We could,
right? We absolutely could, but the statistically my gut sense on are we going to
incredibly low given current conditions. So step one was like feed the holy, like celebrate life.
Shame on us while there is still goodness, truth and beauty in abundance, right? Not to be sucking
the mirror out of life and not to be putting those memories in the bank. And at the same time,
we can never give up hoping because if we give up hope, then that adjacent possibility can never
happen. Like for certain, it's nails in the coffin. If we just go into despair and cynicism
or even just hedonism, like fuck it while Rome burns, I'm just going to party. Like those are
unconscionable decisions. So can we use our feeding of the holy, the idea of like, I'm going to bear
witness to the glory of creation, right? And the absolute heart-rending poignancy of this human
experience. Can I use that, right? To in some tiny, small, insignificant, but profound way,
ritually keep the world on its on its axis, right? As most indigenous cultures did, we pray,
we make these offerings, we do these things so that the sun keeps rising, right? So that the
rain keeps falling so that the crops grow, like can we participate in the wonder of that creative
cycle while we are fortunate enough to still have that opportunity and choice. And then oh, by the
way, leave space for grace, right? Because it has always happened that way. And funnily enough,
this was also, Yuval just mentioned, he typed something maybe just about AI like a month ago,
and he said, we have forever, all of human history, all of human civilization and culture is living
in someone else's dream. Free markets was a concept, like the democracy, civil rights,
everything that we take as the memetic norms of our reality came up and someone dreamed them first.
So the leaving space for grace is, and how can we dream a way through that we cannot see from here?
We cannot, because at least I can't. I've looked, right? And most of the people I look up to have
been looking. And if you really behind closed doors sit down with most of those folks,
it's far grimmer than even the headlines encapsulate, right? But the reality is, is we are
still amazingly adaptive cunning little monkeys with opposable thumbs and brilliant prefrontal
cortexes. So we can't see from here what adaptations, what permutations, what mutations
will happen around the bend. And this goes back to Jim Stockdale, is Admiral Stockdale,
he was the highest ranking POW in Vietnam. And he actually went on to be a vice presidential
candidate at one point. But his, the Stockdale paradox was, he noticed that in those North
Vietnamese POW camps that the pessimists didn't live, because they were like, I'm fucked, you know,
sure enough, they snuffed it. He said, but the really interesting insight was the optimist didn't
live either. Because what happened is they'd be like, we're going to get the boys home for Christmas
or Easter or July the fourth, and those dates would come and go. And then they would just collapse,
they would lose all ability to maintain hope after their hope redemption came and went.
And he said the paradox was the people who survived were ruthlessly realistic about short-term
realities while remaining relentlessly optimistic about the long-term possibility. I don't know
when we're going to get out, but we're going to go home, right? And that is, to me, is sort of
all of us right now. We don't, like we are in a massive intersecting chaotic and complex tight
spot, right? And it's the confluence of every intentional and unintentional quality of our
civilization to date. And we're just hurtling off the cliff, no skid marks. Now, whether or not we
can figure out how to turn into Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, you know, and sprout wings or turn
into a boat or do something else, we can't see from here. And I wouldn't give it super long
odds. We may just get subject into the trash compactor of history, right? But it is on us,
it's incumbent on us to maintain a thread of hope and resilience. And just so that doesn't seem
super pie in the sky, you're like, okay, to me, the where we can look for the most compelling
examples of that. I mean, A, a POW in Vietnam, that's a pretty reality tested one. But the other
are what are fourth world nations or peoples, right? First world was the U.S., second world,
Soviet Union, third world was everybody else, AKA all the poor folks that weren't worth scrapping over
for the first two. But the fourth world, we're literally diaspora peoples, the Tibetans, the
Kurds, the Roma, right? The Rohingya, like the all first nations in the Americas, right? Where
we are uprooted from our home and we are dispossessed people and placeless people in many
instances, right? And so the question there is like, okay, how did those, in fact, we're just
about to be at an event with Bob Thurman, who's the preeminent Tibetan scholar at Columbia
University's Uma Thurman's father, but he's a brilliant, wonderful man and scholar and was
largely responsible for the Dalai Lama's move, bringing the Dharma to the West and all of the
free Tibet movements and those kinds of things and have actually asked him to speak exactly on
this subject, right? Which is like, how do you maintain cultural continuity? How do you maintain
love and compassion? How do you maintain hope for future generations that haven't yet been born
while this generation is in the absolute suck of it? How do we maintain radical hope?
And the key is, you know, as Westerners, coming to the end of the tether of our
hyper-consumptive, hyper-individualist society, the last thing which we should fucking do is do
some ideological neocolonialism of like, hey, oh, you poor bastards that we really gave the
short end to over the last 300 years, you seem to have figured out some stuff about how to endure
conflict and hardship and chaos, which by the way, we were sort of responsible for, but now we're
realizing we've cooked our own goose and can you give us any pointers or tips like that? We
definitely don't want to do, you know, because it just becomes, right, the last gossip of
neocolonial extraction and fetishization, right, of like, oh, you wonderful wise ones who've endured
so much, do teach us, you know, like that would be insufferable. To your point about, do flow
states or do peak states, can they contribute to this, right? An example would be the Native American
Church, right, which in the late 19th century started as the peyote cult, and it was, and it was,
and Kwanaparko was a Comanche who helped spread it, and it was literally after Indian removal
to the reservation systems, most of their world will have used connections to their place,
their, you know, the buffalo hunt or whatever, their ecosystem, they were part of, shattered,
and they were moved to bum-fucked wastelands in, you know, in Oklahoma or all these other places,
and yet the connection to the peyote ceremony, right, and the connection and the singing and the
prayer in the TP, right, was a, and it was highly syncretic, so it also included elements of
Christianity and connection with Jesus and all of these things, was a profound healing modality,
and it allowed there to be rehabilitation, restoration, and community out of a culture that
was otherwise in collapse, and so those kinds of moments and those kinds of movements can be,
I think, profoundly informative and instructive. How do we digest our grief? How do we metabolize
our trauma, individual and collective, and there's quite likely going to be more of it,
right? In fact, again, Zach Stein has said we may be entering an era where billions watch
while millions die, right, and that's actually optimistic, you know, if you think about the
UN's reports on climate refugees for every additional one degree Celsius, we're expected
to have an additional billion climate refugees, billion, you know, there's only eight of us total,
so like that gets large in a hurry, so for sure you could say that fourth nation, diaspora peoples,
do hold insights, and to acknowledge that none of this is neat and tidy, and one of the questions
I intend to be asking Bob Thurman about this is what about the Tibetan nuns and monks who have
engaged in self-immolation? There have been hundreds in the last decade who have said,
okay, Dalai Lama, we revere you, and we absolutely get the long infinite game. Maybe the Chinese
invasion was actually a part of the impetus to bring the Dharma to the West, and maybe this is,
you know, good luck, bad luck, who knows, maybe this is all going to work out for the best, but
fucking hell, man, this is genocide, right, and we have to take witness, and there have even been
monks and dharma, all our younger ones who are like, actually, we need to engage in some terrorist
acts, we actually need to fight back. The Compa, the Com people in Tibet were actually,
you know, they were badasses, they were like the Lakota of the Tibetan Plateau,
and, you know, with all sorts of interesting cahoots with the CIA and everything else during
the Cold War, actively, aggressively, and highly effectively fought the Chinese, and it wasn't until
Kissinger betrayed them completely as Nixon went to China, and that suddenly was like, oh, we don't
need you anymore, that those guys all got clipped. So the questions as to how do we navigate the
decades to century ahead? How do we do it maintaining hope? I would say the first is unplug
from our craziness online, be more of an analog human to the extent that you're capable, live as
if it's your last year on earth and suck the marrow out of all the things that are beautiful and
wonderful and true while we still have them. Without falling into hedonism. Without falling
into hedonism. And where you're becoming even more extractive. Exactly. And then also, like,
let's start girding our loins. What does resilient culture look like? And my sense is, is that
just a psychological categorical analysis is that we're actually not built to handle the
stresses and the challenges that we're facing right now because we're almost 100 years into
being conditioned as fragmented, isolated, rational consumer individuals. So we've all
been conditioned to almost be like potted plants, you know, and we're wrapped in plastic and our
root balls are all bunched up and we have to rely on artificial watering and artificial light and
artificial energy, right? But if you think and of course we blow over and of course we get mold
and mildew and fungus and all these things and of course we're not resilient in a shadow of our
former selves. But when you realize, oh, we have to take our stand in a stand of relationships and
networks and ecology. And you know, the beautiful, we took our kids to do a canopy tour in the Redwoods
in California a few years ago. And the interpreter was like, Hey, here's the deal. And this was
before that book overstory came out. It was before all of these neat books that have been
acknowledging this. And she was just like, Yeah, here's the deal. The Redwoods that are down on the
creek shunt water to the ones that are up on the ridgeline in a dry. When one of them gets
attacked by a beetle or a pest or a fungus, the others instantly understand and develop antibodies
and even albino Redwood trees and they pointed to one, they're like that one evolution,
red, you know, law of the jungle, that motherfucker should not live a plant that cannot conduct
photosynthesis does not get to spread its genes. And the entire ecosystem of the Redwood Grove
funneled food to the albino tree. And it was not as big as the biggest, but it was
thriving. So you're like, Okay, so what if we move more towards that? Right, because all of our
anxiety, depression, diseases of despair, all of these are coming because we're isolated,
potted plants. And if it's, if it's, I mean, mine now, and that's how we've been conditioned as
consumers, every itch has a scratch. And if not, I call them, I pull a Becky and call the manager,
right, or a Karen, right? Like, I'm upset. I want mine. My rights, my rights. Yeah.
That is not going to be up to the task. But if, if you go back to you again,
I mean, think of any of those diaspora peoples, like, I guarantee you their lives have sucked,
roaming in transition, et cetera, why do they keep going? It's, it's, it's the Israelites and,
and, and the, you know, Moses in the desert for 40 years, it's, we keep on going even if
we won't get ours. And this goes back to that stockdale paradox, we keep going on behalf of our
children's children. And it feels like integrating some form of like seven generational awareness,
right? Which is the idea of like, Hey, I'm acting and not just seven generations ahead,
which is the way sometimes people describe that. But three generations behind me,
what did my parents, my grandparents, my great-grandparents do to give me even this
crack at life? Almost certainly for most of us, they, they had to embrace harder things than we
did for sure, right? So you're like, okay, hat tip and gratitude. And let me not fuck up the lead
you gave me. And then what's the, and I stand in the center and then what's three generations ahead
of me? I can absolutely wrap my head around my children, right? Which is biologically hard by it.
I can even think of my grandchildren. That's not a stretch at all. So add one more.
And now I am in the center of that seven generational orbit or ecosystem, bridging time and space.
And I now have, I'm galvanized in my responses, right? So my stress levels, my fear, my, my sense
of even my own narrative, all get expanded and buffered. And they've done studies that show
that children who know the family story, interestingly, who know just not just their
parents, but their grandparents as well, they're, they less depression, less anxiety, higher SAT
scores, higher attendance and completion of university. It's literally like being inoculated.
And, and the story, interestingly, the family stories that are the most inoculating, they have
the most positive effect on outcomes. This isn't like we kick ass, you know, the go team USA. It's
like, it's like, Hey, this is us. This is who's come before you. We've had our shares of ups and
downs. And we're still here. Like those kinds of stories of triumph and disaster and perseverance
are the ones that actually galvanize us the best. And you're like, Oh, that's beautiful.
So really, I would say that the best way forward into our future is to not in a nostalgic way,
but in a respectful and intentional way is to dust off and go back to the past and realize that we,
we cannot weather this storm as isolated potted plants. And we have to put down our roots into
an ecology of relationship, both in, in, in space, the stand in the stand of, you know, we take our
stand in a stand and then time the seven generations. And then that again, doesn't let off, let us off
any of the hooks, but it at least gives us a fighting chance. I think a large
issue for many people is that they aren't, you know, they don't have their family unit nearby.
You know, my, my parents live in the UK. I live in America now. If I'm having children,
how do I give them the same upbringing that I had with my grandparents, you know,
called from while up the road, a large part of people listening to this are probably like,
yes, absolutely. I want to be, you know, more located in time and space with both my ancestors.
And, you know, physically in the same city as the people who I consider my, my crew, but
that is not possible. And how do you marry that up with, you know, online can fit that
bridge that gap to an extent, but then it's making us be more online, which as you were
saying earlier is, is something we need to reduce because it is not good for us. So what,
how do we resolve that tension? I think online to coordinate real life is a beautiful level up,
right? Online to get lost in the real, you know, endless looking glasses of refractory
projected digital narcissism, not so healthy. So the idea of the ability to find and coordinate
among like-minded folks is beautiful. And then, and also, you know, just to kind of expand our
notion of what our relations might look like is that, you know, humans have always been these
crazy mashups, tribes and bands. I mean, even the notion of like non-chattel slavery, right?
So slavery has been around for an awfully long time before there was just like the West African
movement, right? And slavery as it was almost always practice was basically we, we beat you in
battle and we're either going to torture you and kill you, or we're going to adopt you and you
become one of our own. And the same that there's just been recent findings on like Viking gravesites
and they're like, oh, whoa, there's way more angles and Saxons in the gene pool of Scandinavia
than we thought. And what that was was it was, is it was, you know, bringing back slaves, bringing
backwards adopting or marrying often women, having children, interbreeding, all of these things.
And even millennials these days, right, the friendsgiving and chosen family, right? So those
two working terms exist because people are saying, gosh, man, my family of origin,
bit of a crapshoot, maybe kind of dysfunctional, especially if I had different gender identities
or anything non-conforming to the culture of the place, I had to leave that in order to find
myself and find my people. That's a beautiful notion, but it's, it's, it's new old. You know,
it's a new expression of what is an ancient thing, which is we always sort of pitched in
and got on with who we are around. So even if our biological families are incompatible or
geographically distant and those kinds of things, chosen family, chosen kinship, those kinds of things
can be beautiful, you know, nutrients that we all sort of, you know, make us stronger and healthier.
What books have been most formative to your thinking? Almost helpful for you in the, in the
last couple of years, particularly in, in finding this healthy middle ground of maintaining hope,
but without getting lost in the constantly looking for solutions.
I think the one, and I've been, I've been recommending this to, to everybody lately is,
is a book called Bittersweet by Susan Kane. And she wrote a book called Quiet, which was how to
be like being an introvert in an extroverted world. It was New York Times bestseller for like
two and a half years or something. And Bittersweet is her most recent. And it's, it was her original
premise was, why is it that Leonard Cohen songs make me cry, but I love them so much anyway, right?
And then at the same time as she was writing the book, she lost both her father and her brother
to COVID. So she experienced actual real loss. And then she was also on this sort of more
philosophical journey. And her whole thing, it's a little like Pamela Chodron and like when things
fall apart, it's just this beautiful notion of like, Hey, we often think of like Maslow's hierarchy
and self-transcendence and all these, these wonderful things, but you know, the whole toxic
positivity thing is, is real. And she's like, actually, there is this bittersweet sweet spot
of being a human. And it is, it is, it is this yearning for something that is beautiful and not
yet, right? And this sort of residing in all of the constraints and limitations and heartache
and heartbreak of this actual experience. And that is gorgeous, appropriate, healthy.
And it's just this wonderful, just kind of like, ah, you mean, I don't need to fix this,
solve this, biohack this, transcend this over, you know, daily affirmation is, I can just be
in that on we, you know? And so to me, I feel like that is super helpful to all of us who,
you know, you just scroll through Instagram or TikTok or Twitter for this. And everybody's
just shouting at you, you, you're unasked for, you know, like, here's the thing you're doing,
Robin, here's what I think you should do at ten easy steps and click on the links and likes and
swipe. And you know, you're just like, Oh, dear God. So I think that one's beautiful. I like,
I really enjoyed David Graber's dawn of everything, that big meta analysis of just human civilization.
He was, he was one of the advisors for Occupy back in whenever that was 08 or 10. So he's
definitely got an anarchist bent. But his whole thing of like, he basically just critiques the
endless rise of civilization narrative. And he's like, man, we've been trying all kinds of different
formulations, and we've been coming at this, and we've been, we got into agriculture, and we
abandoned it, we went back to hunting, we started with cities in, in Gobekli Tepe, but we didn't
have farming, we didn't have priests. And then we kind of, we buried them all and moved on. And
we've just, just this idea that we are constantly innovating, and that there's all sorts of
decentralized ways that humans have done the human thing, instead of we were in caves and
then cities and then, and then priests and then cathedrals, like he just critiques that and
dismantles it in really, I think, fun and provocative ways. Do you know Tyson Yankaporta?
He's an aboriginal scholar. He's like, how indigenous thinking can save the world. In
fact, if you're asking for another book, I would say Sand Talk.
Sand Talk?
Sand Talk.
Sand Talk.
Yeah. And he said something, and this goes back to that seven generations idea, but he says,
you know, sort of, you know, playfully, it was sort of like you Westerners, right? You're just,
you're wrapped around the axle of all these childish questions. Like, who are we? And what's
the universe? And what's the meaning of life? And where do we go when we die? And all these things,
these are things that any young person in any intact tradition would already know,
understand and trust the answers to those questions. Like the idea, this goes back to the
potted plants thing that we're all sort of isolated in fragment and trying to figure this out for
ourselves by ourselves. He's like, those are ludicrously pretentious questions to presume
you're just going to take on and solve for yourself. You know, like the answers are in our
elders, the answers are in our ancestors, the answers are in our gods and rituals and worship.
This is who we are. This is the way the world works. This is why we're here. This is where we
go. This is where we came from, you know, and just that idea that that's a sort of almost adolescent
cubris that we can and ought to figure that shit out from scratch. Because I think it's
fascinating. I just heard that a few weeks ago and I'm still like percolating on the implications.
Okay. Do you think we are living in a cosmological game? And if so, what do you
think the purpose of the game is? Do I believe we're living in a cosmological game?
Are we in some kind of game? And if so, what is the objective of the game?
I mean, the old hippie bumper sticker, like life's the school and loves the lesson.
No, I heard that one.
Yeah. I don't think it's half bad if you want to, you know, commit to the bit, right? That,
yes, this is a game and this is the purpose. And in fact, John Lilly, who's the famous slash infamous
university of Pennsylvania, PhD, psychonaut, LSD with dolphins, inventor of float tanks,
that guy who went longer than almost any other human ever has since and come back to tell about it,
went as far as divining. I mean, he would intramuscularly inject ketamine and spend hours at
a time in float tanks in deep space, communicating with multiple levels of entities. And because he
was a rational scientist was also mapping it. Now, if you look at his leadership, which you
can find on YouTube, he's wearing like a Davy Crockett Coonskin camp and looks like a
Lysergic Shoemaker's elf. So like definitely he went there. But he even articulated the
Earth Coincidence Control Office. It was this system that oversaw Earth. And you can even
go to his Wikipedia page, just John Lilly Wikipedia, and it lists there the eight rules
that he received from Echo from the Earth Coincidence Control Office. So like,
it was like everything that's happening in your life is happening for a reason,
you know, like the key is not to forget, like everything here is training you and training
you for purpose built shit. We control the large coincidences in your life, you control
the small coincidences and it's just this whole like rules of the game. And you're like, oh,
shit, that is, that is awesome. Right. So if that were the case, wouldn't that be amazing?
My personal situation is I'm almost in the sort of the antithesis of Pascal's wager, right? So
in Blaise Pascal, right, famously said, better to believe in God in case he's there,
then not believe him and burn in hell for my doubts, right? And I would almost sort of say,
this wasn't a choice. I just kind of have ended up here. It's almost more like Nietzsche's
wager, right? A better to believe that God is dead, right? And if it turns out I've got
guardian angels looking out for me, fucking bonus, you know, so I would say what's your,
what's the MVP? What's my minimum viable philosophy that gets me through the night?
And to me, I don't know. And I'm not sure any of us can, but I'm pretty certain I,
I haven't yet figured out with any declarative certainty whether there is a bigger picture,
whether there is, you know, the goddess is alive and magic as a foot, whether all of these things.
And that's not to say I haven't had life-changing, shaping and informing, profound, non-ordinary
experiences. I haven't, I do. But epistemically, where they live and what that means about larger
orders or truth claims, I don't know. I'm an agnostic, gnostic, right? I've had the experience,
the undeniable truth of effing the ineffable, right? And I have no fucking idea what the
implications are of that. So for me, the MVP, my minimum viable philosophy is just, I choose to
believe, and this is, I'm willing to like double click on this, like this is where I end fact-based
assertions or evidentiary argument. I choose to believe that a universe with a little more
goodness, truth and beauty in it is better than a universe with a little less.
And then that gives me all I need to know to act and to act in hopefully a direction that
more aligns with that. I'm not saying that is the truth of it. I'm not saying that is validated or
stamped, you know, by a higher power. I'm just, I choose to believe that, feels right-ish,
and it's enough to govern all my actions from here. And now if it turned out that like I crossed
the play of the gates and I get a little pat on the head like, oh, Jamie, you were such a sweetheart.
You had to, you tried and you struggled and you did this all alone and you never prayed
to all of us. We were just sitting here ready to cheer you on. It would have been so much
fucking easier if you'd just relaxed and realized you were on rails and I would have gone, oh,
stone me, right? The joke's on me. But for me, it's enough to get out of bed. Right. And I take
that I would rather be pleasantly surprised than gutted when I went to lean on something that
wasn't there. Beautiful. Thank you so much. Thanks for listening, everyone. And of course,
thank you to Jamie for joining me today. I've linked in the show notes below all of the sort
of resources that we talked about and do check out his books, Stealing Fire and Recapture the
Rapture. They are excellent. Also, check out flowgenomeproject.com and also his sub-stack.
Again, link below. And thanks as always to my wonderful editor, Raymond Way, for putting
everything together on this, dealing with all my camera snaffoos, which always happen. And to
you all, make sure you subscribe on whatever channel you like to watch or listen to this too
so that you don't miss the next one. And until then, may your life be full of win-wins.
