Hi everybody, welcome back to the front room. I'm Kai and I'm here with my dad today.
Hi guys, hope you're having a good day. Thanks for joining us again.
Maybe, maybe you won't have a good day after listening to this song.
Oh, I'm gonna show you at least. Okay. Great, good to hear that.
This is a highly requested song and artist.
I could take a stab at who it might be, but I won't.
Okay, yeah. We're gonna be listening to a song called
Dance with the Devil by Immortal Technique.
Thought it might be that one. I really did.
Yeah, because people have asked for it for a long, long time.
Yeah, a long time. Yeah, Dance with the Devil by Immortal Technique.
Yes, it's an underground classic, but it's so popular in the underground, you know,
people that maybe don't listen to rap that much or, you know, might have come across it.
It's got released in 2001 and it's a pretty epic song, but I was gonna say, you know,
I've listened to some other Immortal Technique. I haven't been the biggest fan.
This song sticks out for me as one of his better ones that I've heard.
Okay. But definitely, I was gonna say I'm a fan of the song,
but I don't know if that's the right word to describe appreciating the song.
So you'll see that. Usually, I give you the lyrics, but this time,
I'm gonna hold off because he's pretty easy to understand.
If you need the lyrics halfway through when I pause or something,
yeah, just let me know and then I can give them to you.
I'll do that. But just focus in and just get ready.
Dance with the devil?
Yeah. Oh boy. Okay.
Here we go.
All right.
Theme from the movie Love Story.
Yeah.
Mellow and...
So criminals, he chilled with didn't think he was real.
You see me and niggas like this have never been equal.
I don't project my insecurities on other people.
He feeding for props like addicts with pipes and needles.
And so he felt he had to prove that everyone he was evil.
A feeble minded young man with infinite potential.
The product of a ghetto bred capitalistic mental.
Coincidentally dropped out of school to sell weed.
Dancing with the devil smoke till his eyes would bleed.
But he was sick of selling trees and gave him to his greed.
Yeah. Very easy to understand.
That was a good line.
Rob and niggas anything you could do to get his respect back
in the eyes of his crew.
Starting fights over little shit up on the block.
Stepped up to selling mothers and brothers to crack rock.
Working overtime making money for the crack spot.
Hit the jackpot and wanted to move up to cocaine.
Fulfilling the scar face fantasy stuck in his brain.
Tired of the black niggas treating him the same.
He wanted to be major like the cutthroats and the thugs.
But when he tried to step to him niggas showed him no love.
They told him any motherfucking coward can sell drugs.
Any bitch nigga with a gun can bust slugs.
Any nigga with a red shirt can front like a blood.
Even puffy smoke the motherfucker up in the club.
But only a real thug can stab someone till they die.
Standing in front of them staring straight into their eyes.
Billy realized that these men were well guarded.
And they wanted to test him before business started.
Suggested raping a bitch to prove he was cohorted.
So now he had a choice between going back to his life.
Or making money with made men up in the site.
His dreams about cars and ice made him agree.
A hardcore nigga is all he ever wanted to be.
And so he met through Friday night at a quarter to three.
I'm just going to pause it there.
Well I can totally understand it.
That's good.
Yeah it's telling the story of this guy.
Just trying to, guy who's trying to make it in the world.
In terms of selling drugs and then trying to move up through the ranks I guess.
But people are saying what have you got that a thousand other guys don't have right?
Yeah exactly.
And even if you do get that money he said you can't buy respect with money.
So yeah he was dealing drugs.
Then did he catch the end of that verse where they said you know if you really want to
move up the ranks and be on our level be part of the you know part of the club I suppose.
You have to rape somebody.
God no I missed that.
Do you want to rewind that a little bit?
Yeah.
Sounds like it's kind of important.
Yes.
Right right and before that they said
they say or he says uh yeah um you know if you're hardcore you can actually stab someone
and stab them repeatedly and stand over them until they die.
Right yeah and also rape somebody.
Yeah.
Show that you're really uh tough that you're really you're worthy to be one of us.
Wow yeah.
Yeah so I think um initiation into the.
Yeah exactly you know any they said basically anybody can shoot a gun.
Right.
Anybody can sell drugs.
But you want to actually be a ruthless.
Yeah.
Person.
Yeah.
Like us.
Yeah.
You got to do these things so it's a tale of whether or not he wants to do it.
Yeah you know and before this uh this um stanza or yeah this portion of the song uh started up
there was a drop in the music did you notice that sort of a it went down a notch I don't know
how to explain it.
Where he wasn't rapping or no when he was yeah there was a change and there's no piano
it was um yeah there's a some sort of strings yeah and it almost sounded like there was the
music got kind of a little more um not ominous but there was a there was a drop in the music
and I thought immediately okay there's a change here and something something's coming up.
Right.
Yeah.
I think um I'm not sure exactly what the change was there.
Yeah.
But I think it was just leading up to this this sort of pivotal moment.
Yeah it was it was.
So that might have been that.
Yeah neat.
Do you want the lyrics or you think you're good.
I don't think I need them.
Okay.
Yeah.
I love that.
That is the best line in the song.
They drove around the project slow while it was raining smoking plunge drinking and joking
for entertainment until they saw a woman on the street walking alone three in the morning
coming back from work on the way home and so they quietly got out the car and followed her
walking through the projects the darkness swallowed her they wrapped their shirt around
their head and knocked her onto the floor this is it kid now you got your chance to be raw
so billy yoked her up and grabbed the chick by the hair and dragged her into a lobby that had
nobody there she struggled hard but they forced her to go up the stairs they got to the roof
and then held her down on the ground screaming shut the fuck up and stop moving around the
shirt covered her face but she screamed and clawed so billy stomped on the bitch till he
broke in a jaw the dirty bastards knew exactly what they were doing they kicked her until
they cracked the ribs and she stopped moving blood leaking through the cloth she cried silently
and then they all proceeded to rape her violently billy was made to go first but each of them took
a turn ripping her up and choking her until her throat burned a broken jaw mumbled for god but
they weren't concerned when they were done and she was lying bloody broken and bruised one of
them niggas pulled out a brand new 22 they told them that she was a witness for what she'd gone
through and if he killed her he was guaranteed a spot in the crew he thought about it for a minute
she was practically dead and so he leaned over and put the gun right to her head
I'm falling and I can't turn back
I'm falling and I can't turn back right before he pulled the trigger and ended her life he thought
about the cold pain with the platinum and ice and he felt strong standing along with his new
brothers cocked the gap to her head and pulled back the shirt cover but what he saw made him
start to cringe and stutter because he was staring into the eyes of his own mother she looked back
at him and cried because he had forsaken her she cried more painfully and when they were raping her
his whole world stopped he couldn't even contemplate his corruption had successfully changed his fate
and he remembered how his mom used to come home late working hard for nothing because now what was
he worth he turned away from the woman that had once given him birth and crying out to the sky
because he was lonely and scared but only the devil responded because god wasn't there and right
then he knew what it was to be empty and cold and so he jumped off the roof and died with no soul
they say death takes you to a better place but I doubt it after that they killed his mother
and never spoke about it and listen because the story that I'm telling is true because I was there
with Billy Jacobs and I raped his mom too and now the devil follows me everywhere that I go
in fact I'm sure he's standing among one of you at my shows in every street cipher listening to
little thugs flow you could be standing right next to you and you wouldn't know the devil grows
inside the hearts of the selfish and wicked white brown yellow and black color is not restricted
you have a self-destructive destiny when you're inflicted and you'll be one of god's children
it fell from the top there's no diversity because we're burning in the melting pot so when the
devil wants to dance with you you better say never because a dance with the devil might last you forever
wow
oh wow gosh what a story told it so well
wow that was
that was mind-blowing that was hard to listen to yeah that that's the reason why I've only you
know when people said you gotta show your dad this I was like you know I listened to the song but
after the first time I never really wanted to listen to it again it's so graphic it's so clear
and but there's such a big message attached to this you know
it's so it's so apparent the message is apparent I don't really have to go over it right but just
yeah and it just but I imagine that there are a lot of people who who are trying to get out of
their situation who may be tempted to follow uh who may be attempted to go against their better
judgment of what they believe in and and they get caught up in things right that leads them to do
crazy things yeah and uh yeah wow wow tough song yeah geez and uh I guess something important
to to know like his mother right yeah so so is this true is this true yeah well well the thing is
there's a lot of sort of it could be true but well he says it is a true story uh but a true story in
the sense that maybe it didn't exactly happen the way it did but you know because it's so
so like um graphic and you know you it's like watching a train crash as they say yeah it is
you know that things just escalating and out of control yeah and it's going to be bad situation
but you just it has your attention locked on it yeah so he said the reason some people said you
know he didn't need to make it that graphic and things like that but he said it just captures
your attention oh no I disagree yeah it captures your attention and and that's why it's become the
song has become into sort of uh it has its own lore to it no it catches you oh really yeah where
people say you know they hadn't heard a song like this before yeah and wherever they were in the world
yeah um they were like you know stuff like this happens and yeah and I didn't realize that other
people sort of it made them realize that it's a universal thing where people want to sacrifice
possibly their morality yeah for riches and power and why not well he mentioned it he says I think
he says black white he mentioned you know this could happen to anybody right yes yeah oh no I I
think um no I think um it's great that he spelled it out this way because you know I could imagine
somebody who you know listens to rap hearing this someone who's maybe on the wrong path on the wrong
direction and hearing this and possibly having this really sink in because it's so vivid right and
using the uh the mother or his mother as a sort of a symbol not because it's not actually his
mother that he raped right that'd be impossible for him to just realize that before he was gonna
blow her brains out yeah um it's just symbolic for his society and his own mother right because if
you are uh you're taking away that person's that person's innocence and and no respect towards them
that's also gonna be destructive towards your own community so that's the reason why he said
it's not he says it's not a song about rape like a lot of people think it is it's a song about
making people realize that women are what he says the most important people in society and
especially latino and latina and black women are often uh you know disrespected yeah so
it's to sort of make people realize right it goes beyond just the story of rape right yeah
to uh encompass the whole uh his his belief point of view yeah wow wow wow
yeah it was really good really good and that last line there the last two i suppose uh starting
here yeah so when the devil wants to dance through the you better say never because a dance for the
devil might last you forever i like a lot of the lyrics i had said i love that lyric where he talks
about the angels used to be up here and how they've fallen and the devils are down here and now it's
one melting pot that's the chorus that's that's the chorus the chorus is is is um it's not delineated
strongly as a chorus is it yeah not not exactly there's a little bit of a pause before he starts
rapping and that shows that it's a new section uh huh uh huh yeah that was great devils used to be
gods angels that fell from the top um yeah there's no diversity because we're burning in the melting
pot yeah i love that and i think possibly the most powerful um thing in the song you're not
powerful it's hard to say what's the most powerful in this song yeah but one of the most powerful
things is that he eventually kills himself oh i know and um and but he won't go to heaven
he's going straight to hell and he knows it yet he does it because once you do something that bad
you can't escape it what's done is done right mm-hmm oh yeah wow this is quite something quite
something um so this is 2001 i noticed that the rhymes come in at the end of the line
yeah he's not um the most technical rapper from what and he actually is slightly messy
in terms of his technical ability all right uh but that allows it to be more of a stream of
consciousness thing where he's just telling a story or talking to you and that's why it's
easy to fall in i got that's the feeling i got yeah he's telling a story i found the music was good
because it didn't take you away from the story at all yeah it's just there and a beautiful piano
beautiful suddenly haunting at least when it's paired with this melancholy story yeah oh wow
so that is dance with the devil i could see why everybody wanted me to hear that
um uh and i didn't need any i didn't need Kleenex but uh
it was uh quite something yeah people are saying you know don't show him this
because he will be destroyed by it no i think i i think this is a really really well done song
and i feel that this song was you know almost necessary to spell these things out what why
should we not say this type of stuff why should your music yeah why shouldn't we why should we not
go there right yeah awesome thank you very much yeah you're you're welcome i suppose yeah in a way
thanks guys i hope you i don't know if enjoy is the right word but i hope you uh found uh our
video today interesting for you in some way uh huh yeah thanks for watching everybody and uh thanks
for checking in yeah see you soon
