Hello everybody, this is Pascal from Neutrality Studies and yesterday my dear friends from
Austria uploaded a video interview that they did live in Austria in Vienna with Jeffrey
Sachs and it is part of this big peace conference that was organized there, was done in conjunction
with my colleague Fritz Edlinger, who is the editor-in-chief of the Austrian magazine
International. A wonderful magazine, if you read German I highly recommend subscribing
to them and also subscribe to their YouTube channel, they do a fantastic job. The interview
with Dr. Sachs was done by my friend and colleague with whom I have published books together
Dr. Professor Heinz Gertner and I would just recommend you watch this one hour long
discussion between the two and all the explanation that Jeffrey Sachs gives. He's a fantastic
speaker and he views world politics and US politics very very clearly. Please enjoy.
So I wrote the war, Professor Sachs. We have several explanations here out there, so starting
from Putin's personality to imperial conquest, to more structural explanations like hegemonic
competition. So we have this range of explanations, so where would you stand? Is it personality
is it imperialism, is it more hegemonic competition, of Kate Barr competition, as we say, so that's
the first question. Great, thank you very much and I'm told to be very brief so that we can discuss
a lot, so I'll give somewhat brief answers because if I get going it's going to be a long evening for
you. I believe the war started nine years ago, not last year. I think it started in February 2014,
it started with the violent overthrow of President Yanukovych, which I attribute to a
significant extent to US participation in a regime change operation in Ukraine. And to my mind that
really was the trigger of this war, meaning that we are basically seeing a proxy war between the
United States and Russia, plus both sides of playing on the very aggravated ethnic divisions
within Ukraine. So Ukraine is a divided country, ethnically, historically, but that meant that
there was competition between the United States and Russia for control, for influence, even for
putting military bases and the US NATO alliance. And I view the lack of prudence by both sides, but
since I'm an American, I will focus on the lack of American prudence as being absolutely central
to this. If the United States had sense, and by the United States I don't mean the American people,
they're never asked about any of these things. This has nothing to do with the American people.
This is to do with a small group in Washington in power. You could call it the military industrial
complex, it's a fair name for it. They don't have prudence, and we are at war because of that lack
of prudence in my view. I don't think anything specific about Putin's personality plays any
important role in this. I don't think that this is some idea of recreating the Russian Empire.
By the way, we hear lots of things in the mainstream media, which to my mind are completely
unrecognizable regarding the truth. And just one more small point. I was advisor, economic advisor,
to President Gorbachev. I was economic advisor to President Yeltsin, and I was an economic advisor
to President Kuchma, the first president of independent Ukraine. I didn't choose sides,
I liked them both. There's no reason why this war needed to happen, but I'll focus because of being
an American on the lack of sense of the military industrial complex in the United States. And I
think that that was a major, major cause of this war. You said personality doesn't really play that
role. You mentioned NATO and probably its structural causes and such a monarchy competition.
And of course, Russia's perception is that Russia wanted to wall off NATO. So he was not really
successful because now NATO is everywhere. So NATO, Finland and Sweden are training NATO and
NATO troops are permanently deployed in Poland and the Baltic States. Right now we have a huge
military, NATO military maneuver in Germany and also Putin wanted to demilitarize Ukraine. And now
Ukraine is the most militarized country in Europe. Was Putin's decision a big geopolitical plunder?
Well, it's a big geopolitical tragedy. What happens from now still remains to be seen.
And let me be clear about the NATO issues. It's my, well, it's without doubt
the American plan to expand NATO to Ukraine already in the mid 1990s, well before there was Putin
as president. It is my understanding from a discussion with one of our leading historians
recently that the plan to expand NATO to Ukraine was made in 1992. Basically within weeks or months
of having promised Gorbachev that NATO would not move one inch eastward. So this is not something
new. It's not something about Putin. It's something that predates Putin. There's a fascinating
article by Zbigniew Brzezinski in Foreign Affairs magazine, which is our establishment foreign policy
magazine in 1997, where he spells out the timeline to NATO enlargement to Central Europe, Eastern
Europe, the Baltic States, and Ukraine almost precisely in 1997, because this was a U.S. plan
at the top levels. When an article was written like that, that's not just an opinion of an
author that's informing the elite opinion in the United States what the real plan is. So this was
in the works for decades, and the specific idea about NATO spelled out by Brzezinski, both in
Foreign Affairs and in a book called the Global Chess Board that he wrote in 1997,
is to surround Russia in the Black Sea region. This is out of the playbook of Britain and France
in 1853 to 1856. It's almost reliving the Crimean War. The idea of the Crimean War was that
Palmerston wanted to kick Russia out of the Black Sea. Brzezinski had a similar idea in the mid-1990s.
The U.S. Neoconservatives had a similar idea back to 1992. If Ukraine and Georgia become NATO members,
if you look at the map, you see that Russia is surrounded by Ukraine, Romania, Bulgaria, Turkey,
and Georgia. Even the idea of expanding NATO to Georgia, to me, is the giveaway.
Last time I checked, Georgia is not a North Atlantic country. It's in the Caucasus.
What in heaven's name is NATO doing in Georgia? This is where things really went awry.
It is official U.S. doctrine. It's surprisingly official, by the way, because you can find it
in many, many documents, that the U.S. goal is to be the dominant power in all parts of the world.
To my mind, no thanks. It doesn't make me feel any safer. It just means endless wars,
when 4.1 percent of the world population presumes that it's going to dominate the world.
But this, I believe, was part of U.S. foreign policy at the core already for decades.
And NATO enlargement is part of this. There's something particular about Ukraine.
It is 2,000 kilometers of border with Russia. It is, from Russia's point of view,
a direct security risk to Russia. I would take the same view as a Russian. I would take the
same view as an American vis-a-vis Russia. I actually don't want Mexico to have a military
alliance with China. I don't want Mexico to have a military alliance with Russia.
And I don't want the United States to have a military alliance with Ukraine for the same
reasons. It doesn't make the world safer. If NATO expansion was one of the main
causes for the decision by Russia to invade Ukraine, because, of course, of the
fear that it might be a similar situation as we had with the Cuban Missile Crisis in
1962, that NATO missiles would be deployed there. However, there have been several
proposals since 2008. There was the Bucharest Summit when NATO promised
Ukraine and Georgia would become NATO members, but not later than 2014 for a neutrality
of Ukraine. So neutrality defined no NATO membership, but at the same time,
the withdrawal of Russian-supported militias in the east. So it could have a neutral Ukraine
avoided the war. Why was it discarded? Of course, since 2019, we know that Ukraine has
the NATO membership in its constitution. Before 2008, there was some fourth and back
independence neutrality NATO membership, but not later than 2005 NATO membership was an
aspiration by Ukraine. So if Ukraine would have defended or presented a credible neutrality,
could the war have been avoided? Of course, it could have. And Austria's history is
a glorious demonstration of the success of neutrality. Austria was not threatened
in the years from 1955 onward by being a non-NATO neutral country. Austria regained its sovereignty
and the Soviet Union went home. And incidentally, the Soviet Union went home in 1955 because
not only was the state treaty signed in the Belvedere agreed and the neutrality
declared by the parliament of this country, but also the Soviet Union was saying to the United
States, do this for Germany and the Cold War ends. Make Germany neutral. What is this NATO
business? This is a threat to us. Germany claimed 20 million lives of our citizens.
Why are you re-arming Germany? And our greatest statesman practitioner of the day, one of our
great historian diplomats in modern history, George Kennan, said at that moment, use the Austrian
example, have a neutral Germany, and tell the Soviet Union, go home out of Central Europe,
out of Eastern Europe. Now you don't need that buffer zone because Germany is neutral. The United
States would have nothing of it. The United States has never believed in it. You were lucky,
they weren't paying attention. But for Germany, no way. We were going to have NATO.
The end of the 1950s, Eisenhower even said, give them nuclear weapons. That's okay. And that is why
in a series of horrible events, we nearly arrived at nuclear armageddon with the Cuban
missile crisis, the United States has a very hard time thinking through the eyes of anyone else.
And when I say U.S., I'm meaning literally a small group of a few hundred people. I'm not
speaking about the American people. They're not told anything about this. And just as a footnote,
I've tried to explain the role of NATO in this to the New York Times. And they will not print
anything on this. They've written 26 editorials since February 24, 2022, that this is an unprovoked
war. I called them. I wrote to them. I said, I've advised all these leaders, these countries. I've
been through this for three decades. Can you give me 700 words? The answer is no. There's a complete
unwillingness to have any discussion about this. Because if you do, you're put on Ukraine's Black
list and you're put on America's no show list in the mainstream media. It's really quite something.
One more thing that's worth everybody understanding. This is not about Democrats and Republicans.
This is not at all about partisan politics. Biden is no different from so many other presidents.
It's not this one's crazy. This one's not crazy. They're all a little bit.
But this is about really state policy in the deepest structure in Washington.
And it's the Armed Services Committees. It's the very 900 billion dollar military budgets.
You have to test your weapons. Believe me, you need wars not so infrequently. You have to be ready.
You have to teach China a lesson in the in the minds of this small group. This war is as much
about China as it is about anything else. Isn't that surprising? It's hard to think the way they think.
But you cannot actually discuss this in the United States right now, in the mainstream.
Of course, there are a thousand outlets to discuss things, but not in the Washington Post,
the New York Times, the Wall Street Journal, MSNBC, CNN. Forget it.
Let's do a step, Professor. You mentioned Austria and compared it to Germany.
Austria was lucky, maybe prudent, as you say, to get its permanent neutrality. Germany was
permanently divided for several decades. So we know this from history that wars
and where the armies stand. So and then you always have a division of territory.
So we know this from the end of the Cold War. In Tehran, 1943, they decided to build the blocks
where basically the armies after the Second World War were deployed. Now we have a situation
in a little bit and sort of Iron Curtain, a little bit more east. So we have an Iron Curtain from the
Arctic. Finland, Sweden is joining NATO. And this Iron Curtain is going right through Ukraine
down to the Black Sea. Do you see for Ukraine now a permanent division like for Germany or for
Korea? Or do we see a permanent war since I guess permanent neutrality is not the option anymore
for Ukraine? I would say we don't know what the options are because there has been no diplomacy
between the United States and Russia since this war began. As far as I know, President Biden
and President Putin have not spoken one time since February 24, 2022. I find that worse than
school children, by the way. It's hard for me to understand how the world can be at the brink of
nuclear war. And I could send them a link if they want so they could get on Zoom. I could even give
them a phone call. I'd lend them my phone. It's not so hard. But they don't talk. This is somehow
sophisticated. This is absolutely mind-boggling. Of course, you need to talk. You need to understand
the other side. Maybe you won't agree. More likely you'll find a modus vivendi or modus operandi to
get beyond this. It could be, in the end, many things could be. So I don't have a prediction.
Ukraine could be divided. We could have nuclear war. We could have Ukraine be neutral.
And Russia go home from most of Ukraine, though I don't think it's going to leave Crimea
for a lot of reasons now. But lots of things could happen. We should understand that in December
2021, the idea that Russia would annex the Donbas wasn't mentioned once. What Russia wanted
was that the Minsk-2 agreements would be honored. Now, that's quite interesting. The Minsk-2 agreements
declared that there would be autonomy for the Lugansk and Donetsk, for Eastern Ukraine,
the Russian dominant ethnic group, signed by Ukraine, and voted 15 to nothing by the U.N.
Security Council and guaranteed by France and Germany. Do you know what my Ukrainian friends,
they don't regard me as a friend anymore. But what they tell me, of course we'd never honor that
as if it's a joke. And then when Russia says, well, this was not honored, we say, ah,
what difference? Russia doesn't believe in diplomacy. And now the sentence that I just uttered
proves that I'm a Putin lover. You know, in other words, we're in a cycle of bizarre arguments.
The truth is actually rather straightforward. The United States participated in the overthrow
of Yanukovych. A Russophobic government came to power. They immediately declared the intention,
immediately means within 2014 to join NATO. Arms shipments from the United States accelerated.
The Minsk agreements were signed. The Ukrainian government ignored them. Chancellor Merkel
explained afterwards, she explained to us last year, that she ignored them completely.
In 2021, December 17, President Putin put on the table a draft U.S.-Russia
security agreement, which had two major points that Putin was emphasizing. One is that the
Minsk agreement should be carried out. And the second was that NATO would not enlarge.
And the United States said, we don't negotiate with you over those things.
And it's NATO doctrine. What we do is no third country's business.
As if Castro said, what business is it of you, United States, just before we invaded in the Bay
of Pigs and also nearly had the world blown up over the Cuban Missile Crisis. If the tables
are turned just a little bit, believe me, the explosion that you would hear of any of the
claims that the United States makes. So that kind of hypocrisy and arrogance also is very grating
on most of the rest of the world. We make wars when we want. We can invade Afghanistan. We can
invade Iraq. We can try to overthrow Assad and have no doubt that was not a civil war. That was a
U.S. regime change operation signed by the President of the United States to the CIA called
Operation Timber Sycamore. We can overthrow Gaddafi with the NATO in the end of 2011. We
can overthrow Yanukovych. We can do what we want. Why are you complaining? We are a peace-loving
defensive alliance. And so this doesn't work. And this is why we don't know what can happen,
because I keep claiming, I'll claim it again, President Biden did what a U.S. president should
do, first picked up the phone or hit the Zoom button and talked to his counterpart and said,
you go home and we won't fill in the void with NATO.
Lots of good things could happen. So I don't rule out anything, but it takes two to make a
negotiation. Incidentally, one more point, sorry to run on, in March 2022, Russia and Ukraine
negotiated an end to the war. Did you know that? They negotiated. What happened? What happened?
Excuse me? No, that's not what happened. Okay. Butcha may or may not have happened,
but that's not what happened at the negotiating table. What happened at the negotiating table
was the United States told them, don't negotiate. That's what the United States told them.
This is now from multiple directions clear. And if you want to hear a very interesting
description of this that shows how bizarre this is, Naftali Bennett, who was then Prime
Minister of Israel and an informal mediator, said we were in the seventh draft and they were just
about reaching an agreement. And then the United States stopped it. And he said, I don't think
they should have stopped it, but they thought it was important about China. Are you kidding?
It takes a certain imagination to think that way. But that's what happened. And I've heard that from
all sides. So this is really not beyond our reach to have a negotiated outcome to this,
not at all beyond our reach. Let me push a little bit on this. On the one hand, you're saying
all options are possible. So you don't know what. But on the other hand, you're saying,
diplomacy does not really work now anymore. So what are the real end result here? So
Karl of Klausowitz, he said, war always pushes to the extremes unless there's a peace agreement
or a total defeat of the adversary. Neither of these options are inside at the moment.
So fighting continues. What are these extremes when it comes on? No diplomacy decision made on
the battlefield. Would it creep to an open, all out war? Is this a possibility, including maybe
nuclear weapons? There are many theories of what's going to happen on the battlefield. But before I
get to them, just to say that Klausowitz's most famous observation I think applies here perfectly,
which is that war is the continuation of politics with other means. This is political issues that
we're talking about here, which means that there is a way to resolve these issues politically,
not militarily. That's key. If this was the delusions of a madman, this would be different.
But this is politics. It's politics about Ukraine and it's politics about NATO. And so this is
susceptible of a negotiated outcome. I would not give up on that at all. Now, what could happen,
many things could happen. The one thing that cannot happen, in my opinion, is that Russia is
defeated. And the reason is that if Russia were to lose in a conventional sense, I believe Russia
would likely escalate to nuclear war. Because my understanding of this issue is that Russia views
this issue as existential for Russia, not as haphazard and not as a flight of fancy, not as a
dream world of Peter the Great, not as recreating the Russian Empire, but as an existential threat
to Russia. Whether it is or is not, it's viewed that way. And Putin is hardly the hardest of the
hardliners in Russia, by the way. There are many who resent the fact that he has not escalated
much harder and much faster, which is within Russia's means. So one possibility is that Russia
wins on the battlefield in the next months. This could really happen, incidentally, because
in a war of attrition, a much, much larger and powerful country has a propensity to win. And
because apparently, although I'm no expert on this, it is said that NATO stockpiles, including U.S.
stockpiles, are running very low. That scaling up of U.S. military production will take years. And
that even an article in Politico, which is a kind of right wing daily in the United States,
said the Pentagon is freaking out over the depleted reserves because our real war is with China,
they say. So it's really possible that Russia has a significant victory on the battlefield.
Okay, that could mean all sorts of things. It could mean NATO escalation in which we ratchet
things further. Or it could mean that there's some negotiation or frozen lines or armistice or
Ukraine divided in two or something else. Okay, that's one possibility. Another possibility is that
Ukraine wins significantly in this counteroffensive. Although, actually, I won't say, although
suppose that it did, is Russia going to say, oh, we made a mistake, we go home? I doubt it.
I think Russia would escalate further. And Russia has 1,600 deployed nuclear weapons,
including tactical nuclear weapons. I'm told every day, oh, don't be blackmailed
by nuclear weapons. People who say that have no idea of the history of the nuclear age. If you're
not terrified of gambling with that, you don't know the history. I'm terrified of it. So if Russia
were to be losing in a conventional war, I'd be, I would be terrified right now of what would come
next. And the idea that we had a story last week in the Washington Post, by the way, which said,
Biden, I don't, I'm paraphrasing, has decided he can ignore more and more of Putin's red lines.
Because so far, it's all been bluff. My God, the best book about the Cuban missile crisis ever
written was a book called Gambling with Armageddon. That's what they're doing. And I know the people
doing the gambling. You wouldn't want to bet the world on them, by the way. I know them personally.
Don't bet the world on them. So this is where we are. Lots of things are possible. But one thing
that is absolutely possible is that Biden picks up the phone and says, you know, we should consider
a way to end this thing without blowing up the world with you going home and with NATO not
enlarging. That's what I would like to see. You said nuclear weapons. Of course, Russia might
use or might threaten with nuclear weapons. But at the moment, it doesn't really seem that Russia
will have a decisive victory on the battlefield. So wasn't the Russian miscalculation in the first
place? So he did not, Russia did not increase military spending decisively before the war.
All other imperial powers did in the history. Russia did not. He invaded Ukraine with 180,000
soldiers. Compared to the US, the US deployed 800,000 soldiers in 1992 in Kuwait, to liberate
Kuwait. Kuwait is 40 times smaller than Ukraine. So wasn't it a military miscalculation by Putin
in the first place? And now the last option, what remains are the nuclear weapons. Was this not
a dangerous gambling on the side of Putin as well? Aren't we just witnessing a game of chicken
on both sides? Isn't that what we're doing? That each side thinks they can bluff the other,
and each side calls the bluff of the other. The United States thought that they could get rid of
Yanukovych. No consequence. That's what the US thought. It's had, the US has overthrown dozens
of governments. It's really a bad habit. They forgot diplomacy. What they learned, they think,
learned it from the British, by the way, that if you don't like your counterpart, overthrow them.
So you forget that there's diplomacy. You don't have to deal with them. You have to subvert them.
So they thought that they could overthrow Yanukovych. No consequence. Putin grabbed Crimea,
like he told George Bush, he would. And the Russian parts of the Ukrainian army broke away
in eastern Ukraine, took the weapons with them, and started the People's Republics of
Donetsk and Lugansk. And by the way, OSCE observers and NATO observers say this was not
Russian weapons coming in. I wasn't there. It said this was Ukrainian weapons taken from within
the Ukrainian army to create these two breakaway regions. That led to the Minsk agreements. Putin
thought maybe that will be the way that this will stop. There will be autonomy for these two regions,
Crimea will be ours. That would have probably stopped this war. But Minsk wasn't honored.
When President Biden came in, Putin said, stop. Stop. And Biden said, no, why stop?
Ukraine's going to become a member of NATO. And during 2021, the United States three times signed
very high-level documents committing the U.S. to NATO enlargement to Ukraine.
On December, and then Putin masked troops on the border and put forward this draft document on
December 17th. He thought I think that would lead to negotiations. I called the White House
a week, two weeks after that, spoke to senior official at length. I said, negotiate. Avoid a war.
Negotiate. It's not even a concession not to expand NATO. It's common sense not to expand NATO.
And I was told, no, no, no, we'll never negotiate over that. So Putin thought that that would work.
It failed. So he launched the invasion on February 24th. What was he expecting then?
My view is he was expecting a quick negotiation. Why do I surmise that? Because three weeks later,
there was a quick negotiation. Three weeks later, Zelensky said, we don't have to be part of NATO.
We can be neutral. Go look it up, ladies and gentlemen. That was Putin's idea. Okay. We've shown
we need business. Now we'll have a negotiated outcome based on neutrality. But the U.S. called
that bluff, said no way we tell our client you don't negotiate, which is exactly what happened.
So they called the bluff. And that with sanctions and us doubling down, Putin will back off.
No, Putin mobilized in the summer of 2021. 300,000 more people. He called the bluff.
Okay, we'll send tanks and F-16s. We'll call the bluff. Come on. All of us have been in sixth grade.
That's what we're witnessing, except they're playing with nuclear weapons.
This is clear. By the way, not only clear, at least to me, I said exactly this to U.S. officials
all through this process, because for a while they would even talk to me.
Because I know them. I've been around. And I said, this is deep for Russia.
And by the way, all of our best diplomats have said the same thing for 30 years.
William Burns, who's very bright and now CIA director in 2008 was the U.S. ambassador to Russia.
He sent a famous memo. The memo is called, NET means NET. He explained that the entire Russian
political class is dead set against NATO enlargement to Ukraine. NET means NET. And he said it's no joke.
But of course, American politicians don't listen to this.
Bill Perry, our defense secretary, said don't expand NATO. George Kennan said in 2007,
no, excuse me, 1997, that this is going to lead to disaster. You can look it up in the
New York Times. It's on the website. This is all predictable. They behave like kids,
Raytheon lobbies for more sales. All the think tanks in Washington are gung-ho for
U.S. unilateral prerogatives. Every article in Foreign Affairs magazine is about what they call
U.S. primacy. So it's all about how can we stay number one? As an economist, it's not even a
question I ask. By the way, a question an economist asks is how can we have a win-win
economy of trade? But if you're a strategist, it's who's on top. That's what counts.
To me, it's back to sixth grade. But for them, each side's calling each other's bluff.
So where's the miscalculation? Both sides. The only absolute disastrous loser is Ukraine in this.
And Ukraine had one president who was trying delicately to avoid being engulfed in a proxy war,
and that was Yanukovych, and he was overthrown.
I have a couple of more questions before we move on to the current A. Three more questions about.
Just to respond, of course, the Western perception is different. So the Western perception is that
Putin abroad wore block-sinking and arms race back to Europe. But it seems that the rest is
more than willing to accept this Putin's reality as a new norm. We have this key word,
zeitnwende. So it seems to be an agreement that they meet on a much lower level. The higher
values like multilateralism, interdependence, arms control, they all give them up also by the best.
So it seems that Putin won this narrative. Now we're in a different world. Whoever is responsible,
but everybody plays the same game.
The very sad thing for me in watching this is how Europe lost its identity as a political union
to become part of NATO. It's something ununderstandable for me, the equation of the EU and NATO.
And the fact that President von der Leyen is campaigning to leave the presidency
of the European Commission to become head of NATO is an example of how utterly bizarre
the situation is. So I'm a professor of sustainable development, and that means that I study
not only income levels, but quality of life, health, and many other dimensions of life.
I also publish as a co-editor, founding co-editor of an annual report called the World Happiness
Report, which uses data collected by Gallup International to assess the subjective assessment
of life in more than 150 countries. The reason I mention all of this is Europe has by far
the highest living standards on the planet, by far, the highest quality of life, by far,
and is most attuned of any region in the world to reducing inequalities, to green transformation,
to doing the things we should be doing in the 21st century. That's Europe's vocation,
a continent of peace, sustainable development, social equity. That's the genius of the OSCE,
that that Europe extends all the way to the Urals. I was advisor to President Gorbachev,
I knew President Gorbachev. He believed in a common European home, not as some pernicious
gimmick, because he really believed in it. And he was a great man of peace,
probably the greatest statesman of our age. And the United States could not understand him.
They could not take yes for an answer. He's offering peace. What's the trick? He's offering
peace. Oh, I get it, will be the unipolar world. He's offering to disband the militaries. I get it,
will extend NATO all the way to the Caucasus. That's the U.S. reaction to the greatest opportunity
we had for peace. Europe is losing its greatest achievements in this. Europe is not the junior
partner of the global hegemon. Europe doesn't even have the same values as the United States.
That's, by the way, literally, objectively, so. We're part of the crazy Anglo-Saxon world.
We're still with John Locke's libertarianism. We're still with, you don't have to help the poor,
there are burden on society. We have ideas that go back to 17th century Britain. And then we learned
what 19th century Britain, what global empire means and decided that that's what our vocation was.
Europe is so much better than what it is signing up for right now. This is extremely sad and extremely
dangerous. By the way, I understand Poland's sentiments. I was their main economic advisor.
I helped them cancel their debts in 1990 and 1991. I helped them stabilize their economy.
I was their biggest champion for becoming members of the European Union. By the way,
it wasn't even the Union then. It was the European community when I started the campaign.
I wrote their first reform program and I was told that the theme is the return to Europe.
That's the instruction I was given by Lech Volens' team. You write a plan for the economic return
to Europe. So I've seen all of this. I can understand their Russophobia. I don't accept it
as geopolitics or as clever or as an answer. I certainly understand it.
My wife was born in communist Czechoslovakia. I have no illusions about the hard attitudes,
but we have to think about how we're actually going to have a safe planet. This isn't about
sentiment only. It's about some knowledge of history, some ability to see the other point of
view, to understand the history, even to understand the history of the Cold War.
This country, as I emphasized, is a great lesson that is completely ignored, by the way,
as all the neutral states other than Austria abandon their neutrality with such enthusiasm.
Big mistake, but my point is, please, Europe is not NATO. Europe is not NATO.
And if you knew how crazy it is on the other side of the Atlantic, I'm trying to tell you.
They think that their biggest, important calling in the world is confrontation with China.
Is that what you want to sign up for right now? Don't. Don't do it. You have the best living
standards and the best values, I would say. Social democratic values, which even for the
non-social democratic parties permeate the idea that people shouldn't be taken care of,
that there should be social housing, that there should be public. We don't have universal health
coverage. You sign up for those values. I wouldn't recommend it. We don't have public values.
We have British, laissez-faire, Lockean, libertarian values. I don't recommend it,
by the way. It doesn't work very well. I live in an expensive neighborhood in New York
that is absolutely filled with beggars, filled with garbage that is not taken care of because
the public spaces don't work and now filled with shootings. Don't do it. And that is an approach
that is part of this, even as we're falling apart internally because we have a mass shooting
almost every day, it seems. Sometimes more. Even as this is happening, we're all about war.
And when we just had our debt negotiations, you know what the bipartisan agreement was?
That the social spending is capped, but the military spending is allowed to rise,
even though we're spending three times more than China. And even though we are spending
more than the next 10 countries in the world combined, and even though we have 800 military
bases overseas around the world, don't sign up for that. Europe is different from NATO.
But at the moment, it doesn't seem like that because, of course, you said Europe's vocation,
Europe's vocation is, of course, effective multilateralism. But what we are moving towards,
it's a polarization. So some call it a multi-polar world, but the multi-polar world
without multilateralism is very dangerous. We had multi-polar worlds before the first
and the second world war. So my question would be, how could multilateralism be regained?
So to combine it, should a European security system be constructed
with Russia, without Russia, or against Russia? Should Russia be integrated in a multilateral
world? And how would we do it? So you mentioned the OSCE, with the CEC of 75 being an example.
So how could a multilateral world without polarization or without too much polarization
look like? Do we have any models, ideas?
I was very keen on the European Union enlargement and played a major role in it in the early years,
because I believe that neighbors should cooperate with each other. And so I really like the OSCE
framework. I think it's right, and I think it is proper for Europe to have a European
security arrangement. All over the world, the regions are divided internally. Typically cold
war divisions, often on a strategy, imperial U.S. strategy of impera et divide. So we want
division. The U.S. is stoking divisions in Northeast Asia. China, Japan is on our side.
I'm sorry, Japan and Korea are on our side. China is on the other side. We're forging a new
military alliance. AUKUS, as you know, which is Australia, U.S., U.K. for nuclear submarines
in Australia, just what we need, just what Australia needs.
What the solution is, each region should cooperate, and African Union should cooperate
internally. Europe should, of course, aim to include Russia. Of course, are you kidding?
How could it not be other than to fall under the nuclear threat day by day again?
So all of this cancel culture is mind-boggling in how wrong-headed it is. By the way, even
the New York Philharmonic canceled a Rachmaninov concert for May.
You can't even imagine how... I mean, I could never imagine how crude this is. This is high
culture. They can't figure out to play Rachmaninov and that that's okay. Or there were protests about
Tchaikovsky, about don't play Sleeping Beauty at Christmas time. Even here, it was an issue.
Please, what is more beautiful than Tchaikovsky's Sleeping Beauty? Maybe a few Strauss-Waltzes also.
Okay, I would say that they're right up there, but we should not be behaving this way.
And the demonization makes nobody safe. It solves no problems. It puts everybody on a hair trigger,
and we are on a nuclear age. And so this is my basic idea is UN Charter and regional cooperation
and globally agreed goals, sustainable development goals, Paris Climate Agreement,
UN Convention on the Law of the Seas, the High Seas Treaty, the Kunming Montreal Biodiversity
Framework. In other words, let's actually take care of people and the planet.
Instead of the $2.2 trillion spent last year on military armaments, if we could get a bit of
that to get kids in school, we'd make a much better world for the hundreds of millions of
children who are not in school because their governments are too broke to be able to afford
high schools for them. So this is what we should be doing. We actually have globally agreed goals,
we have the OSCE, we have the means to do this. US politicians should not fly to Taiwan
and declare that we're going to defend Taiwan at all costs.
We had agreed 50 years ago to a one China policy, and that's the right policy. And China
believes in that because starting in 1839, the Western imperialist powers, followed by Japan,
tried to destroy China on several occasions, or to conquer China. So they're not too keen on that
happening again. I understand that. We should have some prudence. So we're not so far away from a
peaceful world because the vast majority of people in the world want it. And we don't really have,
China, by the way, is not aiming to take over the world. That's another long evening. I have gone
to China for 42 years, many times a year on many cases. It's the last thing in the world that I'm
worried about is China taking over the world. It's not even a category. In 2000 years of Chinese
statecraft, China has not launched one overseas war. 2000 years. The one that you could count is
when the Mongols controlled Beijing and launched an invasion of Japan in, I think, 1274, though I
may have the day wrong, and the Kamikaze wins, the typhoon defeated the Mongol fleet. Other than that,
never. You know, Britain and France fought with each other almost every year for a thousand years,
one way or another. But Japan and China never accept Japan invading China on three occasions,
never China invading Japan. So don't worry so much about China. Really don't.
Nice place, good food, fascinating culture. Go have a visit.
Before I ask you the very last question, I just want to add to your observation that was
China at the one and the last survey of the European Council on Foreign Relations,
which is a transatlantic think tank. There was a poll asking citizens, not government,
citizens of the European Union, if it comes to a conflict between the US and China over Taiwan,
65% of Europeans would say 60 to 65% would say that other would stay neutral
instead of siding with China or even siding with the US. So European citizens might think
differently than the governments. But I cannot avoid asking this very last question now,
because we are sitting here as an American, and you also wrote a piece about the link between
war and debt. And debt is accumulating in the US, and in the US there will be elections next year.
So will the debt crisis have an impact on the decision to support Ukraine by the next government?
US politics is basically a plutocratic state where public policy has been taken over by
several powerful lobbies, each one devoted to its specific area. And they keep the control over
US policy through campaign contributions, because our election campaigns are funded by
billionaires and by corporate lobbies. And they cost about $15 billion now for an election cycle.
And you may have seen George Soros yesterday said, I give my empire to my son. And the son said,
I'm going to fund the Democratic Party. Well, that's the billionaires that
he'll put in hundreds of millions of dollars, a billion dollars would not be surprising
in the 2024 election. And then there are other billionaires. And so what are the lobbies?
Wall Street controls financial policy. And our health lobby controls
our unbelievably expensive private so-called health system. And our ad lobby controls the
food industry with about 60% obesity or overweight in the United States.
Another huge, very serious public health crisis. And the military industrial complex
controls foreign policy, not just military policy, foreign policy. So we have perpetual war
and trillion dollar military budgets, 900 billion in the Pentagon budget, but there's a lot more.
There's the CIA, and there's Homeland Security, and there are many other categories,
Department of Energy with nuclear weapons and so on. It's maybe $1.2 trillion a year.
So that's on the spending side. On the revenue side, we have unanimous agreement among the
billionaires. Don't tax us. Very simple. So we have a low tax collection in the United States.
And this spending on the military, for example, which has cost about $6 trillion in the wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan and some of the other wars, $6 trillion. It's a lot, by the way,
starts to add up a little bit. And so our debt crisis comes from a broken political system.
It's not so interesting Democrats and Republicans, by the way. That's a little bit a children's game.
The oligarchy is, the plutocracy is both parties. And I lost interest in the
because it's basically a game that is below our intelligence.
And this is our problem. Now, we will have rising debt in the future.
It's a big country, big economy. We can spend a lot on wars. There's been no public debate
for a moment on the $120 billion that has been spent so far. This has all been just bits and
pieces inside omnibus legislation. So we can't get a debate on anything because there is no debate.
There'll have to be another appropriation for Ukraine. They'll try to put it in a must pass
bill so that it's not really debated and can just be snuck in because there's no interest in asking
the American people anything about any of this. There's no attempt at deliberative democracy at all.
No debate at all. So the answer to the question is I'm not sure because there probably has to be
another vote, but they will try to make the vote so that nobody notices. And it's just part of some
omnibus legislation that funds social security, something or other. It's not won't be social
security, but it'll be something that has to pass and it'll just get through. That's how it's done
in general. If it came to an actual vote, it would probably be defeated. If there was actually a debate
in Congress, do we really want to spend another $50 or $100 billion on this,
it would probably lose. They know that, but they have the convenience of avoiding any kind of public debate.
