Hello again and welcome back to our second lecture on pre-calculus review.
Last time we looked at equations and graphs and we began the study of functions.
Today I'd like to look a lot more at functions and in particular at trigonometry.
As I said last time, the concept of function is fundamental in all of mathematics and especially
in calculus.
And also let me remind you that we have a workbook associated with this video and you'll
see many more examples of pre-calculus review in that workbook or you could pick up any
textbook on pre-calculus for more review.
So let's begin by looking at another example of a function to remind ourselves of some
of the key ideas we are talking about.
Let's look at the function f of x equals 1 over x minus 1.
Remember how to evaluate a function.
For example, if x is 3, then f of 3 would be 1 over 3 minus 1 or a half.
And that point, 3, 1, half would be on the graph of this function.
What's the domain of this function?
Well, you can't divide by 0 in math, can you?
So the domain is all x values except x equal to 1.
Now look at the graph of this function.
It really has some neat features.
Notice that it's not defined at x equals 1, but near 1, the graph seems to be getting
either very large or very small, going towards negative infinity.
And also as x gets very, very large, the function seems to be hugging the x-axis.
We'll talk about some of these features called asymptotes later on in the course.
Here's another function that plays a crucial role in calculus.
It's called the absolute value function, and it's on every graphing calculator built
in.
The absolute value of a number, you'll remember, is always non-negative.
And here's a specific definition of the absolute value function.
The absolute value of x is defined to be x if x is greater than or equal to 0, but minus
x if x is less than 0.
Watch how this definition works.
If x is 3, then the absolute value of 3 is, of course, itself.
If x is 0, then the absolute value of 0 is itself, 0.
But what about minus 5?
Well, the absolute value of minus 5 is minus a minus 5.
It's negative x, and that minus minus turns it into a positive number.
So the domain of the absolute value function is all x, but the range is all y greater than
or equal to 0.
This is another example of a function that I carry around with me because it comes up
in calculus so many times.
Here's a picture of the absolute value function.
It kind of looks like a big V. Let's now talk about a function that is
defined by two rules because we'll sometimes see functions of this nature.
Here's a function that has the rule f of x equals 1 minus x if x is less than 1, but
if x is greater than or equal to 1, it's defined by the rule square root of x minus
1.
Let's make sure we know how to evaluate this function.
What's f of 0?
Well, 0 is less than 1, so we would use the top rule and get 1 minus 0 or 1.
What about f of 5?
Well, 5 is greater than or equal to 1, so we would use the bottom rule and we would
get the square root of 5 minus 1, which is the square root of 4 or 2.
How about f of 1?
f of 1 is kind of the boundary point between the two rules, but in particular, 1 is greater
than or equal to 1, and so f of 1 turns out to be 0.
Here's a picture of that function, kind of interesting looking.
On the left-hand side, it's a straight line going down to the point 1, 0, and then on
the right, it sort of looks like the square root function, doesn't it?
But it's been shifted over to the right one unit.
Now, I hope we're comfortable with functions.
Now we're going to look at another property of some functions, and it's the idea of being
a one-to-one function.
Here's the definition of a one-to-one function.
We say that a function is one-to-one from the set x to the set y.
If for each y value in the range, there corresponds exactly one value in the domain.
In a minute, we'll look at an example to make that clearer, because it's kind of a complicated
definition.
But this idea of one-to-one functions is going to be crucial when we talk about inverse functions.
For example, logarithms and exponential functions are inverses of each other, and then the trigonometric
functions have a whole family of functions called inverse trig functions.
But let's not get ahead of ourselves.
Let's look at an example of a one-to-one function, one of our old favorites, f of x equals x
squared.
Is this function one-to-one?
Well, I claim it's actually not one-to-one.
Why not?
Because for a given y value, for instance, y equals 4, there are two x values that correspond
to that y value.
Two and minus two both square to give 4.
So that is not a one-to-one function.
How about x cubed?
Well I claim x cubed is a one-to-one function.
And one way to see that is, if you look at the graph of x cubed, horizontal lines only
touch that graph once.
That means for a given y value, there is at most one x value.
So y equals x cubed, or f of x equals x cubed, is indeed a one-to-one function.
Let's be clear now.
Here we have a vertical line test for whether or not an equation is a function.
For instance, x cubed passes the vertical line test.
You're a one-to-one function if you also pass the horizontal line test.
Horizontal lines hit you just once.
Another property of some functions is that of being an even function.
You're an even function if f of minus x equals f of x.
That's equivalent to saying you're symmetric with respect to the y-axis.
For instance, x squared, our favorite little parabola, is an even function.
Why is that?
Well, f of minus x would be minus x quantity squared, and the minus signs cancel and you
get back x squared, which is f of x.
Here's again a picture of our parabola, and you see that it's symmetric with respect
to the y-axis.
That's called an even function.
And then you have odd functions.
For instance, the function x cubed will turn out to be an odd function.
The property of being odd is similar to that of being even.
Or an odd function if f of minus x is minus f of x.
Now the word odd here doesn't refer to something like it's a weird function, but rather that
polynomials like x cubed, x to the fifth, x to the seventh, in other words to an odd
power, those turn out to be odd functions.
We can verify that x cubed is an odd function by noticing that f of minus x is the same as
minus x cubed, and then the minus sign comes out, and you get that to be minus f of x.
There's a graph of x cubed, and you see that it's got symmetry with respect to the origin.
It's an odd function.
Now we've seen a lot of functions so far in this lecture and the previous lecture.
Here's a list of some of the functions that I think we should pack up and carry with us
as we march through this calculus course.
F of x equals x, of course, is a straight line of slope 1, y intercept, 0.
x squared is our friend the parabola, x cubed we just saw.
The square root function will come up a lot, the absolute value function, and then we'll
do all kinds of movements of these functions.
We'll shift them around by adding and subtracting constants.
Let me show you an example of that shifting property.
Let's look at the function square root of x minus 3 plus 5.
So that looks like a pretty complicated function, doesn't it?
What's that look like?
Well, I can analyze it using the functions that I'm carrying around with me.
First of all, there's a square root sign.
It's a square root of x minus 3, which means the domain starts at x equals 3.
It's the square root function shifted to the right three units.
And so the domain is x equals 3 or larger, the interval 3 to infinity.
But also it's got a plus 5, so it's been shifted upwards five units.
So it looks like the square root function shifted three units to the right and
then up five units.
The beginning point is 3, 5 if you plug in 3 there.
And there's a picture of the function.
You can see that by knowing these basic functions,
we can then figure out what more complicated functions look like.
That's the square root function shifted, kind of neat, isn't it, how it works?
Now, there are a lot of other functions that we're going to talk about here in
this calculus course, the trigonometric functions that we'll talk about in a moment.
Then we have the inverse trigonometric functions that will use that idea of one
to one functions.
We'll also talk about exponential functions,
which you might be familiar with from your pre-calculus,
like the function two to the x power.
And then we'll have logarithmic functions, the logarithm of x.
And again, that might be familiar to you from some pre-calculus.
It's interesting that all the calculus functions that we use
are built into your scientific calculator.
That's how important they are.
The makers of these calculators have taken all these crucial functions for
calculus and applied mathematics and engineering and
hardwired them into your calculator.
So, we've seen a little bit about functions.
We know how they're defined.
We've seen some examples.
Let's now turn to a class of functions that we'll be using daily in our calculus
course, and these are the trigonometric functions.
A lot of people study trigonometry from the viewpoint of a triangle definition of
the trigonometric functions, and then others study them from the viewpoint of
a so-called unit circle definition.
What I'd like to do here is look at both definitions of the trigonometric function
because they're equivalent to each other.
And I'm not sure which one you're more comfortable with, but
we should be aware of both techniques, both methods for
defining the trigonometric functions and working with them.
So let's first look at the right triangle definition of the trigonometric functions.
Here's how this works.
Consider a right triangle with sides AB and hypotenuse C.
And let's look at one of the acute angles which I'll label theta.
The definition of the trigonometric functions is as follows.
The sine of theta is the opposite over hypotenuse, so it's A over C.
The cosine is the adjacent side over the hypotenuse, or B over C.
And the tangent is opposite over adjacent, or A over B.
That, of course, is equivalent to saying sine over cosine.
So those are the basic, the three trigonometric functions that we'll use.
There are also three other functions that we'll talk about a little bit later.
C-Cant, C-Cant, and Cotangent.
But in a minute, we'll come to those.
Let's do an example to make sure we're comfortable with this
triangle definition of trigonometric functions.
Let's look at one of my favorite little triangles whose sides are three and
four, it's a right triangle.
And hence, what's the hypotenuse?
Well, we can use the Pythagorean theorem.
And the hypotenuse would be three squared plus four squared all square rooted.
That's nine plus 16 or 25, square root of 25 is five.
This is often called a three, four, five right triangle, and
is used a lot in geometric, in geometry classes.
So, what are the three trigonometric functions?
The sine would be opposite over hypotenuse, or three over five.
Cosine would be four over five, and tangent would be three over four.
Notice, by the way, that sine and cosine here are always less than or
equal to one in absolute value.
That's always true, and we'll come to that important property a little bit later.
Now, in calculus, we tend not to use degree measure.
We tend to use something called radians.
And the reason is the formulas for derivatives and integrals that are coming
later just don't work if you're dealing with degrees.
Now, I'm more comfortable with degrees.
When somebody says the angle's 60 degrees, I can sort of picture what that means.
But if they tell me it's pi over three radians, I'm like, hello.
But let's try to get comfortable with this radian measure.
Let me remind you what it is.
Recall that a full circle has 360 degrees, and that's called two pi radians.
So two pi radians equals 360 degrees.
In other words, 180 degrees, a semi-circle is pi radians.
When you're doing applications, you'll often have to convert from degrees to
radians in order to apply calculus techniques.
And we'll get comfortable with that as we move along.
Here's an example of a triangle that I've used the radian measure in it.
In this triangle, one leg is length one.
Another leg is length square root of three.
And hence by the Pythagorean theorem, the hypotenuse is one plus three equals
square root of four or two.
Though this is a triangle with a hypotenuse of two.
The side opposite, the small angle is one, and
the other side has length square root of three.
Now the angle there is pi over six, which is 30 degrees.
And we can now do the sine and cosine of this triangle.
The sine of pi over six is one half, opposite over hypotenuse.
The cosine is square root of three over two, and
the tangent is one over the square root of three.
Now, now, wait a minute.
Should I write that as one over square root of three?
Or should I rationalize the denominator?
This is a great question because a lot of times in calculus textbooks,
the answers in the back of the book always have the denominators rationalized.
And that's kind of, I don't know, that's a legacy from a long time ago, I think.
To me, those are equivalent answers, they're both correct.
And in fact, a little note about advanced placement exams,
you're encouraged on AP exams to not simplify.
Because you might make a mistake when you simplify.
If you get your answer of one over square root of three, leave it like that.
It's correct.
Don't take the extra time to rationalize the denominator.
By the way, this triangle, if you convert to degrees,
you'll discover that the angles are 30 degrees, 60 degrees and 90.
And it's often called a 30, 60, 90, right triangle.
Good.
So that's the triangle approach to trigonometry.
Let me now talk about the unit circle definition of trigonometric functions.
Here's how this works.
And I think it's a better way to approach trigonometry, actually.
Consider a unit circle.
By that, I mean a circle of radius one centered at the origin.
And let x, y be some point on that circle.
And then let theta be the angle formed by the joining x, y to the origin,
as indicated in this figure.
So using this unit circle, you can define the trigonometric functions as follows.
The sine of theta is the y coordinate.
And the cosine of theta is the x coordinate.
And then the tangent is defined to be sine over cosine or y over x.
This is equivalent to that triangle definition.
Trust me, it is.
But I think it's a little bit easier to work with this definition.
And I mentioned earlier there are three other trig functions.
Cotangent is another trig function and
defined to be the reciprocal of the tangent function.
So it's one over tangent.
And then you had the secant function is one over cosine.
And the cosecant function is one over the sine function.
So we define the sine to be the y value of that and
the cosine to be the x value.
So it's pretty simple, actually.
Let's do an example.
Let's evaluate the sine, cosine, and tangent of the angle pi over four.
Pi over four, by the way, is 45 degrees.
So how could we do this?
How could we find the sine, cosine, and tangent of the angle pi over four?
Well, first draw a unit circle and indicate the angle pi over four.
Well, because it's a unit circle, the hypotenuse is one.
And because the angle's 45 degrees, that's actually an isosceles triangle.
It's an isosceles right triangle.
So the x and y values are the same.
And they're both equal to one over square root of two by the Pythagorean theorem.
So we have that the sine and cosine of pi over four is one over square root of two.
And of course, the tangent is their quotient.
So the tangent of pi over four is just one.
By the way, suppose you had changed this angle to three pi over four.
You then move over to the second quadrant.
The sine will be the same, but the cosine will be negative, won't it?
Because the x value is now negative.
See, the unit circle definition of trigonometry allows for
some of these functions to be negative.
And of course, the trigonometric functions can be negative or positive.
Now, here's a common pitfall that I see over and over again as a teacher of calculus.
Usually I see with a student coming up to me in panic mode saying,
professor, my calculator gave me a different answer, but let's reword it.
Suppose your friend comes up to you with a calculator and
was verifying the problem we just did.
Remember the tangent of pi over four was one.
But on his calculator, he gets the answer 0.0137086 approximately.
What happened?
Why is this student in panic mode and how can we soothe him?
Well, the calculator was not set in radiant mode.
It was in degree mode.
And what the student did was find the tangent of pi over four degrees.
But that's not what we were after.
So, warning here, in calculus, set your calculator to radiant mode.
That's what we'll be using throughout the course.
Good, good.
When you study trigonometry, you define the trigonometric functions and
then you begin to deal with relationships between those trigonometric functions.
For example, in that unit circle definition,
you notice that the sine was defined to be the y value and
the cosine was the x value and that point x, y was on the unit circle.
So by the Pythagorean theorem, sine squared plus cosine squared was one.
And that is called the most fundamental identity of all of trigonometry.
If there's ever a trigonometric identity that you're gonna wanna memorize,
it's the identity sine squared theta plus cosine squared theta equals one.
Just memorize that.
Now, you'll see it often with different letters.
I mean, you don't have to use theta.
You could have called your angle w or q or anything.
In fact, you could call it x.
Now, that's a little misleading because we used x for the different role.
But when we're dealing with functions, we'll often use the variable x.
So whenever you see sine squared of something plus cosine squared of
something that always equals one no matter what the variable is.
There are lots and lots of other trigonometric identities.
Please see the workbook for a giant list of identities.
But as we progress through this course,
I'll point out the ones we'll need as we go along.
For instance, cosine satisfies the equation cosine minus x equals cosine x.
That means it's an even function, isn't that neat?
And how about sine?
Well, sine of minus x turns out to be minus sine of x.
So sine's an odd function, isn't that neat?
That we have another example or two examples here of our even and odd functions.
Well, for a given x value, you can now define sine of x and
you could draw a graph of this.
This is a function, the sine function, and it has a certain graph.
You may be familiar with this graph from your pre-calculus days.
It is a wave type function.
It goes through the origin because sine of zero is zero.
And notice that it's an odd function, isn't it?
It's symmetric about the origin.
And also notice that the domain is all x values, but
the range is very, very specific here.
The sine function is sandwiched between minus one and one.
Please keep that in mind that it's a wavy function,
but it's sandwiched between minus one and one.
The sine of a number at most is one in absolute value.
The same is true for the cosine function, by the way.
It's also sandwiched between minus one and one.
Perhaps more interesting to you is the tangent function.
It has really a cool looking graph, I think.
Here it is.
And again, you can review these graphs in our workbook or
in any trigonometry textbook.
The tangent function has the interesting quality that at
certain values it's not defined.
For instance, pi over two, the tangent's not defined.
The reason being its sine over cosine and cosine pi over two
is zero, and dividing by zero in math is a big no-no.
So there's a graph of the tangent function.
And again, we'll use this function and its graph quite a bit.
One of the kinds of problems that will come up, as we're
doing calculus, will be solving trigonometric equations.
This can be pretty difficult.
Let me show you a simple example of a trigonometric
equation and how you might solve it.
Here I want us to find all values of theta, again, I
could use the variable x if I wanted, all values of theta
such that sine theta is equal to a half.
Well, here's how you might do it.
First, draw a unit circle.
There's a unit circle.
And indicate when the y value, that's the sine, sine is the
y value, is equal to a half.
And I've indicated a little 1 half there on the picture.
So what angles correspond to that y value being a half?
Well, if you do some trigonometry, some playing
with these functions, and playing with those triangles,
you'll discover that those are 30, 60, 90 right triangles.
And the angles are then pi over 6, 30 degrees.
And of course, the other side, 5 pi over 6.
So the sine of pi over 6 and the sine of 5 pi over 6 are
both equal to a half.
You can verify that on your calculator if you want.
Now, there are other values that also give a half.
You could go around the circle and come back to pi over 6.
So that would be pi over 6 plus 2 pi, or 4 pi, or 6 pi.
So you get this class of solutions, pi over 6 plus 2k pi,
and 5 pi over 6 plus 2k pi, where k is any integer.
Now, sometimes we'll restrict our domain to 0, 2 pi.
And in that case, there would be just two solutions.
Now, let me give you another study tip here about trigonometry.
My feeling is that a lot of students are kind of insecure
with trigonometry.
But I invite you to pick up almost any textbook for a
review of trigonometry and, of course, of algebra.
And as we proceed with this course, I'll point out those
places where trigonometry is playing a key role.
As I think I might have said earlier, one of the reasons
calculus is really difficult is because it has a lot of
pre-calculus in it.
The calculus ideas aren't so bad, it turns out.
Let me close by saying that I hope you're now comfortable
with some of the pre-calculus ideas that will play a role
in our calculus course.
We've looked at equations, graphs of equations, lots of
functions, graphs of functions, one-to-one functions,
et cetera.
Hopefully most of this is familiar to you.
But if you're like me, if you haven't seen it for a while,
you have to sort of bring it back.
You've got to sort of, oh, yeah, I remember that.
Yeah, oh, yeah.
So that's one of the reasons we do these two review lectures.
Next time, we're going to jump into calculus, real calculus.
We're going to turn to the topic of limits.
And we're going to spend three lectures on this crucial
topic for calculus, that of limits.
We saw that briefly when we did the tangent line problem.
We had a certain limit there that we evaluated.
So in the next three lectures, we'll amplify
that concept of limits.
So thank you very much, and I look forward to seeing you
next time for our lecture on limits.
