Hello and welcome back to our first lecture on limits.
You might say this is our first real calculus lecture because the last two times we reviewed
pre-calculus, looking at some of the skills we'll need to be successful in this calculus
course.
So now we're going to turn to limits for the next three lectures.
You might remember that back in lecture one, we briefly saw a limit when we were solving
the tangent line problem.
But today we'll have a closer look at the concept of limit, looking at some examples
of functions that have limits and others that don't have limits.
We also will approach limits from three different viewpoints, the so-called graphical approach,
numerical approach, and then an analytic approach.
But before I get deeper into limits, let's quickly review the tangent line problem that
I looked at in lecture one.
You might remember that this is one of my favorite problems, and it was to find the
equation of the tangent line to the parabola y equals x squared at the point 2, 4.
Remember how we did this?
We took a nearby point called q with coordinates x, x squared.
We formed the slope equation joining p and q for that line segment, and that equation
was x squared minus 4 over x minus 2.
We then simplified by factoring the numerator and discovered that the slope was given by
x plus 2.
And then we said, let's take a limit as x gets closer and closer to 2, and that slope
turned out to be 4.
That sort of gave us a very informal look at limit.
Let me now look at a definition of limit.
This definition has some flaws, as you might see in a moment, but this is sort of an informal
way of understanding what a limit is.
Here's what we say.
If a function f of x becomes arbitrarily close to a single number l as x approaches c from
either side, then we say that the limit of f of x as x approaches c is l.
And we write it as follows.
Limit and then underneath x approaches c of the function f of x equals l.
In that previous example, we would write it as the following.
Limit as x approaches 2 of the function x squared minus 4 divided by x minus 2.
And then we simplified that to be the limit as x approaches 2 of the function x plus 2.
Then of course you can just plug in the 2 now and you get the answer 2 plus 2 or 4.
Now as I said, that definition has a few flaws because words like arbitrarily close from either
side approaches, those are not well defined.
I'll talk about that a little bit later.
But for our usage, it's a perfectly good definition.
Again, in that previous example, remember what we did.
We factored the numerator, canceled the common factor of x minus 2 and discovered that the
quotient equals x plus 2 as long as x is different from 2.
Now I want to take a closer look at this.
Here we have two functions.
One of them is the original x squared minus 4 over x minus 2 and the other is x plus 2.
Well, that second function is a straight line, isn't it?
It's the line x plus 2.
The first function is the same as the second function except it has a hole in it at x equals
2.
I like to call it a line with a hole in it.
So these two functions, the original one and the simplified version, agree everywhere
except at x equals 2.
And they have the same limit as I approach the hole as I approach 2 because it's never
important in limits what happens at the point you approach.
Let me repeat that.
When you're taking a limit as x approaches c, it doesn't matter what happens at c but
rather what happens arbitrarily close to c.
Let's keep that in mind as we proceed.
I'd like to look now at a more interesting, a little bit bigger example, a little more
complicated.
Let's find the limit of the function x divided by square root of x plus 1 minus 1 as x approaches
0.
Now, of course, you might think, let me try just plugging in 0.
See what happens.
Well the numerator would be 0 and the denominator would be 0 plus 1 is 1 minus 1 is 0 and you
get an expression 0 over 0 which is indeterminate.
You can't tell what it is.
So plugging in the point you're approaching will not work here.
We're going to have to do a deeper study now.
You can't just plug in the point.
And what I'm going to do is a three pronged attack.
I'm going to look at a picture, a graphical approach, then I'm going to do a numerical
approach plugging in some numbers near 0 and then I'll do an analytic approach using
some algebra.
So here's a picture of the function whose limit we desire.
We want to know what happens to this function as I get closer and closer to 0.
Well look what's happening.
Again, it's not defined at 0 but it looks like it's getting very close to 2 as I approach
0.
So graphically, my guess is that the limit's going to be 2.
Let's now look at a numerical approach.
Take your function x divided by square root x plus 1 minus 1 and plug in a lot of values
near 0.
In this chart, you'll see that I've plugged in values like 0.01, 0.001, etc. and then
some points on the other side of 0 like minus 0.01, minus 0.001, etc.
I've plugged in values getting closer and closer to 0 from both sides of 0.
Well look at the output of this function.
We get values like 1.99499 when I plug in minus 0.01 and from the table I think you
see that as I get closer and closer to 0, the function values are getting closer and
closer to 2.
So we've done it graphically and we seem to think the answer's 2.
Numerically it seems to be 2.
Let's now do it algebraically.
Let's take our original problem and manipulate it in such a way that we can figure out the
limit without a calculator.
So here's our original expression and what I'm going to do is multiply by the conjugate,
meaning I multiply numerator and denominator by the square root of x plus 1 plus 1 over
square root of x plus 1 plus 1 and that's really multiplying by 1.
I'm not changing the expression.
When I do that multiplication, look what happens.
The denominator is the difference of two squares and simplifies to x plus 1 minus 1 and then
I can cancel the 1 and the minus 1 in the denominator and I'm just left with x which
will cancel with the x in the numerator.
So after all that algebra and I admit there's a lot of algebra here, you can see how pre-calculus
plays a big role in calculus.
We come down to the simplified version of our original function and it's now square
root of x plus 1 plus 1.
Now that limit as x approaches 0 of that final expression is the same as the limit of the
original expression and of course in that final expression it's very easy just to plug
in 0 and you get 1 plus 1 equals 2.
So the algebraic technique also shows that the answer is 2.
Now let's talk about this a minute.
We approach this three different ways.
I think you might agree that the graphical and numerical solutions are not really proofs.
It's kind of looking at what a computer is telling us or a calculator.
I like to say that these serve to verify the solution.
Mathematically speaking it's that algebraic approach that really is the correct one.
I kind of remember when I was a student that we didn't have graphing calculators.
It's a long time ago.
We used slide rules or our brains to do multiplications and to draw pictures and things in mathematics.
It was a tough time and we only used the algebraic technique for finding limits.
We had no visualization of what was really happening.
I think things are a lot better now that we have graphing calculators and computers that
can help us verify our algebraic work.
Now here's a problem I like to do in class.
I talk about limits for a while and then I ask the students a question and it's really
to test me if I've explained things correctly or not, if students are understanding me.
Let's look at the following problem.
Here's a function defined by two rules.
The first part of the rule is that the function is 1 when x is not equal to 2 and then it's
equal to 3 when x equals 2.
Here's a graph of that function.
It wants to be 1 everywhere except at 2 it jumps up to 3.
I like to call this a hiccup function because it goes along and it has a hiccup and jumps
up to 3 and then goes back down to 1.
And the question is what's the limit of this function as x approaches 2?
Well the point of this is that the limit is 1.
As x approaches 2 the function equals 1.
It's irrelevant what happens to this function as x equals 2.
If x equals 2 the function is 3 but that's irrelevant.
What counts is what happens as x gets closer and closer to 2 and as x gets closer and closer
to 2 the function is always equal to 1.
So that's the answer.
Let's briefly now look at some examples of functions where limits fail to exist.
These are kind of interesting functions that give us a view of understanding limits by
showing cases where the limit fails to exist.
As a first example let's look at the function absolute value of x over x.
In a minute I'll show you the picture but let's see what it's going to look like.
When x is positive the absolute value of x equals x and that's just x over x or 1.
So for positive x the function value is 1.
But how about if x is negative?
Well if x is negative then the absolute value of x is minus x and so that function is minus
1.
So for x positive the function is 1, for x negative the function is minus 1.
These don't agree do they as I approach 0.
And so as you can see from the picture the limit doesn't exist as 0 because as I approach
0 the function is not settling down at a single value l but rather it wants to be 1 on from
the right and minus 1 from the left.
By the way we call those one sided limits.
But for our case now the limit does not exist because the function does not approach a single
value as x approaches 0.
I like to call this function the diving board function because you're kind of motoring along
at the position 1 and then you jump off down to minus 1.
Here's another interesting function for which the limit doesn't exist as x approaches 0.
It's the function 1 over x squared.
Now let's see how this behaves.
Let me approach 0 from either side.
What happens to x squared?
Well x squared will be very very small won't it?
A small number squared is small and then 1 over a small number is very very large.
Like if you plug in a tenth, a tenth squared is a hundredth and a 1 over a hundredth is
a hundredth.
That's getting pretty big.
So as I approach 0 from either side this function seems to be getting larger and larger.
Here's a graph of that function and you can see that as I approach 0 from either side
the function is going off to plus infinity.
We say that this limit does not exist because it's not approaching a fixed number L.
Later on we will say that the limit's infinity but for the time being just say this limit
does not exist because it's not approaching a finite number L.
Good now I'm going to look at a little bit tougher example but I think it's a more interesting
example.
This is one of the most fascinating examples I think to show on a graphing utility.
It's the function sine 1 over x as x and we're going to look at the limit as x approaches
0.
So what does sine 1 over x look like?
Well let me first show you a picture of it and this is a difficult picture to show on
your graphing utility because here's what's happening.
As I get closer and closer to 0 this function goes up and down between minus 1 and 1 infinitely
often.
It just goes crazy as it's getting near the origin.
Just up and down, up and down, up and down.
I invite you to graph this on your graphing utility and then zoom in near the origin.
You'll see this chaotic behavior as the function goes up and down.
Seeming to, you know that kind of tells us I think that hey this limit is not going to
exist.
This is not a well-behaved function.
It's doing crazy things near the origin.
Let me convince you of that algebraically.
This is a little complicated but bear with me.
I'm going to look at the function sine of 1 over x and I'm going to take some numbers
near 0 because I'm interested in what happens near 0.
For example let's plug in 2 over pi.
Well what's sine of 1 over 2 over pi?
That would be sine of pi over 2 which is 1.
Then plug in sine of 2 over 5 pi.
When you plug that in you get sine of 5 pi over 2 which is also 1.
And then plug in 2 over 9 pi.
That also equals 1.
I think you see the picture don't you?
This sequence of x values that I plug in all give 1 when I plug them into the function.
But here's another sequence of points that gives minus 1.
Plug in 2 over 3 pi.
That would be sine of 3 pi over 2 which is minus 1.
Then plug in 2 over 7 pi, 2 over 11 pi, etc.
And you get a sequence of values going to minus 1.
That's why it keeps going up and down between 1 and minus 1 and all values in between.
It's a crazy function but it's kind of interesting I think.
There it is.
And by the way we'll come back to this function next lecture and look at it a little closer.
Well, what about this limit definition?
What about this concept?
Let me be the first to say that it's difficult and historically the concept of limit was
difficult for mathematicians and scientists to figure out.
It wasn't until the 1800s, well after calculus had been developed by Leibniz and Newton,
that the formal definition of limit was given by Bolzano and Cauchy.
Until then mathematicians kind of had a feel for limits but they didn't fully know how
to write down a precise definition.
Remember those words I used earlier like getting close to and as close as you want and approximately?
It's tough to make that precise but if you look in any calculus book you'll see a precise
definition of limit.
It's very complicated.
It's called the epsilon-delta definition and I remember as a student we had to work with
that definition.
I never understood it.
I didn't know what I was doing.
It was a manipulation of symbols just blindly doing stuff.
We like to call it sort of a way to torture our students and it never led to any deeper
understanding of what limits do, what they're for or how to calculate them.
So I invite you to go look at the definition of limit in a calculus book.
We'll have it in our workbook of course but we will not need that formal difficult definition
to be successful in this course.
That said, limits have very nice properties that can be proved using that definition but
I think you'll believe most of these properties just informally.
For example, the limit of a constant as you approach any point is of course equal to that
constant.
The limit of the function x as you approach c is just c and in fact if you have any polynomial
like x to the n, the limit as x approaches c would just be c to the n.
We like to say in mathematics that nice functions have nice limits.
Those are well behaved for nice functions.
Then we have properties of how to manipulate two different limits.
You might have the function f with limit l and the function g with limit k both as x
approaches c.
You can add them, subtract them and you add and subtract the corresponding limits.
A constant times a limit can be written.
You pull the constant outside the limit sign.
The limit of a product is the product of the limits and the limit of the quotient of
two functions is the quotient of the limits, of course assuming that you aren't dividing
by zero.
Good.
Let's do now a little more interesting example to see how to calculate some limits and then
I'll give you a strategy in general on how to calculate limits.
Let's look at the function x cubed minus one over x minus one as x approaches one.
Now naively I'd say plug in one, see what happens.
Well if you do that the numerator and denominator both vanish and it's meaningless.
Remember you can't divide by zero in mathematics.
So it's not at all obvious what this answer is.
Well let's do some manipulations.
The numerator can be factored using a pre-calculus skill, right?
And so x cubed minus one factors to x minus one times the quantity x squared plus x plus
one.
By the way I suggest that you memorize the formula for the difference of two cubes and
the sum of two cubes and how to factor it because these seem to occur a lot in calculus
problems.
And now we have a common factor of x minus one in the numerator and denominator.
So let's cancel that common factor and we're left with a new limit problem.
What's the limit as x approaches one of x squared plus x plus one?
Well duh, just plug in one and you get one plus one plus one equals three.
Now a couple of points here.
One is we needed a lot of pre-calculus to be successful with this algebraic manipulation.
And more to the point here, we started with an expression x cubed minus one over x minus
one and we manipulated that to get an expression x squared plus x plus one.
Those two functions agree everywhere except at one point and that point was x equals one.
The point we're approaching.
But in terms of limits that's irrelevant because remember you don't care what happens
at one.
You want to know what happens nearby.
And nearby these two functions agree and the second function tends to three.
So what's a good strategy for finding limits?
Suppose I give you a limit problem, here's one.
What will you do to attack that problem?
You always should try plugging in the number, just direct substitution.
Sometimes that will work on simple problem.
For example, if I asked you what's the limit of cosine x as x approaches pi?
Well, you'd go, hey, cosine pi, that's minus one.
That's the answer.
No problem.
I'm not dividing by zero, I'm not taking square roots of negative numbers.
Things are well behaved here.
So that limits very easy to figure out.
Now, but in most problems you'll find you can't just plug in the number like the previous
example.
You notice that it took some algebraic manipulation.
So the trick now is if you have a problem where you can't just plug in the number, do
some algebraic trick, some kind of massaging of that problem to get another function that
agrees with the original function except at one point, the point you're approaching.
And then those two will have the same limit.
And then when you're finished, what do you do?
You got this answer, well, you should verify it.
You should make sure you're correct by either using a table of values or a graph.
For instance, in that previous problem, we could have graphed the original function x
cube minus one over x minus one.
And I invite you to do that when you go over your lecture notes today.
And if you do graph it, you'll see that indeed the function wants to be three when x gets
closer and closer to one.
Now, there's a very important limit that occurs in all through calculus that deals with the
function sine x divided by x.
And the question we're going to look at right now is what's the limit as x approaches zero
of sine x over x?
It's really an interesting problem.
You could approach it, of course, the three different ways.
You could look at the graph of this function, and I'll show you in a minute the graph, and
you see what the function is trying to do near zero.
Or you could look at a table of values.
Of course, you can't just plug in zero, can you?
If you plug in zero, you get zero over zero, which is not defined.
So we're going to have to do something.
Or you could do an analytic approach, and it's a fairly complicated analytic approach.
It's in most textbooks, but it requires some geometry and something called the squeeze
theorem, and I don't think we'll go into those details right now.
But if you look in a calculus text, you'll see an analytic approach to this limit.
But let me show you the graph of the function.
Here it is.
And it looks like that as I get closer and closer to zero, the function seems to be getting
closer and closer to one.
And as x gets further from zero, you can see that the sinusoidal behavior, the wave behavior
begins to dampen.
It gets, the waves get smaller and smaller as I get further away from the origin.
But what we really care about is what's happening near the origin, and near the origin, when
x is near zero, the function is getting closer and closer to one.
Another way of saying that is, when x is small, sin x and x are approximately equal, because
their limit is one.
Isn't that interesting?
You might remember that from physics, because sometimes when you're doing pendulum problems,
they say, assume that sin x and x are approximately the same.
So we have this limit, sin x over x, as x approaches zero, and that's equal to one.
A related limit that comes up a lot is the limit as x approaches zero of one minus cosine
x over x.
That limit turns out to be zero, and it's instructive to see the analytic proof of that.
So let me step through that limit as x approaches zero of one minus cosine x over x.
I think you'll like this little proof.
It uses some neat techniques.
So what I do is, I multiply numerator and denominator by one plus cosine x over one
plus cosine x.
That's very much like rationalizing the denominator.
So look what happens.
The numerator becomes one minus cosine x squared, and oh yeah, I remember my trig identity.
Remember, sine squared plus cosine squared is one?
That means that one minus cosine squared is sine squared.
So I replace the numerator with sine squared x, and my denominator is still x times the
quantity one plus cosine x.
And now I do some sort of moving people around.
I take one of the sine x's and put it on top of the x.
So I have sine x over x, and then I take everybody else, the other sine x, and put it over one
plus cosine x.
So now I have a limit of a product of two functions.
The first function is sine x over x.
What happens to that function?
What's its limit?
Ah, that limit is one.
We just talked about it.
What about the limit of sine x over one plus cosine x?
Well, let's plug in zero and see what happens.
The numerator is zero.
What's the denominator?
Oh, it's not zero, is it?
It's two.
It's one plus cosine zero.
Cosine zero is one, so it's zero over two.
So this limit is one times zero or zero.
Okay, that was a pretty complicated algebraic solution, wasn't it?
How would you verify that?
How would you make sure you did it correctly?
What would you do?
Right, you could draw a picture of the function.
You could have your graphing utility, graph one plus cosine x over x, or you could do
a table of values.
And in either case, or both cases, you'll see that the function is getting closer and
closer to zero as x gets closer and closer to zero.
I think now we're fairly comfortable with the concept of limit.
I hope you sort of have a good feel for the definition of limit, that the limit of a function
as x approaches c equals l, if I can get as close to l as I want as x gets closer and
closer to c, and l must be a real number, must be a fixed number.
We also saw some examples of functions where they had limits that didn't exist, and sort
of keep those in mind as we go along, some functions that were poorly behaved.
Next time we're going to look at a related concept called continuity.
Imagine a function that goes along without any breaks or anything, it's just a solid
curve that motors along.
That would be a continuous function, versus say that diving board function that was broken,
and those are functions that are going to be discontinuous or not continuous.
And we'll use this concept of continuity to be able to find roots and zeros of equations.
So thank you very much for our first lesson on limits, and I'll see you next time.
