Hello again and welcome to our final lecture on limits.
Last time we talked a lot about limits and discussed the concept of continuity and we
even did an application with the intermediate value theorem. Today we're going to look at
some really interesting behavior of functions. We'll first look at something called infinite
limits. This will be functions that grow without bound or decrease without bound. They go
off to infinity or to minus infinity and then we'll also look at the concept of limits
at infinity. Now that means what happens to a function as x gets larger and larger or
as x gets smaller and smaller towards negative infinity. So both of these concepts are related
to each other and we'll deal with each one in turn and see some applications of them.
Let me begin by with an example as I usually do. Let's look at the function 3 over x minus
2. Here's a graph of that function. This is the graph of 3 over x minus 2. Now look
what's happening according to the graph as I get nearer and nearer to 2. From the right
as I get nearer and nearer to 2, the function seems to be growing, getting larger and larger.
Whereas from the left it's getting smaller and smaller, you would say that it's going
down to minus infinity informally here. So the line x equals 2, that vertical line is
what we call a vertical asymptote. The function is not defined there. 2 is not in the domain
and that vertical line is not part of the graph. That's called a vertical asymptote
in the sense that the function gets closer and closer to the line x equals 2 as it goes
off to infinity or minus infinity. So the notation for this is as follows. We say that
the limit of the function f of x as x approaches 2 from the right, so that's the 2 with the
little plus sign above it, is infinity and as x approaches 2 from the left, and that's
the little minus sign, is minus infinity. These are what are called infinite limits.
The limit doesn't exist there. That's, that's, be careful. I'm not saying the limit exists
because that's not a number. Infinity's not a number. We're just describing the behavior.
Okay. And again, x equals 2 is a vertical asymptote. Notice again how we're using one-sided
limits here, approaching from one side alone. Let's look at another example. How about 1
over x minus 1 quantity squared? Well, let's approach 1 from 1. So x approaching 1 of 1
over x minus 1 squared. Again, it's not defined at 1, so something strange is happening there.
And analytically, as I get closer and closer to 1, x minus 1 gets closer and closer to
0. And that means it's reciprocal. 1 over x minus 1 squared is blowing up. It's getting
larger and larger, isn't it? So 1 over x minus 1 squared is a large positive number when
x is very close to 1. So we say that the limit as x approaches 1 of 1 over x minus 1 squared
equals infinity. Again, we aren't saying the limit exists. The limit does not exist, but
we're describing the behavior of the function as going off to infinity. Here's a picture
of that graph. The function, as you see, at 1 is not defined, but it's getting larger
and larger as I get closer and closer to 1. The line x equals 1 is a vertical asymptote
of this graph. Now, here's a common pitfall. I want to make sure we understand, and I've
said it a few times already. When we write the equal sign, like limit as x approaches
c of a function f of x is infinity, that does not mean that the limit exists. On the contrary,
this tells us the limit does not exist, but rather it describes the behavior of the function.
It describes that unbounded behavior of the limit. So infinity's not a number. Just keep
that in mind. It's not a number, but it's describing the behavior that is getting larger and larger.
Good. Now, I've used the word vertical asymptote a few times, and I've used the word vertical
asymptote a few times. Let me give a more formal definition of it. We say that f of x approaches
infinity or negative infinity as x approaches c from the right or left, and if that is happening,
then we say that the line x equals c is a vertical asymptote of the graph of the function.
So you're a vertical asymptote if the function is getting closer and closer to you by going
off to plus infinity or minus infinity. Vertical asymptotes occur at points x equals c where
the function is not defined. The function is not defined at its vertical asymptote, but
it has that strange behavior that is getting closer and closer to its vertical asymptote.
Now, let's go back to our old friend, the tangent function. We've seen it a number of
times already. Let's talk about its vertical asymptotes. Oh, remember what the graph looked
like? Here it is. It has these periodic pieces, don't we? You see these chunks of this tangent
function? Let's say focus at pi over 2. The function's not defined at pi over 2, is it?
It's not defined there. But look at the behavior near pi over 2. The limit from the left is
plus infinity, and the limit from the right is minus infinity. So pi over 2 is a vertical
asymptote of the tangent function. How many vertical asymptotes does the tangent function
have? How many? Well, an infinite number. Wow. It has lots of vertical asymptotes. Pi
over 2, 3 pi over 2, 5 pi over 2, and then the other way, minus pi over 2, minus 3 pi
over 2, et cetera. And you see that we have these one-sided limits. On one side, the limits
plus infinity, and on the other side, the limit is minus infinity. I'd like to show
you now a little bit trickier problem. It's kind of fun. You'll like this one, I think.
Let's look at the function x squared plus 2x minus 8 over x squared minus 4, and let's
find its vertical asymptotes. Now, one of the natural things to do is to say, well, it'll
have this unbounded behavior when the denominator is zero. So you might think, I'll just factor
the denominator, x squared minus 4, and that'll give me my vertical asymptotes. Uh-uh. You
got to be careful here, and you'll see why in a moment. Let's look closer at this function
and to see what's happening. So I'm going to do some algebra on this function, this
kind of algebra we've used before. We take our original function and factor numerator
and denominator, the numerator factors to x minus 2 times x plus 4, the denominator factors
as the difference of two squares, x minus 2 times x plus 2, and oh-ho, there's a common
factor. The x minus 2's cancel each other, and I've simplified it to x plus 4 over x
plus 2, as long as I remember that x does not equal 2. Okay, what do we observe here?
The original function equals this new function, x plus 4 over x plus 2, except it has a hole
at x equals 2. These two agree everywhere except at the point x equals 2. So I ask you, is
x equal 2 a vertical asymptote? Well, no, it's not, because 2 is a factor of both the
numerator and the denominator. At 2, the function is not defined, I admit that, but the function
is well-behaved near 2. What does it want to be near 2? What is it getting near? It's
getting near 2 plus 4 over 2 plus 2 or 3 halves. Isn't that interesting? 2 is not a vertical
asymptote. Now minus 2 is, because minus 2, the denominator vanishes and the numerator
does not vanish. Here's a graph of that function. That's the original function we talked about
in this example. Notice that it looks just fine except when x is 2, there's a hole in
it, and I've indicated that, a little hole there. You could fill that hole in. That's
a removable discontinuity. It wants to be 3 halves if it's going to respect its limit.
But 2 is not a vertical asymptote. Look, it's not going off to infinity there, is it? It's
perfectly well-behaved, but over at minus 2, you see that it's blowing up to infinity
or down to minus infinity. So this is a common pitfall. To find the vertical asymptotes, you
can't just find the zeros of the denominator because some of those zeros might also be zeros
of the numerator. So you got to make sure you cancel like factors in your problem before
you determine those vertical asymptotes. And as usual, I encourage you to do a verification
with your graphing utility to check out some of these results of vertical asymptotes. Let
me show you an example here of vertical asymptotes, an example to relativity theory for our physics
folks. According to the theory of relativity, the mass m of a particle depends on its velocity
and is given by the following formula. m equals m sub zero, m sub zero is the rest mass of
the particle, divided by the square root of 1 minus the quantity v squared over c squared.
v is the velocity of the particle and c is the speed of light. So I ask the following
question. What happens to the mass m as the particle's speed gets closer and closer to
the speed of light? So we're asking what happens in the limit as the velocity v approaches
c from the left, from values below the speed of light. Well, look what happened, it's pretty
easy to see. As v gets closer to c, v squared over c squared gets closer and closer to 1,
the denominator gets closer and closer to 1 minus 1 or zero, it's blowing up to infinity,
isn't it? And so you see from relativity theory that as a particle velocity increases, its
mass also increases. Isn't that interesting? So now let's turn to the other type of limit
I'd like to talk about today and that is limits at infinity. Again, I'll begin with an example.
Let's look at the function 3x squared over x squared plus 1. Here's a graph of that function.
This is 3x squared over x squared plus 1. Well, look at the curious behavior as x gets
larger and larger. It seems like it's getting closer and closer to y equals 3. And the same
is true as x goes in the negative direction. It's getting closer and closer to 3. We like
to say it in the following way. As x increases without bound, that means you go out in the
x-axis, really big values of x, then the function approaches 3 and as x decreases without bound,
f approaches 3. Here's how we write that mathematically. We say that the limit as x approaches infinity,
so you put the x approaching infinity down underneath the limit symbol, of the function
equals 3 and the same is true as x approaches minus infinity. We say here that y equals
3 is a horizontal asymptote of the graph. The technical definition of horizontal asymptote
is as follows. We say that a line y equals l, a horizontal line y equals l, is a horizontal
asymptote of the graph of a function if the limit of the function as x approaches minus
infinity is l or as x approaches infinity is equal to l. Good. Let's look at some examples.
What I'd like to do here is look at a series of polynomials that almost look alike and
to get a real feel for this horizontal asymptote behavior, in other words, the behavior out
at plus and minus infinity. These three examples almost are the same. The first one is, well,
they all have the same denominator, which is 3x squared plus 1. It's the numerators
that I'm changing. The first one is 2x plus 5, the second one is 2x squared plus 5, and
the third one is 2x cubed plus 5. Let me first give you an intuitive analysis of what these
limits will be, and then we'll go ahead and do them algebraically. How about that first
one? What's the limit as x goes out to plus infinity, x gets larger and larger, of 2x
plus 5 over 3x squared plus 1? Well, here's the intuitive argument. If x is really big,
the plus 5 and the plus 1 are irrelevant. When you're dealing with numbers like a billion
or a Googleplex, those numbers are just buried. They don't import. Now, what about the numerator?
It's two times a big number, and the denominator is three times a big number squared, so the
denominator is getting bigger much faster than the numerator. I would suspect that that
limit will be zero because the denominator is getting much bigger than the numerator.
It's winning the battle. How about the second one? Now the numerator is 2x squared plus
5, denominators 3x squared plus 1. Again, when I'm dealing out there with large values
of x, the plus 5 and the plus 1 are going to be essentially irrelevant, and I'm dealing
with two times a large number squared over three times a large number squared. Those
large numbers will cancel each other, and I'm left just with two thirds. So my guess
is that second limit is going to be two thirds. In a moment, I'll prove it for you. How about
the third one? Well, I think you get the picture, don't you? The third one, it's the numerator
that's now bigger than the denominator. It's 2x cubed plus 5, and so that one we suspect
will blow up to infinity. It will get larger and larger. So let's do the algebra now to
verify those results. You'll see that the trick's the same each time. Let's look at
the first one, 2x plus 5 over 3x squared plus 1. Well, multiply numerator and denominator
by 1 over x squared, and watch what happens when I do that. The 1 over x squared slides
in to multiply times 2x plus 5, and so the numerator simplifies to 2 over x plus 5 over
x squared. How about the denominator? It simplifies to 3 plus 1 over x squared. So I've multiplied
the numerator and denominator by 1, by the same quantity, and hence I get a new expression,
and now imagine x going to infinity. The numerator will go to zero. Two over a large number and
five over a large number all go to zero, but what about the denominator? It's got a
three down there, so the three is solid. It doesn't move when I take the limit, and hence
the resulting limit is zero over three, which equals zero, which, again, we did that intuitively
a few minutes ago. Let's look at the second one, which had that interesting answer of
two-thirds. Again, I start with the original problem and do the same trick. Multiply numerator
and denominator by 1 over x squared, and then slide that in with some algebra, and you
get the following expression. Two plus five over x squared, all divided by three plus
one over x squared, and now let x go to infinity. The five over x squared, poof, it goes to
zero. The one over x squared in the denominator, poof, it goes to zero, and we're left with
two over three. Our answer is two-thirds. And the third one, I think you get the picture.
I invite you to do this on your own, but you'll see that in this case the numerator wins the
battle and the function gets larger and larger, and we say that the limit is infinity. That
is to say, the limit does not exist, but it does not exist in a special way. The function
is getting larger and larger as x gets larger. As usual, I invite you to verify all of these
limits with your graphing utility and you'll see that the graphs correspond to what we
just did. Now, let's step back a bit and summarize our results for these quotients of polynomials.
Quotients of polynomials are often called rational functions, polynomial divided by polynomial.
What did we observe? Well, if the degree of the numerator is smaller, less than the degree
of the denominator, the limit's zero. If they have the same degree, then the limit
is the ratio of the leading coefficients, that two over three. And if the numerator
is bigger in degree, then the limit's going to be either infinity or perhaps minus infinity.
So that's a nice rule to keep in mind. Well, my students often say, Professor, why don't
we just use calculators in this class? They can answer all the questions for us. We don't
need to do any thinking. Let's let the calculator do the problem. Let me show you kind of a
curious example. Let's graph this wild function on a graphing calculator. Here's a picture
of it. And notice the screen that I'm using here. X is between minus 10 and 10, but the
Y values are between minus two and two. And if you were to look at this graph, what would
you think the limit as X approaches infinity or minus infinity is? What are the horizontal
asymptotes? You would think perhaps it's one, wouldn't you? Because look, it's going closer
and closer to one as I go out to the right or to the left. But wait, look back at the
function. This is a rational function, polynomial over polynomial. And the leading coefficients
are two for the numerator and one for the denominator. So the actual answer should be
two. You see, the graph that I've shown from minus 10 to 10 doesn't really show the true
behavior. You would have to take a screen that is really gigantic, something that's
unnatural to do in order to actually realize that the horizontal asymptote is Y equals two
rather than Y equals one. So these calculators can fool you if you aren't careful.
We've seen an example of a function with, well, up to now, our functions have only had
one horizontal asymptote. Let me show you a curious example of a function with two horizontal
asymptotes. How about 3x over square root of x squared plus two? Okay, look what's going
to happen here. As x gets larger and larger positive, you can sort of say, well, that
two in the denominator is not going to be very important. So it's like 3x over the square
root of x squared, which is the same as 3x over x, and that's about three. So the limit
to the right, the limit as x approaches infinity is going to be three. How about approaching
negative infinity? The same kind of argument, but now there's a little kicker here. The
numerator is going to be negative, because I'm approaching negative infinity. The denominator
is always positive because the square root of a number is always non-negative, and so
now it's going to be negative three to the left. Here's a picture of that function. Kind
of looks like the tangent function kind of twisted around, but it's not. This is a rational
function. This is a square root type function. But notice that off to the right, it's approaching
three, and off to the left, it's approaching minus three. Kind of interesting, isn't it?
Let me show you an example now as applied to biology. Here we're going to model the
level of oxygen in a pond, and we'll call one to be the normal level, 100% oxygen, at
the unpolluted time. And then the model that say we come up with when we measure pollution
in ponds is t squared minus t plus one over t squared plus one. In real life, models would
be much more complicated than this, but the principles are just about the same. So somebody
dumps some organic waste into the pond, and so the level of oxygen is going to go down.
For instance, after one week, the level of oxygen is f of one, and if you plug one into
our model, you get that it's one half or 50%. So the level of oxygen is now 50% of what
it used to be. And at time two weeks, it's 60%, and at time ten weeks, it's 91 over 101
or about 90%, 90.1 to be more exact. So what's happening here? What is going to happen as
t approaches infinity? What's going to happen to the level of oxygen? Well, look at the
original model. It's a polynomial over a polynomial. They have the same degree, two, and so the
leading coefficients, it's that ratio, one over one. So ultimately, as a limit, the horizontal
asymptote will be one or 100%. Here's a graph of this model. Notice that at time zero, the
function is equal to one. It's got the full amount of oxygen, 100%, and then somebody
throws the stuff in, and the model shows that the amount of oxygen goes down, and I've put
some dots there at one and two, which we calculated. But notice the function comes back up, and
it approaches its horizontal asymptote. Here's a problem that I do in all my lectures. This
is kind of a problem that brings back a lot of the limit ideas, kind of summarizes many,
many limit ideas that we've seen in this lecture and the previous two lectures. I like to call
on students for this. I won't call on you, of course, but here's what I tell them. I
give them a problem, and I see if they can give me an answer. And here's the problem
I'll pose. Suppose I give you a function, and the value at two is four. So suppose f of
two is four. That's all you know about this function. f of two is four. What can you say
about the limit of this function as x approaches two? So I give you the value at two, and I
ask you, what is the limit as you approach two? And so I'll ask my students that question,
and hopefully they'll say, Professor, you can't say anything. You don't know what's
going to happen in the limit sense. Just because you know the value at the point you're approaching,
that says nothing about the limit as you get nearer to that point. Remember the hiccup function?
As I approach two, the limit was one, but then there was a hiccup, and the value was something
else. So the answer to that question, it's kind of a trick question for my students. The answer
is nothing. You can't say anything, Professor. And then I ask a reverse question. Suppose
you know the limit as x approaches two is four. What can you say about the value at two? And
again, my poor students have to answer. I call on somebody, and hopefully you'll agree with
the answer that you can say nothing. You can't say anything. Just because the limit is four
as you approach two, that says nothing about the value at two. In fact, it might not even
be defined at two. Now, that said, the reason this kind of confuses students and me sometimes,
people think, well, if the functions continuous, if the function were continuous, then all
these answers would be different because it would respect its limit, wouldn't it? You would
be able to say something. But if the function is just an arbitrary function, you have no
idea what it is, you can't make any judgments there. Let me ask another question, which
I like to do in class. In life, the real life question, how many vertical asymptotes can
a function possibly have? In other words, can you, is there any rule about the maximum
number or minimum number of vertical asymptotes that a function can have? What do you think?
Well, the answer is basically any number you want. There are functions that have no vertical
asymptotes, or one, or two, or five, or ten. In fact, there are functions that have an
infinite number of vertical asymptotes. You remember which it is? Can you think of an
example? How about the tangent function? It has an infinite number of vertical asymptotes.
Can you think of another one? How about cotangent? That, too, has an infinite number of vertical
asymptotes. Isn't that interesting? Well, let's pose a related question. How many horizontal
asymptotes can a function have? What do you think now? What do you think now? Well, you
could have zero. For instance, the function, let me think, how about y equals x, f of x
equals x, the straight line of slope one? It has no horizontal asymptotes. You could
have one horizontal asymptote. We've had lots of examples of that. You could even have two
horizontal asymptotes, couldn't you? And we saw an example previously of a function with
two horizontal asymptotes. One of them was out to plus infinity. It had a certain value.
And then out to minus infinity, it had a different value. It had two horizontal asymptotes. Could
you have more? I think not. Just because there are only two limits to take. One is x to plus
infinity. So at most, there will be one limit there. That will be one of the horizontal asymptotes.
And then going to minus infinity will be the other one. And that's it. At most, you can
have just two. Good. Well done. So we are pretty much finished now with our study of limits
and asymptotes. I'm the first to admit. It's kind of difficult material. It's interesting.
Hopefully it's been a challenge to you, but you have a good feel now for calculating some
limits and some asymptotes. Don't forget we have a workbook where you can practice your
limits skills. Next time, we'll use limits to go back to that tangent line problem and
develop something called the derivative. We will generalize that example I did in lecture
one of the tangent line to a parabola. So I'm looking forward to seeing you next time
when we begin our study of the differential calculus. Thank you very much.
