Hello again. I hope you've enjoyed our lectures on the rules of differentiation. Today we're
going to see yet another rule, and again I think you'll find it fairly easy to use.
This is called the chain rule. You'll remember the last few lectures, we've talked about
the derivatives of sums of functions, sine and cosine, and then we did the product and
quotient rules, which gave us the opportunity to find the derivative of all the trigonometric
functions. And of course we notice that the product and quotient rules are not that easy
to use. They're a little messy at times. Now today we'll talk about how to find the derivative
of a composition of two functions. Let me show you why that's needed. Consider the following
example. We know how to find the derivative of the square root function. That's x to the
one-half. Its derivative would be one-half x to the minus one-half. That's the power
rule. But how would you find, say, the derivative of the square root of, say, 3x plus 1? It's
a little more complicated inside that square root sign. Well it's not obvious how to proceed.
But notice that this is a composite function. It's composed of two functions. The inside
function is 3x plus 1, and then you square root that inside function. In a minute we'll
come back and actually do the derivative of this function once we've developed the chain
rule. So how does the chain rule work? Let me explain it with a simple example. I think
you'll discover that it's very easy to use the chain rule, but the formal definition
of it is actually kind of confusing. So let me show you how it works. Let's do the example
x squared plus 1 all cubed. That's a composition of two functions. The inside function is x
squared plus 1, and then we cube that inside function. So here's how the chain rule works.
Let's find the derivative. The derivative equals, well, it's something cubed. So it's
3 times that thing. So it's 3 times x squared plus 1 squared. In other words, that's like
the power rule. But then you have to multiply that by the derivative of the inside function.
And the derivative of x squared plus 1 is 2x. So it's 3 times the thing squared times
the derivative of the thing, where the thing is the inside function. Isn't that simple?
And then you can combine the 2x with the 3 and get a final answer of 6x times x squared
plus 1 squared. Now you might say, well, Professor Edwards, I wouldn't have used the chain rule
here. I would have just multiplied that cubic out and made it into a long polynomial and
then go boom, boom, boom, boom, differentiating each term of that polynomial. And I say fine.
That's right. That would work. But I'm going to change the problem on you. How about if
it's x squared plus 1, not cubed, but to the, say, hundredth power? Good luck multiplying
that out. Whereas the chain rule would be trivial. It would be 100 times x squared plus
1 to the 99th power times 2x. Simple. Here's the formal definition of the chain rule. And
as I said earlier, I find this not very helpful in understanding what the chain rule does.
I think it's easier sort of to see it in practice. But let me write this down for you and you
can sort of savor it at your leisure. Suppose y is a function, a differentiable function
of u. u is that inside function. And u is another function, which is also differentiable.
Then the derivative of the composition, dy dx, is dy du. That's the derivative of the
inside, excuse me, the derivative of the outside function times du dx. And that du dx is the
derivative of the inside function that you add on at the end. If you want to write it
in the different notation, the derivative of f of g of x, that's the composition of
f with g, is f prime of g of x times the inside derivative, g prime of x. Again, I find this
definition sometimes not very helpful. Let's do an example to get us sort of comfortable
with how to do the chain rule in practice. Let's look at, say, 3x minus 2x squared all
to the fifth power. And let's find the derivative. So the inside function is 3x minus 2x squared.
And then we're taking that thing to the fifth power. What's the derivative? Well, it's five
times that thing to the fourth power. That's like the normal power rule. And then you've
got to multiply it by the derivative of that inside function, 3x minus 2x squared. So it's
five times 3x minus 2x squared to the fourth power times the derivative 3 minus 4x. That's
that inside derivative. How about that problem we saw a little bit earlier? Square root of
3x plus 1. What's its derivative? Well, first write 3x plus 1 square rooted as an exponent,
3x plus 1 to the one-half power. And then use the chain rule. It will be one-half, bring
down the exponent, times 3x plus 1 to the minus one-half. And then don't forget the inside
derivative, which in this case is just 3. So the final answer is 3 over 2. And of course
3x plus 1 to the minus one-half is the square root of 3x plus 1 down in the denominator.
Notice the form of both of these problems that we just did are of the form something
to a power, u, which is the inside function to a power. This is often called the general
power rule when we apply the chain rule to u to the n. And the derivative of u to the
n, where n is any real number, is n times u to the n minus 1. And then don't forget
the derivative of the inside, du dx. So it's kind of like the power rule. Remember how
the power rule worked, except now you've got, instead of having x, you've got some bigger
quantity, some function of x, so you multiply at the end by the derivative of that larger
quantity involving x. So the chain rule has this special case of the general power rule.
The chain rule is actually more general. For example, if you want to define the derivative
of sine of 6x, that's not a power rule problem. That is actually just a straight chain rule.
Let's do it. What's the derivative of sine of the quantity 6x? Well, here's how I talk
about it. I would say this is sine of something. So the derivative of sine of something is cosine
of that thing, and then I have to differentiate that thing. I have to do the inside derivative.
So an extra 6 plops out, and the final answer is 6, cosine 6x. Nice, isn't it? Not so bad,
I don't think. Let's do a monster example, a much bigger example that combines a number
of skills. See if you can follow along with this one and see all the steps that we're
doing. This is kind of, you know, get our hands dirty here a little bit. Let's consider
the function x squared times the square root of 5 minus x squared, and let's ask the following
question. What's the derivative of this function at the point 1, 2? In other words, imagine
the graph and we're trying to find the slope of the tangent line on that graph when x equals
1. That's what we're trying to find. Well, here we go. We take the derivative and I hope
you notice the first thing is this is a product rule, isn't it? It's one function x squared
times another function, that square root. So we have to do the product rule first. So
here we go. Before I do the product rule, of course, I want to make sure that I rewrite
the square root of 5 minus x squared as an exponent, 5 minus x squared, to the one half
power. So what's the product rule do? It's the first times the derivative of the second.
So the derivative of that second function requires the chain rule. Wow, what a neat problem
this is. It has a product rule and an embedded chain rule. So here we go. It's x squared and
now I'm going to differentiate 5 minus x squared to the one half power. That's one half 5 minus
x squared to the minus one half times the inside derivative, which is minus 2x. Plus
the second term, 5 minus x squared to the one half and the derivative of the first term,
oh, thank goodness that's pretty easy, just 2x. And then we could simplify this, but
because we want the derivative at a particular point, go ahead and plug that point in right
now after you've differentiated. And this is actually non-trivial to plug in one. Watch
what happens. The x squared is just 1. There's a one half and then there's a 4, 5 minus 1
is 4 to the minus one half times the minus 2 plus, and the second term is 4 to the one
half times 2. Add those together. Wow, well, what's 4 to the minus one half? That's 1 over
4 to the one half, which is the square root of 4. So that's one half times, one half times
minus 2. That gives a minus one half and the second term gives a 4. Add those up, seven
halves. Ouch. That sure was a lot of pre-calculus. And I said it over and over and it's really
true. There's a lot of algebra here that we have to be sort of comfortable with. I invite
you again to practice this problem maybe at your leisure, and then in the workbook you'll
see other problems like this that will not only have a derivative calculation, but they'll
have some pre-calculus afterwards. It's not pleasant work, but we have to be pretty good
at it. Let me pause here and give some study tips. Many of these we've talked about before.
If they ask for a derivative at a point, plug that point in right after you take the derivative.
Don't simplify ahead of time. On AP tests, remember you don't really have to simplify
your answers, but in college you may have to ask your professor. They may require simplifications.
And then again, remember that the back of the book answer might not look like your answer,
but you still could be correct. Let's do another chain rule problem that has a nice little
twist to it in that it's a double chain rule. Let's find the derivative of sine cubed of
4x. By the way, notice this notation, sine cubed. That means the sine function all cubed.
We tend to write that cube after the word sine instead of outside. So it really means
sine of 4x all cubed. What's the derivative? Well, the chain rule would say it's three
times the function sine 4x squared times the derivative of sine 4x times the inside derivative.
But wow, that itself requires a chain rule, doesn't it? That itself is a composition.
So our answer now is 3 sine 4x quantity squared times the derivative of sine 4x, which is
cosine 4x times the inside derivative 4. Wow. Double chain rule. And then simplify all this
mess and you get 12 sine squared 4x times cosine 4x. Pretty tough going.
Let's do a surprise problem. Let's find the derivative of sine squared x plus cosine
squared x. Let's see what happens. So what's the derivative of sine squared? Well, that's
something squared. The derivative would be 2 times sine x times the derivative of sine
x, which is cosine x. Plus, what's the derivative of cosine squared? Well, the derivative would
be 2 times cosine times the derivative of cosine, which is minus the sine. So look at
our answer. The derivative is 2 sine cosine minus 2 cosine sine. That equals zero. Wow,
we. The derivative of my original function is zero. Quite curious. Why is it zero?
Do you see what's going on here? Ah, yes. Sine squared plus cosine squared is equal
to 1. That's that famous trig identity. So you would expect its derivative to be zero.
In fact, you might have said that in the first place and said, why do the chain rule? I know
it's equal to 1. The derivative must be zero. Let's do a similar problem. Let's find the
derivative of tangent squared minus secant squared. Here we go. The derivative of tangent
squared is 2 times tangent times the derivative of tangent. Memorize, memorize. Oh, that's
secant squared. And then I have to differentiate secant squared, which is 2 secant. And then
the derivative of secant, which is secant tangent. And now look at our answer. It's 2 tangent
secant squared minus 2 secant squared tangent. That's zero. We got zero again. That ugly
looking function, sort of complicated, has a derivative equal to zero. What's going
on? Well, let me show you. Remember our identity, sine squared plus cosine squared equals 1.
This identity, if you divide both sides by cosine squared, gives rise to another very
important trig identity. So take sine squared plus cosine squared equal to 1 and divide both
sides by cosine squared. The first term becomes sine squared over cosine squared, which is
tangent squared. Cosine squared over cosine squared is 1, and the other side is 1 over
cosine squared, which is secant squared. Now look back at our original problem. It was
tangent squared minus secant squared, wasn't it? Well, according to this identity from
trigonometry, that's a constant. It's equal to minus 1, and we would expect its derivative
to indeed be zero. By the way, please memorize that trig identity, tangent squared plus 1
equals secant squared. I say that even though you can derive it by the trick I just showed
you. Let's find the second derivative of a particular function. How about 1 over 2x
minus 6? Let's practice doing differentiation twice. So this can be rewritten as 2x minus
6 to the minus 1 power, and now I do the chain rule. The derivative equals minus 1, 2x minus
6 to the minus 2 power times the inside derivative 2, and then I simplify. That's minus 2 times
2x minus 6 to the minus 2 power. Now differentiate it again. So I get the second derivative equals.
Well, first there's the minus 2 I had sitting in front originally, and then I bring down
the exponent to give me another minus 2, and then I get 2x minus 6 to the minus 3, and
then another inside derivative 2. Boy, there are a lot of 2s floating around here, and
if you simplify all those 2s, it turns out to be the minuses cancel. You get 8 divided
by 2x minus 6 all cubed. Good. That was a pretty hard problem. Let's turn now to an application
of what we've been doing with the chain rule. I'd like to look at a pendulum problem. These
kind of problems occur a lot in physics. Imagine you have a pendulum hanging from the ceiling
and it's 15 centimeters long, and it moves according to the equation that its angle is
equal to 0.2 times cosine 8t, where t is time and the angle, of course, is measured in radians.
Here's a picture of that pendulum, and it makes an angle theta, and it kind of goes
back and forth, back and forth, according to that equation. Well, we know the position
function. Let's calculate the maximum angular displacement. In other words, how far out
does the pendulum go before it swings back? And also, let's calculate how fast the pendulum
is moving its angular velocity with respect to time. Before we do that, let's study some
of the values of this function for various values of time.
For instance, if t is 0, then cosine of 8 times 0 is just cosine of 0, which is 1, and
so theta is 0.2. That turns out to be the maximum displacement, because cosine at most
is equal to 1. So at time 0, this thing is out here at maximum angle 0.2 radians, and
then it swings back over to minus 0.2 radians. Notice that when t is pi over 16, you get
cosine 8 times pi over 16, which is cosine of pi over 2, which is 0. And hence, at pi
over 16, the pendulum is vertical, and then it keeps swinging over. So let's complete
the problem. Here's the formula. Theta is 0.2 times cosine 8t. The maximum displacement,
as we said earlier, is 0.2 radians. That's because that's how big cosine can get. And
the derivative is by the chain rule, 0.2 times minus sine of 8t, and then the inside derivative
is 8. So it's minus 1.6 sine of 8t. Notice that when t equals 0, the rate of change of
the angle is minus 1.6 times 0. What does that mean? When time is 0, remember the pendulum
was out here at its maximum displacement, and it's actually not moving. It's coming
out, and then it turns around. That's why d theta dt is 0 there. It's slowed down, and
then it turns back around and swings back. Kind of a neat problem, and I invite you to
plug in some other t values to see how this behaves. Okay, good. I'd like to look at a
problem now that actually will be used, looked at again next time, when t is pi over 16,
when we talk about a topic called implicit differentiation. I'm going to look at the
problem here from the viewpoint of the chain rule, and show some of the flaws of this problem
or our approach to the problem, and then we'll see a better way to do it next time.
So what I'd like to do is analyze the circle x squared plus y squared equals 25. That's
a circle of radius 5, and I want to find dy dx, the derivative, or the slope, at any
point on the circle. Here's how you might do that. Take the y squared term and leave
it on the left and bring the x squared to the other side, and then take the square root
of both sides. So you have y equals square root 25 minus x squared. Now there's a flaw
with this. We're assuming here that y is positive, aren't we? If we wanted to know the slope
at a negative value of y, this wouldn't quite work. So let's assume for the moment that
we're going to deal with the upper hemisphere. So I want to find the slope, so I'm going
to have to differentiate this function, square root 25 minus x squared. So I write it as
an exponent, 25 minus x squared, all to the one-half power, and I use our old friend,
the chain rule. One-half 25 minus x squared to the minus one-half times the inside derivative,
which is minus 2x, and then I simplify this and get the 2s to cancel, and it's minus
x over the square root 25 minus x squared. And again, this is the derivative at any point
above the y-axis, above the x-axis. We're in the upper semi-circle, as indicated in
this figure, because the square root is always going to be positive. So what kind of derivatives
can we now calculate with our formula? The derivative is minus x over square root 25
minus x squared. That's telling me the slope of this semi-circle at various points. We're
going back to kind of basic principles here. Let's make sure we're comfortable. 3, 4 is
on that circle. It's on that semi-circle. What's the slope there? Well, you would plug
3 into the equation. Look how it works. The denominator would be 25 minus 9, 3 squared,
and the square root of 16 is 4, so it would be minus 3 fourths. So at 3, 4, the slope's
negative. At minus 3, 4, the slope turns out to be positive. How about at 0, 5? How about
if x is 0? Well, the numerator is then 0, and the slope is 0. And how about at 5, 0?
Well, if you plug in 5, you're dividing by 0, aren't you? So the slope's undefined at
5, 0. Let's look back at our picture and see how these results are verified geometrically.
Look at 3, 4. The slope is negative. At minus 3, 4, the slope is positive. Up there at 0,
5, you have a horizontal tangent. The derivative is 0. And then back down at 5, you can see
that actually the curve has a vertical tangent, doesn't it? And the derivative is not defined
there. Great. Good going. We'll come back to that problem next time. Let's do a pretty
hard problem now. Let's find the points on the interval 0, 2 pi at which this function
has horizontal tangents. Finding points where functions have horizontal tangents is an important
skill in applied calculus. So we're going to do this problem, and this will give rise
to some interesting trigonometry. So what do we do? We take our function 2 cosine x
plus sine 2 x, and we take its derivative. I like to always tell students when you don't
know how to start a problem, when in doubt, take a derivative. You'll get some partial
credit. So we take the derivative, and we want to set it equal to 0 to find where the
derivative is 0, and we already have a problem. That's a hard equation to solve. But let me
remind you of a trig identity. Remember that cosine 2 x is equal to cosine squared minus
sine squared, or 2 cosine squared minus 1, or 1 minus 2 sine squared x. Let's say one
of the fundamental trig identities. I haven't talked about it yet in this course, but it
is part of that review lesson that we did back in lesson 3, and you'll see it in our
workbook. So I can replace cosine 2 x with 1 minus 2 sine squared x, and then I'll have
an equation just involving the sine function. Also, by the way, I can, of course, cancel
the 2's in the derivative equation because there are no problem. So we take our equation,
sine x minus cosine 2 x, replace cosine 2 x with 1 minus 2 sine squared x, and then we
have an equation involving just the sine function. 2 sine squared x plus sine x minus
1 equals 0. Wow, well, that's a polynomial in the variable sine x. You can factor that.
It's 2 sine x minus 1 times the quantity sine x plus 1. You know, check yourself. Multiply
out that factored form, and you'll get the original problem. And now, the factored form
is equal to 0, so either term can be 0. If sine x is equal to 0, excuse me, if the first
term is equal to 0, that means that sine x is 1 half, that would make the first term
0. And in that case, x turns out to be pi over 6, or 5 pi over 6. If the second term
is 0, that would mean that sine x is minus 1, and that occurs when x is 3 pi over 2.
Notice how we have to be very, very comfortable with solving trig equations, like I did back
in lecture 3. Being comfortable with trig is a key aspect of success in calculus. Here's
a picture of that original function, which verifies the results we just had. Notice that
pi over 6, 5 pi over 6, and at 3 pi over 2, the function has a horizontal tangent line,
doesn't it? It's kind of neat how the picture verifies the analytic work that was so difficult
to do.
Let's do a practice problem. Let's see if you can do the following problem. Can you
find the derivative of 3x plus 5 to the 50th power? Think about that. How would you find
the derivative of 3x plus 5 to the 50th? This is now back to our original discussion of
the chain rule. Hopefully, after this lecture, you look at that problem and go, haha, that's
easy. I can do that one. It's nothing more than 50 times 3x plus 5 to the 49th, and then
don't forget the inside derivative times 3. Good. And then you could, of course, simplify
that. Great. I think you're comfortable now with the chain rule.
So what are we going to do next time? We have one more lecture on formulas for derivatives.
And next time, we're going to look at a topic called implicit differentiation. This will
allow us to look back at that circle, remember, x squared plus y squared equals 25. We'll
be able to attack that problem in a much more global fashion and not have to just restrict
to the upper semi-circle. Again, I think you'll find implicit differentiation a fairly straightforward
topic. And when we finish with implicit differentiation, we'll basically have all the derivative rules
we'll ever need to be successful in calculus. Now, that said, we're going to have some more
functions come into play. We're going to have logarithmic functions and exponential functions
and things. But these rules are fundamental, and they will serve us well throughout the
course. We'll also see some really neat applications next time, something that we call in mathematics
related rate problems. And I'll leave you with the following kind of puzzle. Suppose you
have a circle that is whose radius is increasing at a certain rate. How would you calculate
how fast the area of that circle is increasing? So it's the related rate of growth. The radius
is growing. How is the area growing? So thank you very much, and I'll see you next time.
