Hello again. I'd like to welcome you to the first of five lectures that will devote to
applications of derivatives. Up to now we've developed the rules for finding or calculating
derivatives and basically we have now the ability to calculate just about any derivative that
we ever need. And in the next few lectures we're going to apply our knowledge of derivatives
to some applications. In particular we'll look at how you find the maximum value of
a function or the minimum value of a function. That function might represent profit for a company
and it would be good to maximize that function. Or you might want to minimize the amount of
material you need to construct a box or something. And these problems are real life models and
often are simplified in calculus courses because a true model of a real life situation might
indeed be much too complicated. It might take days to develop the model and then apply the calculus.
We'll see simpler models as we go along in the next few lectures but the principles we use
will be the same as you would use in the real world. I'd like to start with a fairly simple
example to show you where we're going today. And I'd like to consider the function x squared
minus 2x defined on the closed interval 04. And here's the question. Given that function,
it's continuous on that interval 04, can we find the absolute maximum value of that function
and the absolute minimum value? What I mean by that is the following. Imagine the function between
zero and four. It does some curves and there'll be some high point of the graph. I want to know
where that high point is. There'll also be some low point on the graph. I want to know where that
low point is as well. Now what we'll notice here is that these high points will occur when the
derivative is zero or perhaps the derivative is undefined. Or, as we'll see in this example in
fact, one of these high points or low points could occur at an endpoint. So let's do the problem.
Our function is x squared minus 2x and we're trying to find the high points, the absolute
maximum value and the absolute minimum value. So let's take a derivative that's 2x minus 2
and let's set the derivative equal to zero and we get that x equals 1. So at x equals 1, the graph
of this polynomial has a horizontal tangent because its derivative is zero. Now, where could the
maximum values occur? Well, they could occur at this point where the derivative is zero, in other
words at x equals 1, or they might occur at the end points at zero and four. So what you do is
you evaluate your function at all of these three candidates. These are the candidates for the
absolute maximum and the absolute minimum. Well, let's let me evaluate them. You evaluate, by the
way, back in the original function. So f of 1, if I plug it into the original function, I get minus
1. At x equals zero, the function equals zero and at x equals 4, the function equals 8. So who's
the winner? Ah, 8 seems to be the largest value. So the maximum value of this function is 8 and it
occurs at x equals 4. Where's the minimum? Well, the minimum value is minus 1 and it occurs at x
equals 1. Let's look at a graph of that polynomial we just analyzed. Notice that it starts at the
origin and goes up to the point 4, 8. 4, 8 was the maximum of the graph and the minimum occurred
in the inside the interval at x equals 1. And you can see that the point 0, 0 is neither an
absolute maximum nor an absolute minimum. So I've used these words absolute maximum, absolute minimum.
Here's the precise definition of these terms. Suppose f is defined on an interval containing the
point c. If f of c is less than or equal to f of x for all x in that interval i, then f of c is called
the minimum or if you want the absolute minimum of the function f on that interval i. And the same
for maximum values. We say that f of c is the maximum value of f on that interval i if f of c
is greater than or equal to f of x for all x in that interval i. In the previous example, our
interval was 0, 4 and we determined the absolute maximum and the absolute minimum using some
calculus. These are often called the extrema of a function or the extreme values. It's the top value,
the winner up here and then the lowest value. And by the way, ties can occur. We'll see some
examples where there is more than one location where an absolute extrema occurs. So we'll see
one a little bit later. Now, do all functions have absolute maximum and absolute minimum values?
Well, if you're defined on a closed interval and if you're continuous on that closed interval,
then the answer is yes. This is called the extreme value theorem. It says the following,
if a function f is continuous on a closed interval a, b, then it has both a minimum
and a maximum value on that interval. I think you can believe that geometrically. If I have
some function that starts here and then it's continuous so it ends over here, it will have a
high point and a low point. Because it's continuous, you don't have any breaks in the function.
So it seems logical geometrically. It turns out this is a very difficult theorem to prove.
It's, you won't find the proof in any calculus textbook. It requires knowledge of the real nature
of what real numbers are and is beyond the scope of an elementary calculus course. This theorem,
you notice, doesn't tell you how to find those absolute extrema. It just says that they're there
and we call this an existence theorem. In other words, it claims that they're there somewhere
but it's going to take some calculus to find them. And we'll learn how to find those absolute
extrema in the next few minutes. And to do this, I'd like to talk about a different kind of maximum
and minimum called relative extrema or local extrema. Let me talk about this by showing an
example first. If you probably noticed, I like to do examples before I get into the theory of calculus.
Let's look at the function x cubed minus 3x squared. It starts down there negative infinity
and it goes up and then it comes down and then it goes up again. And at the point 0, 0, the function
seems to turn around. It has a maximum there locally. In other words, in a small interval
around x equals 0, the point 0, 0 is the high point of the graph. Similarly,
look at the point 2 minus 4 on the graph. That's not an absolute minimum, is it? The function goes
below that value far away. But locally around the point x equals 2, the point 2 minus 4 is the
lowest point on the graph. That's what we mean by relative or local maximum values or minimum
values. Locally, they're the winners or the losers, if you want to say it. So let me be clear about
some of the ways of expressing the results about relative extrema and even absolute extrema.
You have to read a calculus problem very carefully to see what they're asking.
For instance, in that previous function that we looked at, the relative minimum occurred at the
point 2 minus 4. There you see it. It's kind of the local low point of the graph. How do you express
this? Well, what I would prefer that we say is the relative minimum value is minus 4 and it occurs
at x equals 2. So read the problems carefully. Are they asking for the relative minimum value
and then the answer would be minus 4? Or are they asking where does it occur? And that answer would
be x equals 2. And again, I hope we're clear on that difference between absolute extrema and relative
extrema. The absolute maximum is the top point all over. It's the winner on the entire function.
The relative maximum are locally winners, but they might not be the global high points.
Here's a technical definition of relative extrema, and it kind of reflects what I was talking about.
If there's an open interval containing c on which f of c is a maximum, then f of c is called a relative
maximum or a local maximum. In other words, you have to have an open interval around the point
where f of c is the maximum value on that little open interval, and a comparable definition, of
course, for relative minimum. Well, we've seen that these, in that previous example, that the
derivative of the function at these relative maximum values and relative minimum values
seems to be 0. In that graph I showed, at the point 0, 0, the function came up and then went down,
and at the origin, the graph was flat. If you took the derivative of that function, you'd see that
the derivative was 0 at that point. Well, this is the part of the definition of what we call critical
numbers. So let me define critical numbers, and then we'll talk about them for a moment.
Let f be defined at c, some value c. If the derivative at c is 0, or if f is not even
differentiable at c, then we call c a critical number. So the critical numbers are the following.
They're the numbers where the derivative is 0, or perhaps the derivative doesn't exist.
And the point is, these are going to be our candidates for relative extrema, where the
derivative is 0 is where it has a horizontal tangent, and where the derivative does not exist
might be a sharp corner, and that also could be a relative extrema. Here's a picture of
a couple of these cases. On the one hand, you see a curve that has a sharp point,
and that is a relative maximum. In fact, it could be a absolute maximum. It's not clear what the
function does outside the part that I've drawn, but locally, that sharp corner there, that point
there, a cusp, we sometimes call it, is a relative maximum. And then the other picture shows a smooth
curve, and the high point there satisfies the property that the derivative will be 0 there.
It has a horizontal tangent there. Good. Now, there's a theorem which tells us
the strategy for finding relative extrema, relative maxima and relative minima, and this will
lead to solving the problem of finding the absolute maximum and absolute minimum values.
And the theorem is very simple. It says that if f has a relative minimum or a relative maximum
at x equals c, then c is a critical number. So, the candidates for relative maxima and
relative minima are the critical numbers. They can't occur anywhere else, just at the critical
numbers. You've got to be careful here. There's a little pitfall. You might have a whole lot
of critical numbers for a function. Some of those will not be relative maxima or minima.
The critical numbers are just the candidates. You might have 10 critical numbers for a function,
and only a few of them are relative extrema. Let me give you a simple example of what I'm talking
about. Look at the function f of x equals x cubed, whose derivative is 3x squared. Now,
because the derivative is 0 at 0, we see that 0, x equals 0, is a critical number. In other words,
x cubed has a horizontal tangent at the origin. But that's not a relative extrema.
Remember the graph of x cubed? Here's that graph. You see that at the origin,
that point is not a relative minimum nor a relative maximum. The function motors up to
the origin, and then it keeps going up, doesn't it? That's not a relative extrema.
Now, the theorem I just talked about, the fact that relative extrema occur at critical numbers,
was first, well, mathematicians think in the history, it's not too clear, but they sometimes
think that Pierre de Fermat, who lived in the 1600s, was the person who first used this theorem.
He's a very interesting character in the history of mathematics. He was trained as a lawyer,
and for him, math was just a hobby. And he developed many of the fundamental ideas of calculus
before Isaac Newton and Godfried Leibniz actually came along and put calculus together into a package.
If you go on and take other mathematics courses or read more about mathematics,
you'll see the name Fermat just about everywhere. He has results in all areas of mathematics.
One very interesting area is number theory, and maybe you've heard of the theorem called
Fermat's Last Theorem. Let me pause here and tell you very quickly about this theorem.
You remember the Pythagorean theorem, x squared plus y squared equals z squared,
is satisfied by right triangles, x and y being the legs and z being the hypotenuse,
like a 3, 4, 5 right triangle, 3 squared plus 4 squared equals 5 squared. Well,
Fermat said, suppose you change the squared, the 2 exponent to a 3, or a 4, or a 5, or any integer.
Are there solutions to that equation? In other words, x cubed plus y cubed equals z cubed.
Are there any solutions in the positive integers? And he claimed, no, there aren't any.
And it wasn't until very recently that mathematicians were able to prove this theorem.
It occupied mathematics for hundreds of years, and a lot of the greatest mathematicians worked on
Fermat's Last Theorem, and only recently was it proved to be correct. There are no solutions,
except for the case when n is 2. Okay, back to our calculus. Let's do an example that puts
all these ideas together. I think you'll see how it all comes together now with a specific example.
Let's consider the function 2x minus 3x to the 2 thirds power. Now, that function is continuous.
It doesn't have any problems. In other words, you can take the cube root of any real number and
then square it. So the 3x to the 2 thirds is not a problem. And I want to find the maximum and
minimum values of this function on the closed interval minus 1, 3. According to the extreme
value theorem, they exist. This is a continuous function on a closed interval. The question
is how do we find them? Well, here's our strategy. We're going to look in the open interval minus
1, 3, and find all the critical numbers, meaning find all the numbers where the derivative is zero
or the derivative doesn't exist. And then we'll check the endpoints because the extreme value
could possibly occur at an endpoint. So here we go. The function was 2x minus 3x to the 2 thirds.
We take its derivative. And we know how to do that because we have all the formulas.
The derivative is 2 minus 2x to the minus 1 third. If you see how I got that, it's x to the 2
thirds. So the 2 thirds comes down in front and the 3's cancel. So you're left with 2x. And then
2 thirds minus 1 is the new exponent. And that's the same as x to the minus 1 third.
Now, I want to set that equal to zero. And it's kind of awkward the way it's written. So
I'm going to do some algebra massaging here so I can handle this better. First, I'm going to factor
the 2 out as a common factor of the two terms. And then I'm also going to write x to the minus
1 third as 1 over x to the 1 third. So I have a new expression now, still a little bit awkward.
So I'm going to get a common denominator. And now it's 2 times the quantity x to the 1 third minus
1 all divided by x to the 1 third. Note the difficult precalculus here. Please take some time to kind
of savor those steps I just did. It's a lot of manipulations of exponents. But now I have a full
picture of the function's derivative and I can find its critical numbers. First of all,
the derivative is zero if that numerator is zero. And that occurs when x is one. Good. That's one of
the critical numbers, one. But now look at the denominator. If x is zero, the derivative does
not exist, does it? So that's also a critical number. The function is continuous at zero,
but not differentiable at zero. And those points are critical numbers. Great. So we have two critical
numbers, one and zero. And then we have our two end points, minus 1 and 3. So we have four possible
winners here. We have four candidates to consider. One of them or more will be the absolute maximum
and one will be the absolute minimum. So all you have to do is go back to the original function
and plug in these four numbers. For example, f of one is minus one. f of zero is zero.
f of minus one, if you plug that into the equation, turns out to be minus five.
f of three is a little awkward because you have to take three to the two-thirds power.
That requires a calculator. And you get that f of three is approximately minus point two four.
Trust me on that. So here are the four candidates. We've evaluated them back in the original function.
Where's the absolute maximum? Ah, zero is the maximum value and it occurs at x equals zero.
Where's the absolute minimum? Well, the minimum value is minus five and it occurs at x equals
minus one. Now, as I said earlier, this is a pretty simple example to find the maximum and
the minimum. In real life models, the functions would be much more complicated. But the principles
that I just used here of analyzing the critical numbers in the end points would be exactly the
same. Let's look at a picture of this function to verify that what we did analytically makes sense.
Notice in this graph, the functions defined on the interval minus one to three,
and we have the absolute maximum occurring at zero zero. And remember, that was an interesting
point. That x equals zero was a point where the function did not have a derivative. And in the
graph, you can see that it has kind of a sharp corner there, a cusp. It's not smooth at the
origin, is it? It's a sharp corner. It does not have a tangent line there. On the other hand,
at the point one minus one, the function is smooth. It has a horizontal tangent there. But one minus
one is not an absolute minimum, but it's a relative minimum, isn't it? Locally, it's a minimum, but
it's not the absolute minimum. The absolute minimum occurs over there at x equals minus one.
Okay, so the picture I think reflects our work. We have one of the extrema at an end point,
and the other extrema occurred inside the open interval. Here are some guidelines for finding
extrema on a closed interval. It's basically what I just did. In other words, consider a continuous
function on a closed interval. You find the critical numbers in the open interval. You evaluate the
function at those critical numbers, and at the end points, then you select the winner
and the loser, the largest value and the smallest value. Here's a common pitfall that I see.
Please remember that critical numbers must be in the domain of the function. I see people a lot
doing the following. You'll have a function like one over x, whose derivative is minus one over x
squared, and then I'll ask, what are the critical numbers? And you might think, well, it doesn't
have a derivative at x equals zero, because minus one over zero squared is not defined.
Zero's not in the domain of this function, is it? It's not there, and hence it's not a critical
number. Critical numbers must be in the domain of your function. In fact, the function one over x
does not even have a maximum value, say, on the closed interval minus two to two. Why not? The
function's not continuous there. It's not defined at zero. Here's a graph of that function. On the
interval minus two to two, the function is not continuous, because it goes off to plus infinity
and down to minus infinity. Great. Let's do a kind of a more complicated example, and I might
skip a few steps here, but it has a good trig component to it that I'd like to point out.
Let's consider the function two sine x minus cosine two x on the interval zero to pi. Let's find the
absolute maximum and minimum values. We know they exist because it's a continuous function
on a closed interval. We take the derivative, two cosine x plus two sine two x. Notice I'm using
the chain rule for that second derivative, and I can divide by two. I have the equation cosine x
plus sine two x equals zero, and I have to solve that. Uh-oh. Not so easy, but let me point out
another trig identity that we'll use a lot. You can replace sine two x with two sine x cosine x.
That's another trig identity that we need to memorize. Sine two x is two sine x cosine x. A
few lectures ago, we saw a similar identity for cosine two x. Well, now we have one for
sine two x. Of course, all these identities are in our workbook. Now, by that replacement,
I can factor out the common term cosine x, and that gives us cosine x times the quantity
one plus two sine x, and that equals zero. The product of two terms equals zero. One of them
must be zero. If cosine x is zero, then you know that x is pi over two or three pi over two,
and if sine x is equal to minus one half, that's the solution to one plus two sine x.
If sine x is equal to minus one half, you get seven pi over six and eleven pi over six.
So, how many candidates do we have here? Ouch. We've got four critical numbers,
and then we've got the two end points. Wow. We've got six possible candidates to look at.
So, you make a giant chart. You write down the six candidates, and you evaluate the function at
each one of these candidates. This will take you about two hours. Well, not that long, but it's
not. You can't do it very quickly. Let me show you the first one. f of pi over two would be two
times sine of pi over two minus cosine two times pi over two. Sine of pi over two is one, so that's
two for the first term. Cosine pi is minus one, so minus a minus one is one, two plus one is three.
And here are the other values. Minus one, minus three halves, minus three halves, minus one, and
minus one. I've evaluated the function at the four critical numbers and at the two end points.
It took me a long time, but now that I have this chart, I know where the absolute maximum and minimum
occur. The maximum value is three. It occurs at pi over two. The minimum value is minus three halves,
and it occurs twice. Here's one of these ties. At two different points, seven pi over six and
eleven pi over six, we achieve the minimum value of minus three halves. So, again, this was a tough
problem. It had some trig identities and a lot of trig evaluations. I invite you to check this with
a calculator. Your graphing calculator should show a picture pretty much like I'm showing here.
The maximum value you can see there when x is pi over two, and you see the two minimum values over
there on the right, where the function is the lowest. Good. So, we're pretty much now, I think,
comfortable with how to find maximum values and minimum values of functions. For finding these
values on closed intervals, the technique is fairly straightforward. You find the critical
numbers on the open interval, and then you evaluate your function at those critical numbers
and at the two end points. And remember, a critical number can either be a number where
the derivative is zero, that means you have a horizontal tangent, or where the derivative
does not exist. And more important, these critical numbers have to be in the domain of the function.
So, next time we're going to continue our study of the nature of graphs, of what graphs look like,
with the goal, again, of trying to find maximum and minimum values,
we're going to talk about the following. Where is a graph increasing? A graph that's going upwards,
or where is it going downwards? Decreasing. And you might sort of think, well, yeah, if it's going
up, the derivative is positive there, and if it's going down, the derivative is negative. So, that
will be kind of one of the topics for next time. So, thank you very much. I hope you enjoyed the
lecture, and I'll see you next time.
