Hello again, and welcome to our lecture on how to use the first derivative to study
the shape of graphs. I hope you enjoyed last time in our lecture when we talked about how to find
maximum and minimum values of functions. You might remember we talked about critical numbers
and what a role they played in determining both relative extrema and absolute extrema.
Well, today we're going to talk about how the first derivative can tell us where a function is
perhaps increasing or decreasing. And we'll use that information to find relative extrema.
And this will be something called the first derivative test. And near the end of today's
lecture, I'd like to talk about two more theoretical theorems. One's called Rohl's theorem and the
other the mean value theorem. So why don't we begin as usual with a fairly simple example that
illustrates today's ideas. Consider our old friend the parabola x squared and whose derivative,
by the way, is 2x. Here's a picture of x squared. Notice that from zero to infinity,
the graph is increasing. It's getting larger and larger. And on the other hand, from minus
infinity to zero, the graph is decreasing. Well, look at the derivative. The derivative is 2x.
And when x is positive on the interval zero infinity, the derivative is positive. And conversely,
when x is a negative number, the derivative is negative, and hence the graph is decreasing.
You can see that the derivative gives us information about whether or not a graph is
increasing positive tangent line slope or decreasing negative tangent line slope.
Let's look at another very simple example. One of our old friends, x cubed, whose derivative is
3x squared. Now, things are a little more interesting. On the interval zero infinity,
this function is increasing. And notice that the derivative is positive. And on the interval
minus infinity to zero, the left-hand portion of the graph, the derivative is still positive.
3x squared is still positive because it's x squared. In fact, this function is not only
increasing on zero to infinity and minus infinity to zero. It's increasing from minus infinity
all the way to infinity. Now, you might say, what is increasing or decreasing really mean?
Well, let me define those terms explicitly. We say that a function is increasing on an interval
if, for any two numbers in that interval, if a is less than b, then f of a is below f of b.
So it's increasing. And similarly, decreasing has a definition. So if you look back at that
x cubed graph, you pick any two points on that graph, an a and a b, f of a will be less than
f of b if a is less than b. Kind of interesting. Okay. How do you find out if a function is
decreasing or increasing on an interval? Well, I think you see what's going to happen here.
We're going to use the first derivative. So let me be more explicit. Let's suppose we have a function
that's continuous on a closed interval and differentiable on an open interval so it has a
first derivative. If the derivative is positive for all x in your interval, then it's increasing on
that interval, actually be increasing on the closed interval. And if your derivative is negative,
you're decreasing on that interval. And perhaps even more interesting, if your derivative is zero,
horizontal tangent, if your derivative is zero everywhere, then the function is a
constant function, isn't it? Because the slope is zero. Good. So that's our test for increasing,
decreasing. Let's apply it to an example. Let's look at the function x cubed minus three-halves
x squared. And we're going to determine the intervals, the open intervals, where this function
is increasing and where it's decreasing. Well, what's going to be the secret here?
If you're increasing and then suddenly you're decreasing, you turn around there at a critical
number. So it's going to be, the secret's going to be finding these critical numbers,
just like we did last lecture. So let's find those numbers by taking the derivative,
which is three x squared minus three x. Notice in that differentiation, the two's cancel.
I'm now going to factor my first derivative. Factor out the three and the x, and that leaves
x minus one. And we see now, setting that equal to zero, that there are two critical numbers,
zero and one. In other words, these are the points where the graph might change from
increasing to decreasing or vice versa. So here's what I like to do. I know my critical numbers.
I like to draw a little chart. And you'll see this in all calculus textbooks, charts like this.
Sometimes they take a different form, but I prefer one like this. You draw a horizontal line,
which is the number line, and you indicate zero and one on that line because those are the two
critical numbers. And then you analyze the derivative in each of the intervals determined
by those two critical numbers. There are three intervals. And what we do is, let's check a point
say to the right of the critical number one, say the point two. Well, for x equals two,
the first derivative is positive, isn't it? It's two, excuse me, three times two times the quantity
two minus one. So the function is increasing on the interval one to infinity because the first
derivative is positive there. Similarly, on the interval zero, one, if you plug in a number like
a half, you'll discover that the first derivative is negative. And then on the interval minus infinity
to zero, the first derivative is positive again. So what's our conclusion? Well, notice what I've
done on the chart first. On the interval minus infinity to zero, I put little plus signs to
indicate that the derivative is positive. And then it turned negative. And then after one, it turned
positive again. So my conclusion is it's increasing on minus infinity to zero, then it decreases
zero to one, and then it increases again. Here's a graph of the function we just analyzed using
that number line. Notice how it increases up to zero zero, decreases down to one minus one half,
and then increases again. Derivative positive, derivative negative, derivative positive.
Here are the guidelines to find the intervals where a function is increasing or decreasing.
It's basically what I just did in the previous example. Suppose you have a continuous function
on an interval a, b. Locate the critical numbers. Remember, those are numbers where the derivative
is zero or the derivative does not exist. Use these numbers to determine a test intervals. In
other words, mark them down on your number line and then analyze the derivative in each of the
intervals determined by these critical numbers. If you discover the derivative's positive on
an interval, the function's increasing. If it's negative, it's decreasing. And by the way,
these guidelines are valid if your interval happened to be infinitely long, like minus
infinity to infinity. Good. You might notice back at this picture of the previous example I did
that the function increased up to zero zero and then decreased afterwards. Well, that means
there's a relative maximum at zero zero. And the same thing happens at that relative minimum.
It's going down. It achieves the relative minimum, then it goes back up again. This is the heart of
what we call the first derivative test. If a function is decreasing and then suddenly it increases,
that point where the critical number is will be a relative minimum. Let me state the first
derivative test, but I think you see how it works. Let's see be a critical number of your function f.
If the derivative changes from positive to negative, increasing to decreasing,
then that top point will be a relative maximum. Not an absolute maximum, no. But relatively speaking,
locally, it will be a high point because it goes up and then down. The same thing will be true for
relative minimum. If it goes down, decreasing, and then it goes up again, that point down there
will be a relative minimum. That's called the first derivative test for relative extrema.
Let's do an example to illustrate how to use the first derivative test.
Consider the function one half x minus sine x, another trig problem. And let's look at the
interval zero to pi. What are the relative extrema of this function? Where does it have
a local maxima and a local minima? That's what we're interested in. Well, as I always say to my
students, if you don't know how to start a problem, take a derivative. You'll get some partial credit.
So we'll differentiate this function and get one half minus cosine x, and we want to set that equal
to zero. And that means that cosine x is equal to a half. And now we use our trig skills to say,
oh, in the interval zero to pi, the only values of x that yield cosine x equal a half are pi over
three and five pi over three. So I form my test intervals using pi over three and five pi over
three on my number line. And that gives rise to three test intervals, zero to pi over three,
pi over three to five pi over three, and then five pi over three all the way to two pi.
Well, we're now going to test these intervals. Let's do, for example, in the middle interval,
pi over three to five pi over three, you select a value of x. How about pi over two?
And then you evaluate the derivative there. The cosine of pi over two is zero, so f prime is a half,
and that's positive. So the derivative is positive between pi over three and five pi over three. So
I put little plus signs there. And if you test a point between zero and pi over three, you'll
discover the derivative's negative and similarly for the third interval between five pi over three
and two pi. So our intervals go negative, negative, negative, plus, plus, plus, plus,
negative, negative, negative. In other words, the function decreases, increases, decreases.
Let's look at a picture to see if what I said makes sense. Oh, look, it's decreasing down to x
equals pi over three, then it increases and then it decreases. So what's our conclusion here?
Because it decreases and then increases, there's a relative minimum at x equals pi over three.
And there's a relative maximum at that other point, five pi over three. And you can see those
points indicated on the graph. Now, that problem was a little difficult for the following reasons,
reasons we've seen before. We had to find the values of x for which the derivative equals zero
or undefined. That can be difficult. In the previous example, we had to solve a trig equation,
cosine x equal a half. So you have to know a lot about trigonometry, pre-calculus,
to be able to do these calculus problems. I think you'll admit and agree with me that the
calculus portion of the problem we just did is pretty easy. In other words, taking that derivative
and studying the positive and negative was okay, but finding those values for which cosine x is
a half required some trig knowledge. And again, you'll have some opportunities to practice these
kinds of problems in our workbook. And also, let me again suggest that you verify these results
with your graphing utility. There's nothing like seeing a picture of the function after you've
analyzed it algebraically. Let's do another example. See how you like this one. How about the function
x squared minus four all raised to the two-thirds power? This example will have some nice features.
I think you'll like it. First of all, notice this function is continuous everywhere. So I'm
going to consider this example on the entire real line minus infinity to plus infinity. It's
continuous everywhere. Let's take its derivative so we can find the critical numbers. So the
derivative is two-thirds x squared minus four to the minus one-third power. Remember how you
subtract one from the exponent and don't forget the chain rule multiply by the inside derivative
two x and then simplify that expression. It becomes four x divided by three multiplied
by x squared minus four to the one-third power. Cool. All right. We got the derivative.
Where are the critical numbers? What are the critical numbers? Well, look at that derivative.
Is it ever zero? Yeah. If the numerator is zero, the derivative is zero. So zero is a critical
number. Are there any others? Well, check out the denominator. If x is two or minus two,
the denominator will be zero. The derivative will not exist in other words. So we have two
more critical numbers, two and minus two. We have three total critical numbers. One of them
is where the function is smooth and that occurs when x is zero. The other two are points where the
derivative does not exist. Good. By the way, we're going to graph this function in a moment.
Give me some ideas of what the graph looks like already. For instance, what are the intercepts
of this graph? Go back to the original equation. If x is plus or minus two, the function equals zero,
doesn't it? So those are going to be intercepts. Also notice perhaps that the domain is all real
numbers, but the function's an even function, isn't it? It's symmetric about the y-axis.
That could help in the graphing because you only have to graph half of it and then flip it over
because it's symmetric about the y-axis. Okay, back to finding our intervals where the function
is increasing and decreasing. Draw your number line, indicate the critical numbers minus two,
zero and two, and then analyze the first derivative inside the four intervals determined by these
three critical numbers. Let me do one of them for you. Suppose x is bigger than two, like 55.
Plug that into the first derivative, the numerator's positive, the denominator's positive,
so the derivative's positive. Notice you don't have to actually evaluate the derivative at 55,
but rather just see if it's positive or negative. And if you do that across the number line,
you determine that the function goes decreasing, negative derivative, positive derivative, negative
derivative, positive derivative. So it goes down, up, down, up. And in fact, at minus two,
it's going negative, positive, it's got a relative minimum, the same for two, and at zero,
it's got a relative maximum because it's going up and then down. Here's a picture of that function.
Good-looking picture, I think. It has some nice features. First of all, let's verify that we got
it right. At minus two and two, indeed, there are relative minima, and at zero, there's a relative
maximum. And notice also that there are sharp corners at minus two and two, cusps, and hence
there's not a tangent line there. It's not differentiable there, but it is continuous there.
And furthermore, you can see the symmetry of this graph across the y-axis.
Let me now do an application, a real-life problem, a very simple one, but you can imagine a more
complicated one. Let's find the length and width of a rectangle that has maximum area,
given that it has a fixed perimeter, let's call the perimeter 80 meters. I like to pose this problem
as follows. Draw a rectangle, let's call it a pigpen, and you've got 80 meters of fence to form
a pigpen. You want to make the largest pigpen possible. You want to have the most pigs in your
pigpen, so make this rectangle as big as possible, but you're limited just to 80 meters of fence.
What kind of shape should you make this pigpen? Well, this is pretty straightforward. The perimeter,
of course, is 2x plus 2y, and that's 80, and the area is, of course, length times width,
length times width, which is x times y. Well, I'm going to eliminate the y value in the area
to make it a function of x alone. So from the perimeter equation, I see that 2y is 80 minus 2x,
so y is 40 minus x. Plug that value of y into the area equation, and the area is now x times 40
minus x, or 40x minus x squared. It's this area function, which I'll call, say, f of x. It's
this area function that we want to maximize. We want maximum area. So what's the high point
of the area function? Notice that its domain is zero to 40, because if x is zero, you don't have
much of a pigpen. You have no side, and if x is 40, the same thing happens. Well, let's take the
derivative of our area function. That's 40 minus 2x. When I take the derivative, set that equal to
zero to find the critical numbers. There's only one. x equals 20, and by the first derivative test,
meaning if x is less than 20, the derivative is positive, and if x is greater than 20,
the derivative is negative, this value of 20 indeed gives us a maximum, and if x is 20,
y is also 20, y is 40 minus x. So what's the conclusion? What's the best pigpen? A square
pigpen. x equals y equals 20. You can make this problem, by the way, much more complicated. You
could have one side bounded by a river, so you only need three sides of fence, or you could have
two pigpens glued together, but I think you get the idea of how to do these kinds of problems.
Let me now talk about a couple of famous theorems in more theoretical math. The first one is called
Rohl's theorem. I think you'll like these theorems because, geometrically, they make a lot of sense.
You'll say, oh yeah, I see what's going on here. Let f be a continuous function on a closed interval
a, b, and differentiable on the open interval, and assume that f of a equals f of b. The theorem
then says that there's at least one number in the open interval such that the derivative is zero there.
This theorem was named after a mathematician named Michel Rohl who proved it in 1691
It's kind of interesting to point out that he was a very vocal critic of calculus. He thought
calculus was garbage. Later on, when he saw how it was being used in astronomy and in applied
mathematics and engineering, he changed his mind and said, oh sorry, actually calculus is pretty
important. Here's a picture to illustrate what the theorem says. Here's a continuous function on a
closed interval between a and b, and it kind of wiggles up and down, but f of a, the starting point,
and f of b, the ending point, are at the same level. f of a equals f of b. The theorem says
there will be at least one point having a horizontal tangent. Let's verify this theorem in a specific
example. Consider the function x to the fourth minus 2x squared on the closed interval minus two
to two. Okay, let's verify the theorem. Well, f is continuous. That's part of the theorem.
It's continuous on the closed interval, differentiable on the open interval, so I can use the theorem
if f of minus two equals f of two, and they are equal. They both equal eight. So the points start
and stop at the same height. So there should be some horizontal tangents in the open interval.
Let's take the derivative, 4x cubed minus 4x. Factor this, baby. 4x times the quantity x minus
1x plus 1. Set that equal to zero. That's where the horizontal tangents will be. And low and behold,
you get three x values, zero, one, and minus one, and they're all in the interval. So actually,
there's more than one value here that satisfies Rohl's theorem. Here's a picture of the function
we just analyzed, and notice that there are three points on the interval minus two to two
where the tangent lines horizontal. So we verified Rohl's theorem for this example.
The mean value theorem is related to Rohl's theorem.
This theorem has to do a lot with averages, and we'll see an example of that in a moment.
But let me state the theorem. You'll see that it kind of looks like Rohl's theorem tilted. Here's
what it says. Almost the same hypotheses. You have a continuous function on a closed interval,
differentiable on the open interval. Then the theorem says there'll be at least one number
c in the open interval such that the derivative at c, the tangent line slope at c, equals f of b
minus f of a over b minus a. Boy, that expression should look familiar to you. Change in y over
change in x, isn't it? That's like an average. Here's a picture of Rohl's, excuse me, of the mean
value theorem. Notice I have a function defined on the interval a, b, and it kind of wiggles a
little bit. You have the point a, f of a, and the point b, f of b. One side of the theorem says
that f of b minus f of a over b minus a. That is the slope of the line joining those two points,
isn't it? That's the slope of the line joining those two endpoints. And the theorem says there's
some value c inside the open interval such that the derivative is parallel. The tangent line is
parallel to that secant line, to that line joining the endpoints. So again, geometrically kind of
makes sense. In fact, tilt your head a little bit and you'll see that it kind of looks like
Rohl's theorem, doesn't it? Let's verify something real quickly to show that the mean value theorem
actually works in examples. How about the function 5 minus 4 over x, which is 5 minus 4 x to the
minus 1. And let's put this function on the interval 1, 4. Well, it's continuous on that interval.
It's differentiable on the open interval. The only bad point here is x equals 0, and I'm not
using 0 in my interval. Let's form the slope joining the endpoints, f of b minus f of a
over b minus a. You get f of 4 minus f of 1 over 4 minus 1, simplifying that it's 4 minus 1 over 3
or 1. So the mean value theorem says there's some point in the open interval where the slope of the
curve is 1. Well, let's find the slope. Let's take the derivative. It's 4 x to the minus 2.
That's the first derivative. And that's supposed to be 1 somewhere. So set 4 over x squared equal
to 1 and solve for x. Well, I get 2 x values, minus 2 and 2. But minus 2 is not in the interval,
is it? So you toss it away. The only correct answer here is x equals 2. That's the c value
guaranteed by the mean value theorem. By the way, this is a pitfall that I see often, a common mistake
that people put an answer down like minus 2, but it's not in the interval. It has to be a number
in the interval that you're considering. Here's a picture of that function we just looked at
with the endpoints 1, 1 and 4, 4. And then you see the tangent line at x equals 2 is parallel
to the line joining those two endpoints. Let me close with a nice little funny example about
the mean value theorem. This is kind of clever. This story never happened to me, but let's imagine
it did. I live in Gainesville, Florida, but I often go to Orlando and to Miami. And one day I
entered the turnpike in Orlando. And I was driving to Miami in my car. And when you enter the turnpike,
at least in the old day, they give you a card, a little punch card. And suppose it took me three
hours to make that 240 mile trip. So I drive for three hours and I drive my 240 miles and I get to
the toll booth in Miami and I give them the card and they look at it and go, well, you're under
arrest, sir. And I go, excuse me? Well, look, you did 240 miles in three hours. You were averaging
80 miles an hour. And I said, so what? That doesn't prove I ever actually did 80 miles an hour at any
one moment. But of course, the toll booth operator was one of my ex students. And he goes, but professor,
according to the mean value theorem, there indeed is at least one value in the interval,
zero to three hours, where your speed equals the average speed. And I go, oh boy, I guess you're
right. That's the price I pay for teaching calculus in the state of Florida, I guess. So again, by the
mean value theorem, indeed, I must have done 80 miles an hour at some point on that trip. I probably
did it more than once, as a matter of fact. Anyway, we've finished this lecture on analyzing the
first derivative to see how graphs behave, where they're increasing and where they're decreasing.
We've also seen two more theoretical theorems, Roll's theorem and the mean value theorem.
You'll have a lot of practice problems with these ideas in your workbook.
Next time, I'd like to bump it up a notch and look at the second derivative. And what does it tell
us about a graph? In particular, it will tell us if a graph is concave up, kind of like it holds
water, or if it's concave down. That will help us analyze the shape of graphs. So I'm looking forward
to the next lecture. I hope you are too, and see you next time.
