Hi, welcome to our lecture on the use of the second derivative to describe the shape of graphs.
You might remember from last time that we talked about how the first derivative can
give us a lot of information about where graphs are increasing or decreasing, and we also
developed the first derivative test for local maxima and minima.
And at the end of last lecture, we looked briefly at some more theoretical theorems called
Rohl's theorem and the mean value theorem.
Well, today we're going to turn to the second derivative and see how it can give us information
about what we call concavity, how a curve bends.
It could be concave down or concave up, and we'll also develop a test called the second
derivative test for relative maximum and minimum values.
As usual, I'd like to start with some examples.
My old friend, x squared, our parabola.
Let's look at a picture of x squared, and this graph is concave upwards, and there's
a couple of reasons why.
Of course, it looks concave upwards, but I've drawn a little tangent line over there, and
notice that the curve is above its tangent lines.
That's one of the properties of being concave upwards.
You're above your tangent lines.
If you were to draw a tangent line anywhere along that curve, you would see that the parabola
is above the tangent lines.
But now there's something more subtle here, and see if you can follow this.
Notice that over there on the left, the slope of the curve, the slope of the tangent line,
is negative, and watch how the slopes go.
They're negative, negative, negative.
When I get down to the origin, the slope of the tangent line is zero, and then the slopes
become positive.
So the slopes of the tangent lines are increasing from negative slopes to positive slopes.
We'll come back to that more complicated analysis in a moment.
But how about a second example?
How about my other best friend, x cubed?
Here's a picture of x cubed, and notice here that something's a little bit different.
It's concave upward on the interval zero to infinity, but it's concave downward on the
interval minus infinity to zero.
Again, let's look at those tangent lines.
The tangent lines for negative x are above the curve.
That makes it concave down.
But over there on the right, the tangent lines are below the curve, and that makes it concave
upwards.
Something more subtle, the slopes of the tangent lines are increasing from very large values,
and then the slope becomes zero.
So the slopes are going from very large to smaller.
So the slopes are decreasing.
That makes it concave down.
But on the other side, the slopes start at zero, and they start increasing.
They're going from small values to large values.
So the slopes of the tangent lines are increasing when x is bigger than zero.
So that means it's concave upward.
So we have sort of two criteria here for analyzing concavity.
One is, are you above or below your tangent lines?
And the other is, are the slopes of the tangent lines increasing or decreasing?
All of this we made more precise in a moment, but let's do some definitions.
Suppose you have a differentiable function on an interval i.
We say that the graph is concave upward on that interval if the derivative is increasing.
That's what I meant when I say that the slopes are increasing.
That means that the derivative is increasing.
It's not the function that's increasing, but rather the derivative of the function that's
increasing.
It's a little subtle here.
And you're concave downward similarly if the derivative is decreasing on i, the interval
i.
And this is basically equivalent to being above your tangent lines or below your tangent
lines.
Basically using the derivative criteria turns out to be easier to use.
Let's go back to x squared and see what I'm talking about a little more precisely.
The function's x squared, the first derivative is 2x, and the second derivative is 2.
Now what does the second derivative measure?
Well it's the derivative of the first derivative.
Well it's the rate of change of the first derivative.
So if the second derivative is positive, and it is, it's equal to 2, that means the first
derivative is increasing, doesn't it?
Imagine we're analyzing 2x.
Is 2x increasing or decreasing?
Well take the derivative of 2x, that's 2, and that's increasing.
So the first derivative is increasing.
It's a little subtle, I admit, because now we're playing with the first derivative and
asking is it increasing or decreasing?
And we find out by looking at the second derivative.
Now with x cubed it's a little more complicated.
The first derivative is 3x squared, and the second derivative is 6x.
So where is the first derivative increasing?
Well look at the second derivative.
When x is positive, the second derivative is positive, which means the first derivative
is increasing.
That's why it's concave upwards there.
And a similar analysis on the interval minus infinity to zero.
So let's summarize what we just said.
What's the test for concavity?
Suppose your function has a second derivative on an interval i.
If that second derivative is positive, then your concave upwards.
And if that second derivative is negative, your concave downward.
That's a pretty simple test.
And the reason it's true is that analysis I did in those previous examples.
So how are we going to determine the intervals where a function is concave upward or concave
downward?
Where we're going to look where the second derivative changes sign.
If it's positive, it's upward.
If it's negative, it's downwards.
I'm looking for the points where it's zero.
So our goal is to find the points where f double prime is zero.
This is very similar to finding critical numbers, isn't it?
But now we're dealing with the second derivative rather than the first derivative.
Good.
Let's look at an example that's a little beefier to see if all this makes sense to us.
Let's consider the function 6 divided by x squared plus 3.
Now I'm going to have to know the first derivative and the second derivative of this function.
These don't make me evaluate those derivatives now.
We know how to do it, right?
We've learned all the formulas.
I'm just going to give you the answers now.
Here are the first and second derivatives.
I know you can obtain these formulas if you had a pencil and paper and maybe a half an
hour.
But I'm just going to give you the answers because what I really care about is using
these derivatives to analyze the function.
So let's look at that second derivative, 36 times x plus 1 times x minus 1 all divided
by x squared plus 3 cubed.
When is that zero?
Well, when x is 1 or minus 1, the numerator is zero.
So those are going to be the points that determine my test intervals for concavity.
So we'll draw our number line again.
Here it is.
And we indicate minus 1 and 1 as the points where concavity could possibly change.
It might not, but these are the potential points.
And we're going to determine now the sign of f double prime on the three intervals determined
by these two points.
Let me do it, for example.
If x is bigger than 1, then the numerator of our second derivative is always positive.
And the denominator is positive no matter what x is.
So I put little plus signs there.
It's concave upwards from 1 to infinity.
Similarly, between minus 1 and 1, I pick a value of x, how about zero?
That's in between minus 1 and 1, plug it into the second derivative.
You get a negative number because the numerator will be negative.
And so it's concave downwards on that interval.
And similarly, on the interval minus infinity to minus 1, it's concave upwards again.
Let me make a couple of points here.
First of all, at minus 1 and at 1, the concavity has changed from downwards to upwards and
upwards to downwards.
Well, those are given a special name.
These points where concavity changes.
Those are called points of inflection, and I'll define those a little bit later.
Here's an algebraic trick, though I'd like to point out here.
Notice how this chart went plus minus plus.
I knew it was going to change signs when I crossed minus 1 and then when I crossed 1
because the terms x plus 1 and x minus 1 in that numerator were to the first power.
Or if they had been to the third power, the same thing.
That means as you cross those points, the sign will change.
If that x minus 1, for instance, had been squared in the numerator, then as I cross
1, the sign of the second derivative would not change.
We'll see an example of that little algebraic trick later.
Here's a picture of the function we just analyzed.
And notice how it reflects what we did.
It's concave upwards, and then it's concave downwards, and then it's concave upwards again.
And those points minus 1 and 1 are the points where the concavity changes.
Okay, those points, as I said earlier, are called points of inflection.
Here's the technical definition.
A point c f of c is a point of inflection if the concavity changes at that point.
By the way, the point of inflection has to be in the domain of the function.
I'll show you an example of that later.
A more technical point, some textbooks require that the function also have a tangent line
at a point of inflection.
Don't worry about that distinction.
It makes no difference for what we're doing here in elementary calculus.
The bottom line is you're a point of inflection if your concavity changes at the point.
I also call these inflection points when I'm teaching math, because I find it a little
bit shorter.
They mean the same thing.
When you have an inflection point, either the second derivative is going to be 0 there,
or the second derivative will not exist there.
This sure sounds like critical numbers, doesn't it?
Remember for critical numbers, it was either the derivative was 0 or the derivative didn't
exist.
Well, this is bumped up 1.
It's now second derivative.
It's either 0 or does not exist.
Just like with critical numbers, the converse is false.
You can have a function whose second derivative is 0, but it's not a point of inflection.
How about x to the fourth as a very simple example of that?
The first derivative is 4x cubed, the second derivative is 12x squared, and the second
derivative evaluated at 0 is indeed 0.
Not the origin is not a point of inflection.
Look at the graph of x to the fourth.
It kind of looks like x squared, but a bit skinnier, and the origin is clearly not a
point of inflection.
X to the fourth is concave upwards everywhere.
Good.
Let's do another example to see how we're doing on analyzing concavity of our graphs.
Our function this time will be x times the quantity x minus 5 to the fourth power.
I'll cheat again and not do the derivatives in front of you, but rather just give them
to you.
The first derivative is 5x minus 5 cubed times x minus 1, and there's the second derivative
20x minus 5 squared times x minus 2.
Trust me, that took me about 20 minutes to do those calculations, but those were skills
we've already learned how to do.
Please give it a try if you have some free time to verify that I did it correctly.
All right, where's the second derivative, 0, at 2 and at 5?
Those are going to be key points where concavity could potentially change, but watch.
Notice that the x minus 5 term is squared, so you'll see what happens when I do my number
line.
Here's our number line.
The two key points were 2 and 5.
So let's start analyzing.
When x is bigger than 5, I plug a number bigger than 5 into the second derivative, like 28,
and I don't care what that number is, but I know that the second derivative is positive
there.
But as I cross 5 and plug in a number between 2 and 5, notice that the second derivative
is still positive, isn't it?
Because the x minus 5 term is squared.
It only changes sign when I cross 2.
If I plug in a number like 0, now the second derivative is negative.
So my chart goes negative, negative, negative, positive, positive, positive, positive, positive,
positive, positive.
It didn't change to negative at 5.
Now, this is kind of a neat function.
It can fool you on your graphing utility.
Two is now a point of inflection, isn't it?
It goes from negative to positive, concave down to concave up.
But if you were to graph this on a standard screen, this is the screen minus 10 to 10
along the x direction, minus 10 to 10 in the y direction, the standard screen on a graphing
utility, you don't see the inflection point, do you?
All you sort of see is a little piece of a parabola.
Well, I know that the inflection point is at 2, 162.
How did I get that 162?
I plugged 2 into the original function.
That tells me I better have a different screen.
I better graph this on a different domain and range.
Here's a picture of the function on a different screen.
Now the point 2, 162 shows up because it's pretty far up on the y-axis.
Some more features show up on this.
Notice at 1, there seems to be a relative maximum.
And at 5, there seems to be a relative minimum.
First of all, y, 1, and 5.
Let's go back to the first derivative.
1 and 5 are critical numbers, aren't they?
Those are the potential maxes and minns.
So that's why 1 and 5 show up here on the picture.
But look closer.
At 1, the curve is concave down.
One is a critical number, horizontal tangent, but it's concave down.
That makes it a relative maximum.
And now look over at the other point at 5, 0.
It's a critical number, but it's concave up there.
It's the bottom of the trough.
It's a relative minimum.
It's that concavity at the critical number that tells us whether or not it's a relative
maximum and a relative minimum.
This will come into play when we talk about the second derivative test.
But let me again warn you about this very common pitfall that inflection points, just
like critical numbers, they've got to be in the domain of the function.
I see this mistake a lot.
Let's look at 1 over x again.
Here's a picture of the graph of f of x equals 1 over x.
It's concave downward when x is negative, and it's concave upwards when x is positive.
But 0 is not an inflection point, because 0 is not even there.
It's not in the domain of the function.
True, the concavity changed for negative values and positive values.
But this graph has no inflection points.
It has no critical numbers, because 0 is not even in the domain.
So be a little careful.
Concavity can change, but you don't have an inflection point.
Good.
Now I alluded to that example previously, that we had the critical number occurring
at a point where the graph was concave downwards.
This is the heart of the second derivative test for relative extrema.
So let's assume that our function has first derivative equal to 0, which makes it a critical
number at c.
If the second derivative at c is positive, that means you're concave up, you've got a
relative minimum.
And if that second derivative is negative, that means you're concave down, so you've
got a relative maximum.
Pretty simple to use, actually.
Let's look at an example to see if we can apply this second derivative test to a specific
function.
How about minus 3x to the fifth plus 5x cubed?
Again, I'll give the derivatives.
There they are, 15x squared times 1 minus x squared.
And the second derivative is 30 times x minus 2x cubed.
OK.
I want to find the relative maximum and relative minimum values.
Where do they occur?
Well, what are the critical numbers?
That means look at the first derivative.
0, 1, and minus 1 are the critical numbers.
Take those critical numbers and plug them into the second derivative and apply the second
derivative test.
So let me plug in 1 into the second derivative.
And if you plug in 1, you get a negative output.
That means it's concave down there, negative second derivative.
So at x equals 1, we have a relative maximum.
The same at x equals minus 1, we get that we have a relative minimum because the second
derivative is positive there.
x equals 0 is more interesting.
The second derivative is 0, so the second derivative test fails.
You can't use it.
But if you analyze the first derivative near 0, you'll discover that the first derivative
does not change sign as you cross 0.
The reason being it's x squared.
So as you cross x equals 0, x squared keeps its same sign.
Here's a picture of that fairly complicated function that we just analyzed.
Notice that we have a relative maximum at 1, 2, a relative minimum at minus 1, minus
2.
And at the origin, the function is temporarily, it has a horizontal tangent there, but that's
not a relative extremum.
Also notice this graph is, this is an odd function, isn't it?
So we would expect the kind of symmetry in our answer.
Let's do another application similar to the one I did last lecture dealing with pigs
and pig pens.
But I'm going to flip it around a little bit.
Now we're going to try to find the length and width of a rectangle having a fixed area,
say 32 square feet.
And I want to find the length and width of the rectangle to have a minimum perimeter.
So here's our picture again.
We have the sides labeled x and y.
This time, x times y is 32, that's a fixed area.
And I want to minimize the perimeter.
Basically speaking, I'm a farmer and I want to have some pigs and I know how much space
they need.
12 pigs, 12 pigs required 32 square feet, but I want to know how much fence to buy.
I want to buy the minimum amount of fence.
I want the minimum perimeter to save money.
Here we go.
The area is 32, and that means x, y is 32, so I can get a formula for y.
It's 32 over x.
And now the perimeter is 2x plus 2y, and I can replace y with 32 over x.
So I have the perimeter in terms of just the x variable, 2x plus 64 over x.
That's the function, 2x plus 64 over x, or 2x plus 64x to the minus 1.
That's the function I want to minimize.
All right.
Let's do it.
Take the derivative.
2 minus 64x to the minus 2 is the derivative.
Set that equal to 0 to find the critical number.
That means I have to solve the equation 2x squared equals 64, or x squared is 32, x is
the square root of 32, which simplifies to 4 root 2.
Notice some tricky algebra here.
We do lots of tricky algebra in this class.
OK.
Is that a maximum or a minimum?
It's the critical number.
Is it a max or a min?
Let's use the second derivative test.
Take the value 4 square roots of 2 and plug it into the second derivative.
Well, what is the second derivative?
I have to differentiate the first derivative, and I get 128x to the minus 3, or if you want
128 over x cubed, and if I plug in that positive number, 4 root 2, you see that the second
derivative is positive.
What is second derivative positive means?
Concave up.
So it's a minimum by the second derivative test.
Indeed, we have a minimum.
X equals 4 root 2 gives me the minimum.
What's the corresponding y value?
Well, plug it in.
Y is 32 over x.
Plug in that x value, and you simplify, and you discover that y is also 4 square roots
of 2.
Wow.
It's a square again in that neat.
OK.
Again, this is a very simple problem.
You could imagine a more complicated fencing problem that would take a little more time.
OK.
Let's do some true false questions.
Something different.
Let's try some true false questions.
What do you think of these questions?
Suppose f double prime of 2 equals 0.
Does that mean that the graph of the function has a point of inflection at x equals 2?
True or false?
If your second derivative is 0 at 2, is there a point of inflection at 2?
Well, I hope you say false here.
The reason is you can find a counter example.
You can find a function whose second derivative is 0 at 2, and yet it doesn't have a point
of inflection there.
Can you think of one?
How about x minus 2 to the fourth power?
Very similar to an earlier example I did, x to the fourth.
I'll let you calculate the first and second derivative of x minus 2 to the fourth power,
and you'll see that the second derivative indeed is 0 there.
But if you graph x minus 2 to the fourth power, it will look sort of like a parabola opening
upwards and it's not a point of inflection at 2.
That was kind of fun.
Let's do another true false question.
Suppose your first derivative at 2 is positive.
Does that make you concave upwards at 2?
If your first derivative is positive at 2, are you concave upwards at 2?
What do you think?
Well, again, I hope you say false.
If the first derivative is positive, that means you're increasing, doesn't it?
That means you're increasing.
It's the second derivative that determines concavity, not the first derivative.
It's hard to keep all that straight, I admit.
The first derivative, second derivative, they each sort of play a different role.
It's a little complicated.
Here's a deeper problem, but kind of fun.
Does every cubic polynomial have exactly one point of inflection?
Remember, a cubic's got to look like this, up, down, up, or down, up, down, something
like that.
Do they all sort of go from concave up to concave down or vice versa?
Concave down to concave up.
You might think of x cubed.
X cubed goes from concave down to concave up.
Is that true of all cubic polynomials?
Well, it is true.
And let me show you what we like to call in math a proof.
When I get scared, proofs aren't so frightening.
This is a fairly simple proof.
It's the kind I like to do in class.
Let me take a typical cubic, ax cubed plus bx squared plus cx plus d.
Cubic meaning that the term x cubed is there.
It's a cubic polynomial, so a is not zero.
B, c, and d are constants also.
They could be zero, but a is non-zero.
So it truly is a cubic polynomial.
And we take a couple of derivatives.
The first derivative is 3ax squared plus 2bx plus c.
And the second derivative is 6ax plus 2b.
Now, how do we find these inflection points?
You set the second derivative equal to zero.
That gives 6ax equal minus 2b.
And now divide by 6a.
And you're left with x equals minus b over 3a.
Now, here's the kicker here.
This is what's really important.
I'm not dividing by zero, am I?
Because a is non-zero.
So x equals minus b over 3a is a real point on the graph.
It's not dividing by zero.
That's where the inflection point occurs.
As I cross minus b over 3a, the concavity will change there.
The sign of f double prime will change from either positive
to negative or negative to positive.
So it's kind of an interesting result.
And you just did a mathematical proof.
We use letters.
And rather than do a specific example like, say, x cubed,
we actually did it in general.
You now know for any cubic polynomial,
it always will have an inflection point.
And you actually know where it is.
It's minus b, the coefficient of x squared,
divided by 3 times the coefficient of x cubed.
Don't memorize that, by the way.
It's not an important theorem, but it is kind of a curiosity.
I think we're pretty much finished
with this analysis of the second derivative
and what an important role it also
plays in analyzing graphs.
We've seen how it determines concavity.
And we did the second derivative test,
which was a very convenient way to determine
whether or not a given critical number is a relative minimum
or a relative maximum.
Next time, we're going to put all these ideas together.
First derivative, second derivative, and then symmetry
intercepts a whole bundle of skills
to talk about how you graph functions, how you actually
produce the graph of a function.
It's a lot of skills coming together.
I think you'll enjoy it very much.
And I look forward to seeing you next time.
