Hello, and welcome again to our calculus course.
I think you're really going to enjoy today's lecture because we're going to put a lot of
ideas together. All those ideas we studied about the first and second derivative plus
some pre-calculus skills like symmetry and intercepts, we're going to put them all together
to study how to graph curves, how to actually graph a function. And we'll see that the
skills are kind of, it's almost overwhelming because we have so many tools now to discover
where the graph is increasing, where it's concave, upwards, et cetera. This is not an
exact science. Graphing functions is difficult and you have to sometimes do a preliminary
graph and then correct it, et cetera. But we'll go through a couple of examples to
give you an idea of how I think about graphs and then you'll be able to practice some in
the workbook. And near the end of the lecture we'll talk about something called linear approximation,
basically that's using the tangent line to a curve to approximate that curve.
So let's begin, as I always do, with a nice example to see about what kind of skills come
into play when you graph a function. And this is a fairly complicated function. It's
two times x squared minus nine over x squared minus four. Again, I'm not going to calculate
the derivatives, I'll just give them to you. I trust that you could do these calculations
if you had some free time. But let's start talking now about what we know about the curve
given this information about the function and its two derivatives. Well, let's step through
some ideas. What about the intercepts? Look back at the function. If x is three or minus
three, f of x is zero. So those are intercepts, three zero and minus three zero. And if x
is zero, we get that y is nine halves. And that is also an intercept, zero, nine halves.
How about symmetry? Oh, it's x squared in the numerator and denominator. It's going to
be an even function symmetric about the y-axis. How about asymptotes? Remember asymptotes?
Well, it's got an x squared minus four in the denominator. So two and minus two are
not roots to the numerator. So those are vertical asymptotes at x equals two and minus two.
And there's also a horizontal asymptote because this is a polynomial of degree two divided
by a polynomial of degree two. So the quotient of leading coefficients is two. So y equals
two is a horizontal asymptote. Step down to the first derivative. Are there any critical
numbers? Well, zero is a critical number because that makes the numerator zero. But be careful,
two and minus two are not critical numbers. Those are the asymptotes. They are not in the
domain, are they? There's only one critical number and it's actually one of the intercepts,
zero, nine halves. So what I suggest at this stage is draw a preliminary graph. Here I've
indicated two vertical asymptotes at two and minus two, a horizontal asymptote at y equals
two, the intercepts at three zero, minus three zero, and then up on the y-axis at zero, nine
halves. Somehow our graph has to sort of fit into this picture. Well, we haven't used much
calculus yet. Let's now analyze the first and second derivative using this argument
of test intervals. So the first derivative, we'll draw our little number line and the
key points are minus two, zero, and two. I admit minus two and two are not critical
numbers, but the increasing, decreasing nature of the function could change there, even though
they are not critical numbers. So we should look at those numbers. So let's start analyzing
these intervals. If x is bigger than two, the first derivative, of course, is then positive,
and as I cross two, the first derivative stays positive because that denominator is squared.
It's only when I cross zero that the first derivative changes to negative. So my conclusion
of the first derivative is it decreases from minus infinity to minus two. It then hits the
vertical asymptote and it continues to decrease from minus two to zero, and then you reflect
it over by the symmetry and you get that it increases from zero to two, hits the asymptote,
and increases again from two to infinity. How about concavity? Let's look at the second
derivative. The key points here are minus two and two because that's when the denominator
vanishes. Again, those points are not in the domain, but those are the vertical asymptotes.
The numerator is always negative, isn't it? So that's not going to be a problem. So what
happens to the right of two, a large positive number, you would get that the numerator is
negative and the denominator is positive. So f double prime is negative there. It's concave
down and similarly you would analyze the signs change. It's concave down, concave up, concave
up, concave down. Notice as I cross zero, the concavity does not change because zero's
not important in the second derivative. It was really only important in the analysis
of the first derivative. So let's put this all together. And this is hard to do. You
have to sort of sketch the graph as you're going along. I know it's decreasing, but it's
got a horizontal asymptote at y equals two. And the function then decreases. It crosses
the intercept at minus three and then goes down and hugs its vertical asymptote. And
then you jump up and it starts at plus infinity and it decreases down to that intercept and
critical number, zero nine halves, and then increases again. And you see that it's concave
up on the interval minus two to two and then similarly the right hand piece. So you put
all these together, the increasing, decreasing nature, the concavity issues, and you obtain
this final graph. It's not an easy skill to graph. It takes some time. And of course you
can verify this with a graphing utility, but in a minute I'll show you how that can
be misleading. So let's summarize some of the techniques that come into play when you
want to graph a function. As I said earlier, it's not an exact science. We have lots of
tools to use, intercept, symmetry, domain consideration, asymptotes, and then we can
look at derivatives. First and second derivative to find out where the relative extrema are,
concavity, inflection points, et cetera. I always recommend you do some point plotting,
put in a few points just to get a feel for the graph. And again, graphing utilities can
be very useful here to verify the graph you produce by hand. That said, let me show you
how misleading graphing utilities can become. I've had students tell me like, Professor
Edwards, why do we spend time learning how to graph functions when I can just plug it
into my calculator and the graph appears in front of me? Well, it's not clear how you
plug it into your calculator the correct way. For instance, suppose in that previous example
I made it a little more complicated. And in real life, most functions are much more complicated
than this. I'm going to add a factor in the numerator and denominator, x minus 20 over
x minus 21. And now I'm going to graph it as most of this would on the standard screen,
minus 10 to 10, minus 10 to 10. And here's the picture of my new function. Well, that
kind of looks like the old function, doesn't it? And if you were to put that down as your
answer to the graph of that second function, the larger function, you'd be wrong because
that second function has some features past 10 and past minus 10. And you only discover
that it has those features if you use calculus. In other words, you have to pick the correct
viewing screen to capture all the important features of the graph. Let me show you the
graph of this fatter function down here on a different viewing screen. Wow! There are
some other things happening on this graph way out near 30. It's not so obvious. This
graph does not look like the other one. So you really need to know some calculus to find
those points where interesting things are happening, like out there near 30, some weird
stuff is happening. There's another vertical asymptote out there, isn't there? Okay. So
that said, I hope I've convinced you that we really do have to spend some time getting
our hands dirty doing some of these graphs. Good. Let's look at another example. I think
you'll like this example because it has some very challenging precalculus skills that go
along with this example. And I'm going to spend some time on those precalculus skills
in a moment. But let's first do the calculus portion. Let's consider the function 2x to
the 5 thirds minus 5x to the 4 thirds. This function has a domain of all values of x.
You can take the cube root of any real number. So we have no domain issues. There are the
first and second derivatives. And in a minute, I'll show you how I got the factored form
of that first derivative because that's a non-trivial calculus skill. I think you're
very good at differentiating f of x, and you get an answer, but it would be the difference
of two terms. I've written the first derivative factored. I'll show you how to do that in
a moment. And then there's the second derivative as well. And it again is factored. Okay. What
can we say about this function? Let's think about it. Any intercepts? Well, look at the
original function. If x is zero, then f of zero is zero. And there's another intercept.
It turns out that when x is 125 over 8, you get an intercept. Wow, that's hard to get.
And I'll show you in a moment, just trust me for the time being, that that is the second
x-intercept. I'll show you in a moment how I got that. Again, it's some tough pre-calculus.
Are there any asymptotes? Well, no. Asymptotes usually occur when you have a quotient, and
here we just have a function just straight across. There are no vertical or horizontal
asymptotes. How about critical numbers? Well, we look now at the first derivative. And is
it ever zero? Yeah, when x is zero, it's zero. And when x to the one-third minus two equals
zero, what does that mean? That means that x is eight. The cube root of eight is two.
So we have two critical numbers, zero and eight. Let me evaluate the function at those
critical numbers. f of zero is zero. That's easy. f of eight turns out to be minus 16.
That's not so easy, is it? If you plug in eight into that expression for the function, let
me show you how you'd evaluate it. Eight to the one-third is two. Two to the fifth is
32. And two times 32 is 64. Remember, 64. Now, I'll do the second term. Cube root of
eight is two. Two to the fourth is 16. Five times 16 is 80. So it's 64 minus eight. So
minus 80 minus 16. Ouch. That's tough. That's tough stuff, isn't it? It's not calculus. It's
not calculus at all. But it's very difficult. I'm the first to admit it. It's not easy for
me to do it either. Okay. On to the second derivative. Are there any inflection points
here, possibly? Well, look at the expression for the second derivative. The numerator is
zero if x is one. And the denominator is zero if x is zero. So those two x values, zero
and one, are potentially inflection points. And the corresponding y values are zero, zero,
and one minus three. So let's do, again, a preliminary graph, putting in some of these
early features that we identified. Zero, zero, eight minus 16, 15 points. So that's
point 625. And then one minus three. The two intercepts are at zero and the 15.625. And
then we have the eight minus 16 and the one minus three as the possible critical number
and a possible inflection point. Good. That's not the graph, obviously. We have some more
work to do, don't we? But at least we have a piece of the graph. We have some information
without doing much thinking. On we go. Let's analyze the first and second derivative using
our little number lines. Okay. So let's start with the first derivative. And one of the
key values here we have to mark on our number line. We have to mark zero and eight because
that's where it potentially changes sign. If x is bigger than eight, then the first
derivative is positive. If x is between zero and eight, it's negative. And if x is below
zero, less than zero, it's positive again because it's a negative times a negative.
So we go from increasing, decreasing, increasing. Good. By the first derivative test, we now
know there's a relative maximum at zero, zero because it increases up to zero, zero,
and then it decreases. That's a relative maximum. And similarly, there's a relative minimum
when x is eight, and that's the point eight minus sixteen. Good. How about our inflection
points? Well, let's look at the second derivative, which will tell us about concavity and inflection
points. The second derivative says that when x is bigger than one, it's positive. So I'll
put little plus signs for x bigger than one. Between zero and one, the second derivative
is now negative. But watch what happens when I cross zero. It stays negative. Why is that?
Well, at zero, we're dealing with x to the two thirds, aren't we? That's something squared.
So it's not going to change sign when I cross x equals zero. So it's concave down from minus
infinity to zero, concave down from zero to one, and then concave up from one to infinity.
And clearly, x equals one is an inflection point because the concavity changes. So let's
put all this together. Wow, there's a lot of information here, isn't there? But here
is the ultimate graph. And this is how we think about it. It was increasing up to zero,
zero, and then decreasing, and that was a relative maximum at the origin. Then it was
decreasing down to eight minus sixteen, where we have a relative minimum. And notice that
on the way, the concavity changed. It was concave down for a while, and then it suddenly
concave up. When x is one, we get a point of inflection. And it stays concave up forever,
and it crosses the other intercept at 15.625. Tough going, lots of stuff. The graph's actually
kind of simple looking, isn't it? But it took a little bit of work to get it. Now, I promised
to go back and look at some of the pre-calculus skills that I kind of sloughed over there
and kind of went, now I'm going to get my hands dirty here with some pre-calculus. The bottom
line is factoring can be difficult in mathematics. This is true all through mathematics, but
we need to do it. I pointed out that we had an intercept at 125 over 8, which is that
15.625 number. Let's see how I got that. The original function was 2x to the 5 thirds
minus 5x to the 4 thirds. I want to know where that function equals zero. That would give
me the intercepts. Well, let's factor out x to the 4 thirds, the largest power of x,
x to the 4 thirds. And when I do that, I'm left with 2x to the 1 third minus 5 inside
the parentheses. You can check that by multiplying x to the 4 thirds through the parentheses
and you'll get the original expression. Okay, so that product equals zero. That means x
is zero, or that second term is zero, which is 2x to the 1 third minus 5. So let's solve
that equation. 2x to the 1 third equals 5, or x equals 5 halves all cubed. And 5 halves
cubed is 125 over 8. Again, pretty rough going, wasn't it? Another issue that came up in
this problem that I kind of left to the side was how I factored that first derivative.
So remember we had our function, 2x to the 5 thirds minus 5x to the 4 thirds, and I said
well anybody can take the derivative. That's pretty easy. The derivative would be 10 thirds
x to the 2 thirds minus 20 over 3x to the 1 third. That's just using the power rule twice.
But now I want to factor that, because I want to know where the derivative equals zero.
And that requires putting it in factored form. Well first factor out the 10 thirds. Get rid
of that constant. And you're left with x to the 2 thirds minus 2x to the 1 third. And
now factor out x to the 1 third. And look what happens. You have 10 thirds times x to
the 1 third times the quantity x to the 1 third minus 2, which is what I showed you on
a previous slide. Now it's easy to tell when the derivative is zero. I had the two factors.
Either x is zero or x to the 1 third is equal to 2, which makes x equal to 8. Good. That
was kind of some rough pre-calculus. But I hope you sort of found it kind of interesting
how it had a very important role in finding the graph of that function. Well let me turn
to a different topic now. This topic is somewhat fading away in the calculus curriculum. And
one reason is it has some pretty unpleasant notation. But the principle of this topic
is going to be with us forever. So the underlying idea here for the next 10 minutes or so, keep
this in mind. The tangent line to a curve is a good approximation to that curve near
the point of tangency. That is the underlying idea throughout this so-called linear approximation
topic that we're now going to talk about. So remember that when we, back in lecture
one we talked about the tangent line to the curve y equals x squared at the point 2, 4.
And we pointed out that that tangent line touches the curve once and it's very close
to the curve nearby the point of tangency. That's the core of what we're about to talk
about. In many applications in mathematics, scientists assume that the function they're
dealing with is locally equal to its tangent line. They call that linearization. Assume
your model is linear. That's because in a lot of cases functions are too complicated.
So they kind of assume that locally near the point they're interested in, the function
is really equal to its tangent line. Physics majors know this when they study pendulums
that are swinging. So linearization is what we're talking about now. Let me first do
a fairly simple example of the tangent line approximation to a curve. This will be very
easy for us because we've done things like this before. Let's find the tangent line
approximation at the point 0, 1 to the curve f of x equals 1 plus 2 sine x. This is a lot
of big words asking for the following. What's the equation of the tangent line to that curve?
That's what we're asking here. We're just using different words for the same idea. We're
calling it the tangent line approximation. It's the tangent line to that curve. How do
we do it? Well, you remember, take the derivative. The derivative is 2 cosine. Plug in the value
0 into the derivative and you get that f prime of 0 is 2 because cosine of 0 is 1. And now
form the equation of the tangent line using the point slope formula. You get y minus f
of 0 equals f prime of 0, the slope, times x minus 0. f of 0 is 1, so you get 1 minus
y minus 1 is 2 times x minus 0 and then simplify y equals 1 plus 2x. Let me show you a picture
of this. There's the original curve, which was 1 plus 2 sine x. It kind of looks like
the sine curve, doesn't it? And there's the tangent line. And I think we all believe that
near that point of tangency, the tangent line and the curve are very close together. Let
me convince you by picking a value close to 0. How about 0.1? f of 0.1 would be 1 plus
2 sine 0.1 and that turns out to be 1.19967 approximately using my calculator. What's
the tangent line at 0.1? Well, that's much easier to calculate. It's plug it into the
tangent line 1 plus 2 times 0.1, that's just 1.2. And lo and behold, look, those two numbers
are very close together. Okay? That's what we're after. Well, I think the idea is pretty
simple, but now we put a lot of symbols in the play here that sort of make things a little
bit uglier. But there's some symbols here that actually will keep playing a role in
our calculus course, especially when we get to a topic called integration. So I feel obliged
to present these ideas and I think you'll be able to follow them. So here we go. Recall
that the tangent line is an approximation near the point of tangency. Let's first write
down the equation of the tangent line to a curve f at the point c f of c. Well, that
would be the point slope formula. y minus f of c equals the slope f prime of c times
x minus c. And you could simplify that if you wanted. You could write it as y equals
f of c plus f prime of c times x minus c. That's the tangent line equation. Now, let's
write down the tangent line equation at x equals c. Okay, I'm going to introduce some
notation now. Please don't panic. It's just a lot of little notation. First of all, delta
x, we've seen that before, that's going to be x minus c. In other words, it's a small
horizontal distance. Delta y, we've also seen before, it's the difference in the y values
of our function. So it would be f of x minus f of c, where x is a nearby point. So that
x could be called c plus delta x, couldn't it? It's near c. It's c plus some small distance.
So that's the difference in the y values, f of c plus delta x minus f of c. And we see,
pardon the pun, that delta y is approximately f prime of c delta x. Because look back at
the equation for the tangent line. It was y minus f of c equals f prime of c delta x.
x minus c is delta x. So delta y is approximately f prime of c delta x. That's basically like
the derivative definition. If you were to move that delta x over to the left-hand side,
you'd have delta y over delta x. That's approximately the derivative. The derivative
equals that if you take the limit as delta x goes to zero. So this expression, f prime
of c delta x, we call the differential with respect to y. So this is the definition. d
y is defined to be f prime of c delta x. And they usually say delta x equals dx. And
they get the definition that dy is f prime of c dx. So that's our definition of the
differential of y. And dx is the differential of x. And it is a small horizontal distance.
Let me show you a picture that puts all this together and I think it will make us more
comfortable. Here's a picture of a curve, f of x. And I've indicated x equals c and
f of c as one point on the curve. And I've drawn the tangent line at that point c comma
f of c. Then I took a nearby point at a distance delta x from c and I call that point x. So
x is near c. It's a horizontal distance of delta x. And now go up and have x go up and
bump into the curve. It hits the curve at f of x. So we have c hitting the curve at
f of c and the nearby point x hits the curve at f of x. Good. So who are our characters?
Delta y and dy. Again, delta x is the change in the x values and you can think of that
as being dx. dx and delta x are the same thing. It's just a notational thing. Delta y is the
change in the y values. So it's f of x minus f of c. It's the change in the y values on
the curve on the function. Who is dy? Well, dy is an approximation of that change using
the tangent line. Do you see how dy in this picture is a little bit smaller in this picture
because my curve is concave upwards? But you can see that dy uses the tangent line to
approximate that vertical distance. And if delta x is small, dy will be very close to
delta y. That's what we call linearization. It's that simple except that the notation
is kind of like eh. Okay. Let me do a quick example of this skill. Let's take our old
friend x squared whose derivative is 2x and ask for the linearization at c equals 2. So
f of c is 4. f prime of c is also 4. And let's take a nearby point, say 2.01. That makes
my delta x 2.01 minus 2 or 0.01. That's a small horizontal distance. What's delta y?
That would be f of 2.01 minus f of 2. And if you plug that in, you get 4.0401 minus 4,
which equals 0.0401. Now, what's dy? dy is the derivative of the derivative of the
at 2 times dx. So that's 4 times 0.01 and that's just 0.04. Miracle of miracles, those
two numbers are close together. That's all we're saying here, that those numbers are
close together just with a lot of fancy notation. Here's a picture of that situation. There's
2, there's 2.01, there's 4 and 4.0401. And you see that the tangent line approximation
gives a very good approximation of delta y. Good. Again, I admit this differential's
topic has some complicated notation, but remember it's just the tangent line approximation.
Well, I'm very excited about the next couple of lectures. We know a lot about functions
now and graphs. We're going to put it all together and we're going to start solving
some real life problems. We're going to do what we call optimization. This is one of
the first applications of calculus. We'll do some really fun examples and I think you're
going to enjoy the next two lectures. Thanks very much and see you next time.
