Welcome again and welcome especially to our first lecture on the integral calculus.
Up to now we've been studying the so-called differential calculus and we're pretty much
finished with our preliminary study. We've learned what derivatives are, how to calculate
them and how to use them in applications. So now we're going to study the integral calculus.
This field also has an enormous number of applications that we'll see as the days go
on. But our first topic is kind of related to derivatives. It's something called anti-derivatives.
It's the inverse of finding a derivative and it could be kind of confusing. You kind
of sort of keep all this straight. Here's what's going to happen. Normally I would give
you a function and you would give me back the derivative. Well now I'm going to flip
it around. I'm going to give you the derivative and you have to come up with the function
that has that derivative. Kind of neat, isn't it? And I think you'll enjoy it. And it's
actually a very interesting topic and quite difficult. There's a lot of mathematics, a
lot of sort of unknown problems here. It's kind of an interesting topic. So let's do
some introductory examples to get a feel for what I'm talking about. Suppose you were
asked the following question. Here's a function 3x squared. Let's call it f of x equals 3x
squared. Can you find a function g? Capital G, I'll call it. Can you find a function g
whose derivative is 3x squared? I'm not asking you for the derivative of 3x squared. I'm
doing the opposite. I'm asking you for a function g so that when you differentiate g, you get
3x squared. Can you think of an answer? What could that g be? Well how about x cubed? What's
the derivative of g of x equals x cubed? Ah, 3x squared. So there's an answer. x cubed.
But now think about it for a moment. Is that the only answer? How about x cubed plus 2?
Ah, its derivative is also 3x squared. How about x cubed minus 28? Ah, that's also got
a derivative of 3x squared. In fact, x cubed plus any constant, I'll call it capital C,
is an antiderivative of 3x squared. So there's a whole lot of functions that satisfy the
criteria that the derivative is 3x squared. Great. Here's the definition of what I just
illustrated with the example. A function capital G is called an antiderivative of little f
on an interval i if g prime of x, if the derivative of g equals f of x for all x in that interval.
And we've observed that if g is an antiderivative of f, then so is g plus any constant, the
reason being that the derivative of a constant is zero. So g plus a constant would also be
an antiderivative. So a given function f would have many, many antiderivatives. Let's do
some more simple examples. And I'm going to couch this in a different terminology, but
it's the same thing. Solve the differential equation y prime equals 2x plus 3. Now don't
panic that word differential equations. All I'm really saying is find an antiderivative
of 2x plus 3. Can you think of a function whose derivative is 2x plus 3? Good. Yeah.
How about x squared plus 3x plus an arbitrary constant c? Because what's the derivative
of x squared plus 3x plus c? It's 2x plus 3, and that's what I started with. Y prime
indeed equals 2x plus 3. Can you find all the antiderivatives of the cosine function?
Well, yeah, the sine function, because the derivative of sine is cosine, so the antiderivative
of cosine must be sine x plus our arbitrary constant. Good. Now there's some notation
that comes along with this, this idea of antiderivative. And I've written out here the notation. You
read this as follows. The antiderivative of f is g plus c, and the word antiderivative
is synonymous with integral. Integral and antiderivative mean the same thing for us,
and I'll use them interchangeably. The integral of little f is capital G plus c. And notice
some of the characters in this equation. On the far left, you see kind of a wiggly thing.
That's called an integral sign, and it kind of looks like an elongated s. And there's
a reason for that that will come to a little bit later. You've got to sort of hold on for
a minute to explain that notation of that elongated s. And then the function little f
is called the integrand, and dx indicates to us that the variable of integration is x.
Now you might be saying, oh, wait a minute. I've seen dx before, and dx used to be a
little horizontal distance, didn't it, professor? What's it doing here? Well, trust me, in
a next lecture, in fact, you'll see why they use that symbol dx in this notation. For the
time being, though, just sort of accept that that little dx is indicating that the variable
is x. For instance, we could have f of t dt, and then the variable would be t. And g,
of course, is an antiderivative of our little function, of our integrand, and c is called
the constant of integration. Good. Let's do some integral problems. Let's find some antiderivatives.
Here we go. And I've written this in our new notation. You would read this as follows.
What's the antiderivative of x to the fifth plus sine x plus three? In other words, what's
the integral of x to the fifth plus sine x plus three? What I'm asking for here, again,
is some function whose derivative is x to the fifth plus sine x plus three. Okay. I
need somebody who differentiates to x to the fifth. What could that be? Kind of interesting,
isn't it? Well, look, how about if I do x to the sixth over six? Now, differentiate that
in your head. What's the derivative of x to the sixth over six? It would be six x to
the fifth divided by six, and the six is canceled, and I'm left with just x to the fifth. So
x to the sixth over sixth is indeed the antiderivative of x to the fifth. How about sine? Who's
the antiderivative of sine? How about minus cosine? Notice the minus sine. This is one
of the things that's sort of unfortunate, these minus signs. Why is it minus sine? Well,
what's the derivative of cosine? The derivative of cosine is minus the sine. Hence, if I want
to get just plus the sine, I have to put another minus sign in there. And how about three?
Well, that's really easy, three x. The derivative of three x is three, and then you add on your
arbitrary constant. Now, one thing you can do with these problems always. I admit they're
kind of tricky. They're kind of, we're going backwards, aren't we? It's kind of weird. We're
going backwards. But one thing you can always do when you write down what you think is the
answer to an integral question or an antiderivative question, you can always check your answer.
You can differentiate your answer and end up with the integrand. Okay, so we could check
our answer by differentiating that, and you'll get back to what you started with. Another
thing to notice here that will come up in a few minutes, that x to the fifth, when we
anti-differentiated it, it was x to the sixth over six. I think you can sort of see the
rule here. You raise the exponent by one, five goes to six, and then you divide by that
new exponent, six. And that seemingly will always work, won't it? So, let's talk more
about anti-differentiation. How are we going to find antiderivatives? Well, it turns out
every derivative formula will give rise to a corresponding antiderivative formula just
by going backwards. For instance, the derivative of a constant is zero. That means that the
antiderivative of zero is a constant. I'm just going backwards. The derivative of a
constant times x, for instance, the derivative of three x, would just be three. So the derivative
of a constant times x would just be that constant, and hence the antiderivative of a constant
would be kx plus an arbitrary constant, c. How about the derivative of a sum? We've learned
that the derivative of a sum is the sum of the derivatives. So that means the integral
of a sum is the sum of the integrals, and that also works for the integral of a difference.
And there are more formulas. Remember that x to the fifth problem that went to x to the
sixth over six? Well, in general, if you want to find the antiderivative of x to the n,
it will come from the power rule, and the antiderivative of x to the n is x to the n
plus one divided by n plus one. Let me check that. What's the derivative of x to the n
plus one divided by n plus one? Well, it's n plus one times x to the n divided by n
plus one. The n plus one's cancel, and I'm left with the integrand x to the n. So there's
a formula for the antiderivative of x to the n. Does that work for all values of n? Think
about it for a moment. What if n were minus one? Then in that formula, you'd be dividing
by zero, wouldn't you? Ouch! You can't divide by zero in mathematics. So the antiderivative
of x to the minus one power, or the antiderivative of one over x, is not covered by this formula.
I'll comment on that in a minute. But how about some simpler ones? The derivative of
sine is cosine, so the antiderivative of cosine is sine. You just go backwards. The derivative
of cosine is minus the sine, so the integral of sine is minus the cosine. And of course,
in all of these, plus your arbitrary constant. The derivative of tangent, you might remember
was secant squared. So now I know that the antiderivative of secant squared is tangent
x plus my constant. Neat. Every derivative formula gives rise to an integral formula.
Let's go back to that special case of the power rule that didn't quite work when n
was minus one. Remember our formula, the antiderivative of x to the n with respect to the variable
x is x to the n plus one divided by n plus one, plus our arbitrary constant. And I said
n may not be equal to minus one. In other words, the antiderivative of one over x is
not covered by this formula. In fact, you might wonder, does it have an antiderivative?
Let me rephrase it. Can you think of a function whose derivative is one over x? Is there a
function out there somewhere so that when you differentiate that function, you get one
over x? Bonus question, as I just tell my students. Well, fortunately there is, but
you have to stay with me for a few more lectures when we study logarithms. Logarithms, wow.
And when we get to that topic, we'll be able to answer this really interesting question,
this kind of missing formula. Okay, let's do some more mundane examples just to make
sure we're comfortable with finding antiderivatives. What's the antiderivative of x plus one all
divided by the square root of x? Remember what I'm asking. I want a function whose derivative
is x plus one divided by the square root of x. And when I look at this problem, I go,
I have no idea how to attack that. Wow, that looks really complicated. Well, let me do some
pre-processing. Let me multiply that out. And it's x over square root of x plus one
over square root of x. And then let me rewrite it in exponent notation. x over the square
root of x is x to the one half, in other words, the square root of x. And the other term is
x to the minus one half. And now I have an integral of a sum, which is the sum of the
integrals. And each of these, I can use that power rule type thing where you raise the
exponent by one and divide by that new exponent. So the first one becomes x to the three halves
divided by three halves. And the second one becomes x to the one half. I'm going up one
divided by one half and then flip up those fractions. It's kind of ugly with those fractions
in the denominator. And you get two thirds x to the three halves plus two x to the one
half plus c. Now, suppose you're taking a test and you come up with this answer and
you've got an extra two minutes. What are you going to do? You're going to check your
answer, aren't you? You're going to differentiate that. And if you differentiate it, you'll
come back to the original integrand. Okay, let me make some general comments now about
this process of finding antiderivatives. It can be pretty rough going. The topic of
finding derivatives, I hope you admit, is pretty easy. We've got all those rules for
finding derivative. You just calculate product rule, quotient rule, chain rule, boom, boom,
boom. Well, antiderivatives is a lot more difficult. And it's a big topic in calculus
courses. When I was young a long time ago and took calculus, we spent basically maybe
eight or ten weeks of our calculus sequence learning how to calculate antiderivatives
with all kinds of obscure techniques. Now, that's kind of gone by the wayside currently.
One reason is technology is so good that a lot of computers can calculate antiderivatives.
And also you can approximate them in certain ways. But in the old days, this was big business
calculating antiderivatives. We'll see as we go on certain techniques for finding antiderivatives,
but we won't spend too much time on that topic. That said, let me convince you how hard this
can be. Let me show you an example and then a challenge problem. What's the antiderivative
of cosine? Well, we just did that, remember? It's sine x plus a constant. Why? Because
the derivative of sine is cosine. So the antiderivative of cosine is very easy. How about the antiderivative
of cosine of x squared? Let's be clear what I'm asking. Can you find a function whose
derivative is cosine of x squared? I like to pose this to my calculus classes every semester
that I teach calculus. I offer them, say, $1,000 if they can find a function whose derivative
is cosine of x squared. And by the way, I've never had to pay up. Why? Because among all
the functions that we've learned to love in mathematics, the trig functions, the polynomials,
the square roots, all those functions, the logarithm functions, the exponential functions,
all those functions, there isn't one that has a derivative equal to cosine x squared.
So I've been safe. I'm never going to have to pay up. Now you might want to try to find
one. Good luck. So let's now turn to one of our themes we've been looking at a long time
now, which are differential equations. And basically we're talking about, in the example
here, of finding an antiderivative. But we're using the word differential equations to scare
us a bit. So let's solve the differential equation g prime equals 1 over x squared.
And let me assume that x is bigger than 0. So what do I do? I have to anti-differentiate
1 over x squared. Well, that can be done. 1 over x squared is x to the minus 2. And the
rule, remember, is you raise your exponent by 1 and divide by what you raised it to so
it becomes x to the minus 1 divided by minus 1 plus our constant. And if you simplify that,
we have g of x is minus 1 over x plus c. Now that's a family of curves. They are 1 over
x plus an arbitrary constant. For every constant, you get a different function, don't you? Well,
if you have a side condition, if you have another restriction on g, you can find that constant.
And in mathematics, we call this an initial condition. An extra condition on the function
g that will permit us to determine the constant. So suppose not only are we given a constant
given the differential equation g prime equals 1 over x squared, but they say find the anti-derivative
that also satisfies the condition that g of 1 is 0. Ah, well, if g of 1 is 0, I take my
answer that I have so far and plug in 1 for x. And so I get g of 1 equals minus 1 over
1 plus my constant. And I'm told that g of 1 is 0, so I set that equal to 0 and I determine
that my constant is 1. So now I have what we like to call a particular solution. It's
a single function. It's not a family of functions. It's minus 1 over x plus 1. Let me be clear
here. That g of x equal minus 1 over x plus 1 satisfies two properties. First of all, its
derivative is 1 over x squared. Second of all, it satisfies the initial condition that
g of 1 is 0. So we've solved this differential equation with that specific initial condition.
Good. Let's pause for a moment. It's pretty honest to say that solving differential equations
is big business. Many, many engineers spend their lives modeling wave motion and heat
transfer, etc. And these are all modeled by differential equations. We teach at the University
of Florida entire courses on differential equations at the undergraduate level and at
the graduate level. Usually these are taken after three semesters of calculus. These courses
are populated by engineers and scientists and sometimes math majors, but actually the
engineers are the ones that take a lot of differential equations courses. So this is
big business. We'll see a little bit more on differential equations as we progress through
the course and at the very end we'll have a couple of lectures completely devoted to
some ideas from differential equations. Now in that previous example, we saw a differential
equation and I pointed out that the general solution was a family of curves. The curves
were minus 1 over x plus c. You can graph that family of curves for various c values
and you'll see here indicated some of those curves. They never intersect each other. They're
kind of vertical translations of each other. As c gets larger, the curves go upwards.
And then with the initial condition, we required that the curve go through the point 1, 0.
And so that curve is a particular curve within that entire family of curves. The specific
answer that satisfies the differential equation and the initial condition. Okay, I hope you're
kind of comfortable with what we've been doing on anti-differentiation or integration.
It's the inverse of differentiation. In differentiation, I give you a function and you give me the
derivative with one of your formulas. Now I give you the derivative and you give me back
the original function. Okay. It's a little bit harder. No question about it. But it has
some really neat applications and I'd like to look at one now, something that we've talked
about earlier. We've talked about the position function of an object that is under the influence
of gravity and only gravity, no error resistance. And we didn't derive a formula, but I gave
you a formula for the position function of such an object, like you throw something up
in the air and it has a certain position. I'm now going to show how you could derive
that formula in a particular example. Let's look at the following problem. I'm going to
throw up a ball, I won't do it, but I'll imagine I do it, up in the air with an initial velocity
of 64 feet per second. And suppose I'm throwing it up from a tower that's 80 feet high. So
I'm on top of this tower and I throw this ball up in the air and it goes up a little
bit higher and then it falls down to the earth. Let's find out when it hits the ground. And
we're going to use the fact that the acceleration due to gravity is minus 32 feet per second
squared. Okay, so what do we know? We know the acceleration because the only force on
this ball is gravity and it's minus 32 feet per second squared. And remember, acceleration
is the rate of change of velocity. It's the derivative of velocity, which means it's
the second derivative of the position function. Wow. So we're going to start with the second
derivative of the position function s. That's equal to minus 32 and we're going to derive
the actual position function and it will require two integrations. Here we go. S double prime
is minus 32. So what's s prime? What's the first derivative? Well, anti-differentiate
minus 32 and you get minus 32t plus a constant, right? Good. And I'll call that constant c
sub 1 because we're going to have another constant in a moment. And then we know that at zero,
the initial velocity was 64. So we can plug that into that equation and determine that
our constant c 1 is 64. So now I know the velocity equation. It's minus 32t plus 64.
So what's the position function? Anti-differentiate again. And I get minus 16t squared. You see
how I did that? That's t squared over 2 and the 32 and the over 2 simplifies to 16. So
it's minus 16t squared plus 64t plus a second constant that I'll call c sub 2. But I also
know the initial height. It was 80. So I plug that in. t is 0, s is 80 and I get that the
constant c sub 2 is 80 and now I have my position function minus 16t squared plus 64t plus 80.
Cool. Nice. And you might recognize that equation. 80 is the initial position, 64 is the initial
velocity. And now we want to know when it hits the ground. All you have to do is factor
that equation and set it equal to 0. When you do that, you can cancel the minus 16 after
you factor it out. You're left with t squared minus 4t minus 5, which factors nicely into
t minus 5 times t plus 1 and then t would equal 5 in this case. So after five seconds,
I throw the ball up in the air. After five seconds, it hits the ground. The general formula
for the position function of an object under the influence of gravity and gravity alone
is s of t equals one half gt squared plus v sub 0t plus s sub 0. s sub 0 is the initial
position, v sub 0 is the initial velocity, and g is the acceleration due to gravity.
In the previous example, it was minus 32 feet per second squared. Please memorize that equation.
It's very, very useful in applications. Good. Let's finish off with some true-false questions.
We've done some of these in the past, and they're kind of fun. Let me ask you this.
Are anti-derivatives unique for a given function f? Are they unique? I hope you realize the
answers. No, because remember, you can add an arbitrary constant. So let me repeat that.
Derivatives are unique. If I give you a function and take its derivative, there's a unique
answer. But if I give you a function and ask for its anti-derivative, there are a lot of
them, plus c plus a constant. Here's another question. Is the function unique for a given
function f? Is the anti-derivative of a product of two functions equal to the product of their
anti-derivatives? What do you think? Well, the answer turns out to be no, and I invite
you to just come up with a simple example, and you'll see that it doesn't work. It's
just the same. Remember, the product rule in derivatives was kind of bad news because
the derivative of a product was not the product of the derivatives. Well, the same thing's
happening here. The integral of a product is not the product of the integrals. Very sad,
but true. Well, good. We've come to the end of our preliminary entrance into the integral
calculus. Today, we basically just looked at the inverse operation of differentiation,
and we talked about anti-derivatives, or what I like to say sometimes integrals. Next lecture,
we're going to look at one of the classic problems of the integral calculus, and that's
how to find areas bounded by curves. This will look completely different than everything
we've done so far. You might go, whoa, what are we doing now? Why are we doing this? But
then we'll discover, in two lectures in fact, this really close connection between finding
areas and finding derivatives. So, thanks very much, and I look forward to seeing you
next time.
