Greetings and welcome back to our calculus course.
So far we've spent a lot of time studying derivatives, and then last time we kind of flipped everything
and studied something called anti-derivatives.
And today we're going to turn to a problem that will seem completely different from everything
we've done earlier.
It's called the area problem, and it's sort of a standalone lecture.
I think we'll sort of finish today and sort of say, well, wait a minute, what does that
have to do with calculus?
But you're going to have to trust me, I've been in this business a long time.
In the following lectures we'll see a very intimate tie between all this derivative material
we presented and the area problem.
Now this area problem also has generalizations that we'll see to other applications besides
just finding areas under a curve.
We'll see later on about how to find volumes of certain solids, how to find the surface
area of solids, and many, many other applications.
The area problem actually dates back to Archimedes, 287 to 212 BC.
He was able to find the area under fairly simple curves, and in fact in a few minutes
we'll do an example that Archimedes could do a long time ago.
So this problem is a lot older than the tangent line problem, isn't it?
So what do I mean by the area problem?
Well we know how to find the area of certain simple geometric objects, like the area of
a circle's pi r squared, and the area of a rectangle is base times height.
Those are fairly simple figures, and we know how to find their areas.
But how would you find the area, say, under a parabola?
How about y equals x squared bounded on the interval between x equals 0 and x equals 2?
Here's a picture of that area that I have in mind.
It almost looks like a triangle, but it's bounded above by the curve y equals x squared
and the vertical line x equals 2, and of course the origin.
How would you find the area under that curve?
Wow, not at all clear how to do it, is it?
Archimedes could do it, and in about a few minutes you'll be able to do it too, because
I'll show you how.
And of course, y equals x squared is just one possible curve.
You can imagine y equals x cubed, or sine x, an arch, you know, the area under one arch
of sine x, all kinds of regions you could imagine trying to find the area.
And we'll be able to do it after a few lectures.
This will be pretty exciting stuff.
Now before I get started, we're going to need some notation.
In fact, in this entire lecture, the notation is a bit unpleasant, but hopefully you won't,
you know, you'll be comfortable with it.
But a lot of the notation is a little bit confusing, and I'll try to cut through it
and show you what's really going on.
One of the notations we'll need is how you write a summation of numbers.
For example, the sum 1 plus 2 dot dot dot up to 6 can be written in a compact form using
what's called a summation sign, and it would be written i equals 1 to 6 of i.
Here's how you use that notation.
That summation starts at i equal to 1, and i takes on integer values until it ends up
at 6.
So it's i equals 1, 1 plus the next i value is 2, so it's 1 plus 2 plus 3 plus 4 plus
5 plus 6.
That's what that notation means.
In general, if you had the summation from i equals 1 to n of terms a sub i, that would
be a sub 1 plus a sub 2 dot dot dot plus a sub n.
It would be the summation of all those terms starting at the first term, a sub 1, and finishing
at the last term, a sub n.
You could use a different letter for the index of summation, like here's an example using
j, and j starts at 3 and ends at 5, and we sum up j squared.
So that would be 3 squared plus 4 squared plus 5 squared, and then you could add that
up if you wanted.
And the kind of sum we're going to look at is a little more complicated.
It'll look like this.
It'll be a summation from i equals 1 to n, so there'll be n terms in this summation.
And each term will be f of x sub i, where x sub i will be a point on the x-axis, times
a constant, which I'm going to call delta x.
But for the time being, that's a compact way of writing f of x sub 1 times delta x, f of
x sub 2 times delta x, dot dot dot until you get to the end, f of x sub n times delta x.
Now there are some properties of summations that we should be aware of.
They're very simple.
For example, if you have the summation of a constant times some terms, you can move that
constant outside the summation sign.
And also, the summation of a sum is the sum of the summations.
Sounds kind of funny, but I think you see what I mean.
Good.
Now there are some formulas for summations that are kind of interesting, I think.
One of the simplest is the summation from i equals 1 to n of a constant, like 3, 3 plus
3 plus 3 plus 3 plus 3.
That would be n times 3.
So if it's c plus c plus c dot dot dot to the final 1, it would be n times that constant.
How about the sum of the first n integers?
You would write that as i equals 1 to n, 1 plus 2 plus 3 dot dot dot out to n.
And the formula for that, you have to trust me, it's in calculus books, is n, n plus 1
over 2.
In a minute, I'll come back to that formula.
It has a curious history.
And you can also add up the sum of the first n squares, 1 squared plus 2 squared plus 3
squared.
And the formula is n, n plus 1 times 2n plus 1, all divided by 6.
And believe it or not, there's a formula for the sum of the first n cubes, fourth powers,
any power you want.
These formulas have been developed over the years.
Let me talk a bit about that formula of the first n integers.
The story goes, who knows if it's true, that when Gauss, the mathematician Gauss, was very,
very young, he was in class.
Let's assume he's like four years old and he's in kindergarten or something in Germany.
And the teacher has to leave the room for some reason and tells the students, hey, why
don't you add up the first 100 integers?
I'll be back in 20 minutes to check your answers.
And as the teacher was walking out of the room, Gauss said, stop, I have the answer.
And whoa, that was pretty quick, adding up the first 100 integers.
Well, here's how Gauss did it, we think.
Write out the first 100 integers in a sum, 1 plus 2 plus 3 out to 100, and call that
x.
That's what we're trying to find.
And now write out those same 100 integers backwards, 100 plus 99 plus blah, blah, blah,
down to plus 1, that's also equal to x.
So you have these two equations for x, add them up.
Well on the right hand side, you have x plus x or 2x.
What do you have on the left?
Well as you add, the first term is 1 plus 100 or 101.
The next one is 2 plus 99 or 101.
What's the last term?
It's 100 plus 1 or 101.
You have 100 terms, each equal to 101.
So the left hand side is 100 times 101, that's equal to 2x, divide by 2, and you get 5,050.
Instantaneously.
And notice that was our formula.
Remember the formula was n, n plus 1 over 2, 100, 101 divided by 2.
I don't know if that story is true or not, but it's kind of fun.
So now let's return to our area problem.
This will have a little notational complications, but I think you'll be able to follow along.
We're going to find the area under x squared, the parabola x squared, and the x axis between
x equals 0 and x equals 2.
Here's basically how our comedies did it.
First of all, we're going to partition that interval into little subintervals of length,
what I'll call delta x, which is the difference of the end points divided by n.
In our case, that's 2 minus 0 divided by n or 2 over n.
So imagine n little subintervals, each of length 2 over n.
And then draw vertical lines hitting the curve from those subintervals.
Here's a picture of what I mean.
Notice that I've drawn the curve y equals x squared, and then I've formed what I like
to call circumscribed rectangles.
These rectangles are above the curve.
Their base is length 2 over n.
And the first rectangle starts at x equals 0, and its base ends at 2 over n.
And the height of that first rectangle is determined by the right-hand endpoint, 2 over
n.
You see how that works?
And the next rectangle would be at 4 over n, and then you go up and bump into the curve,
and that determines the height of the second rectangle.
The final rectangle is determined by 2 being the height, so its height is 4, as a matter
of fact.
2 squared is 4.
So we're going to add up the areas of these rectangles for any value of n.
Now you could do it for n equals 4 just by doing some geometry, but we're going to do
it general for any value of n.
And this is where the notation gets a little unpleasant, a little complicated, but stay
with me.
You'll understand it, and the outcome is very interesting.
So I'm going to form what we like to call an upper sum.
It's the sum that's larger than the area under the parabola.
And here's how it is.
It's the summation of the areas of those rectangles.
Well what's the base of each rectangle?
The base of each rectangle is delta x.
Oh, we've been using delta x a lot in this course, haven't we?
It's delta x.
Now what's the height?
Well the height's determined by the right hand endpoint, and I have to have n of them.
So it's the function evaluated at the right hand endpoint, which is 2i over n as i goes
from 1 to n.
Spill out that summation in your head.
What's the first term?
F of 2 over n.
That's when i is 1.
What's the next one?
F of 4 over n.
What's the last term in my summation?
It would be when i is equal to n, and you get 2n over n, the n's cancel, it's f of 2.
That's the right hand endpoint, isn't it?
Good.
So that's our summation.
We can now say, well, what's the function f?
It's the squaring function.
It's x squared, so I square 2i over n.
And what's delta x?
That was the width.
It's 2 over n.
So now I have a summation of 2i over n quantity squared times the width 2 over n.
We'll multiply that out inside the summation sign, and you get 2 times 2 times 2, or 8
in the numerator.
You have n cubed in the denominator, and then you have i squared sitting over there.
That's the summation which gives the area of our n rectangles.
And now we're going to use one of these formulas.
First of all, notice that the summation involves i squared, 1 squared, 2 squared, 3 squared.
The 8 over n cubed is a constant with respect to this summation.
So I can just pull that outside.
Just sort of put it over there on the left, 8 over n cubed.
And then I have the summation of i squared.
Well, we saw the formula for the summation of the first n squares.
That formula was n times n plus 1 times 2n plus 1, all divided by 6.
Wow.
Look at that for a moment.
We now have a formula for the area under n rectangles formed by looking at y equals x
squared and using the right-hand endpoints.
Let me simplify that formula, and a miracle will occur.
So I multiply, let's see, 8 over 6 is 4 thirds.
I'm going to cancel one of the ends in the denominator, and I end up with 4 over 3n
squared times 2n squared plus 3n plus 1.
And now multiply in that 4 over 3n squared, and you get 8 over 3 plus 4 over n plus 4
over 3n squared.
I'm exhausted.
It took a long time to come to that final formula.
I admit that.
There was a lot of hard work in there.
But let's now savor our result.
We've shown that using right-hand endpoints, that the sum of the circumscribed rectangles
is 8 over 3 plus 4 over n plus 4 over 3n squared.
So if I said n was 10, you now know the area under those rectangles, don't you?
Just plug 10 in.
Now that answer is too big.
The rectangles are above the curve, right?
But if you let n be, say, 1,000 or a million, what do you observe?
It's kind of like back in that tangent line problem when we were doing limits, isn't it?
Because n gets larger and larger, meaning more rectangles.
By the way, that's equivalent to saying that delta x gets smaller and smaller, isn't it?
You shrink down the widths, so you have thousands of rectangles, millions of rectangles.
Now they are really doing a good job in approximating the area under that curve.
And what do they tend to?
What does that area approach?
Well, 8 thirds.
Because the 4 over n term and the 4 over 3n squared, those terms die off as n tends to
infinity.
Now to convince you even further that the area under that curve is 8 thirds, suppose
you did inscribed rectangles.
Here it would be the same procedure, which I'm not going to do, my goodness, I'm already
exhausted doing the circumscribed rectangles.
But if you would use inscribed rectangles, meaning the left-hand end point determines
the height of the rectangle, you would come up with the following sum for the area of
the rectangles.
It would be 8 thirds minus 4 over n plus 4 over 3n squared.
Isn't that interesting?
There's an 8 thirds in both of these formulas, and then a bunch of stuff involving n.
And as n goes to infinity, all that stuff goes to zero.
And so the inscribed rectangles and the circumscribed rectangles kind of squish together and give
you as a limit 8 thirds.
And that is the exact area under y equals x squared between x equals zero and x equals
two.
Good going.
You, just like Archimedes, now know how to find the area under a parabola.
You could do this for different parabolas, of course.
And now we have a definition here.
If f is a continuous non-negative function on an interval a, b, we call the area of the
region bounded below by f and the x-axis between a and b, we call it the limit that
we just evaluated.
So it's the limit as n goes to infinity.
In other words, the number of rectangles goes to infinity of that summation.
And in fact, we observe that you could use the left-hand endpoint or the right-hand endpoint
to determine the heights of our rectangles.
And in fact, you can use any point you want.
You could use the midpoint if you want.
Not as convenient, I don't think, but the function can be evaluated at any point in
that little sub-interval of length delta x.
Now what do mathematicians do once they have the area problem firm in hand?
They generalize it by saying, we don't have to restrict the function to be non-negative.
The function could be negative.
It could go below the x-axis and come up again.
And you could still have that same limit, except now possibly the function values, instead
of always being positive, they might be negative.
So what?
If that limit exists, either though it might be positive or negative, we call that, and
here comes the word, the definite integral of f from a to b.
This is the definition of the definite integral of f from a to b.
Notice that word integral is being used again, but now it has an adjective in front, definite
integral.
So for the time being, this is completely different than antiderivatives.
But trust me, soon it won't be.
But for the time being, the definite integral is nothing more than that very complicated
limit that we just did.
And the notation is very similar to the notation for antiderivatives, except now we have little
numbers on that funny elongated s, a to b.
So you read this as the definite integral from a to b of the function f of x dx.
Good.
If that limit exists, as it did with the parabola, we say that the function is integrable.
It's clearly unpleasant to evaluate definite integrals using this limit definition.
It was pretty hard to do x squared.
Trust me, we will develop formulas for doing this much easier.
Just as remember, it's sort of like when we did derivatives.
Remember our limit definition of derivative that was so difficult to use, and then we
had all those formulas?
Well now the same thing will happen.
We will develop some formulas for finding definite integrals.
But that said, you should keep in mind that this definition is going to be very useful
when you apply these ideas to new problems like volume problems and surface area problems
and arc length problems.
The principle of adding up a function times a little delta x, and then adding more and
more of them, i.e., taking a limit, will be kind of a constant theme in the lectures to
come.
Good.
Let's talk a little bit about the history of this.
In this definition of definite integral, one of the key components was that summation
of f of c i times delta x, and that delta x, of course, reminds us of dx, it's our differential.
That summation is often called a Riemann sum named after a mathematician named George
Friedrich Bernhard Riemann, who lived in the 1800s, a German mathematician, I probably
pronounced his name incorrectly, but Riemann worked in many areas of mathematics.
You might have heard of non-Euclidean geometry.
He made very important contributions to differential equations and number theory, and in fact,
his work in math and physics formed a lot of the structure that Einstein used to develop
the theory of relativity.
It's kind of interesting.
Now, let's test ourselves.
Let's see if we're comfortable with the notation of definite integrals, and here I've written
down the integral from 1 to 3 of 4 dx.
What does that signify?
Well, the function is 4, so that's a horizontal line, and it starts at x equals 1 and ends
at x equals 3.
So basically, we have a rectangle.
The height is 4, and it starts at 1, and it ends at 3, and the definite integral from
1 to 3 of 4 dx is nothing more than the area of that rectangle, which is 2 times 4 or 8.
The dx reminds us in this notation that we have, imagine a lot of rectangles being placed
in this figure.
The dx would be the widths of those rectangles, but the heights are all 4, aren't they?
The constant height, and of course, the area when you add them up is 8.
Good.
Now, I'm going to go through some properties of the definite integral.
These will all be in your workbook, and they're all kind of common sense.
So they might look kind of funny, but these are fairly straightforward properties.
I don't think you'll have any trouble understanding these properties, but I want to sort of get
them on the table so we can use them later on.
First of all, we define the definite integral from A to A. In other words, the same endpoint
from A to A to be 0, and that kind of makes sense because there would be no width.
You'd have no area.
We also define the definite integral from B to A to be the negative of the definite
integral from A to B. That's just the definition, and sometimes you need to reverse the endpoints.
For example, the integral from pi to pi of sin x dx, the definite integral is equal to
0, and the integral from 3 to 0 of x dx, which doesn't make much sense right now, does it?
It's not going backwards, but we define that to be minus the definite integral from 0 to
3.
Here's some more properties.
This one's kind of fun.
The integral from A to B is the same as the integral from A to C plus the integral from
C to B. Look at the picture.
You'll be convinced immediately.
The integral from A to C is sort of the area of that first piece, and the integral from
C to B is the second piece.
What I'm saying is, if you add up those two pieces, you get the entire integral from A
to B. That's what this property says.
What's fascinating about this property, and not at all obvious, is that the value of C
here I've drawn in between A and B, haven't I, and it's pretty clear, but C could be outside.
It could be to the right of B or to the left of A, and the property is still true.
Isn't that neat?
But in general, we use it this way.
We use it where C's in the middle, and this will come up.
We'll use this property quite a bit.
We'll split up regions into two pieces.
Here's some more fairly straightforward properties that won't cause us headaches.
If you have an integral, a definite integral of a constant times a function, you can slide
that constant outside the integral sign.
If you have the integral of a sum of two functions, you can sum their integrals.
You can split it apart.
It's linear, just like derivatives were linear.
These guys are also linear, and of course it works with the minus sign.
A warning here, a pitfall, you can't move variables outside the integral sign.
You can move like a number two.
If you had a two in there, you could slide it outside.
But if you have an X there, you can't move it outside the integral sign.
That's a no-no, so don't do that.
Okay, a couple more fairly simple properties.
If you have a function that is non-negative on the interval AB, non-negative means it's
positive or perhaps zero.
But if it's non-negative, it's above the x-axis, or at worst on the x-axis, then the
definite integral of that function is also non-negative.
Well that makes sense, because to find the definite integral, imagine what you're doing.
You're doing rectangles, aren't you?
Well the heights of all those rectangles are positive.
They're above the x-axis, or at worst they're zero.
So when you add them up, you add up all those rectangles, you're going to get a number that's
non-negative.
Good.
And another obvious property.
If one function is underneath another function on the interval, then the definite integral
of the smaller one is less than or equal to the definite integral of the larger one.
Here's some pictures that illustrate those two theorems I just talked about.
First of all, if you're above the x-axis, your integral is going to be non-negative.
In fact, that's the area problem, isn't it?
You're finding the area under the curve F, so of course it's going to be non-negative.
Area is always positive, in fact.
Don't buy a piece of land with negative area.
Area is always going to be positive.
And over here on the other picture, you see that the function F is below the function
G, and hence the definite integral of F is less than or equal to the definite integral
of G. Let me make some comments about our notation here.
In this notation for the definite integral, the variable x, we like to say, is a dummy
variable.
It's not like it's stupid, but rather it can be any other variable, and it won't affect
the outcome.
The reason being, when you calculate a definite integral, and all we know now how to calculate
them basically is that limit definition, but when you finish calculating a definite integral,
your answer is a number.
It's a number, like eight-thirds was a number we got previously.
It's not a function.
It's a number, and hence it doesn't matter what variable you use.
For instance, the integral from 1 to 3 of x squared dx means exactly the same thing
as the integral from 1 to 3 of t squared dt, because when you're through calculating that,
and we don't know how to calculate that very easily, when you're through, the answer will
be a number.
Definite integrals are numbers.
As we progress through, please keep that summation process in mind.
I know it's an unpleasant process, but it's a good visualization of how integration works.
Think of the dx as delta x as a width of a rectangle, and keep in mind that the heights
are formed by the function.
Good work.
That was not an easy lecture, I think, because it had some fairly unpleasant notation, but
we've now seen one of the classic problems of the integral calculus, the so-called area
problem.
I hope you're saying to yourself, I want you to be saying to yourself, whoa, what does
this have to do with derivatives?
What does this have to do with anti-derivatives?
We just sort of seemingly started a new topic.
But then I invite you to come back next lecture.
All of this will be bundled together.
It's really an amazing result that we'll see next lecture.
It's probably one of the, well, without a doubt, it's the most important theorem in
all of calculus.
It is the theorem.
It's called the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, and next time we'll see it.
Thanks a lot, and I'll see you next time.
