Hello again and welcome back.
I'm very excited about today's lecture because we're going to see today perhaps the most
important theorem in all of calculus, the fundamental theorem of calculus. You'll remember
last time we looked at the problem of calculating the area under a curve bounded between numbers
A and B. And then we generalize that problem to something called the definite integral.
And I hope you agree with me that calculating that definite integral is pretty difficult.
We can use something called a Riemann sum, meaning we partitioned the area under the
curve by vertical rectangles of width delta x and the heights were determined by evaluating
the function either at the left end point or the right end point or some other point.
And then we added up those rectangles and took a limit. The number of rectangles approached
infinity or the width delta x approach zero. And if that limit existed, we called that the
definite integral of our function. Again, that's pretty difficult to do. Today we'll
develop a formula that will allow us to calculate these definite integrals by using anti-derivatives.
This is the amazing intersection of the differential calculus that we're very, very comfortable
with after many lectures and these anti-derivatives that we looked at two lectures ago.
Near the end of the lecture today, I'll also try and give a little explanation as to why
the fundamental theorem of calculus is true. But the first step, I think, is just to present
the theorem and become comfortable in using it. So, what does the fundamental theorem
of calculus say? Here's the setup. Suppose you have a continuous function on a closed
interval a, b. If you want to calculate the definite integral of that function f of x
between a and b, here's all you have to do. Find an anti-derivative of the function f.
Any anti-derivative will do. And with that anti-derivative, subtract the anti-derivative
evaluated at the upper limit b minus the anti-derivative evaluated at a. In other words,
the definite integral from a to b of f of x dx is g of b minus g of a, where g is an
anti-derivative of f. It's pretty amazing. We don't have to do that limit process. All
you have to do is find an anti-derivative and plug in the endpoints. Let's do an example
to make sure we're comfortable with what I just said. Suppose you wanted to find the
definite integral from 2 to 4 of the function x. You can think of x as being the straight
line y equals x. And this is actually an area problem. We're finding the area under
that straight line between 2 and 4. In a minute, I'll look at the picture and show you that
area. But let's now do the fundamental theorem of calculus. Well, what's an anti-derivative
of x? It has lots of anti-derivatives, but perhaps the simplest is x squared over 2.
Then you evaluate the anti-derivative at the two endpoints. So, g of 4 is 4 squared
over 2 or 8, and g of 2 is 2 squared over 2 or 2. So, we've evaluated the anti-derivative
at the two endpoints, and now we just subtract them to get our final answer. So, the definite
integral of the function x between 2 and 4 is g of 4 minus g of 2 or 8 minus 2 equals
6. Now, let me make some comments about this process. To use the fundamental theorem of
calculus, you have to be able to find anti-derivatives. This theme will come up over and over in the
next few lectures. You also don't need to include a constant of integration. Any anti-derivative
will do, and you just subtract them at the two endpoints. Finally, we'll see some examples
where the variable of integration might not be x. Let me be specific about this. The definite
integral from a to b of f of x dx is precisely the same as the definite integral from a to
b of f of t dt or f of theta d theta. That letter there is unimportant, because when
you're finished finding a definite integral, the answer is a number. The variable evaporates.
Now, let me look back at that previous example. Remember, it was the line y equals x, and
we were finding the area between 2 and 4. Well, you can sort of see how this is going
to work. The area of the larger triangle is one half base times height. That's 4 times
4 is 16 divided by 2 is 8. Then we subtract from that the area of the smaller triangle,
which is 2 by 2 divided by 2, so the smaller triangle area 2. That 8 minus 2 gave us the
answer to the problem 6. Good. Let's do another example to see how we are with calculating
definite integrals using the fundamental theorem of calculus. In a moment, I'm going to introduce
some notation that makes it even easier. Let's find the definite integral of x squared minus
3 between x equals 1 and x equals 2. What's the first thing you have to do? You've got
to find an antiderivative of the function x squared minus 3. Well, how about x cubed
over 3 minus 3x? Remember, you can always check your antiderivatives by just differentiating
them. That's a good antiderivative because if I differentiate that, I come back with
the original x squared minus 3. I found my antiderivative, which I like to call g. Now,
a good notation is to put that antiderivative in brackets and then on the right-hand bracket
down below, put the lower limit of integration, which is a 1, and on the top, put the upper
limit of integration, which is 2. Then you take x cubed over 3 minus 3x and first plug
in the 2 and you get 8 thirds minus 3 times 2, which is 6. Then you subtract off the antiderivative
evaluated at the lower limit of integration, evaluated at 1, and that turns out to be 1
third minus 3. Then you simplify those pretty messy fractions. You get 8 thirds minus 1
third is 7 thirds, minus 6 plus 3 is minus 3, and 7 thirds minus 3 is minus 2 thirds.
A little warning here. These computations can be messy. There's lots of arithmetic involved
and even worse, there are a lot of minus signs, minus, a minus, a minus. This will come up
a lot, so be careful with your minus signs here. Something else that's kind of interesting
in this example. Clearly, we were not finding the area under a curve, were we? Because our
answer was negative and areas are non-negative. You can sort of see why this answer is negative.
Imagine the original approach we did for the definite integral. Remember, the widths were
delta x and then we had those rectangles. Well, in this curve, x squared minus 3, we
have a parabola, the parabola x squared, but it's been moved down 3 units. Hence, a lot
of the parabola is below the x-axis. Hence, when you draw those rectangles, they aren't
going up. They're actually going down for a while because they bump into the curve below
the x-axis. So when you add up the function times delta x, you get some negative numbers,
don't you? Some people like to call that negative area, but I don't like to use that term.
Just be aware that a lot of times, definite integrals can have answers that are negative.
It could even be zero sometimes. Good. I hope we're comfortable now using the fundamental
theorem of calculus. How about a couple more examples? What's the definite integral of
the cosine function between zero and pi? Good. Okay. What's the plan? You have to find
an antiderivative of cosine. What's that? Sine. Good. So you put sine in brackets and
then put the zero down below and the pi up above. You evaluate sine at pi minus evaluating
sine at zero. Sine of pi, of course, is zero. Sine of zero is zero and zero minus zero is
zero. That's kind of curious. The definite integral of the cosine function between zero
and pi, excuse me, between, yeah, between zero and pi turns out to be zero. I invite
you to graph the cosine function on the interval zero pi and you'll convince yourself why the
answer should be zero. Good. How about a little harder problem? How about secant squared
x between zero and pi over four? What do you think? Well, we need an antiderivative of
secant squared. Ah, how about tangent? Remember, the derivative of tangent was secant squared.
So the integral or antiderivative of secant squared must be tangent. And then we evaluate
tangent at pi over four and we get one. And then we evaluate tangent at zero and we get
zero. So the final answer is one. Good. Let me be very clear here about something. And
this is often confusing to students, I think. The definite integral which we've been evaluating
today looks like a to b of some function. That is always going to be a number. The answers
going to be a number as long as a and b are constants. You should think of that as generalizing
the area under a curve and it's going to be a number. Now, later on, that definite integral
will represent other things like a volume or a surface area. But for the time being, keep
in mind that it's going to be a number. On the other hand, anti-differentiation, which
we did two lectures ago, is a function. The antiderivative of some function f of x is
some other function. And that's because there are no limits of integration, are there? So
there's a real difference here between the definite integral and anti-differentiation,
even though they have the same symbol, that elongated s. And why did they use that symbol?
To calculate definite integrals by the fundamental theorem of calculus, you need anti-derivatives.
Good. Let me look now at a theorem involving definite integrals that I think you'll find
kind of interesting. It's called the mean value theorem for integrals. Remember we
had the mean value theorem for derivatives many lectures ago? Well, now we have one for
integrals. And here's how the theorem goes. If f is a continuous function on a closed
interval, then there's some number c in that closed interval such that the following is
true. The definite integral from a to b of f of x dx will equal f of c times b minus
a. Let me show you a picture of what's going on here. And it'll be crystal clear, I think.
Here I've drawn a, actually I drew a positive function here. It doesn't have to be positive.
It could be a, it could be negative or whatever. But I've drawn a function defined between
a and b. And you can imagine it has a certain area under that curve between a and b. The
theorem says the following. There's some point c in between a and b such that if you draw
a vertical line from c, go up and hit the curve and then go over. That's f of c. And
what's the area of that rectangle? Well, the base is b minus a and the height is f of c.
Well, that's what the theorem says. It says the area under the curve is the same as some
rectangle. That rectangle has the same area as the area under the curve. Kind of a neat
theorem, isn't it? Once again, this is an existence theorem. It doesn't tell us how
to find the number c. It just says that it will always exist. Good. Let me do an example
to show you how to use this theorem. And then I'll give an interpretation as to why it's
called mean. Not because it's angry, but for a different reason. So let's look at the
function of square root of x, say between one and four. And if you integrate the square
root function between one and four, that should equal, that definite integral should equal
f of c times four minus one, the difference in the end points, for some number c. Let's
find that number c. So first I'm going to find an antiderivative of x to the one half,
the square root function. That would be x to the three halves divided by three halves.
And then when I flip that fraction up, I get two-thirds x to the three halves. And then
I plug in my end points, which are one and four, and I get two-thirds times. Well, what's
four to the three halves? Oops, let's see. That square root of four is two, and then
cube it, it's eight, and then plug in one, you get one. So the final answer is fourteen
over three. So according to our mean value theorem for integrals, there's some number
c such that fourteen over three equals f of c, which is the square root of c, times three.
And then you solve that equation. The square root of c is going to be fourteen over nine,
and c is then fourteen over nine squared, which is about 2.42. Here's a picture of what
we just did. There's the square root function, and I've marked off between one and four,
and we discovered a number c that was about 2.42, and now I've drawn a rectangle of height
f of c. So in other words, at c, I draw a vertical line and it bumps into the curve,
and that forms a rectangle, and the mean value theorem for integrals says that the area
under the curve between one and four is the same as that area of the rectangle. We like
to say with this theorem that f of c, which is part of that theorem, equals one over b
minus a times the definite integral, we like to say that f of c is the average value of
the function f on that interval. That's the definition of average value. In our case in
the previous example, f of c is the square root of our c value, so it's fourteen over
nine. Now let me try to interpret this a little bit. Look back at the picture. Imagine you've
got a lot of people lined up and their heights go from one up to two, say meters. So you've
lined up all these people and they kind of line up underneath the square root function.
Well, what's the average height of all these people? Well, that's the average value of
the function. So you sort of see that f of c is kind of the average height of that square
root function between one and four. Kind of an interesting theorem. Good. I'd like to
look now at perhaps some more, as we say, interesting examples using the fundamental
theorem of calculus to make sure we're comfortable with some of the difficulties that might occur.
For example, let's find the definite integral between zero and four of the absolute value
of x minus three. Well, between zero and four, the absolute value of x minus three is kind
of complicated because sometimes x minus three is positive on that interval and sometimes
it's negative. More particular, the absolute value of x minus three equals x minus three
if x is greater than or equal to three, and then it's minus x minus three if x is less
than three. That's the definition of the absolute value function. So how am I going to calculate
the definite integral between zero and four? Well, remember that theorem where you can
split up an integral into two pieces? So first I'm going to integrate from zero to three,
and on that interval, I'm going to integrate three minus x, in other words, minus the quantity
x minus three, and then on the interval three to four, I integrate the function x minus three.
So you're integrating two different functions here. One is the negative of the other, taking
into account that the absolute value function is kind of complicated when the thing inside
is negative. So now I have two integrals, each of which can be evaluated very quickly.
The first one, the antiderivative, is three x minus x squared over two, and I plug in
the limits zero to three, and the other one is x squared over two minus three x, and I
plug in the limits zero, excuse me, three to four. And then if you do all that arithmetic,
it's kind of messy, it takes a while, and add it all up, you get the answer of five.
Let me show you a picture to convince you of that. Here is the absolute value function
of x minus three on the interval zero, four. Notice that it's our friend, the V, of the
absolute value function, but it's been shifted to the right three units. Good. We just calculated
the area under that curve because the absolute value function is non-negative, and we got
the answer of five. Does that make sense? Well, the left-hand piece is a big triangle.
Its area is base times height divided by two, which is nine over two, and then the right-hand
little triangle is one by one, so that's a half. Nine halves plus a half is ten halves
or five, so our answer seems correct. Good. So, I think now, hopefully, we're comfortable
using the fundamental theorem of calculus if we can find those anti-derivatives, and
again, that's a big question there. Can you find anti-derivatives in order to use the
fundamental theorem of calculus? But for the time being, the problems have been such that
we could find them. I'd like now to spend the remaining portion looking closer as to
why the fundamental theorem of calculus is true. This is sort of a proof, and normally
in elementary calculus we don't do many proofs, but this is a good one in the sense that we'll
see why integration and differentiation are connected, why one is kind of the inverse
of the other. They involve each other. They're tied together. Something you wouldn't expect.
Historically, the integral problem is much, much older than the tangent line problem,
and yet here they are connected. So let me step through the proof. Let's suppose we have
a function, and let's assume it's non-negative to make things simpler, and I'm going to define
capital A of x to be the area from little a up to x under that curve f. Now I'm going
to use f of t rather than f of x because I'm using x as my upper limit of integration.
Here's a picture of what I'm talking about. We have our graph of f, and on the t axis,
which is the horizontal axis, the graph starts at a, and then I've drawn it out to x, and
capital A of x is the area under that curve between little a and little x. Good. Now,
let's move to a nearby point. x plus delta x. Remember delta x is always kind of a small
change in x. So we move to x plus delta x, and now we have the area starting at a and
going out to x plus delta x. But what would that area be? According to our symbols, it
would be the integral from a to x plus delta x of our function f of t. Good. Now, let's
subtract these two. That would give the area of that skinny little rectangle of width delta
x, and the height is determined by the curve between f of x and f of x plus delta x. So
now I'm calculating the tiny strip determined by x and x plus delta x. So I'll call that
delta a change in area, and it's going to be the integral from a to x plus delta x
minus the piece from a to x. Take the big piece all the way out to x plus delta x, and then
take off the smaller piece, and you're left just with the strip. Good. Okay. Now, look
at our picture here for a moment. I'm going to let little m be the minimum value of f
on that little strip x to x plus delta x. In my picture, little m seems to be the distance
up from x, but the function could be decreasing there. But let m be the minimal value of the
function on that small interval, and let capital M be the maximum value of the function on
that same interval. What do you notice about little m and big m? Well, again, let's look
at the picture. Little m determines a rectangle, height little m with delta x. That's a certain
area. Big m determines a larger rectangle, height big m with delta x, and I claim the
area under the curve is in between those two maximal and minimal values. Writing it is
an equation, m delta x, that's the area of the small rectangle, is less than or equal
to delta a, that's the area under the function between x and x plus delta x, and that's less
than or equal to big m times delta x. We've sandwiched the area under the curve between
two rectangles. One is smaller and one is larger. Now divide all three sides of this
inequality by delta x, and you have little m less than or equal to delta a over delta
less than or equal to big m. Now, let's take a limit. Let delta x get closer and closer
to zero. That means that my rectangle there is getting skinnier and skinnier. What's going
to happen? What's little m going to approach? Well, it's going to approach f of x. What's
big m going to approach? It's also going to approach f of x. What does that mean the thing
in the middle approaches? Well, it's kind of in a sandwich here. We call this the squeeze
theorem or the sandwich theorem. We have f of x less than or equal to the limit as delta
x goes to zero of delta a over delta x, less than or equal to f of x. Hello, it's in between
the two of them. It must be equal to them. Hence, the thing in the middle equals f of
x. Well, who's that thing in the middle? That's the definition of derivative. That's
the derivative of a with respect to x or a prime of x. That's the definition of derivative.
So what do we have? We have a prime of x equals f of x. Good. That means we can now find an
anti-derivative. A of x will be some g of x plus a constant, and g will be an anti-derivative
of f. Good. Can I find the constant c in my equation? Well, we know one more piece of
information. What's the area from a starting at a to a? Zero. So what's the area from a
to a? So that means that big a of little a equals g of a plus the constant, and that
has to equal zero. That tells me that my constant is minus g of a. So we're almost done. I hope
you've kept up with this. It's a tough little proof. We finally have that the area function
is the integral from a to x of f of t dt. That's how we defined it. And it's equal to
g of x minus g of a, where g is an anti-derivative of f. Now replace x with b. So you have from
a to b f of t dt is g of b minus g of a. And remember, I said you can use any letter you
want in these formulas. So why don't we get the final line, the integral from a to b f
of x dx is g of b minus g of a. Wow. That's the formula in the fundamental theorem of calculus.
That's a tough theorem to prove. There are many other proofs in textbooks. But this one
kind of shows you, I think, how the derivative comes into play when you're looking at the
area under a curve. Good. Next time, I'd like to continue looking at
the fundamental theorem of calculus. It's so important that we're going to devote two
lectures to it. We'll see yet another relationship between integrals and derivatives, how they're
tied together. And then a little later, we'll look to the issue of how do we find these
anti-derivatives? That's big business. A lot of calculus courses, especially at universities,
spend weeks on calculating anti-derivatives. So I look forward to seeing you next time when
we continue our discussion of the most important theorem in all of calculus, the fundamental
theorem of calculus. Thank you very much.
