Hello again. I hope you enjoyed our last lecture on the fundamental theorem of calculus. That
theorem permitted us to calculate definite integrals by using anti-derivatives. Today
we're going to explore more relationships between differentiation, finding derivatives,
and integration, finding anti-derivatives. And we'll discover today that this process
of differentiating and integrating are basically kind of inverses of each other. I'll be little
more specific about that coming up, but they're intimately related, these two processes. And
also we'll show something called the second fundamental theorem of calculus, which again
reflects this relationship between derivatives and integrals.
Let's begin by recalling our famous fundamental theorem of calculus. Here's how it goes. Let
F be a continuous function on a closed interval and let capital G be an anti-derivative of
F. Then the definite integral from A to B of F of X dx is nothing more than the anti-derivative
evaluated at B minus the anti-derivative evaluated at A. This will be a number when
you're finished with this process. It could be area under a curve. Later on we'll see
that it might be a volume. It might be the amount of work it takes to send a rocket to
the moon. It might be arc length, etc. But for the time being, it's area under a curve
or more general definite integral. And as I said earlier, the variable X in this formula
can be any letter you want. We sometimes call that a dummy variable. Let's remind ourselves
with a quick example. For example, what's the definite integral of the cosine function
from 0 to pi over 2? Well, how do you do it? You find an anti-derivative. Well, the derivative
of sine is cosine, so the anti-derivative of cosine must be sine. And then you take the
sine function and evaluate it at the two end points, at pi over 2 and then at 0. Sine
of pi over 2 is 1, sine of 0 is 0, so our final answer is 1. Good. I'm going to change
things a little bit now. I'm going to look a little deeper into this process of definite
integrals. I'm now going to make the upper limit of integration a variable. So I'm going
to look at the function g of x defined as follows. It's the definite integral from a
to x, f of t dt. This is a function in the following sense. You give me a value of x
like 7, and I plug 7 into the upper limit of integration, and then I calculate that
definite integral. So g of x means take an x value, and that is the upper limit of integration.
In the literature, this is called an accumulation function. We are accumulating the function
f. I'll show you an example of that right now, and you'll see why it's called an accumulation
function. Let's let g of x be the integral from 0 to x of cosine t dt. We're going to
calculate g of 0, g of pi over 6, and say g of pi over 2. We're going to evaluate this
function at certain x values. Well, let's evaluate it g of 0. What does that mean? That
means you take your integral from 0 to x and replace x with 0, and you have the integral
from 0 to 0 of the cosine function. Well, that's equal to 0, because remember, if you're
going from a point to the same point, you have no width. The delta x's are 0 here, so
that is clearly 0. We haven't accumulated much yet, have we? Now we'll plug in pi over
6. Then we have the integral from 0 to pi over 6 of the cosine function. Ah, that one
we can calculate. The antiderivative is sine, and then you evaluate sine between 0 and pi
over 6, and you get sine of pi over 6, which is 1 half minus 0 or 1 half. And how about
g of pi over 2? The same computation, but now we evaluate the antiderivative sine t
at pi over 2, and we get 1. Look at the picture. You really see this sensation of accumulating.
We're accumulating area here. There's the cosine curve between 0 and pi over 2. And
what I've done in this problem is I've calculated the area under that curve for various x values,
for instance, from 0 to pi over 6, the area turned out to be a half. I accumulated half
a unit of area, and then I went even further out to pi over 2, and I accumulated an area
equal to 1. As x moves, we accumulate more area. Isn't that neat? So, let's look closer
at this accumulation function. We could have solved this problem all at once. We could
have done all three parts by observing the following. g of x was equal to the integral
from 0 to x of cosine t. Well, we could find the antiderivative sine t, and then plug in
0 and plug in x. Plug in the variable x, and you get sine x minus sine 0 or sine x. So,
g of x is nothing more than sine x. And if you wanted to now calculate g of 0 or g of
pi over 6 or g of pi over 2, just plug them in, sine of 0, sine of pi over 6, sine of
pi over 2. But now maybe you've noticed something even more interesting here. This is really
interesting. Look at our g of x. g of x is sine x in this problem. What's the derivative
of g? Well, it's the derivative of sine, which is cosine. Wait a minute. Cosine is the original
integrand. It's the original function we just integrated. So, what's happening here? If
you differentiate g, in other words, if you differentiate that integral, what do you end
up with? You end up with the function inside. That's the second fundamental theorem of calculus.
Let me be more specific now and put this in symbols. Suppose you have a continuous function
on an interval i containing the number a. Now, for any x in that interval, if you first
take the definite integral from a to x of your function, and I'm going to use the letter
t for the function f of t dt, so you take that integral and then you differentiate it.
You come back to the original function evaluated at the upper limit of integration x. This
is what I mean by inverse. It's sort of an inverse. Watch how you do it. First, you integrate
it from a to x, and then you differentiate it, and you come back to where you started
from. You come back to the inside function, which happens to be evaluated at the upper
limit of integration. Let's show our example to see how this works. The derivative of the
integral from 0 to x of cosine dt is the derivative of the sine function, and the derivative of
sine is cosine. Look what happened. The derivative of the integral is cosine. In a sense, the
integral and the derivative have undone each other, and you're left back where you started
from. That's what I meant by inverse operations. Derivative of integral is the original function
evaluated at the upper limit of integration. Let's do some more examples of this second
fundamental theorem of calculus. What's the derivative of the integral from 1 to x of
4t cubed dt? Well, the theorem says it would be the same function evaluated at the upper
limit, so it would be 4x cubed. Now, you can check that, because in this case, we actually
can integrate 4t cubed. We would get the derivative of t to the fourth. t to the fourth is the
anti-derivative of 4t cubed. Then we plug in the endpoints. The endpoints are 1 and
x, and we would have the derivative of x to the fourth minus 1, and now you differentiate
and you get 4x cubed, and notice the constant goes away. The derivative of a constant is
0. So, it worked. The derivative of that integral is the original function. Here's a harder
problem. What's the derivative of the integral from 0 to x of the square root of t squared
plus 1? Well, if you're like me, you don't know what the anti-derivative of the square
root of t squared plus 1 is, do you? So, you wouldn't be able to do this problem by first
integrating and then differentiating. That would be really hard. It turns out there is
an anti-derivative for that function, but it's unpleasant. But the fundamental theorem
of calculus, the second version of it, says the derivative of the integral is nothing
more than the inside function evaluated at x. So, it's square root of x squared plus
1. Isn't that easy? Let's look at another one. What's the derivative of the integral
from x to 3 of sine of t squared? Wow. Well, that looks pretty tough, because first of all,
it's not going from a constant to x, but rather from x to a constant. That's not the right
form for the fundamental theorem of calculus. So, we reverse them. And remember, when you
reverse the limits of integration, that introduces a minus sign in the formula. So, now we have
the derivative with respect to x of minus the integral from 3 to x of sine of t squared
dt. Now, it's precisely in the right form, constant to x, and so the answer would be
minus sine of x squared. Here's a little aside. You cannot find a function whose anti, let
me say it better. You cannot find a function whose derivative is sine t squared. In other
words, sine of t squared does not have an anti derivative among the functions of elementary
calculus that we've learned to love. So, this is the only way to do the problem is using
the second fundamental theorem of calculus. Let me make some comments about this theorem.
I like to sometimes say this theorem is an inverse process that the derivative of an
integral is the original function. And then I say sort of because it's not quite the same.
The integral has to go from constant to the variable. To use this theorem, it must be
in the exact form, constant to a variable x. And by the way, along those lines about
the dummy variables of integration and then this variable that's now appearing as a limit
of integration, sometimes you'll see students that use the same variable for a limit of
integration as well as the variable of the function being integrated. Let me give you
an example. The integral from 3 to x sine x dx. That's incorrect mathematics. You can
not write that. That's a no-no. That makes no sense mathematically. In fact, if you were
to put that into a graphing calculator, your calculator will probably give you an error
message. So, these calculators are pretty smart. So, remember, the limits of integration,
if you want to use variables in those limits, don't make it the same variable of the function
being integrated. Good. Let's now look at a much harder example. And you'll see these
in textbooks and they're a little bit tricky. We're going to use the chain rule now to look
at a harder problem. Let's suppose capital G of x is the integral from pi to x cubed
cosine t dt. I want to find G prime. I want to find the derivative of that integral. What's
the problem? Well, the upper limit is not x. It's x cubed. And so we have to do some
massaging here. Here's the secret. G prime of x equals the rate of change of G with respect
to x, dG dx. But by the chain rule, that's dG du times du dx if I let u be x cubed. So
I introduce an intermediate function x cubed. That's the upper limit of integration. Now
watch what happens. This is really neat. d du of the integral from pi to x cubed cosine
t dt equals the integral from d du of pi to u cosine t dt. In other words, replace x cubed
with u. Now we can go back and do the entire problem. The derivative with respect to x
of the integral of pi to x cubed cosine t dt equals the derivative with respect to
u of the integral from pi to u cosine t dt times du dx. That's that chain rule. And that
equals, well, the first piece is now precisely in the correct form for the second fundamental
theorem of calculus. So it's cosine u times 3x squared, 3x squared being du dx. And now
go back to the original variable, get rid of the u, and you have cosine x cubed times
3x squared. What's the moral of the story in this problem? If you have a function as
your upper limit of integration, make sure you multiply at the end by its derivative.
That 3x squared at the end is the derivative of x cubed. Complicated problem. Okay, we're
still looking at this fundamental theorem of calculus and the second fundamental theorem
of calculus. I'd like to now introduce one of the very important applications of this
theorem, and it's called net change. And before we actually do an example of this, let
me kind of reinterpret the original fundamental theorem of calculus. Remember it said that
the integral from a to b of f of x dx was g of b minus g of a, where g was an anti derivative.
In other words, g prime is f. So in the original equation for the fundamental theorem of calculus,
replace f with g prime. And you have the following equation, the integral from a to b of g prime
of x dx equals g of b minus g of a. Now look what this says. This is really curious. This
says that the integral of a derivative, well, it's not the original function, but it's the
original function evaluated at the two end points. So again, we have this almost inverse
operation. Previously, it was derivative of an integral. Now it's integral of a derivative.
And the answer is the function evaluated at its end points and subtracted. Now this
g of b minus g of a is called the net change or total change of g. What you're doing here
to find the net change g of b minus g of a is you're integrating g prime. You're integrating
the rate of change. Watch how this works with particle motion. This is really kind of an
interesting application. Suppose you have a moving particle going up and down, say the
x axis. In fact, I'll call it the t axis. Here it goes back and forth. Now the fundamental
theorem of calculus that we just looked at said the following, that the integral from
a to b of the derivative, which is s prime, the derivative is the same as the integral
from a to b of the velocity because the derivative of the position is the velocity. And that integral
of the velocity is the position at b minus the position at a. Now this answer could be
zero. It could be negative. It's the displacement of the particle. Imagine a particle doing
this. It starts here and it goes for a while this way and then it goes maybe back here
and then it comes back to where it started from. Well, the displacement would be zero,
wouldn't it? Because this part, it goes up and then it comes back over here and it ends
up going nowhere. So s of b minus s of a is zero in this case. So the net change or displacement
can be negative, positive, or zero. But that's not the total distance the particle traveled,
is it? It went down here for a while and then it went over here. It traveled a long distance.
How do you find the total distance traveled? Well, you integrate the absolute value of
the velocity. So it's the integral from a to b of the absolute value of the velocity.
Let me show you a specific example and I think it'll become clear what I'm talking about.
We're going to consider a particle moving along the axis here. According to the velocity
function, v of t equals t squared minus five t plus four. And let's put this on the interval
zero, five. So t starts at zero. At time zero, the velocity of this particle is four when
you plug in zero. So it's moving to the right with a velocity of four. And then after a
while the velocity, it might turn around. The velocity might be zero and then it might
turn around the other direction, etc. So this particle goes back and forth. Here's a graph
of the velocity function. This is the graph of that polynomial, t squared minus five t
plus four on the interval zero to five. Notice some features here. The graph intersects the
t axis at one and at four. Between zero and one, the velocity is above the t axis. So
the velocity is positive. It's moving to the right. Between one and four, the velocity
is negative because it's below the t axis. So it's turned around. And in fact, at time
t equals one, the velocity is zero. So it goes this way, stops and then goes back the
other way. And then at time four, it stops again because the velocity is zero at four
and then the velocity is positive again. You see how that works? It's kind of neat. It goes
this way and then back and then back. So here are the questions. What is the total distance
this particle traveled and what is the net change or the displacement of this particle?
Again, between zero and one, it's moving forward. Then it moves back between one and four and
then between four and five, it moves forward again. Well, the displacement or net change
is nothing more than the integral of the velocity. So it's the integral from zero to five of
our function, which is t cubed, excuse me, our function integrates to t cubed over three
minus five t squared over two minus four t between our endpoints, zero and five. You
plug those numbers in. Don't make me do it in front of you. It's a lot of arithmetic,
uninteresting arithmetic, lots of chances to make mistakes. But I think I got it right
here and you finally get minus five, six feet. What does that tell me? This particle went
this way for a while, then it went the other way and then it came back and it didn't quite
reach its starting point because it sort of ended up minus five, six of a foot before
the starting point. In other words, it didn't go very far overall. It's like going to the
store and coming back home again. You might have traveled a long way, but you didn't get
very far when you look at the total net change or the displacement. So what was the total
distance traveled for this particle? Well, that's the integral from zero to five of the
absolute value of the velocity function. And now we have to split it into pieces because
sometimes that's positive, sometimes it's negative, sometimes it's positive. So you split
it into three pieces from zero to one of the velocity and then from one to four of negative
the velocity and then from four to five of the positive part. Each of these pieces will
give a positive number. The first one gives eleven-sixths when you do all the arithmetic.
The second one is nine-halves and the third one is eleven-sixths. If you add up those
three fractions, you get forty-nine over six. That's the total, total distance this particle
traveled. It traveled a long way even though its net change was very, very small. Good.
Kind of a nice problem, I think. And that difference between the total distance and
the displacement is important to keep in mind. Okay, let's do some practice problems
because these theorems are so important I want to make sure we're comfortable with calculating
with them. What's the derivative of the definite integral from zero to x of sine of t squared
dt? Well, the good news is we don't have to find an anti-derivative. You wouldn't be able
to, but rather we have the derivative of an integral. The second fundamental theorem of
calculus says it's the inside function evaluated at the upper limit of integration x. So the
answer is sine of x squared. Good. How about a little bit more complicated? What's the
derivative of the integral of sine of t squared between zero and cosine x? Remember that
issue that if the upper limit of integration is a function, you have to multiply by the
derivative of that function at the very end. So the answer will be sine of cosine x squared
sine of the upper limit times minus sine of x. Complicated, I admit, very complicated.
How about the derivative of the integral from x to five times sine of x squared?
And I'll change letters of theta cubed d theta. Remember, that's a dummy variable, doesn't
matter what it is. Well, again, we'll have the problem of the limits of integration are
backwards, so I just flip them, and now it goes from five to x, and I put a minus sign
in front, so the answer is minus x cubed. Good. Okay. Let's see if you can find a mistake
in my work here. I'm going to evaluate the integral from minus one to one of x to the
minus two. Okay? Now, you might think about this problem a minute before I start doing
the calculations. You might sort of say, wait a minute, there's a problem here, but hold
on. Let's just evaluate it without thinking very much. Let's just evaluate it without
thinking very much. Let's just take the function and anti-differentiate it and plug in the
end points. Before we do that, notice that this function is always positive. In other
words, on the interval minus one to one, x to the minus two is one over x squared, and
that's a positive number on that interval. So we should expect the answer to be positive.
Well, here we go. What's the anti-derivative of x to the minus two? It's x to the minus
one divided by minus one, and then you plug in the end points minus one to one, and that's
the same as minus one over x, simplifying that expression between minus one and one.
I now plug in the end points, so it's minus one over one minus minus one over minus one.
We're setting a record here for the most minus signs in an expression. That simplifies to
minus one, and that's a triple minus sign, so that's still minus minus one minus one
equals minus two. Whoa, whoa, whoa. I have a negative answer here, but this is an error
problem. We're finding the area under that positive curve between minus one and one,
and we're getting a negative answer. Something's wrong. What's wrong? Can you think? Can
you see a problem here? What's going wrong here? Well, I hope you say to yourself, wait
a minute, professor, that function is not continuous on the interval minus one to one.
It's broken. It's not defined at zero, and all the theorems we've been doing up to now
in these fundamental theorem of calculus, et cetera, require continuity. In fact, here's
the picture of that function. One over x squared sort of goes off to plus infinity as you get
nearer and nearer to the origin, and what we were looking at in this problem was the
integral from minus one to one, and we were crossing a discontinuity, and when that happens,
you basically are breaking all the rules, and you can't expect things to turn out right,
and they didn't. Things were wrong. So, moral of the story here, when applying the fundamental
theorem of calculus, make sure your function is continuous on the interval that you're
considering, a to b. Otherwise, some really crazy things can happen. So, I think I'll
call an end to this lecture. We've now looked at the fundamental theorem of calculus and
the second fundamental theorem of calculus, and we're at the point now where to use the
first fundamental theorem of calculus, we have to know how to calculate antiderivatives.
So, next time we'll look at that very difficult question. How do you find antiderivatives
of fairly complicated functions? In general, it's more difficult than differentiation,
and I look forward next time to showing you some skills in finding antiderivatives. Thank
you very much.
