Hello again, and welcome to our lecture on integration by substitution.
We've seen in the last few lectures that in order to find definite integrals, we have
to find antiderivatives, that's how the fundamental theorem of calculus works.
And so finding antiderivatives is an important goal in calculus courses.
And today we're going to look at one of the techniques that's fairly straightforward for
finding antiderivatives.
It's actually based on the chain rule.
The chain rule you remember was for finding derivatives.
So now we'll kind of do it backwards and use it to find antiderivatives.
That said, I want to make sure we're clear that calculating derivatives in my mind is
a pretty easy task given that we have all those rules for derivatives.
On the other hand, finding integrals, finding antiderivatives really does take a lot more
work.
And that's why we'll have a lecture today devoted to a technique for finding some antiderivatives.
But before I start on this integration by substitution, let's recall the fundamental
theorem of calculus.
Remember if you have a continuous function on a closed interval a, b, and if g is an
antiderivative of that function f, in other words g' equals f, then the definite integral
from a to b of f of x dx is nothing more than g of b minus g of a.
So again, the goal, how do you find these antiderivatives g?
Here we go.
Let's do some simple examples and you'll see how this is going to go.
The derivative of x cubed over 3 is of course x squared.
And hence the antiderivative of x squared must be x cubed over 3 plus an arbitrary constant.
We've seen this before.
Basically every derivative formula gives rise to a corresponding integral formula.
Let's look at another example.
The derivative of sine of x squared is cosine of x squared times the inside derivative 2x.
That's the chain rule.
So what does that say about the antiderivative of cosine x squared times 2x?
Well it must be sine of x squared plus an arbitrary constant.
Again, a derivative formula gives rise to a corresponding integral formula.
Now let's see how substitution works.
Suppose you were just presented with the problem I just did.
Suppose you were asked, what is the antiderivative of cosine x squared times 2x?
How would you approach that?
How could you find the antiderivative of that fairly complicated function?
Well here's the technique.
Replace the x squared with a new variable.
Let me call it u.
And so u is x squared and the derivative of u is then 2x.
And using this differential notation that we've talked about earlier, du is then 2x dx.
Now look back at the original problem.
We had cosine x squared times 2x dx.
I can take all those terms involving x and replace them with terms involving the variable
u.
The cosine x squared becomes cosine u.
In other words, u replaces x squared.
And now the magic part, 2x dx is precisely the derivative of u du.
So that fairly complicated integral compactifies into a very simple problem.
What is the antiderivative of cosine u with respect to the variable u?
That's easy, that's sine of u plus a constant.
And now return to the original variable and you have a final answer of sine of x squared
plus a constant.
And that's the same answer we had previously.
So you see the trick here, get rid of the complicated variable like x squared by renaming
it u and then hopefully things will work out.
Now that said, that previous problem was cosine x squared times 2x.
Suppose you didn't have the 2x there.
This problem, cosine x squared, the integral of cosine x squared, looks simpler doesn't
it?
It looks smaller.
It's much harder it turns out.
In fact, it's basically impossible to find the antiderivative of cosine of x squared
using the elementary functions of calculus.
This is one of the reasons why anti-differentiation or integration is so complicated.
Let's do some more examples.
Suppose you have the antiderivative of x cubed plus 1 all squared times 3x squared dx.
So we want to find the antiderivative of that function inside the integral side.
Now one way to do it would be to multiply it out, but that would take a lot of arithmetic.
And by the way, if I had changed it to x cubed plus 1 to the eighth power or something,
it would be much more complicated.
So here we go.
We will now replace the variable x cubed plus 1 or the expression x cubed plus 1 with
the variable u.
I'll replace what I like to call the ugly rule, the thing that's kind of most complicated
in the expression, replace that with u.
The derivative is then 3x squared, and we have sitting in front of our eyes 3x squared
dx in the original problem.
So I can substitute everybody into the new variable u.
The original problem was x cubed plus 1 all squared times 3x squared dx.
That becomes the integral of u squared du.
You see how that simplified so nicely?
We were very fortunate to have the du in the original problem.
Okay, what's the antiderivative of u squared?
It's just u cubed over 3 plus a constant.
And again, go back to the original variable, which of course is x cubed plus 1 all cubed
over 3.
Good.
And by the way, on all these problems, you can of course check your answer by differentiating
the answer, and you'll end up with the original integrand.
Here's a little study tip.
Make sure you leave your final answer in these integration problems in the original variable.
In that last problem I just did, we obtained as an intermediate step that the antiderivative
was u cubed over 3 plus a constant.
That's incorrect to leave it that way.
You must go back and substitute back the expression for u in terms of x, which of course is then
x cubed plus 1 all cubed over 3 plus your constant.
Okay, let's make it slightly more difficult.
How about the integral of x times x squared plus 1 to the seventh power dx?
Again, you could multiply this out, but multiplying something to the seventh power is very unpleasant,
so we will use integration by substitution.
What should u be?
Well u wants to be x squared plus 1, and hence its derivative would be 2x dx, but I'm missing
the 2.
Hmm, what can I do?
Well 2 is a constant.
So I'm going to multiply and divide by 2 before I start doing the problem, and that
way I'll introduce the 2x dx by just this arithmetic trick.
So the original problem, x times the quantity x squared plus 1 to the seventh power, becomes
the integral of x squared plus 1 to the seventh power, 1 half times 2x dx.
So a 2 and a 1 half get introduced, and now factor the 1 half outside the integral sign.
You're allowed to factor constants outside the integral sign, and we have a new problem.
What's the integral of x squared plus 1 to the seventh power times 2x dx?
Well, we use substitution.
Let u be x squared plus 1, the derivative is 2x dx, which is sitting right in front
of us.
So our problem becomes 1 half u to the seventh du.
In other words, the integral of x squared plus 1 to the seventh, that part becomes u
to the seventh, and 2x dx becomes du.
And then there's a 1 half outside that kind of just walks along.
Well, what's the anti-derivative of u to the seventh?
That's trivial.
It's u to the eighth over 8.
So our problem is now 1 half u to the eighth over 8 plus a constant.
And now, of course, you have to go back to the original variable, 1 half x squared plus
1 to the eighth power divided by 8.
And you can simplify a little bit further, x squared plus 1 to the eighth over 16.
And of course, in every stage, plus our arbitrary constant.
Good.
So that trick was multiply and divide by 2.
Stick in the desired constant to make the du work out.
A warning here.
You can't do that with variables.
You can't, for example, multiply a variable inside your integral sign and then pull it
outside as well.
That's just against the rules.
That's not a theorem.
If that were true, integration would be a lot easier because you could pull everybody
outside.
You can only pull constants outside the integral sign.
So be careful about that.
OK, good.
I hope we're sort of getting the idea now of integration by substitution, converting
a problem to a new problem involving a different variable.
And hopefully, that new problem is easier.
Here's another example for you to ponder.
What's the anti-derivative of the square root of 2x minus 1?
It's not obvious, is it?
Can you think of a function off the top of your head whose derivative is the square root
of 2x minus 1?
I can't.
But watch how substitution works.
Let's let u be 2x minus 1.
du is 2 dx.
Hence the square root of 2x minus 1 becomes the square root of u, and that dx in the original
problem is nothing more than du divided by 2.
So my original problem, integral square root 2x minus 1 dx, becomes the integral square
root of u times du over 2.
Bring the 1 half outside, and you have the integral of u to the 1 half.
Oh, that's the power rule.
It becomes 1 half times u to the 3 halves divided by 3 halves plus your constant.
And now you do a little bit of simplification with those fractions.
The 2s cancel, and you get 1 third u to the 3 halves plus a constant.
And now you know you have to go back to x land, as I like to call it, instead of being
in u land.
So the final answer is 1 third 2x minus 1 to the 3 halves plus a constant.
Remember, you can always check your answers with integration.
Integration is a lot more difficult than differentiation, but it has a good side to
it as well.
Once you're finished with an integral problem, you can check your answer by differentiating
that answer, and hopefully coming up with the original integrand.
In that previous problem, we integrated square root of 2x minus 1 and obtained the following
answer, 1 third 2x minus 1 to the 3 halves plus a constant.
Let's check that answer by differentiating.
So the derivative of 1 third 2x minus 1 to the 3 halves plus a constant equals, well,
there's a 1 third, it just stands there, and now we do the power rule.
It's 3 halves, 2x minus 1 to the 1 half, and the chain rule.
You see how the chain rule is really what integration by substitution is all about?
A 2 pops out at the end.
And then everybody cancels.
The 2s cancel, the 3s cancel, and you're left with the square root of 2x minus 1 as desired.
Isn't that nice?
A fairly difficult integral problem, but checking it was pretty easy.
All we had to do was differentiate our answer using the chain rule.
Well, good, good.
I hope we're comfortable now with the idea of substitution.
So suppose your friend comes up to you and says, hey, which problem would you prefer
to try to solve?
Do you prefer the integral of the square root of x cubed plus 1, or do you prefer the more
complicated problem, integral x squared times the square root of x cubed plus 1?
So the first problem looks small.
It's just a square root of something.
The second problem is the same square root, but an extra x squared has been thrown in.
Which problem do you like better?
Which problem would you prefer to do on an examination?
By the way, when I teach calculus, I do this all the time.
I ask students on a problem to do one and only one of the following two problems.
And hopefully they'll choose the one that's easy.
In this case, which one is easier?
What do you think?
Well, it turns out the second one is easier because, look, if you let you be x cubed plus
1, that's the stuff inside the square root sign, then du is 3x squared dx.
And I've got the x squared already.
All I'm missing is a 3.
So I'd put a 3 in there and divide by 3 outside.
So that second problem can be done.
The first one, boy, I'm not sure how to do that.
In fact, I know you can't do it.
Because it's impossible.
It doesn't have an antiderivative among all the functions we've learned to love in mathematics.
So I'd hope you'd select the second one.
Here's another one.
You're taking a test.
And Professor Edwards says, do the first one or do the second one?
The first one says the integral of tangent to the eighth times secant squared.
And the second one looks easier, it's smaller.
It says tangent to the eighth.
Which one do you like?
Well, let's think about it.
What if you selected in the first problem u to be tangent?
So we would have u to the eighth, tangent to the eighth.
And what's the derivative of u?
What's the derivative of tangent?
Ah, the derivative of tangent is secant squared.
And there it is.
We've got the secant squared in the problem.
That first problem is actually quite easy.
The answer is tangent to the ninth over nine plus a constant.
Wow, that was pretty easy.
How about that second one?
Not so obvious.
That one, by the way, the second one can be done using some techniques called trigonometric
integrals.
And it's a chapter in many, many calculus books.
It's a problem that by hand would take probably a half an hour.
It's a difficult problem, but it's not impossible, as in the previous example.
Good.
Now, we were doing integration by substitution and finding antiderivatives.
Well, sometimes you're dealing with definite integrals.
In other words, you're dealing with a problem that has the endpoints.
You're finding the integral from 2 to 5 or from 7 to 12.
Substitution works also for problems like this.
And I'd like to talk about an example and show you two ways of proceeding.
And then you can take your pick as to which is the easier way in a particular problem.
Let's look at the integral from 0 to 2 of 3x squared times the square root of x cubed
plus 1.
Now I hope you're saying to yourself, I could do this as follows.
I could find the antiderivative of 3x squared times the square root of x cubed plus 1 using
substitution.
Let me tell you who the characters would be.
U would be x cubed plus 1.
That's the thing inside the radical.
Du would be 3x squared dx, and I've rigged the problem so that it's right there in front
of us.
It doesn't take any work, not even any massaging.
So this would be a fairly straightforward problem.
You would find that antiderivative, and then you would plug in the endpoints, and you'd
get the right answer.
That would work fine.
But let me show you a second way that you might prefer.
And it's the following.
Do the same substitution.
U is x cubed plus 1, du is 3x squared dx, and now change the endpoints of the definite
integral into the new variable u.
In other words, change the entire problem from x's all the way over to u's.
Even the endpoints will be changed now.
Here we go.
X starts at 0.
That's the lower limit of integration.
X was 0.
Well, u is equal to x cubed plus 1, so u would be 0 cubed plus 1 or 1.
That's the new lower limit of integration.
X ends at 2.
So u becomes 2 cubed plus 1 or 9.
So in u-land, when I change over to the u-variable, my limits are going to be 1 to 9.
And now let's change the integrand into u-variables.
The square root of x cubed plus 1 becomes the square root of u or u to the 1 half, and
the 3x squared dx becomes du.
So we're left with the following problem completely in the u-variable.
From 1 to 9, u to the 1 half du.
It's as if we were given another problem.
In a sense, you can forget the old problem.
Let's solve this one.
It's pretty easy.
The anti-derivative is u to the 3 halves divided by 3 halves between the limits of integration
1 to 9.
I'll flip the fraction up 2 thirds, and now I'll evaluate it first at 9.
9 to the 3 halves is the square root of 9 or 3 cubed, i.e. 27, minus 1 to the 3 halves,
which of course is 1.
So the final answer is 2 thirds times 27 minus 1 or 20, excuse me, 26 times 2 over 3 or 52
over 3.
And that's the answer to the original problem as well.
Now let's look a little closer at this.
This is kind of an interesting observation I'm going to make here.
We had two problems here.
First we had the original problem using the x-variable, and that was a certain area under
a curve because the function's non-negative.
And then we had a new problem in the u-variable, and that's another area problem.
And in both cases the area is 52 over 3, the final answer we got.
So the area under the original curve, x cubed plus 1 square rooted times 3x squared between
0 and 2, is precisely the same area as under the square root function between 1 and 9.
Let me show you a couple of pictures here.
On one picture you'll see the original function on the interval from 0 to 2, and on the other
diagram you see the square root function on the interval 1 to 9.
And what we've just observed is they have the same area.
The integrals don't look alike, but they both calculate to be the same answer, which
is the area under those curves.
Great.
Okay, so we're comfortable, I think, with integration by substitution.
It turns out that using substitution you can prove some very interesting properties about
even and odd functions.
We're going to omit these proofs, but they'll be self-evident as I show you some examples.
I'd like to start with the following problem.
Let's look at the function x to the fourth between minus 3 and 3.
X to the fourth between minus 3 and 3.
Here's a picture of x to the fourth on that interval.
And suppose you had to integrate from minus 3 to 3.
Can you see a shortcut?
Well x to the fourth is an even function.
It's symmetric about the y-axis.
So the area, or if you want the integral from minus 3 to 0, is the same as that from 0 to
3.
There's a symmetry here in the picture.
So to find the problem to calculate that integral, I can calculate it from 0 to 3 and
double my answer.
So here we go.
The integral from minus 3 to 3 of x to the fourth dx is twice the integral of 0 to 3
x to the fourth dx.
And now we integrate that.
It's 2 times x to the 5 over 5 between 0 and 3.
And then you plug in the numbers and it turns out you get 486 over 5.
That's the area under that curve.
And I calculated it by calculating the right-hand side and doubling my answer.
How about some odd functions?
Remember odd functions are symmetric across the origin.
Let's calculate the integral from minus 3 to 3, x cubed dx.
Now if you look at the picture of what's going on here, x cubed is, of course, an odd function.
And the integral from minus 3 to 0 is going to be negative.
And the integral between 0 and 3 is going to be positive.
And in fact, they'll cancel each other out.
The final answer is going to be 0.
Let's do the calculations.
The integral from minus 3 to 3 of x cubed dx is the same as minus 3 to 0 of x cubed
dx plus the integral from 0 to 3 of x cubed dx.
And then we can anti-differentiate these two.
The first one is x to the fourth over 4 between minus 3 and 0.
And the second one is x to the fourth over 4 between 0 and 3.
And these two cancel each other, giving a final answer of 0.
One of them is negative, one of them is positive, and they cancel each other.
What are our conclusions here from what we just did?
Suppose you have a function that is integrable on the interval minus a to a.
Assume it's a continuous function on the interval minus a to a.
If your function is even, symmetric with respect to the y-axis,
then the integral from minus a to a f of x dx is the same as twice the integral
from 0 to a f of x dx.
That's by the symmetry of the picture.
And if your function is odd, then the integral from minus a to a f of x dx
is 0.
Good.
Now, let's step back a minute.
We've been doing lots of anti-derivatives and lots of definite integrals.
Remember that a definite integral can be positive, negative, or even 0.
We just saw one that's 0 a few seconds ago.
But keep in mind that if you're finding area, that is always non-negative.
To go back to that previous x cubed problem, notice that the area bounded
by these two curves, or the two pieces of x cubed, is going to be a positive area.
The one on the right is a certain area, and the one on the left is also a certain area
equal to the one on the right.
The integral is 0, but if you had to find the areas of these two regions,
you'd have to add up both the areas.
It would be some positive number.
So area and definite integral are kind of different.
Area is always non-negative, but integrals could be negative.
Good.
Let's do some practice here at the end.
What's the integral from minus pi to pi of sine x?
Can you do it without finding an antiderivative?
Well, yeah, sine is an odd function, and we're on a symmetric interval, so the answer is 0.
Here's a picture of sine x, and on the interval minus pi to pi, you see that the two regions
kind of cancel each other in terms of the definite integral.
To go back to our original definition of integration, when you form the rectangles,
on the right they'll have a positive height, but on the left-hand side, the rectangles
will be below the x-axis, and the function will be negative there.
How about cosine?
How about the integral of cosine x from minus pi over 2 to pi over 2?
Here's a picture of that.
It's one arch of the cosine function.
Well, to integrate that, all you have to do is recognize that it's even and multiply
two times the integral from 0 to pi over 2 of cosine x dx, and that's 2 sine x between
0 and pi over 2, which is 2 sine pi over 2 minus sine 0.
Sine of pi over 2 is 1, so the answer is 2.
Let's look at that picture again.
There's an arch of the cosine function.
Its area is two units, two square units.
I've always found that interesting.
Trig functions are kind of complicated, but here we have the area under an arch of the
trigonometric function cosine, and the area is so simple, it's two.
It's not something involving pi and stuff like that, it's just two.
Good.
Okay, we've finished with integration by substitution.
I hope you agree it's pretty difficult.
It requires a little bit of work to find anti-derivatives, and for this reason, computers and graphing
calculators are used a lot for finding definite integrals.
Next time, we'll look at a method for approximating definite integrals using computer programs.
It's very similar to how we used rectangles to develop the Riemann sums originally when
we looked at the definite integral.
Again, I hope you enjoyed this lecture, and I'll see you next time.
Thank you.
