Hi, welcome to our lecture on approximation methods for definite integrals.
We've seen how the fundamental theorem of calculus permits us to evaluate definite integrals
by finding appropriate antiderivatives of the integrand.
But I think you'll agree with me that finding these antiderivatives can be quite difficult
if not impossible.
We learned last time about integration by substitution, and that permitted us to find
some antiderivatives, but still there are many, many integral problems that are extremely
difficult to do using the fundamental theorem of calculus.
There are other methods for finding antiderivatives besides integration by substitution.
If you look at a calculus textbook, you'll see an entire chapter devoted to finding antiderivatives
by various methods.
You'll see methods like integration by parts, partial fractions.
You'll see trigonometric substitution.
There's a whole list of complicated algebraic methods for finding antiderivatives.
Fortunately, the use of these methods and their necessity has lessened now that we have graphing
calculators and a lot of good technology.
We're able now using computers to calculate many antiderivatives without resorting to
these sort of esoteric methods.
That said, later on in this course, we will look briefly at a couple of these methods
for finding antiderivatives, integration by parts and trigonometric integrals.
But that's coming later.
Today I'd rather focus on what we like to call numerical integration, approximation
techniques.
Today we'll be dealing with definite integrals, integrals that have endpoints.
These came about through the area problem.
To evaluate them with the fundamental theorem of calculus, we need to find the antiderivatives.
Instead of doing that, we're going to use or develop some computer techniques, some
practical applied techniques, approximation techniques that will give us a good approximation
of a definite integral.
These are very, very practical methods.
Many, many computers and graphing calculators have these methods built in.
Let me again repeat why we need to even study approximation techniques for definite integrals.
Some definite integrals don't even have antiderivatives among the elementary functions that we have
learned to love in mathematics.
For instance, the integral from 0 to pi of sine of x squared dx cannot be solved using
the fundamental theorem of calculus.
Try as you might.
You will not find a function whose derivative is sine of x squared.
I like to pose this problem to my calculus classes.
Every year I'll say I'll give you $1,000 if you can find a function whose derivative
is sine of x squared.
That's equivalent to saying, of course, can you find the antiderivative of sine of x squared?
Here's another one, the integral from 0 to 1 of the square root of 1 minus x cubed.
It does not have an elementary antiderivative.
So to calculate that, you have to do something else.
Also, I alluded earlier to some of these more esoteric methods for finding antiderivatives.
You sometimes run across a problem where, yes, you can find the antiderivative, but
it's ugly and gigantic and hard to work with.
To give you an example, the antiderivative of x squared sine x is the following long
function, minus x squared cosine x plus 2x sine x plus 2 cosine x plus our arbitrary constant.
Wow.
How did you ever get that answer?
That's actually using something called integration by parts.
If you have a few extra hours, differentiate that answer I just gave you, and you will
come up with x squared sine x after about an hour, and it can get worse.
If I had changed the x squared to x to the eighth power, your answer would be a mile
long.
Well, not that much, but it would be a very large answer.
So what's the idea of approximate integration?
Again, we're going to be dealing with definite integrals now.
You remember back when we were developing the definite integral, in fact, let's focus
on the area problem.
Here's how we first confronted that problem.
We said, suppose you have a curve, and let's assume it's above the x-axis just to make
things simpler, between A and B. How would you find the area under that curve?
Between A and B. Well, here's how we did it.
We said, divide it up with vertical rectangles.
The width is delta x, a very small width, and the heights are determined either by the
left-hand endpoint of the sub-interval or the right-hand endpoint or the midpoint.
It doesn't matter.
And then you add up the area of those rectangles, and that would give you a good approximation
of the area under the curve.
And in fact, that's a perfectly reasonable approximation technique.
It's called the rectangle rule, and it's approximate a definite integral with rectangles.
For instance, if you took 100 rectangles under your curve, you'd probably get a pretty good
approximation.
And if you wanted to make it better, take 1,000 rectangles.
Computers can add those up very, very quickly.
Now that said, we can do better than rectangles.
Let me show you a picture.
Here is a curve.
I made it positive again, so we'll sort of think area, but all of this is fine if the
curve is below the x-axis.
There's no difference in the theory here, but it's easier to understand if we think of
it as being above the x-axis.
So we're between A and B, and we want to approximate the area under that curve with some kind of
technique that will permit us to add up the rectangles and get an approximation.
Well, as I said, we can do better than rectangles.
Suppose you divide up the interval from A to B into little pieces.
I'm going to call these pieces x sub 0, that's the point A, the beginning point, and then
there's x sub 1, x sub 2, dot, dot, dot, out to the last point, x sub n, which is the right
hand end point B. And the width of each of these intervals, these sub intervals, is
delta x, a small horizontal distance.
Now instead of forming rectangles, let's do better.
Let's form trapezoids.
So at x sub 0, you move vertically and you bump into the curve, and then at x sub 1,
that's the first point over, you go up to the curve and bump into it, and then you connect
those two points where you hit the curve, and you've got a trapezoid now, don't you?
And that looks a lot better than a rectangle.
So you form these trapezoids, joining the points along the curve, and you have a set
of trapezoids.
This is the heart of the trapezoid rule that we will see in a moment.
But before we get our hands dirty with the trapezoid rule, let me just add that there
are lots of even better ways than the trapezoids.
There's something called Simpson's rule, which is instead of using trapezoids, you use
little parabolas.
So parabolas kind of can wiggle, and they can fit into that curve a lot better.
They give even a better approximation.
And there's a whole world of these approximations.
Entire textbooks are written about approximation techniques for definite integrals.
Let's see how the trapezoid rule works now explicitly.
Let's go back to our picture.
We've subdivided the interval from A to B into our N equal segments of length delta
x, and then we've formed the heights going up and bumping into the curve, and we have
now a set of trapezoids.
So more formally, if we have a continuous function on our interval AB, as I said, we
partition the interval into N subintervals of width delta x, which would be B minus A,
the entire length of the interval divided by N. That would be the length of a delta
x.
So you subdivide the interval AB, and then you select these points at every distance
delta x.
The first point is A, or x sub zero, then it's x sub one, x sub two.
Keep going to x sub N, which is B, the right hand endpoint.
Now the trapezoidal rule says form those trapezoids and find their area.
Add up the areas of all those trapezoids.
Now here's the formula you get if you do that.
It's not difficult to see why this formula arises from adding up areas of trapezoids.
The proof is in, or the derivation I would say, is in every calculus text it's not difficult.
It's basically adding up a lot of trapezoids.
Here's the formula.
The definite integral from A to B of f of x dx is approximately, this is an approximation,
B minus A over two N times the quantity, and now we're going to evaluate the function
at lots of these subintervals, f of x sub zero plus twice f of x sub one plus twice
f of x sub two, and you keep going with twos until you get to the second to last point,
which is two times f of x sub N minus one, and then the final point doesn't have a two
in front of it.
It's just f of x sub N.
So the coefficients go one, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, one.
That's how they go.
You add up the function values, one times the first one, twice all the middle guys, and
then one times the end one.
And that will give you an approximation of the definite integral.
Now how accurate is this approximation?
Well it's not going to be very good if N is a small number like four subintervals or
six subintervals.
You can imagine that it's not going to be very accurate, but with a computer you could
have a hundred or a thousand subintervals, add this up, and you get a good approximation.
In other words, as N increases or equivalently as the delta x width decreases, your approximation
gets better and better.
As I said, the derivation, the formal derivation of this is in any calculus text.
Let me add that the trapezoid rule works for any function.
It doesn't have to be a non-negative function.
It doesn't have to be above the x-axis.
The function should be continuous, of course, but it doesn't have to be necessarily an area
problem.
It's still the same formula.
And I think you'll agree if you've had some experience writing computer programs, this
is not a difficult program to write.
A lot of times the booklets for graphing calculators have this program in the appendix because it's
so useful, and people sometimes program it into their graphing calculator.
Let's do an example to see how to use that formula.
It seems somewhat theoretical.
Let's see an example.
Let's find the area under one arch of the sine curve.
That's between zero and pi.
Here's a picture of the sine curve, and I'm going to use four subintervals.
So I start at zero, and I go to pi over four, pi over two, three pi over four, and pi.
Those are my four subintervals.
I draw the vertical line, which basically I'm forming the trapezoids.
Good.
What does the trapezoid rule say about this problem?
Well, n is four, so delta x is pi minus zero.
That's the difference in the endpoints divided by four, or pi over four.
So here comes the trapezoid rule.
The integral from zero to pi, sine x dx, is approximately pi minus zero.
That's b minus a over two n, so over two times four times the quantity, and now I'm going
to add up the summation here.
Sine of zero, that's the first point, then it's two times sine of pi over four, two times
sine pi over two, two times sine three pi over four, and then the last one is just sine
of pi.
Remember the coefficients, one, two, two, two, one.
And now we evaluate these coefficients, or these expressions.
Inside we have pi over eight, and then it's times the quantity zero, plus, well what's
sine pi over four, it's square root of two over two, so two times sine pi over four is
square root of two, sine of pi over two is one, so the next term is just two, and then
square root of two again, because sine three pi over four is also square root of two over
two, and sine of pi is of course zero.
And now we add this up, we get pi times one plus square root of two, all divided by four,
which is approximately 1.896, okay, I just put that in my calculator, good.
Is that answer too big or too small compared to the real answer?
Well, look at the picture, the trapezoids are underneath the curve, aren't they?
So I've underestimated the area under one arch of the sine curve.
How can I do better?
Well, I could take more trapezoids, take more trapezoids.
For example, if I use eight trapezoids, I get the answer of 1.974, trust me on that.
With a calculator I could take a hundred trapezoids.
What's the exact answer to this problem?
Let's compare our approximations with the exact answer.
Well, you might remember that we once calculated the area under one arch of the cosine curve,
and our answer was two.
The same thing is going to happen here, but let's go ahead and do it.
The integral from zero to pi sine x dx is, well, find an anti-derivative, that's minus
cosine x, between zero and pi, plug in pi and then plug in zero.
So it's minus cosine pi minus a minus cosine zero, again a lot of minus signs, and cosine
of pi is minus one, so we get one, and then cosine zero is one and the two minus signs
cancel, so it's one plus one or two.
So our answers are close.
Remember our answers were 1.896 and 1.974.
They're getting closer and closer to two.
Good, so we could do the area under one arch of the sine curve with the trapezoid rule,
and I think you see how it works now.
It's not too difficult, except there's a lot of arithmetic in adding up those terms.
That said, you wouldn't use the trapezoid on that problem in real life, would you?
As you know the anti-derivative of sine x, but how about if I had given you zero to pi
sine of x squared dx?
I've pointed out earlier that we don't know an anti-derivative to sine of x squared, so
we're stuck.
We can't use the fundamental theorem of calculus, but we could use the trapezoid rule.
I did it on my calculator, and I got the answer 0.77265.
I invite you to take out a graphing calculator, plug in the function sine of x squared and
integrate it from zero to pi.
Either use the trapezoid rule or the built-in integrator and see what you get.
Your answer might be slightly different depending on what approximation technique you use.
This is one of the interesting aspects about this whole field of approximation techniques.
There are errors committed, and one has to figure out how close is the answer.
What is the error, and that is a whole field unto itself.
Let me make some notes here before we do a more practical example.
As I said earlier, most graphing utilities and computer systems have built-in integrators,
programs that do approximate integration.
They don't tell you how accurate their answer is.
They kind of just spit out an answer, and there it is, and you aren't sure how close
it is to the real answer.
That theory of accuracy is quite difficult.
Fortunately for us, all we really need to know, I think, to be successful in elementary
calculus is to understand and use the trapezoid rule.
Now here's a little warning.
We've seen problems like this earlier.
You better make sure your function is continuous when you integrate it.
For example, what happens if you try to find the following definite integral from minus
one to one, one over x squared dx, minus one to one, one over x squared dx?
Before I tell you what my calculator gave me, do you see the problem here?
Yeah, the interval is minus one to one, and the function is not continuous on that interval,
is it?
It's not defined at zero.
Here's a picture of that function.
It goes off to plus infinity as x gets closer and closer to zero, so we don't really know
what this integral is going to be.
Now despite that, I was playing around and just had my calculator try to solve that problem,
try to integrate that.
Here's the answer it gave me.
One point, zero, six, nine, six, times 10 to the 14th power.
Hello, what does that mean?
Obviously it's wrong.
I mean 10 to the 14th, is it?
The calculator didn't know what to do.
It was doing something like the trapezoid rule, but the trapezoid started getting taller
and taller, didn't they?
It couldn't handle it, and it kind of just gives back a garbage answer like this.
And again, I invite you to try this problem on your calculator.
Hopefully it would give some kind of error message saying, warning, the function you're
trying to integrate is not continuous.
As I said earlier, there are lots and lots of approximation techniques.
We've seen Riemann sums with left endpoints, right endpoints, midpoints, trapezoidal rule.
There's a Simpson's rule that's in most calculus textbooks.
All of these are difficult by hand, but very easy to do with technology.
So let's do a problem now that I think you'll find very, very interesting where the trapezoidal
rule is pretty much the best way to do it.
Imagine the following situation.
You have a plot of land, and I'll show you a picture of it.
It's bounded by two roads, and the roads meet at a right angle at the origin.
And then there's a river along the other side of the land.
So it's a piece of land that has a right angle, and then there's a river, and you can sort
of see that river flowing along.
How much area do we have in that piece of land?
Now we don't know the formula that gives the function for the river, do we?
But suppose you do the following.
Suppose you take measurements from the x-axis up to the river.
In other words, we're going to walk over at distances of 100 meters.
So you start here at zero, and you measure how far it is to the river.
And you step 100 meters over and measure again how far it is to the river.
And you keep doing that until you get to the other side, which is at 1,000 meters.
So here's the table of values that you obtain in this example.
We suppose this is what it is.
I've bought this piece of land.
I want to know how many square meters I have, and this is how I determine it.
Every 100 meters, I take a measurement.
So let's imagine that at zero, it's 125 meters to the river.
And then at 100, it's still 125 meters.
But then when I get to 200, it's now 120.
The river's getting closer.
At 300, let's say it's 112.
At 400, it's 90.
At 500, it's 90.
At 600, it's say 95.
And then it's 88, 75, 35.
And finally, if you look at the picture, when I'm at 1,000, the river now hits the road
there, and the distance is zero.
So can I now figure out the area bounded by the river and the two perpendicular roads?
Well, yeah.
You can use the trapezoid rule on this problem, and yet you never really know what the function
is, do you?
You don't know what the curve is that gives the boundary of the river, but you don't care
in the trapezoid rule.
What you really need is the heights, the vertical distances up to the river.
Those are the function values at our x points, zero, 100, 200.
So here would be the answer.
The area would be approximately b minus a over 2n, that's the trapezoid rule, times
the quantity, f of x0.
And we know what that is, that's x0 is zero, and the height was 125 there.
Twice f of x1 plus dot, dot, dot, twice f of xn minus 1 plus 1 times f of xn.
Let's fill in the characters.
b minus a is 1,000 because this went across 1,000 meters divided by two times, well, how
many subintervals did I have here?
I had 10 subintervals when I did this measurement.
So it's 1,000 over 2 times 10.
And then I start adding up the vertical distances, 125 plus 2 times the next one, which also
was 125, plus 2 times the next one.
We keep going, I won't write them all out, 2 times the second, the last one, the second,
the last one was 35, and then zero was the last measurement, the final measurement.
And I have this string of numbers, and trust me, I can add them up and multiply by the
outside factor, and I get approximately 89,250 square meters.
So isn't that neat?
I've measured approximately the area of my piece of land bounded by a river and a couple
of roads, and I did it by an approximation technique.
I never really knew what the function was, and yet I still could get an answer.
And it's kind of nice.
Let's pause here and make sure we understand about how the trapezoid rule works.
Here's a practice question for you.
Suppose you have a function, continuous, of course, that's concave upward on the interval
0, 2.
Remember concave upward, it sort of goes like this, from 0 to 2, it's concave upward.
Good.
Would you expect the trapezoidal rule to yield an answer that was too large or too small
compared to the exact answer?
You're finding the area under this concave upward curve between 0 and 2.
You apply the trapezoidal rule to it.
Is your answer too big or too small?
Well, look at the picture.
There's a concave curve on an interval, and look how the trapezoids fit that curve.
They're on top of the curve, aren't they, because of the concavity.
It's concave upward, so the trapezoids are on top.
So you would expect the trapezoidal rule to yield an answer that's too big.
Good.
Good.
Okay, we're at a good stopping point now in our course.
We've done the differential calculus, and now we've pretty much completed the introduction
to the integral calculus.
We've defined what a definite integral is, we've defined anti-derivatives, we've done
the fundamental theorem of calculus, we've talked about how to find anti-derivatives,
and then we've kind of today looked at numerical integration, what to do if you can't find
an anti-derivative.
Good.
We're now going to turn, in the next few lectures, to an entirely new class of functions.
These are the logarithmic functions and the exponential functions.
You might remember these from your algebra courses you took.
You might have studied the logarithms to base ten, or exponential functions like two
to the x, or ten to the x.
Well, we're going to look at those functions ourselves.
But instead of having log base ten, or the function ten to the x, we're going to have
a different base.
It's not going to be log base ten.
It's going to be log base something else.
So I invite you to continue the next few lectures, and at that time I'll let you know what that
new base is.
It's a very famous number in mathematics.
And as we do these lectures, the logarithmic and exponential functions, we'll see really
some interesting applications, issues like radioactivity, how you do carbon dating, issues
like population growth, compound interest.
All these come into play when we deal with the logarithmic functions and the exponential
functions.
So I look forward to beginning this new set of lectures with you.
And until then, thank you very much.
