Hello again, and welcome to our lecture on the natural logarithmic function.
Last time we finished up a series of lectures on the so-called integral calculus.
We looked at antiderivatives and then the very famous and old area problem.
We then presented the definite integral and discovered that you could calculate definite
integrals using the fundamental theorem of calculus if you could find appropriate antiderivatives.
And then we looked a little bit at a method called integration by substitution, which
helps us find antiderivatives, and we looked at some numerical integration, some approximation
techniques.
Well, today we're going to start a new topic.
We're going to present a family of new functions.
These will be the natural logarithmic function today, and then in the following lectures
we'll talk about the exponential function and also some functions related to those two.
The good news is these functions will be familiar to you from your pre-calculus days.
But what's interesting is we'll define these functions using calculus.
So it's kind of a neat interplay here, old pre-calculus functions that come to us via
calculus.
And as we go along, we'll see some applications to areas such as biology, geology, finance,
etc.
So let's begin by recalling the power rule for finding antiderivatives of polynomials.
In other words, what's the antiderivative of x to the nth power?
And we observed that the answer is x to the n plus 1 divided by n plus 1.
You raise the exponent by 1 and divide by what you raised it to.
That formula is true because if you differentiate the answer you come back to get x to the n.
But then we notice something sort of unfortunate.
That formula is not valid when n is minus 1 because you can't divide by 0 in mathematics.
So we don't have an antiderivative for 1 over x.
That's the case when n is minus 1.
We do not know the antiderivative of 1 over x.
That's the bottom line.
So what do we do about this?
Well, we're going to define a new function whose antiderivative will be what we want.
In other words, we will define a function to solve this missing case.
Here's how we do it.
We're going to use the second fundamental theorem of calculus that we saw last time.
We're going to define a function.
I'm going to call it log of x, and the symbol is ln, log of x, and it's defined as follows.
It's defined using an integral.
It's the integral from 1 to x of the function 1 over t dt, and we define it for just positive
x.
You can think of this as being the area under the curve 1 over t from 1 out to x.
Now, given that definition, what's the derivative of our new function log x?
Well, remember the second fundamental theorem of calculus.
It said if you differentiate an integral, you get the function that's inside the integrand.
Now the integral has to be in the correct form.
It has to be a constant at the lower limit of integration and the variable x at the upper
limit, and that's what we have here.
So the derivative of our new function log x is 1 over x.
It's 1 over t, and you replace the t by the x, which is the upper limit of integration.
Wow.
We have a new function, and its derivative is 1 over x.
So let me pause here and ask you, if the derivative of log x is 1 over x, what's the antiderivative
of 1 over x?
Ah, that's the missing case.
It will be log x.
It's really curious how this works.
We're missing a case.
We can't find the antiderivative of 1 over x.
So what do we do?
We define a new function so that it works.
We make up a function such that the derivative of that function is 1 over x, and hence the
antiderivative of 1 over x is log x.
Here's the miracle.
This new function log x, which we define using an integral, behaves just like the old logarithms
you studied in precalculus.
Good.
But before we talk about some of those properties, et cetera, I'd like to look at this function
a little bit closer.
Remember, log x is defined to be the integral from 1 to x of 1 over t dt for x bigger than
0.
So the domain of the logarithm function is positive values of x.
Now, plug in 1 into this equation.
What's log of 1?
If you plug in 1, you get the integral from 1 to 1.
The upper limit would be 1, and of course, that's 0.
That's one of the properties of the definite integral.
So we know that the log of 1 is 0.
In other words, if I start to graph this new function called logarithm, I know it has an
intercept at 1, 0.
When x is 1, the y value is 0.
Let's look closer.
What's the derivative of our new function?
Well, the derivative was 1 over x by the second fundamental theorem of calculus.
And that is positive, isn't it?
1 over x is positive because x is positive.
So this function is increasing.
It has a positive derivative.
And look a little bit closer.
Suppose x is 1,000.
What's the slope of the curve when x is 1,000?
It would be 1 over 1,000, which is almost 0.
So the function's increasing, but as x gets larger, it doesn't increase quite as fast.
Good.
What's the second derivative?
Well, if the first derivative is 1 over x, you can then differentiate 1 over x to get
minus 1 over x squared, and that's the second derivative of our new function.
And that's always negative.
So this function is concave downward because its second derivative is negative.
Furthermore, if x is bigger than 1, log of x is greater than 0 because the integral would
be from 1 to a number greater than 1.
And that would be a positive area under the curve 1 over t from, say, 1 to 12.
So log of x is greater than 0 if x is bigger than 1, and a similar argument shows that
if x is between 0 and 1, log of x is less than 0.
So here's a graph of the natural logarithmic function.
That's what we call this log of x function, the natural logarithmic function.
Notice how the graph reflects what we just talked about.
Its intercept is at 1, 0.
It's increasing.
It's concave down, and as it increases, the rate of increase is not as great as it goes
out towards plus infinity.
And as you get nearer and nearer to x equals 0, the function goes down further and further.
Very large negative values.
The domain of the logarithmic function is all positive x.
The range is all real numbers.
Good.
Let me step back and talk about what we just did.
It's kind of unusual, I think, to define a function by an integral.
But it turns out this is a very common occurrence in upper level engineering and applied math
courses.
There are lots of functions that are defined in this funny way using an integral.
And more important, I think, for us, because the derivative of our new function is 1 over
x, the integral of 1 over x is log x.
The anti-derivative of 1 over x is log x plus our arbitrary constant, of course.
And that's the missing case.
That's the case that the power rule did not cover.
So now we can integrate x to the n for any n value.
Good.
Log rhythms have a very interesting history.
John Napier, who lived from 1550 to 1617, invented logarithms to help with multiplication
and division.
This is before Newton and Leibniz were finalizing calculus.
So logarithms really sort of had nothing to do with calculus.
They were used as a computational device, and they were usually in base 10.
That's probably the logarithm that you're comfortable with from your pre-calculus.
Log rhythms were very useful when I was a young student, because I was a student so
long ago in college that we didn't have graphing calculators.
We had to do everything either by hand or use something called a slide rule.
You can ask your grandparents about what a slide rule is.
But the principle of a slide rule is it converts problems that are multiplicative, multiplying
two numbers, into an addition problem.
And that's how a slide rule works, and we'll see that in a few minutes why slide rules
are based on logarithms.
And in fact, if you look at an old textbook in mathematics, say in calculus or pre-calculus,
you'll see at the back they'll have tables of logarithms for us to calculate logarithms.
And now with technology, we don't have those tables in textbooks anymore.
But I still think it's quite amazing that logarithms appear in calculus using this integral definition,
and yet they're just about the same thing that Napier invented for a completely different
reason.
It's kind of one of those miracles of mathematics, I think.
But here's one of the kickers.
For computational reasons, log base 10 is the popular base of logarithm.
That's what you probably studied in high school.
I think 10 because we have 10 fingers, or our number system is base 10.
But in college, in this natural logarithm function in calculus, the base is a number
called E. And I'd like in a moment to talk about the number E. It's a very famous number
and we'll play a big role in our calculus course.
But before we do that, let's remind ourselves of some of the properties of logarithms.
These are properties that hold for pre-calculus logarithms that you've seen before, but they
again hold for this new function, the natural logarithmic function.
So assume that x and y are positive, then the log of 1 is 0, we saw that earlier.
The log of a product is the sum of the logarithms.
That's why slide rules work basically, it converts products to sums.
The log of a quotient is the difference of the logarithms, isn't that interesting?
And here's another really interesting property.
If you have log of x to a power, I'll call the power a, you can motor that a down into
the front of the logarithm.
So log of x cubed is the same as 3 log x, isn't that an interesting property?
The proofs of these using our integral definition can be found in any calculus textbook.
Let's do some examples to manipulate these rules and see how they work.
For instance, can you simplify the expression log 8 minus log 2?
Well that's the same as log of 8 over 2, remember the log of a quotient is the difference
of the logarithms and log of 8 over 2 would be log 4.
Here's another very useful property.
What's the log of the square root of 3x plus 2?
Well the square root means take it to the one half power, so that's the same as log
of the quantity 3x plus 2 to the one half power, and now the one half can be brought
down in front by that property I pointed out a few minutes ago.
So that equals one half log 3x plus 2, good.
So you see how to manipulate logarithms using these properties.
Now if you have a calculator, you can punch in log 2 and you'll get an answer like 0.6932.
That's an approximation of log 2.
You can think of that as follows, remember how logarithm was defined, it's the area
under the curve 1 over t between 1 and x, well here it would be between 1 and 2.
You could find that area or approximate it using the trapezoid rule or an integrator
on your graphing utility.
However you do it, log 2 turns out to be approximately 0.6932.
And log of 3 turns out to be approximately 1.0986, and then you could calculate other
logarithm values, but I'm interested in these two for the following reason.
Log 2 is less than 1, log 3 is bigger than 1, that means there is some number, some special
number whose logarithm is exactly 1.
And it's between 2 and 3, isn't it?
It's between 2 and 3, because log 2 is less than 1, log 3 is bigger than 1, somebody's
in between there.
And that number is called E. E is going to be the base of our logarithms.
It's the unique number that satisfies the equation log of E is 1.
Let me show you a picture of what I'm talking about.
Here's that curve 1 over t, and remember how we defined the logarithm.
It was the integral from 1 to x, 1 over t dt.
Well let x be E, and E is that special number such that the area under the curve between
1 and E is exactly one unit.
That's how E is defined.
It's between 2 and 3, and if you have a calculator, it's built into every graphing utility, you'll
find out that E is approximately 2.7182818.
This is even an irrational number, it's not a fraction, it's an irrational number, much
like pi is an irrational number.
But again, it's built into all computers and graphing calculators because it plays such
an important role in mathematics.
Historically the symbol E was first used by a very famous mathematician named Leonard
Euler, and he wrote a letter to Goldbach in 1731 where he used this notation for E.
I'm not exaggerating when I say E is one of the most important numbers in all of mathematics.
It's much like pi, these are very important numbers.
In fact there's a very famous equation in math that links E and pi and I, I being the
square root of minus 1, wow, and that equation is E to the I pi, let me say it again, E to
the I pi equals minus 1.
That's an equation you would see if you went on and took a calculus course say the third
semester of calculus or a course in differential equations.
It's kind of an amazing equation in that it links three very important numbers, E, pi,
and the imaginary number square root of minus 1.
But fortunately that's not going to be important for this course in elementary calculus.
Okay, let's do some calculations.
We know that the derivative of log x is 1 over x, in fact that's why we defined it.
So that the derivative would be 1 over x.
That means that the derivative of log of a function, of a bigger function would be 1
over that function times the derivative of the function, that's the chain rule.
Let me show you some examples.
What's the derivative of logarithm of 2x?
Watch how we can do it.
It's log of something.
The derivative is 1 over that thing, so it's 1 over 2x times the inside derivative, the
chain rule.
So you get an extra 2 that pops out.
So it's 1 over 2x times 2 and the 2's cancel, you get 1 over x.
Let me show you another way of doing that same problem that you might find curious.
What's the derivative of log 2x?
Let me pre-process it beforehand by splitting the log of a product into the sum of logarithms.
So I'm asking what the derivative of log of 2 plus log of x is, the sum of those logarithms.
Well the derivative of log 2 is 0 because that's a constant and so the derivative of
log x is just 1 over x and we have the answer that we obtained earlier.
How about another more interesting example?
What's the derivative of x log x?
x times log x.
Ah, product rule.
So it's the first one, x times the derivative of the second which is 1 over x plus the second
function log x times the derivative of the first function which is just 1 and then you
simplify that to get 1 plus log x.
Let me show you a couple of examples now that often confuse students.
They almost look alike these two examples but they're quite different.
Let's find the derivative of log of x cubed.
What that means is first you have x cubed, that's the inside function and then you have
the logarithm of x cubed.
So here's one way of calculating it.
The 3 can move into the front by that logarithm property and so we're asking what's the derivative
of 3 log x and then that of course is 3 over x, 3 times the derivative of log x.
So it's 3 over x.
Now here's a different problem.
What's the derivative of log x all cubed?
This means the entire log x is cubed.
That's different from the previous problem.
How do we do this problem?
Well this is a power rule believe it or not.
It's something cubed and how do you do something cubed?
You do 3 times the thing squared so it's 3 times log x squared and then you must multiply
by the inside derivative which is the derivative of log x so that's 1 over x.
Way 1 over x pops out by the chain rule and our final answer is 3 log x squared over x.
Good.
Log rhythms will play a major role in what we do in the next few lectures.
One of the skills that will be important is to notice how they can help us calculate derivatives.
Let me show you an easy example first and then I'll show you a more interesting one.
Suppose you had to find the derivative of log of the square root of x plus 1.
Well I wouldn't recommend just differentiating it right away.
Do some massaging ahead of time.
The square root means one half power so that's log of the quantity x plus 1 to the one half
power and then move the one half into the front and we have to differentiate one half
of log of x plus 1.
Well that's pretty easy.
It's one half times the derivative of log of x plus 1 which is 1 over x plus 1.
The inside derivative is just 1 so that is the final answer.
It's 1 over 2 times the quantity x plus 1.
Now let me show you what I promised, a more interesting example and you'll see the power
of using log rhythms.
Let's find the derivative of x times the square root of x squared plus 1 and let's find the
derivative at a specific point say x equals 1.
Now you could differentiate this right away using the skills we learned earlier.
You notice that first of all it's a product rule, that's already kind of bad news and
then that second function in the product rule is going to be a chain rule isn't it?
So it's kind of ugly looking.
Let me show you how log rhythms can help us simplify this.
Take the original equation and apply the logarithmic function to both sides.
So we have log of the left, log y equals log of the right hand side and the log of that
big thing in brackets x times x squared plus 1 to the one half power can be split into
the sum of log rhythms.
It's log of the first one, log x plus and that second one I can also bring the exponent
down into the front so it's plus one half log of the quantity x squared plus 1.
Now differentiate.
This is implicit differentiation, something we studied many many lectures ago.
The derivative of log of y, well y is a function of x, so the derivative of log y would be
1 over y times the derivative of y, which is y prime.
So the left hand side is y prime over y, what about the right hand side?
Because I've converted this problem to sums, the differentiation is pretty easy.
It's the derivative of log x, so that's 1 over x and then it's one half log x squared
plus 1 and that derivative is one half times 1 over x squared plus 1 times the inside derivative
2x.
And then what do you do?
Well you can bring the y to the other side and you get y prime equals y times the quantity
1 over x plus, notice the 2's cancel so I can write it as x over x squared plus 1.
Now plug in your point x equals 1.
Notice that when x is 1, y is the square root of 2, isn't it?
It's 1 times the square root of 1 plus 1.
So y prime, our final answer is square root of 2 times the quantity 1 plus 1 half.
That's plugging in x and y into our equation.
That simplifies to 3 square roots of 2 over 2, good.
As we proceed, we'll be seeing problems that involve logarithms of absolute values of functions.
Here's why this is an issue.
You can't take the logarithm of a negative number.
It's not defined, it's only defined for x bigger than zero.
But we'll see expression sometimes where we will want to deal with negative x.
So we can take the logarithm of the absolute value of x without a problem because that's
non-negative and in fact the only place that we have bad news here is if x is zero.
You can't take the logarithm of zero but you can take the logarithm of the absolute
value of any other non-zero number and fortunately the derivative of the log of the absolute
value of x is still 1 over x.
The absolute value sign doesn't hurt us and similarly the derivative of log of the absolute
value of some function u is 1 over u, u prime.
Let me show you an example.
What's the derivative of the log of the absolute value of sine x?
Kind of an obscure problem, isn't it?
But hold on.
Log of absolute value of sine x, I want the derivative of that.
Well, it'll be 1 over the thing inside, 1 over sine x times the derivative of sine x.
What's the derivative of sine x?
Cosine x.
So our final answer is cosine over sine also known as cotangent.
Now let me ask you a question.
If the derivative of log of the absolute value of sine x is cotangent, what's the integral
of cotangent?
There's your answer.
It's log absolute value of sine x.
Let me point out now some subtle points about logarithms.
I find over the years that students and my colleagues and me, we make lots of mistakes
with logarithms.
Keep in mind that the logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms.
That's a crucial equation.
And it's a little tricky because x and y had better both be positive in this equation.
Otherwise it makes no sense if one of those numbers were negative.
In fact, notice that the log of 25 equals the log of minus 5 times minus 5 because minus
5 squared is 25.
But that's not equal to the log of minus 5 plus the log of minus 5, is it?
So make sure you always have positive numbers in your logarithm function.
And the most common error I see in this business is people who think that the log of a sum
is the sum of the logs.
That's wrong.
It's the log of a product is the sum of the logs.
Good.
I'd like to finish off by looking back at a problem that we did way back in our early
lectures, the tangent line problem.
Let's go back to sort of basic principles.
I'd like to calculate a tangent line to a curve.
But let's make our curve involve logarithms.
So let's consider the function 3x squared minus log x.
And we're going to find the equation of the tangent line to that curve at the point 1,
3, which is on the curve.
How do we do it?
Well, we have to find the slope, the derivative.
So we take the derivative and we get 6x minus 1 over x.
The derivative of log x, remember, is 1 over x.
And then we evaluate the derivative at our point 1 to find the slope there.
And if you plug 1 into that equation, you get 6 minus 1 or 5.
So the tangent line has slope 5, and it passes through the point 1, 3, so I can use my point
1 slope formula and I get y minus 3 is 5 times x minus 1.
And then I simplify that and I end up with y equals 5x minus 2.
That's the equation of the tangent line to the original curve.
I invite you to use your graphing calculator to graph the original function together with
its tangent line and they will touch at the point 1, 3.
That's the point of tangency.
And I think this kind of is nice to revisit this fundamental idea of the differential calculus,
the tangent line to a curve.
Great.
I hope you enjoyed so far this brief introduction to our new class of functions.
Today we did the natural logarithmic function and we defined it in a very unusual way using
an integral.
But now we know something really valuable.
The derivative of log x is 1 over x.
So the antiderivative of 1 over x is log x because they're inverse operations of each
other.
So integration formula will now permit us to develop some more formulas.
And that's what we're going to do next time is use the integral formula that we just developed
to explore more some trigonometric functions and applications.
Thank you very much and I look forward to our next lecture together.
