Hello. I'm pretty excited about today's lecture because we're going to talk about the exponential
function. And this is perhaps the most important function in all of calculus. I think you'll
enjoy the development of the exponential function. In particular, we'll talk about the calculus
of the exponential function, its derivative and its anti-derivative. Here's how we're
going to go. Remember that we defined the natural logarithmic function by an integral.
And that was kind of an unusual way to define a function, but we discovered that the properties
of the logarithmic function were very similar to logarithms you studied in pre-calculus.
Remember that the derivative of log x is 1 over x, and that means the function is increasing.
Log rhythm kind of goes upwards. Hence, it's 1 to 1. Okay? And because it's 1 to 1, it
has an inverse, and that inverse is called the exponential function. The exponential
function behaves much like 2 to the x power, or 10 to the x power, except now the base
is not 2 or 10, but that magic number e, which is about 2.7. And then in the next lecture,
we'll actually see some applications of the exponential function. So let's recall from
pre-calculus our exponential functions we saw with bases like 2 or 10 or 1 half. Those
functions I think were pretty comfortable with them. Here's a picture of two of them.
There's a picture of 2 to the x, and another picture of 1 half to the x power. 2 to the
x is increasing, and 1 half to the x is decreasing. In both cases, they have a y-intercept at
1. The function e to the x will look very much like 2 to the x. So again, how are we
going to construct this new function e to the x? Well, the logarithmic function is 1
to 1 on its domain x bigger than 0. Furthermore, we define this number e such that the log
of e is 1. Remember that, the log of e is 1. So log has an inverse, and I claim that
inverse is e to the x. Let me try to convince you of that. Well, they would be inverses
if their composition gave x back. So let me compose e to the x with logarithm. Let's
analyze log of e to the x. Well, remember that property of logarithms that the exponent
x can be moved into the front. So that expression becomes x log e. But what's log e? Log e is
1. So it simplifies just to x. So you see that the composition that way, log of e to the
x, indeed is x. And that verifies part of the definition of inverse functions. And you
can also verify it the other way. So conclusion, the natural logarithmic function ln of x,
log of x, has an inverse e to the x. They are inverses of each other. You might remember
from high school you saw equations of the form y equals 10 to the x being equivalent
to x equals log base 10 of y. Well, the same thing is true here. y equals e to the x is
equivalent to saying x is the natural logarithm of y. Those are equivalent. That's because
they're inverses of each other. Here's a picture of our two functions. There's our
friend logarithm, and we've talked about its graph earlier, and there is e to the x.
What's the domain of the logarithm function? Ah, positive x. That means its inverse will
have a range exactly the same. And notice that e to the x is above the x axis. So its
range is positive values. What's the range of the logarithm function? Well, it goes all
the way down to minus infinity, so its range is all real numbers. So that means the domain
of e to the x, the domain of the inverse, must be all real numbers. You can take e to
any power you want and get an answer. Good. Because these are inverses, we have two really
important properties that the composition of these two functions together gives x. For
instance, the log of e to the x is just x, and e to the log x power is just x. In a sense,
they undo each other. First you log it, and afterwards you go e, and you're back to where
you started from. I invite you to check this on your calculator. Pick a number, any number,
and take its logarithm. Well, it better be a positive number. Take its logarithm, and
then take e to that number, and you'll discover that you come back to the original number.
Good. So now we have our two functions. Let's do some pre-calculus with them a little bit.
Solve some equations just to get comfortable with that inverse relationship between the
two of them. Suppose you had to solve an equation of the type, say, 7 equals e to the x plus
1. In other words, what's x if it's embedded in that equation? How can you get x to be
all by itself? Well, here's one way to do it. Start with your equation 7 equals e to
the x plus 1, and take logs of both sides. So the left-hand side is log 7, and the right-hand
side is log of e to the x plus 1. But because of the inverse nature of logarithm and the
exponential function, they cancel each other, and I'm left with just x plus 1. Isn't that
nice? And now bring the 1 to the other side, and I have x equal to minus 1 plus log 7.
Punch it on your calculator. You get approximately 0.946. Now let me make a comment about answers.
A lot of times, students will write their answer to this question as x equals 0.946.
That's wrong. The answer is not 0.946. It's approximately that answer. And so please get
in the habit of telling everybody that you know that it's approximately that. So you
put kind of a wiggly equals sign there. The exact answer is minus 1 plus log 7. That's
an irrational number. It has an infinite non-repeating decimal. So you'll never be able to write
that number down in decimal form. But you can approximate it, but make sure you put
a little wiggle sign there. Otherwise, some teachers will mark you wrong. Let's do another
problem. How about, can you find x if you have the following equation involving x? Log
of 2x minus 3 equals 5. In other words, x is kind of embedded inside the logarithm. How
can I get it out? Well, here's one way. Take the equation and raise it to the e power. In
other words, the left hand side would be e to the log of 2x minus 3, and the right hand
side used to be 5, and now it will be e to the fifth power. Why did I do that? Well,
I then have e and log composed together, and because of their inverses of each other,
they disappear, and the left hand side becomes just 2x minus 3. And the right hand side is
still e to the fifth, and now I bring the 3 to the other side, and I have 2x equals 3
plus e to the fifth, divide by 2, and my exact answer is 1 half the quantity 3 plus e to
the fifth, which is approximately 75.707. Great. So now I think we're comfortable solving
some equations involving logarithms and exponents. This logarithmic function has algebraic properties
that are very familiar to you from pre-calculus. For instance, e to the a times e to the b
is e to the a plus b. You add the exponents, and the same with division, e to the a divided
by e to the b is e to the a minus b. As I said earlier, the domain of e to the x is all real
numbers, and the range is positive real numbers. If you look at the graph of e to the x, and
please memorize the shape of this graph, it's the reflection of the logarithm graph, and
it has some interesting features. For instance, there's a horizontal asymptote at y equals
0. It tails off to getting closer and closer to the x-axis, and it grows up to infinity,
it grows without bound off to the right. Other properties, it's a continuous function, it's
increasing, it's one to one, well of course it's one to one because it has an inverse.
What's the inverse? The natural logarithmic function, and also notice that it's concave
upward. Good, so that's kind of some nice features of the graph of e to the x. Now we
come to, I think, one of the most interesting parts of today's lecture, and that is, we
are going to find the derivative of e to the x. What's the derivative of e to the x? Wow,
we know the derivative of log x, that's one over x, but what's the derivative of e to
the x? The answer will surprise you, and let me show you one way of figuring out the answer.
It's kind of a curious little derivation, I think you'll like it. Let's start with the
equation log of e to the x equals x. Why is that true? Well, e and log are inverses of
each other, so log of e to the x equals x. So, starting with that equation, I'm going
to differentiate both sides simultaneously. The right hand side's the derivative of x,
which is just one, that was pretty easy. What about the left hand side? Think about this.
The derivative of log of e to the x, well that's log of something. And what's the derivative
of log of something? It's one over the thing times the derivative of the thing. So the
derivative of the left hand side is one over e to the x times the derivative of e to the x.
And that's what we're trying to find, isn't it? So, the left hand side is one over e to
the x, one over the thing times the derivative of the thing, where the thing is e to the x.
Well, neat, one more step. Take that e to the x on the left and multiply it through, and
you're left with the derivative of e to the x equals e to the x. Wow, here's a function
equal to its derivative. Isn't that strange? This is the first time we've ever seen this,
a function equal to its derivative. It's kind of amazing, isn't it? The derivative of e
to the x is itself. What's the second derivative? e to the x. What's the eightieth derivative?
e to the x. Things are pretty easy. I like to sometimes tell my students, bad joke coming,
that e to the x is very easy because of this very nice derivative formula. Good. So, we
now have our derivative of e to the x. It's equal to e to the x. Of course, you have to
memorize that, but it's not so difficult to memorize. And if you, of course, have e to
a function, something more complicated, you would use the chain rule. And we'll see some
examples in that in a moment. What's the geometric implication of this derivative formula? For
instance, suppose x is zero. What's the derivative of e to the x when x is zero? Well, the answer
is e to the zero, which is one. Let's go back to the graph. Look at the point zero one on
the curve. What's the slope there? The slope is one there. What's the slope at, say, x equals
two? It's nothing more than e squared. It's the y coordinate of the point on the curve.
So, as the curve grows, the slopes get larger and larger, don't they? And as you go the
other way, the slopes get, the curve gets flatter and flatter. So, good. We now know the
derivative of e to the x. It's very easy. Let's do some problems to make sure we're up to
speed here. What's the derivative of e to the 2x minus one? Well, you would just use the
chain rule. It's e to a power, so it's e to the same power, 2x minus one, times the inside
derivative, the derivative of 2x minus one, so an extra two pops in there, and the final
answer is 2e to the 2x minus one. How about a product rule? What's the derivative of e
to the x times log x? Here, we're putting our two functions together. Well, it's a product,
so it's the first times the derivative of the second, so it's e to the x times one over
x, that's the derivative of logarithm, plus the second function, log x, times the derivative
of the first one, which is just e to the x, and if you want, you could factor out e to
the x and obtain the answer e to the x times the quantity one over x plus log x. Okay,
good. We've got this formula now for the derivative of e to the x. This is a new function, e to
the x, and we know it's derivative, so what's the anti-derivative of e to the x? Well, pretty
simple, isn't it? If the derivative is e to the x, then the integral is also e to the
x plus a constant. Wow, things are really nice. This is a great function because it's
so easy to work with. That'll be a theme in the next few lectures how easy it is to work
with this function. That said, we can make some integral problems a little more interesting
not having e to the x but having something more complicated in the exponent. How about
the anti-derivative of e to the 3x plus 1? Well, I think you know how to do these now
by substitution. I would like to make u 3x plus 1, then it would be e to the u, and I
need a du. Well, the derivative of 3x plus 1 is 3. I don't have a 3 there, do I? But I
can put 1 in and divide by 3 outside, and so my final answer is 1 third e to the power
3x plus 1 plus an arbitrary constant. How do I know that I'm right? Well, differentiate
that answer. Watch what happens when I differentiate it. I get 1 third times e to the 3x plus 1
times the derivative of 3x plus 1, and so a 3 comes out canceling with the 3 in the denominator.
So, I think we know how to integrate with our exponential function. Here's a slightly
harder one. How about the anti-derivative of x times e to the minus x squared? Well, let's
see. If I'm going to let u be minus x squared, what I need is a derivative minus 2x. Well,
I have the x, but I'm missing the minus 2. Stick in a minus 2. Divide by minus 2 outside,
and we have minus 1 half e to the minus x squared times minus 2x dx. That's e to the
u du, and that gives an answer of minus 1 half e to the minus x squared plus c. Again,
check your answer if you want to. Now, that's kind of an interesting problem. It had an x in
there that was really important to do it, because without that x in there, you would have a
problem that looks simpler. It would be e to the minus x squared. That one, it turns out,
does not have an anti-derivative among the elementary functions that we've learned to
love in calculus. You can't do that one. Isn't that interesting? Okay, you can't do it, but
people still use that function in applied mathematics. Maybe you've heard of the normal
distribution, the so-called bell-shaped curve. The technical name is the standard normal
probability density function. Standard normal probability density function. It's kind of
hard to say all that. Here's the definition of that function. 1 over square root of 2pi
times the quantity e to the minus x squared over 2. Wow, looks kind of complicated. Here's
a picture of that function. It's the bell-shaped curve you might have seen in some of your
statistics books. For example, when I give out grades in a class, they often fall in a
bell-shaped curve. The average is right there in the middle, and most of the students are at
the average, and then over here on the right you have a few students that do really, really
well. They get the a's, and then over here on the other side you have other students. Good.
So that's the bell-shaped curve. It turns out the area under that curve. This is really
interesting. It can be calculated. Now you might say, wait, it goes off to infinity on both
sides. It still has a finite area, and it turns out that area is 1. Now that's the content of
calculus 2, not calculus 1, but you can trust me on that. You might also remember that SAT
scores are often distributed in a bell-shaped curve, and it kind of looks like that curve
given by the standard normal probability density function. Good. So that's kind of a nice
application of a function that does not have an elementary anti-derivative. Good. Let's do
some more examples. This next example I think is really interesting because it kind of touches
upon this idea of a region going on to infinity. Watch how this works. First we're going to
calculate something very easy. We're going to find the definite integral from 0 to 1 of e to the
minus x dx. Here we go. e to the minus x dx. I'm going to let u be minus x, so du is minus
1 dx. I need a minus sign in there. So a minus sign comes outside the integral, and I put a minus
sign in front of the dx, and then the anti-derivative is minus e to the minus x. Let's check that
real quick before we go on. What's the derivative of minus e to the minus x? Well, it's e to the
minus x, and the derivative of that is e to the minus x times minus 1, and then I have a minus
outside, and the minus is canceled. So I had the right answer there. Then I take my anti-derivative
and plug in the endpoints. So I get minus e to the minus 1 power minus minus 1. In other words,
when you plug 0 in, you get e to the 0, which is 1. Now, this is a record, I think, of the most
minus signs I've seen in a while. It's minus e to the minus 1 minus a minus 1. Ouch! This is why
calculus can be very, very frustrating. The ideas are pretty simple, but you get to an equation
like this, where you're just plugging in some numbers, and you just get bogged down with
arithmetic, all these minus signs to keep track of. It's very, very difficult. That's why
calculators are so important to kind of check your work. Let's simplify this expression. The minus
minus 1 becomes a plus 1, and minus e to the minus 1 is minus 1 over e. So after all this very
difficult arithmetic, our final answer is 1 minus 1 over e, which is approximately 0.632. Good. Now,
I'm going to change it slightly. The upper limit of integration used to be 1. Now I'm going to change
it to b, just a constant b. The computations are exactly the same, except instead of plugging in
1, we plug in b. And when you're done with that, I'll step through it. You get minus e to the minus
x between 0 and b. So that's minus e to the minus b, minus a minus 1, and then you get 1 minus 1
over e to the b as your final answer. Let me show you what we've been doing here. Here's the graph
of e to the minus x. It's a decaying exponential. It's going downward. It's going the other way
because it's e to the minus x. It crosses the y-axis at 1. It kind of looks like 1 half to the x power,
doesn't it? And we found the area shaded in there between 0 and b. When b was 1, that was the first
part of this problem. We discovered the area was approximately 0.632. Now let b be larger. Suppose b is
1,000. What's the area? Well, it's 1 minus 1 over e to the power 1,000. e to the 1,000th power is about
0. Well, 1 over e to the 1,000th power is about 0. So as b goes out to the right, this curve starts
hugging the x-axis. And in the limit form, if you take the limit as b goes to infinity, the second
term, 1 over e to the b, goes to 0. Here's our conclusion. The area under the curve, e to the minus x
between 0 and infinity is 1. Now I hope that looks bizarre to you. It's pretty amazing. Here's what's, I
mean, let me step back. These are called improper integrals. It's a theme of second semester university
calculus, and actually these appear in the bc portion of the advanced placement exam. But we can understand
them now. Here's a region which has finite area. The area is 1, and yet the region goes on forever. It goes out
the x-axis forever. It's very curious. I think it's very interesting how this works, and this is, again,
something called improper integrals. Good. Let's look at another example that will reflect some of the
properties of logarithms that I want to make sure we're comfortable with. Let's find the definite integral
of e to the x over 1 plus e to the x between 0 and 1. This is an area problem because the function is
non-negative, and we're finding the area bounded by that kind of complicated function. e to the x
divided by 1 plus e to the x. I need an anti-derivative of that function. Not so obvious, is it? What could it be?
Well, how about this? How about if in your mind you say, let you be the denominator 1 plus e to the x? What's
its derivative? Well, the derivative of 1 plus e to the x is e to the x, and oh, miracle, it's sitting in the
numerator. So this is nothing more than 1 over u du. This is a logarithm. The answer is logarithm, natural logarithm,
of 1 plus e to the x, and then we'll plug in the endpoints. Check yourself. Quick. Differentiate log of 1 plus e to the
x. It's log of something. The derivative is 1 over that thing, 1 plus e to the x, times the derivative of 1 plus e
to the x, which is e to the x, and there's my numerator. Kind of nice, isn't it? And now we plug in the endpoints.
If you plug in 1, you get log of 1 plus e, e to the 1 power, and then you plug in 0, you get log of 1 plus e to the 0.
e to the 0 is 1, so it's 1 plus 1, or log 2. So we have log of 1 plus e minus log 2. Again, a calculator says it's about
0.620. Notice I don't need absolute value sign in the portion 1 plus e, because why? Because it's positive. e to the x is
always positive, so so is 1 plus e to the x. You can't, by the way, combine these as a difference of logarithms.
Remember, the log of a sum is not the sum of the logs, and the same with log of a difference is not the difference in the logs.
But you could compactify this a little bit. You could write it as log of a quotient. You could write it as log of 1 plus e all divided by 2.
That's a legal step, and in fact, when you're looking at answers in a calculus book, it might be in either form.
By the way, I said this was an area question. Here's a picture of that function, and you see that we found the area under that curve between 0 and 1.
Good. Let me close with some simple questions to see if we're sort of on the same page here. These will be pretty easy, I think, but let's see how you do.
Can you think of a function, f, such that f equals f prime? Well, yeah, the exponential function. The derivative of e to the x is e to the x.
It's a function which equals its derivative. Here's another question. Describe the geometric relationship between the graph of log x and the graph of e to the x.
Well, I hope you have both graphs kind of in your mind, sort of memorized, and the relationship is that they are reflections of each other across the line y equals x.
In other words, if you only know one of the two graphs, you can figure out the other one by reflecting it across the line y equals x.
Here's another key question. How did we define the number e? Remember how we defined it? It was that special number such that the integral from 1 to e of 1 over t dt equals 1.
So it was a very special number such that log of e was 1. Good. I hope you're now kind of comfortable with the function e to the x and the logarithm function.
Next time, we're going to look at these same functions, but we're going to change the base. We're going to look at functions like log base 10 or 2 to the x instead of e to the x.
A common theme will be that these are harder to work with. It's much easier to work with the natural logarithm and much easier to work with e to the x.
But we'll still look at the calculus of these other functions and then we'll see a couple of interesting applications to radioactivity and to compound interest.
So thanks very much. I hope you enjoyed the lecture and I'll see you next time.
Thank you.
