Hello again, and welcome to our continuing study of logarithmic and exponential functions.
We've developed both the natural logarithmic function and its inverse, the function e to
the x. And we observe one of the amazing properties of e to the x that it's equal to its derivative.
So today we're going to look at exponential and logarithmic functions to different bases.
These are probably some of the functions you saw in your pre-calculus courses. For example,
the logarithm to the base 10. These functions are more complicated in calculus. The formulas
for derivatives and integrals are not nearly as pleasant as the ones for e to the x and
log x. Fortunately, the properties of these functions will be similar to our pre-calculus
properties. But again, you'll find some of the formulas unpleasant, and I'll talk about
that issue as we go along. And then also we'll intersperse this lecture with some applications,
one to half-life of a radioactive material and the other to compound interest. So let's
remember where we are here. We define the function log of x and its inverse e to the
x. These are inverses of each other. Their graphs are symmetrical, are mirror images of
each other about the line y equals x. Now we're going to define the exponential function
to a different base, not e to the x, but say 2 to the x. And here's the trick. Here's
how you do it. You define 2 to the x in terms of e, and that will permit us to find derivatives
of 2 to the x. So here's the definition of 2 to the x. Remember that we could rewrite
it as e to the log of 2 to the x, because log and e are inverses. So if I do e to a
log, those cancel each other. So why would I make things more complicated? Well, now
I have log of 2 to the x in the exponent and the x can slide into the front by the properties
of logarithms. So 2 to the x can be defined in terms of the exponential function as e
to the x log 2. It's e to a power. Isn't that interesting? Here's the general definition
of a to the x where a is a positive real number, and usually you assume that a is not 1. The
definition is a to the x equals e to the power log a times x. This function a to the x obeys
the usual properties of exponents that you learned in pre-calculus. Notice that this
definition simplifies a lot if a happens to be e. Remember, e is kind of our magic
number. If you substitute, if you replace a with e in that equation, look what you get.
The left hand side would be e to the x, and the right hand side would be e to the log
log of e is 1, and so it's e to the x. This is a generalization of e to the x. Let's pause
and do an application where we see that using a base different than e can be useful. Well,
it turns out that the half-life of carbon 14 is about 5,715 years. So suppose you have
a sample of material that contains one gram of carbon 14. How much carbon 14 will be present
after say 10,000 years? Well, here's how half-lifes work. After 5,715 years, you'll only have
half a gram. In other words, half of it decays away. You start with one, after 5,715 you'll
have half a gram, and then in another 5,715 years you'll have a fourth of a gram. That
means that in 11,430 years, that's two times the half-life, in that many years you'll have
a quarter of a gram. So what should we expect after 10,000 years? Well, we should expect
to have a little more than a quarter of a gram, shouldn't we? So let's model this situation
and see what the answer really is. Here's an interesting model of the half-life of carbon
14. Y equals one-half to the power T over 5,715. So why is the amount of carbon 14 at
time T? Let's check this model to see if it works. How much is there in the beginning
when T is zero? Well, one-half to the zero power is of course one. Anything to the zero
power is one. How much is there after 5,715 years? Well, replace T with that number and
your exponent is now one. And so Y is equal to one-half. Great. You can see how it works.
Every time you have every interval of 5,715 years, you go down by a factor of two. So
all you have to do now is plug in 10,000 for T and on a calculator, calculate one-half
to the power 10,000 divided by 5,715 and you get approximately 0.3 grams. That's how much
carbon 14 is left in your sample after 10,000 years. Good. We've done the exponential function
to a different base. What about logarithms to a different base? Well, we're going to assume
that our base is a positive real number and again, we won't use a base of one. And here's
the definition of logarithm to base A of x. It's defined to be one over log A, natural
log of A times the natural log of x. In other words, you define the logarithm to base A
in terms of the natural log to base E. You might recognize that formula from your pre-calculus
days. That's the change of base formula that you might have used in a course on logarithms
when you're changing from one base to another. In a sense, we're changing from base A to base E.
So there's our official definition of logarithm to base A.
If you look at your graphing utility, your calculator, you'll see a button on there for
logarithm to base 10 and you'll see another button for the natural logarithmic function
because both of these functions play a big role in applied mathematics. In calculus, log base E
is much more important than log base 10, but both buttons are on graphing calculators.
Fortunately, the logarithm to base A satisfies all the properties of logarithms that you learned
to love when you were taking algebra. For example, the logarithm of a product is the sum of the
logarithms. The logarithm of 1 is equal to 0. The logarithm of A to base A, the logarithm base A
of A is 1. The logarithm of x to the n has that same formula as before. You can move the n out to
the front and it's n logarithm of x and the logarithm of a quotient is the difference of
the logarithms. Good. It turns out, you would expect this, that the logarithm to base A and the
exponential function A to the x are inverses of each other. They are reflections across the line
y equals x, just like E to the x and the natural logarithm functions are inverses of each other.
You can verify that as follows, logarithm base A of A to the x, so I'm composing A to the x with
logarithm, slide the x out to the front and then log base A of A of course is 1, so I end up with
just x and in the same way A to the power log base A of x equals x. Good. So those are the inverse
relations. Here's a graph of 2 to the x which sort of looks like E to the x and the graph of log base
2 of x which sort of looks like our natural logarithmic function and they are reflections of
each other along the line y equals x. Good. I can't emphasize enough the common mistake that I see
where students will write that the logarithm of a sum is the sum of the logarithms. That's not
true with the natural logarithm nor is it true with any logarithms. The log base A of x plus y
is not the sum of the two logarithms. In fact, you really can't simplify the logarithm of a sum.
You can simplify the sum of logarithms. In fact, it's the log of their product. Okay, so be careful
with that. That's something to always try to remember when you're taking a calculus course
and dealing with logarithms. It's a very common mistake.
Let's do some equations now involving our logarithms and exponential functions to different
bases just to practice some of the manipulation skills. Suppose you had an equation 3 to the x
power equals 1 over 81. What's x? Can you find x? Well, it's up there in the exponent. How can I
bring it down to earth? Well, here's one way. Take logarithms to both sides, but make the logarithm
to the base 3. The advantage of that is the left-hand side becomes log base 3 of 3 to the x,
and those are inverses of each other, and so the left-hand side is just x, and the right-hand side
is log base 3 of 3 to the minus 4. I got that by saying log base 3 of 1 over 81, and 1 over 81 is
3 to the minus 4th power, and now I have log base 3 of 3 to the minus 4. The inverse property
again says that that equals minus 4. That's your answer. Good. Let's do another example.
How about solving for x if log base 2 of x equals minus 4? So now the x is kind of hiding in the
logarithm. How can we get it out of the logarithm? Well, one way would be raise both sides to the
power 2. In other words, 2 to the log base 2 of x equals 2 to the minus 4 power. Why did I choose
2 here? Well, I'm doing a log of base 2, so I'm going to do the exponential function that's the
inverse of that, which is 2 to a power. So the left-hand side has a cancellation and leaves just
x, and the right-hand side is 2 to the minus 4th, which is 1 over 2 to the 4th, which is 1 over 16.
Good. So I hope we're comfortable with solving some of these equations, and by the way, there are
other methods for solving logarithmic and exponential equations, and they all will give good answers.
Great. Let's turn to calculus now. We have these new functions, a to the x, and log
rhythm base a. What are their derivatives? Well, the derivative of a to the x is easy to find,
because we can replace a to the x with its definition, which involves the exponential
function e to a power. So a to the x equals e to the log a times x. So now I have to differentiate
e to the log a times x. Well, that's a simple chain rule. The chain rule says it's e to the same
power, e to the log a times x, times the derivative of the exponent, which is log a. And now that
first part of my answer, e to the log a times x, is nothing more than a to the x. And so the final
answer is log a times a to the x. You can see why the base a is unpleasant. That's not a very pretty
formula. It's much nicer if it's e to the x. And you can see why if it's e to the x, then in the
formula the log a becomes log e, which is 1. So it is unpleasant when you're dealing with different
bases. It's going to be unpleasant also with the logarithm function. The derivative of log base a of x
is the derivative of its definition, which is 1 over natural log of a times log x. So the final
answer is 1 over log a times the derivative of log x, which is 1 over x. So those are two formulas
that are a little more complicated than I would like as a mathematician.
I hope you see why in both these cases, e is the preferred base. It simplifies the formulas.
Let me summarize them in a different notation.
a to the x prime, in other words, the derivative of a to the x is log of a times a to the x.
Log base a of x prime, in other words, the derivative of log base a of x equals 1 over log of a times x.
Unpleasant, complicated formulas. Should you memorize these? Well, I sort of don't think so.
A lot of my students have very good memories and they know all these formulas when they come to
calculus class. They just memorize them and they can use them freely. I don't have such a good memory.
I kind of rely on being able to derive the formulas when I need them. I remember the definition
of a to the x and hence I can derive this formula if I ever have to use it. A personal note here,
I'll admit something to you. I used to be a chemistry major when I was in college,
my first two years at Stanford, and then I took organic chemistry my sophomore year and
it had so much memory that I just couldn't handle it. A lot of those benzene rings and things that
just really boggled my mind and I said, uh-oh, I'm not going to be successful in chemistry.
What can I do? And I had taken a lot of calculus simultaneously with my chemistry classes because
the chemistry major required calculus. We were using calculus in the chemistry classes
and then I had all this calculus and I talked to an advisor and the advisor said,
hey, why don't you be a math major? And here I am. Good. Okay. Enough personal
asides. Let's do some more examples to make sure we're comfortable with these fairly unpleasant
formulas. What's the derivative of two to the x? Well, it's log two times two to the x. You have
to put that extra logarithm in there. What's the derivative of two to the three x? Now it's even
a little more complicated. It would be log two times two to the three x times the derivative of
the exponent, which is three. So an extra three comes out and the final answer is three log two
times two to the three x power. How about a problem involving logarithms?
What's the derivative of logarithm to the base 10 of x? Well, it's one over the log of 10. That's
the natural logarithm of 10 times x. So the denominator is one over log 10 times x. A fairly
unpleasant answer because the base is not e. How about, here's the worst one. What's the derivative
of log base 10 of the cosine function? It would be one over log base 10 of cosine. You know,
one over the thing and you put the log base 10 in there and then you have to differentiate cosine
by the chain rule and you get minus sine x. So the final answer is minus one over log 10
times the tangent. Sine over cosine is tangent.
Well, there's even more. Sorry about all this, but there's even a formula now for the integral
of a to the x. How would you get the integral of a to the x or the antiderivative of a to the x?
Well, if you know the derivative, then you know how to get an integral formula. So the integral
would be one over log a times a to the x plus a constant. Why is that true? Think about it.
Differentiate the answer. The derivative of a to the x is log a,
a to the x, and the log a's cancel, don't they? So this must be the right formula. Again,
it's not a formula I would suggest you memorize, but you can sort of figure it out. If you know
the derivative formula, you'll know the integral formula as well. Finally, let me repeat. I hope
you see why e is the preferred base in calculus. All these formulas simplify if a is equal to e.
You might be asking also, is there a formula for integral of log of x, log base a of x,
or even the natural log of x? We don't know yet. We have to tune in later. In a later lecture,
we'll talk about that question. Let's do a couple of examples to apply these principles. Here's a
very simple one. What's the area under the curve y equals two to the x between zero and two? Okay,
how would you do that? You imagine two to the x, it's a exponential function going upwards,
and we're finding the area between zero and two. That means we have to integrate two to the x between
zero and two. So what's the antiderivative? Well, it was that formula I just talked about. It's one
over log two times two to the x, and the limits of integration are zero to two. So I plug those limits
in. I get one over log two times the quantity, two squared, that's plugging in the top limit,
minus two to the zero power, and two squared is four, minus one is three, so it's three over log two.
That's the area under that curve. Good. I'm now going to move to a seemingly different topic.
We're going to talk about a limit that's really fascinating. It's the function one plus one over
x to the x power. And you might say, whoa, where's this coming from? Stay with me for a few minutes,
and you'll see something really fascinating about this function. One plus one over x to the x power.
And I ask the following question. What's the limit as x goes to infinity? In other words,
what's its horizontal asymptote? Now, some of you might argue as follows. This is one plus
something really small because x is going to infinity, and one plus something small to the
infinity power. Well, it's a little bit bigger than one to a big power. Maybe the answer is that it
goes to infinity. But others might say, well, it's one plus something negligible to a large power.
One to any power is one. So you might think the answer is one to this problem. Well, if you use
a graphing utility and plug in large values of x, you discover that the limit is in between
one and infinity. The limits e are old friend e. Wow. In fact, many textbooks use this as the
definition of the number e. It's an amazing result. This number e appears all over mathematics.
And here's a definition of it. It's the limit of that function as x goes to infinity. Good.
Let's apply that to finance, compound interest. And then I'll give you some advice if you're ever
a banker. Let me remind you about how compound interest works. Suppose you have p-dollars
and you deposit it in a bank that pays compound interest and a compounded n times per year.
Then the formula for how much money you have after one year is the following. It's p times
the quantity one plus r over n to the n. r is the interest rate and you express it in
decimal form. a is the amount after one year. And n is the number of times you compound per year.
Let me show you an example of how this works, a very specific with numbers. Suppose you have
a thousand dollars and it's 8% interest, which we, it's a pretty good interest rate,
which we write as a decimal, 0.08. And suppose it's compounded every six months. So it's
compounded twice a year. How does it work? After the first six months, here's how much money you
have in your account. You have the original thousand dollars plus you've earned some interest.
Now you didn't earn 8%. You earned half of that, 4% for the first six months. So you've
earned a thousand times 0.08 divided by two. And so that, if you factor out the thousand,
after six months, you have 1000 times the quantity one plus 0.08 over two, which is exactly $1040.
So you've earned some interest. Now, here's why compounded interest is so powerful.
How much money do you have after six more months at the end of the year, in other words? Well,
here's how much money you have. You have the amount you earned after six months,
which was 1000 times one plus 0.08 divided by two. And then you earned interest on that amount.
Well, how much interest do you earn? It's that amount times the interest rate. So it's 1000 times
one plus 0.08 over two times the interest rate, which is not eight, but rather four,
0.08 divided by two. And now factor again, factor out the 1000 times one plus 0.08 over two.
And you're left with one plus 0.08 over two. And then you can compactify that into 1000 times
one plus 0.08 over two quantity squared. And that was the original formula.
And that turns out to be 1081.61. Notice it's a little more than 8% because we compounded.
It wasn't just $80 of interest, but you made 81.61. So that was compounding twice a year.
Suppose I compound 10 times a year, 20 times a year, 50 times a year. I'm going to compound
more and more frequently. Let's see what happens to my formula. Remember, the formula is p, the
amount you deposit, times the quantity one plus r over n to the nth power. And I want to know
what happens when n gets large. Take the limit as n goes to infinity. And I'm going to now
manipulate that equation a bit. It's one plus r over n, which if I put that in the denominator
becomes one over n over r. You see how that fraction got flipped? Now I do the following.
I take that equation one plus one over n over r. And the power used to be n, but I want the power
to be n over r. So I put n over r there and then put outside an r so I don't change the problem.
So I multiply and divide by r, in other words. Now, this is n going to infinity. Imagine in
your mind that x equals n over r. So as n goes to infinity, n over r goes to infinity. So x goes
to infinity. So I can rewrite this as follows. It's p times the limit as x goes to infinity
of one plus one over x to the x power. And then there's an r sitting way outside.
Do you recognize that character sitting there? That's our friend, E. That limit is E, one plus
one over x to the x. Wow. So this collapses to p, E to the r. And that's called continuous compound
interest. It's compounding continuously, not a thousand times a year, not a million times a year,
but continuously. So let's do a quick problem on this. Suppose you have, well, let me show you the
formulas then for compound interest and continuous compound interest. For compound interest, for t
years, it's the same formula as before, but you add a t in the exponent. So it's p times the quantity
one plus r over n to the nt power. And for compound interest continuously, it's p, E to the r, t.
You add the t in the exponent as well. So here's an example. Suppose you have $2,500
at 5% interest for five years, okay? $2,500, 5% interest for five years. Suppose you're
compounding four times a year. How much money do you have? The formula says it would be
2,500 times the quantity one plus 0.05, that's the interest rate, divided by four,
because it's four compoundings, to the power four times t, four times five. So the exponent is 20.
And if you do a calculator, that's $3,205.09. How about 12 compoundings? Well, that turns out to be
$3,208.40. A little bit more, $3 and something more. How about continuous compounding?
Well, now it turns out to be 3,210.06. A little bit more, isn't it? So if I were a banker, I would
tell my customers, come to my bank and deposit your money because I don't compound it once a year
or twice a year or four times a year or monthly. I compounded every second or every
millionth of a second, basically saying continuous. And the amount of money and interest I would have
to pay out to these customers is not much more than if I were compounding 12 times a year.
So you see that continuous compounding is you get more money that way, but not a whole lot more.
Good. We did a lot in this lecture, and it was difficult material because we had these
unnatural bases that were not the number E. The calculus of these functions was difficult,
but we saw some applications where the exponential and logarithmic functions were quite important.
Next time, we're going to look at inverse functions again, and we're going to look at the
inverse trig functions. Earlier in an earlier lecture, we'd observed that the sine function
was not 1 to 1, so we'll have to restrict some domains to construct these inverse trig functions.
I think you'll enjoy next lecture, so I'll see you then. Thank you very much.
