Hello again, and welcome to our lecture on the inverse trigonometric functions.
In the past few lectures, we've studied logarithmic and exponential functions.
And today we're going to look at another class of functions called the inverse trigonometric functions.
The good news is this will be the last set of functions we'll need in our calculus study.
There are six inverse trigonometric functions, but really you only need to work with three
of them.
Let me recall a little bit about inverses to remind ourselves of some of the problems
we're going to have in developing the inverse trigonometric functions.
Remember that a function has to be one-to-one in order to have an inverse.
For instance, the natural logarithmic function and the exponential function e to the x were
both one-to-one, and hence they had inverses, in fact they were inverses of each other.
A function is one-to-one, you remember, if it passes the horizontal line test.
That said, if you look at the graphs of the six trigonometric functions, not one of them
passes the horizontal line test.
They are not one-to-one.
So what do we do?
Well, we restrict their domains onto a small piece on which the function is one-to-one.
Let me show you how you do that with the sine function.
Here's a graph of f of x equals sine x.
It's that wavy sine curve, and you can see that a horizontal line will hit it infinitely
often.
So what we'll do is we'll cut off most of the function and just restrict it in the interval
minus pi over two to pi over two.
And on that small interval, the function is indeed one-to-one.
So because it's one-to-one on that interval, it will have an inverse, and that inverse
we call the inverse sine function.
Here's the precise definition of the inverse sine function.
Y equals the inverse sine if and only if sine of y equals x.
Let me say it again, and I'll use a term that is very popular for inverse functions.
Y equals arc sine x if and only if sine y equals x.
And the further restriction to keep in mind is that the x values here are between minus
one and one, and the y values are between minus pi over two and pi over two.
I think the following graph will make this pretty clear of what's happening.
I've drawn here the sine curve restricted to its small interval and the arc sine curve.
Let's look at the sine curve for a moment.
It begins at minus pi over two minus one on the left, crosses the origin, and ends at
pi over two one.
The arc sine function is the mirror image of this function across the line y equals
x.
That's how inverse functions work.
So the inverse sine function starts at minus one minus pi over two.
You flip the coordinates, and it ends at one pi over two.
You sort of see how that works?
The inverse sine function, again, is that mirror reflection of the restricted sine function.
Here are some more technical definitions of the three inverse functions that are perhaps,
I won't say most important, but the functions that perhaps you're most comfortable with.
The arc sine function, y equals arc sine x, if and only if sine y equals x, and we restrict
x again to minus one to one closed interval, and y is on the closed interval minus pi over
two to pi over two.
Arc cosine x is a little bit different.
Here, of course, x is between minus one and one, but now the y values are between zero
and pi.
The reason for that is cosine is one to one on that interval.
And finally, arc tangent x is defined so that x is between minus pi over two and, excuse
me, x is between minus infinity and plus infinity, whereas the y values are on the open interval
from minus pi over two to pi over two.
Again, I talked about that notation.
We often say y equals arc sine x, or y is the inverse sine of x.
There's a notation they use here that is very unfortunate.
They often write it as sine, and they put a minus one as an exponent, sine inverse of
x.
I don't like that notation because you often think that means one over sine x, which it
does not mean.
There are three other inverse trig functions.
Only one of them we'll come back to, and that's the inverse secant function, arc secant
of x, but let's hold off for that for a moment.
I'd like to spend a minute looking at the inverse tangent function, arc tangent.
Remember how tangent looked?
Tangent was periodic of period pi, and it had vertical asymptotes at minus pi over two
and pi over two.
Here I've drawn the tangent function on that interval from minus pi over two to pi over
two.
Now it goes off to infinity at pi over two and to negative infinity at minus pi over
two.
The arc tangent function will be the mirror image of the tangent function, so the vertical
asymptotes of the tangent function become horizontal asymptotes of the arc tangent function.
Isn't that interesting?
We'll look at that issue again in a moment.
Let's do some numerical examples.
What is the arc sine of minus one-half?
Well, how do you answer questions like this?
Arc sine of minus one-half, here's how I suggest doing it, set it equal to y, and that's equivalent
to saying that sine of y is minus a half, but there's a restriction on the y value here.
It has to be between minus pi over two and pi over two, because that's how we restricted
the sine function to make it one to one, and in that interval, y is minus pi over six.
In other words, the sine of minus pi over six is minus one-half, and hence the arc sine
of minus one-half is minus pi over six.
By the way, all these inverse trig functions are built into your scientific calculator
or your graphing utility.
These are functions that are so important in applied mathematics and engineering that
the graphing utility companies have put them on the calculator, so you can check your answer.
One of the downfalls of that, of course, is sometimes the calculator gives you an answer
in a decimal form.
Would you recognize the decimal expansion of minus pi over six?
Not clear.
The exact answer is minus pi over six.
The decimal approximation is a rounded answer, of course.
Good.
That was a nice calculation.
Let's do another one.
Can you evaluate arc tangent of the square root of three?
Well, again, I'll use that same trick.
Arc tangent square root of three, I'll call it y, and that's equivalent to saying that
the tangent of y is the square root of three, and y has to be in that interval minus pi
over two to pi over two, the open interval.
Well, can you think of a number in that interval whose tangent is square root of three?
Yeah, pi over three.
The tangent of pi over three is square root of three.
So the arc tangent of square root of three is pi over three.
Notice something kind of interesting so far in this lecture.
We have not touched upon any calculus, have we?
We haven't done any derivatives or integrals yet.
In a sense, the inverse trig functions that we're developing right now, this is pre-calculus
still, but I'm the first to admit that it's a part of pre-calculus that a lot of times
we've forgotten or even never looked at in our courses on algebra and trigonometry.
Suppose a student comes up to you and says the following, hey, cosine of minus pi over
three is a half.
That's a true statement, isn't it?
Cosine of minus pi over three is a half.
So that must mean that arc cosine of a half is minus pi over three.
You flip-flop, right, because they're inverses.
Is that correct?
Is that a correct statement?
Well, here's the problem.
The minus pi over three is not in that domain that we restricted cosine to.
Remember we restricted cosine to a domain of zero to pi.
That's where it's one to one.
So in fact, the arc cosine of a half is really pi over three because the cosine of pi over
three indeed is a half and pi over three is in the correct domain.
Good.
So it is kind of tricky, I admit.
You can then solve some equations involving these inverse functions.
Let me show you a very simple example.
Suppose you were given arc tangent 2x minus three equals, say, pi over four.
Can you solve for x in that equation?
Well, here's one way.
Take the tangent of both sides of that equation.
So on the left hand side, we have tangent of arc tangent of 2x minus three.
And on the right hand side, we have tangent of pi over four.
Good.
Well, the tangent and the arc tangent are inverse functions of each other, so they undo
each other.
They cancel, and the left hand side becomes just 2x minus three.
And how about tangent pi over four?
Oh, that's where sine and cosine are equal, angle pi over four, and so the tangent is
one.
And so we have a very simple algebraic equation.
2x minus three equals one.
That means 2x is four, or x is two.
And you can plug two into the equation, and you'll see that that's the correct answer.
Now, a lot of times in calculus problems, you have to sort of play with inverse trig
functions and trig functions at the same time.
Let me show you a kind of a really neat way of approaching these kinds of problems.
And it uses a right triangle interpretation of inverse trig functions.
So here's the question I'll pose to you, and then we'll use a triangle argument to solve
Suppose I say that y is the arc sine of x.
Can you now find the cosine of y?
In other words, what's the cosine of the arc sine of x?
And let's restrict y to zero, between zero and pi over two, to make things simpler.
So here's how I suggest you do this.
Draw a right triangle, and we're trying to find cosine of an angle.
The angle is y.
So label one of the acute angles in your right triangle, y.
Now, because y is arc sine of x, that means that the sine of that angle y, sine of y equals x.
And now that means using the definition of the sine function, it's opposite over hypotenuse.
So label the side opposite the angle y, x, and label the hypotenuse one.
So if you look at that triangle, the sine of y is x over one, which is x.
Good, you're with me?
What's the third side of my right triangle?
Well, the Pythagorean theorem says that it's equal to the hypotenuse squared minus the x squared, all square rooted.
So the third side is the square root of one minus x squared.
So we're almost done.
We're trying to find cosine of y.
Well, cosine is adjacent over hypotenuse.
So it's the square root of one minus x squared divided by the hypotenuse one,
which equals the square root of one minus x squared.
Kind of amazing, isn't it?
That this triangle can give you so much information, you could also figure out the tangent of y.
Anything you want from this triangle.
All right, you've been waiting now.
Let's finally do some calculus.
How are we going to differentiate the inverse trig functions?
Let me show you how you do it with the arc sine function, the inverse sine function.
I think you'll like this derivation, and it works for all of them.
Suppose y is arc sine x.
I'm trying to find dy dx.
So reverse it to the form x equals sine y.
That's what inverse functions mean.
X is sine y, and there's certain restrictions on the domains, but
let's not worry about them right now.
And now with that equation, x equals sine y,
do implicit differentiation on both sides of the equation.
Well, the left-hand side is easy.
The derivative of x is one, duh.
But how about the right-hand side?
What's the derivative of sine y?
Remember, y is a function of x.
So the derivative of sine y is cosine y times dy dx.
That's the chain rule.
Now, take your dy dx and put it on one side of the equation.
And on the other side, you have one over cosine y.
Well, that's not quite the form I want my answer to be.
I've got the derivative there, but
it's not quite the right way to write it.
Remember that sine squared plus cosine squared equals one is our
fundamental trig identity.
So cosine is the square root of one minus sine squared from that identity.
So replace cosine with one over square root of one minus sine squared.
Good.
Now, why did I do that?
Well, I know what sine of y is.
Sine of y is x.
It's the original variable x.
So I come down to the final answer.
The derivative dy dx is one over the square root of one minus x squared.
Okay?
Isn't that neat?
There's some real surprises here, but
let me talk about some technical stuff.
Notice that the domain here is the open interval minus one to one.
x can't be one or minus one in that equation because you'd be dividing by zero.
Let me point out something else.
What's the integral of one over the square root of one minus x squared?
Well, it would be arc sine of x, wouldn't it?
So we've got this formula for the derivative of arc sine.
There are formulas for the derivatives of all six inverse trigonometric functions.
Only three of them are really important.
The derivative of arc sine is one over the square root of one minus x squared.
The derivative of arc tangent is quite interesting.
It's one over one plus x squared.
And then a complicated one is arc secant.
This derivative is one over the absolute value of x times the square root of x squared minus one.
Don't panic about that yet.
I'll come back to that issue.
By the way, all these derivative formulas give birth to integral formulas.
You can integrate the right-hand sides of these equations and discover that, for example,
the integral of one over the square root of one minus x squared is arc sine of x plus a constant.
I'll show you these formulas again in a moment.
Let's do some practice problems, though, with these derivative formulas.
Suppose you had to differentiate arc sine of 2x.
Well, we'll use the formula and the chain rule.
We get one over the square root of one minus 2x squared times the derivative of 2x, which is 2.
And the final answer is 2 over square root one minus 4x squared.
In the same way, the derivative of arc tangent of 3x would be one over one plus 3x quantity squared.
That's the formula for the derivative of arc tangent x times the 3 from the chain rule.
And our final answer is 3 over one plus 9x squared.
So let me make some comments now about the calculus of these inverse trigonometric functions.
It's kind of amazing to me that the derivatives of the inverse trig functions are not trigonometric functions, are they?
They're actually radical functions. They don't involve sine or cosine or trig function.
It's kind of amazing, I think. What happened to the trigonometry suddenly?
The inverse trig functions came from trigonometry, but their derivatives don't involve trigonometric functions.
It's kind of amazing.
A second comment I'd like to make, we saw a formula for the derivative of the arc secant function.
That's a complicated formula. And textbooks don't agree on even the definition of arc secant.
Some books have a certain definition and others have a different definition.
The problem is secant is not one-to-one. We've talked about that earlier.
So you have to restrict the domain of secant to define the inverse.
Well, some authors restrict it differently than other authors.
You can restrict it many ways and still get an inverse function.
Don't worry about that. This will not never be an issue, but it's kind of curious that even mathematicians are fighting this battle as to the definition of the arc secant function.
On a graphing calculator, by the way, you can graph arc secant as arc cosine of 1 over x.
There is no arc secant button on your calculator, but there is an arc cosine button.
I talked about this earlier, but let me bring it up again because it's kind of interesting.
The arc tangent function has two horizontal asymptotes.
And you can check this numerically by plugging in a large positive number into the arc tangent function, like arc tangent of 100, and you'll get approximately 1.56.
Here's the graph of arc tangent x. It's the mirror image of the tangent graph.
Notice that it's approaching a horizontal asymptote to the right and another one to the left, pi over 2 and minus pi over 2.
Good. Let's do an application now. Let me put some of these new ideas to work, and this is kind of a fun problem.
Imagine the following situation. There's a police car, a patrol car, is parked 50 feet from a long wall,
and there's a revolving light on top of the car, and it shines along the wall, and then it goes around and shines again.
And imagine you're standing next to the wall, and this light's coming, and you have to run away so you won't be in the light.
So here's the question. How fast is that light moving along the wall, say, when the angle is 45 degrees?
Let me show you a picture of the situation. There's our patrol car, and it's 50 feet from the wall, and the light makes an angle theta along that wall.
The wall is the horizontal line, and x is the distance from the vertical, the perpendicular, out to where, say, you're standing where the light's hitting.
And I think you can imagine that as theta changes, the distance x changes. And I'm trying to find here the speed of the light.
I'm trying to find dx dt, aren't I? That's what I'm trying to find, dx dt. So here's what we're going to do.
We're going to express the angle theta as a function of x, and then we'll solve the problem of finding dx dt.
That's how fast the light's moving down the wall. Now, there's kind of a tricky part here. We need to know the rate of change of the angle with respect to time.
That's something we're going to have to know. This is a related rates problem, and theta is changing, as is x.
Well, we're given that this light makes 30 revolutions a minute, 30 a minute, so it spins around 30 times in one minute.
I have to convert that to radians. So remember that there are two pi radians in one revolution. If you go around a circle, one revolution, you're going two pi radians.
So you have 30 revolutions per minute times two pi radians per revolution. That gives 60 pi radians per minute.
That's the rate of change of the light with respect to time. It's 60 pi radians per minute.
So let's look back at our picture. What's the tangent of theta in this picture? Well, it's x over 50, opposite over adjacent.
And then if I use inverse trig functions, I discover that theta is the arc tangent of x over 50.
So now I've expressed the angle theta in terms of x, and we use the inverse trig function to do that.
Okay, so what's dx dt? Well, we have our equation tangent theta equals x over 50. Write that as x equals 50 tan theta, and now we'll do a related rates type problem.
We'll differentiate both sides with respect to time. The left hand side becomes dx dt, and the right hand side, well, let me remember this.
What's the derivative of tangent? secant squared. And so the right hand side is 50 secant squared theta times the derivative of theta, which is, of course, d theta dt.
And we know what that is. Good. So at theta equals 45 degrees, well, we have to convert that to radians. That's pi over 4 radians, isn't it?
And let's see what secant is when theta is pi over 4. Look back at the picture, and imagine that x is 50, and that the angle is 45 degrees or pi over 4.
That would be an isosceles right triangle, wouldn't it? And so what's the hypotenuse? It's 50 squared plus 50 squared all square rooted.
So I now know what secant of that angle is when theta is pi over 4. Well, it's the inverse of cosine. Cosine is adjacent over hypotenuse, so secant is hypotenuse over adjacent.
And the hypotenuse was the square root of 50 squared plus 50 squared, and the adjacent side is 50, and that simplifies to square root of 5,000 over 50.
We're almost done. Let's plug in all these numbers. dx dt is 50 times the secant square, so that's the square of my secant.
That'll be 5,000 over 50 squared times my d theta dt, which was 60 pi. And then I simplify that. A lot of things cancel, and you're left with 6,000 pi feet per minute.
That's approximately 314 feet per second. I don't think I can outrun the light. It's going pretty fast along that wall.
Good. Kind of a neat problem. Let's go back to some more formulas that we are developing here. We know the derivative formulas for many of the inverse trigonometric functions.
As I said earlier, they give rise to integral formulas, and textbooks usually write these formulas a little more general than I showed earlier.
For instance, it can be shown that the integral of 1 over the square root of a squared minus x squared is the arc sine of x over a plus an arbitrary constant.
Instead of having 1 minus x squared, you have an a squared. It's just a slightly more general, and you can verify that by differentiating the right-hand side.
There's a similar formula involving arc tangent, and it goes like this. The integral of 1 over a squared plus x squared is 1 over a arc tangent x over a plus a constant.
There's also one for arc secant. Let's not worry about it. That gets a bit complicated because of the disagreement as to what arc secant really is.
Let me do a quick example to show you how easy these formulas are to use. How about the integral of 1 over square root 4 minus x squared?
Well, if you look back at the formula, the a here is 2 because 2 squared is 4, so the answer is arc sine x over a or x over 2 plus c.
And you'll see some more practice problems like this in the workbook. I don't think these are that important to lose sleep over.
Rarely do we test the memory of these formulas. Most professors would give a list of integral formulas and would expect you to know how to use them but not have to memorize them.
Let's practice with putting some ideas together. Why don't you try to tell me how you would integrate each of the following functions? What rule would you use?
This is kind of fun because we aren't going to actually do all the heavy lifting and actually integrate them, but we're going to say how we would do it.
For example, if you were given 1 over x log x, how would you integrate that?
Well, this is way back in the logarithm material and if you let u be log x, du is 1 over x and we would get a using the logarithm rule.
Good. How about log x over x? Again, let u be log x, du is 1 over x and again it's sitting there so I can do that problem too.
Here's a third one that's even simpler looking. How about just log x all by itself? What's the antiderivative of log x?
We don't know that yet, do we in the course? You'll have to wait for a few more lectures to find the answer to that problem.
Good. So I hope you enjoyed this final look at our set of functions that we need for calculus.
We basically have all the functions we'll need to solve applied calculus problems.
As I said earlier, you can practice with our workbook exercises and for the next few lectures, we're going to look at something I think a lot more fun and that is applications of calculus.
We're going to see how we can use calculus ideas and in fact the integral calculus to solve problems like the calculation of a volume or the length of a curve.
All of these applications are based on the same idea of remember how we summed rectangles to find the area under a curve?
Well, that summing process will be the same thing we'll use in all of these applications.
So I'll see you next time when we begin with areas. Thank you.
