Hello, and welcome back.
Today we're going to return to the area problem, and we're going to look at how to calculate
the area of more interesting regions in the plane.
Up to now, we've now developed all the functions we need to be successful in calculus.
All of these functions are hardwired on your graphing utilities, and in the next few lectures
we're going to use some of these functions to do applied mathematics.
We're going to use integration theory to find volumes of solids, arc length, surface
area, etc.
I'd like to begin all this with looking at the area problem again, and the good news
is we have the fundamental theorem of calculus, so we don't have to do that summation of little
rectangles like we did when we first approached the area problem.
That said though, the idea of summing rectangles, and then taking a limit as the number of rectangles
goes to infinity, or equivalently the width of the rectangles approaches zero, is the
underlying thought process for all of the applications that we'll see.
So please keep that in mind.
We'll be summing up little rectangles, and then we'll take a limit which turns the problem
into an integral.
So let me begin like I like to do many times with a simple example to show you what I'm
talking about.
Let's look at two curves.
Y1 will be x squared, and Y2 will be x cubed.
You'll notice that they intersect at the points zero, zero, and one, one.
Here's a graph of those two curves.
Also notice that the x-squared curve is above the x-cube curve on that interval zero, one.
And what I'd like to calculate is the area between those two curves.
Good.
A very straightforward problem.
Well imagine the following.
Imagine you have a little rectangle, and I've drawn one there in the picture, placed between
the two curves.
And imagine you add up all those little rectangles.
They start down when x is zero, and the final rectangle is up there when x is one.
They're pretty small at the end, but imagine you have, you know, thousands and thousands
of these rectangles.
Their widths are delta x, and their heights are, well, the height is the difference of
the two functions, isn't it?
It's the top function minus the bottom function.
So here's how you would set up this problem using calculus.
The area would be the integral, that means add up the rectangles, starting at zero and
ending at one.
The first rectangles at x equals zero, and the final rectangles over there at x equals
one.
And it's the top function minus the bottom function.
That's the height of my representative rectangle.
So it's x-squared minus x-cubed.
So that integral will give us the area bounded by those two curves.
Well, let's do the integrations, although they're fairly straightforward.
You get x-cubed over three minus x to the fourth over four.
You plug in the endpoints zero, one, and you obtain one-third minus one-fourth.
Cross multiply to subtract those fractions.
You get one-twelfth.
There's not much area there, is there?
It's kind of a little sliver, and the area is one-twelfth.
Now a common mistake that people make is they get the two functions upside down.
If you had done x-cubed minus x-squared, what would have happened to your answer?
Right, you would just get the negative of that answer.
And keep in mind, area is positive.
So you would just say, oops, I made a mistake.
The wrong functions.
The other one's on top, and then you would reverse your argument.
In today's lecture, we'll find that it's setting up these problems that's much more
important than actually doing the integrations.
I hope you looked at this problem and said, oh, that integration's very easy.
It's the power rule boring.
So it's the setup that I'm really interested in these problems.
Good, let's do another one.
Let's look at the two graphs, two minus x-squared, and the line y equals x.
So one is a parabola.
That parabola's opening downwards, and the other one's a straight line.
First of all, we're going to have to find out if they intersect, or where they intersect,
and see if they determine a finite region.
So let's set the two equations equal to each other.
x equals two minus x-squared, and now I'm solving a quadratic equation.
x-squared plus x minus two equals zero.
Factor it.
x plus two times the quantity x minus one, and we see we have two solutions.
When x is minus two, that means y is also minus two, and when x is one, y is one.
So here's a picture of our situation.
The intersection points are minus two, minus two, and one, one.
And you see that the parabola is on top of the line, isn't it?
So when I do my representative rectangle, I'm going to have the subtraction of the parabola
minus the line.
That's the length of my representative rectangle.
I like to think of these as little toothpicks, and the toothpicks start over there when x
is minus two, it'd be a short little toothpick, and then they would grow and grow, and then
finally the final toothpick is over there at x equals one.
And we're adding up the areas of these rectangles, and then we're taking the limit which turns
it into an integral.
So here we go.
The area equals the integral.
The first rectangle is down there at minus two, and the final one is at one, so those
are my limits of integration.
And then I subtract the top function minus the bottom function.
So it's the parabola minus the line.
So it's two minus x squared minus x, and then you have this integral.
Now ask yourself, is that a difficult integral to solve?
I don't think so, but it's going to take a few minutes, isn't it?
You're going to have to integrate all three terms and then plug in those end points.
There's going to be a lot of minus signs, lots of opportunities for arithmetic mistakes,
but there's no calculus anymore in a sense.
It's just plugging in the end points.
That's very difficult arithmetic, so I won't bore you with it.
You can check it on your own, and after about 20 minutes you'll get the answer of nine halves.
That's the area bounded by those two curves.
Again, what's more important is the setup of the problem.
Okay, here's another one that has another little twist to it that I think you'll enjoy.
Let's look at a cubic and a quadratic.
And so cubics go up, down, up, and a quadratic is a parabola.
And in this case, the parabola looks like it's going downwards.
It's got a vertex up high, and it goes this way.
And the question is, do these two curves determine a finite area?
So how could we do that?
Well, we could graph them.
And to aid in the graphing, let's find the points of intersection of the cubic with the quadratic.
Well, here we go.
Set them equal to each other.
3x cubed minus x squared minus 10x equals the other quadratic minus x squared plus 2x.
And you cancel the minus x squared, and you have 3x squared minus 12x.
Factor out the 3x, and that leaves x squared minus 4.
And that also factors, so we have a complete factorization, 3x times x minus 2 times x plus 2.
We see that there are three solutions.
x can be minus 2, 0, or 2.
Three different solutions.
And for each of those x values, you can plug it back into either one of the equations.
The quadratic would be easier, of course, and you'll get the corresponding y value.
For example, when x is minus 2, plug that into the equation for g, and you get that y is minus 8.
And in the same way, the other point is 0, 0, and the third point is 2, 0.
Good.
We found out where these curves intersect.
Let me show you now the graphs of these two curves.
And we'll see that it reflects those three intersection points.
Notice that down there at minus 2, minus 8, they intersect.
At the origin, they intersect.
And then over there at 2, 0, they intersect again.
And what we're after here is the area in between these two curves.
And I've shaded that area in for us.
Well, there's something kind of tricky here, isn't there?
On the left-hand side, the cubic is above the parabola.
But over there on the right-hand side, the parabola is above the cubic.
So we have to be a bit careful how we do this.
Remember, in these problems, you have to form the representative rectangle,
and you have to know which functions on top and which functions on the bottom.
And it switches here at the origin.
So let's set it up.
It'll be two integrals.
Here we go.
The area bounded by these two curves consists of the first integral,
will be from minus 2 to 0.
And it's the cubic minus the quadratic, f of x minus g of x.
And then the second area piece is from 0 to 2.
And now it's the quadratic minus the cubic.
Interesting.
Well, you could plug all those numbers in.
This is, it would be a monstrous problem, a very easy problem,
if you have maybe a day to do it in because of all the trivial integrations you have to do.
So trust me that the first integral gives an answer of 12.
And the second one also gives an answer of 12.
And the total area is then 24.
In other words, looking back at the picture, each chunk has area 12.
And the total area is 24.
Now, here's a common mistake you might have made, or I might have made.
You might have just said, I'm going to integrate from minus 2 to 2.
I'm going to ignore the fact that the curves crossed at the origin.
If you had done that, what do you think your answer would be?
You're right.
That first integral actually would be negative.
And you would end up with an answer of 0, which clearly isn't correct.
So you have to be very careful to determine which functions on top.
Great.
Good going.
I'd like to turn now to yet another twist on what we're doing in solving area problems in the plane.
Now we're going to look at two equations in which x is a function of y, rather than y being a function of x.
And it will force us to think of this problem in a different way.
We'll have to tilt our heads in a sense.
So here's our example.
Let's let x be 3 minus y squared, and x also equal y plus 1.
The first equation is a parabola, but it's a parabola going this way.
It's because x is now a function of y, rather than y being a function of x.
In a moment, I'll graph it for you.
And the second equation is still a straight line.
So again, this parabola and this line hopefully will intersect, and then they'll determine a finite region.
And that's the area we desire.
So let's set them equal to each other.
They're both equal to x, so we get an equation involving y.
y plus 1 would be 3 minus y squared.
And then bring all the y's to the left-hand side.
You get a quadratic.
y squared plus y minus 2.
Again, that factors.
One of the things I do in all these lectures is make sure the numbers come out nice.
Otherwise, we get bogged down in some very ugly arithmetic.
The principles are the same, no matter what your numbers are.
But it's easier to focus if we have nice numbers like these.
So it factors into y minus 1 times y plus 2.
We have two solutions.
One of them is y equals 1.
And when y is 1, you go back to one of the equations.
And x is 1 plus 1 or 2.
And then when y is minus 2, you discover that x is minus 1.
So there are two points of intersection, 2, 1, and minus 1, minus 2.
Here's a picture of our situation.
You see the straight line going up.
And there's the parabola, but it's bent, isn't it?
It's turned sideways.
And notice that that parabola and that line intersect at two different points,
at minus 1, minus 2 down at the bottom, and at 2, 1 at the top.
We want that area.
Well, imagine first in your mind that you use vertical rectangles again.
Just imagine putting in vertical rectangles in that picture.
What do you notice?
Well, the rectangles for a while, let's start down at the bottom.
For a while, the line is on top of the curve, isn't it?
Until you get up to the point x equals 2.
And then suddenly, the line is no longer relevant.
And the rectangles from 2 out to 3, the top of the parabola, in a sense, that part,
that region, is determined by the parabola alone.
Ouch!
Now, you can do it this way with vertical rectangles, but it'd be pretty hard because
you'd have to discover the equation of those two pieces of the parabola.
Let me show you a much easier way.
And that is, do the integration horizontally with respect to the y variable.
This will be a lot easier.
So imagine now that your representative rectangles, your toothpicks, are horizontal.
And their width is no longer delta x, it's delta y, dy.
So our integral will involve the variable y.
OK.
Let's keep thinking this way.
Here's the first rectangle.
Well it's way down when y is minus 2.
Can you see sort of a little bitty horizontal toothpick down there?
Can you imagine one?
And then the toothpicks keep going up until finally the final toothpick is when y is 1.
So the toothpicks go from minus 2 to 1 in terms of the y variable.
Now how long is a toothpick?
Well it's the parabola minus the line.
That's how long it is.
It's usually top minus the bottom.
But now it's furthest right minus the lesser right.
Not said very well, but you get the picture I think.
It's the right hand curve minus the other curve.
That's the length of that toothpick.
So let's do the algebra now.
The curves were 3 minus y square.
That was the parabola.
And the other curve is y plus 1.
I've expressed them both as functions of y.
What's the area?
Well it's the integral from minus 2 to 1.
Remember we said the y's start at minus 2 and they go up to 1.
So those are our limits of integration.
And it's the parabola minus the line.
So it's 3 minus y squared minus the quantity y plus 1.
And we integrate with respect to the variable y.
Isn't that neat?
We get to just do the same kind of reasoning,
but we've done it horizontally with the units being
horizontal now, and we integrate vertically upwards
from the bottom to the top.
And it turns out again after some uninteresting integrations
that the answer is 9 halves.
Good.
Let me talk now about some tricks
that you might be able to use when you're finding
areas of regions in the plane.
One thing that's very useful is to take advantage
of the properties of even functions and odd functions.
That often can simplify some of your calculations.
Here's an example of that.
Suppose you have the absolute value function.
And let's define it on the interval minus 5 to 5.
Here's a picture of that function.
It's the v that we're used to, and it starts at minus 5
and goes to 5.
What's the area under that curve?
Well, let's use calculus to find it,
although we could just add up the areas of the triangles.
But I'm trying to illustrate a point here with even functions.
The point is that the area under the absolute value
function between minus 5 and 5 is twice the area from 0 to 5
because the absolute value function is even.
And we're on a symmetric interval.
So this is a very good trick with more complicated even
functions.
So here's the answer.
It's minus 5 to 5, the absolute value of x dx.
That would be the area under the curve.
But because it's an even function,
it's twice the integral from 0 to 5.
And now I can drop the absolute value sign, can I?
Because on the interval 0, 5, the absolute value of x equals x.
If you're like me, when you see the absolute value function,
your stomach kind of churns a little bit
because you've got to worry about x being negative
and things like that.
But with this simplification, everybody's positive.
And then you just do the integration x squared over 2
between 0 and 5.
Plug in the 5, you get 25, and then the 2's cancel.
And notice that the other limit of integration
is very pleasant, 0.
0 is generally a wonderful limit of integration
because usually when you plug 0 in, you get 0 back.
Not always, but usually you do.
Great.
OK.
Here's another kind of situation that I see a lot
as a professor of mathematics.
And that is you present a problem on a test or something.
And without thinking, the students kind of do it,
and they get kind of an absurd answer,
and they circle it and go on to the next problem.
And you'll see why this is kind of tricky here.
Let's find the area bounded by the curve x squared minus 6x.
Now let me show you sort of the naive way of thinking about it.
x squared minus 6x has two intercepts on the x-axis.
When x is 0, y is 0.
And when x is 6, you get 36 minus 36.
So at 0 and at 6, the curve is 0.
And so you might think, I'm going to integrate from 0 to 6
my function.
Just integrate the function from 0 to 6.
Well, if you do that, you get a negative answer.
Oops.
Remember, area better not be negative.
What's going on here with this function?
Well, here's a picture of it.
Here's a graph of x squared minus 6x.
Yeah, it has intercepts at 0 and 6.
I agree with that.
But look, the curve is below the x-axis.
So if you were to integrate the function,
you would expect a negative answer
because your rectangles are going the wrong way in a sense.
What you really have to think about here
is which curve is on top and which
curve is on the bottom for my little rectangles?
Well, the top curve is the function y equals 0,
also known as the x-axis.
And the bottom function is the parabola.
Isn't that curious?
So here's the arithmetic involved in this problem.
The area equals the integral from 0 to 6.
That part was right.
Top minus the bottom.
The top is 0 and the bottom is minus.
Well, you get minus the bottom function.
So it's minus x squared minus 6x.
Or if you want, you can slide the minus sign through.
And you have to integrate minus x squared plus 6x.
And if you do that integration, it's, again, uninteresting.
You get a positive answer of 36.
And that's what we would expect, that it would be a positive
number.
By the way, when I took calculus back thousands of years ago,
of course, we didn't have graphing technology.
And we couldn't have quickly, perhaps, looked at a figure,
a graph, and determined if it was above or below the x-axis.
Of course, this one's a simple parabola, and you could
probably graph it by hand.
But in a more complicated function, it's very, very
useful to have that graphing utility.
And to graph the function, and then you'll see where it is.
And you'll see who's on top and who's on the bottom, things
like that.
That's important to realize before you just madly
integrate the function without thinking about the setup.
Great.
OK, I'd like to have some fun now.
I'm going to look at some functions that will kind of
stretch our minds a bit.
I'm going to look at a pair of functions here and calculate
some areas under the curves.
And I hope I'll surprise you with some of these answers.
The first graph I'd like to look at is the function 1 over x.
And I'm going to have it start at x equals 1 and finish at
some point, say, b.
And b you can imagine to be 10, or 20, or 30, or something.
So what's the area under the curve 1 over x from 1 to b?
Let's find the area.
Well, it would be the integral from 1 to b of 1 over x dx.
Good.
What's the antiderivative of 1 over x?
That's our old friend, the natural logarithm, isn't it?
Remember that function we developed a few lectures ago?
So it's the logarithm of x, and we have the two end points.
So we get log b minus log of 1, and the log of 1 is 0.
So our answer is log b.
So for instance, if b is 20, the area under the curve from
1 to 20 would be log of 20, which is not a very big number.
And if b is 1,000, it would be log of 1,000.
So as b tends to infinity, as that region gets longer and
longer, is the area approaching a limit?
Equivalently, does log b approach a limit as b goes to
infinity?
And the answer is no.
Remember, the log function looked like this.
It grew up, and it went up like this.
It kept rising.
It was always increasing.
Now, it wasn't increasing very fast, but the log function
gets larger and larger.
It's an increasing function.
So the bottom line here is the limit of this integral as b
goes to infinity does not exist.
It's infinity, in other words.
The area under that curve you can think of in street
language as being infinite area under that curve as you go
out to infinity on the x-axis.
That's pretty believable, I think.
Infinite extent, infinite area.
Well, let me change things very, very slightly.
Instead of the curve 1 over x, let's look at 1 over x squared.
Now, the graph of 1 over x squared looks just about like
1 over x.
They almost look the same.
After the point 1, it turns out that 1 over x squared is
slightly below 1 over x.
But the form is basically the same.
So we're going to calculate now the area under this new
function, 1 over x squared, from 1 to b.
All right, here we go.
It's the integral from 1 to b of 1 over x squared, which is
the same as x to the minus 2.
Remember how you integrate?
You go x to the minus 1 over minus 1, and then that turns
out to be minus 1 over x.
And then you plug in the two endpoints, you plug in b, and
you plug in 1, and you get minus 1 over b plus 1.
Good.
Now, imagine b gets bigger and bigger.
What if b is 1,000?
What's the area under the curve?
It would be 1 minus 1 over 1,000, which is about 1,
isn't it?
It's a little bit smaller than 1.
How about if b is a billion?
Then it's 1 minus 1 over a billion.
That's getting really small.
What's the limit now as b goes to infinity?
Well, I think you see the limit is 1.
So that's kind of amazing.
The area under the curve 1 over x squared, which looks very
much like the curve 1 over x, behaves completely
differently.
Now, as you go out to infinity, the area under that curve
is a finite number, and it's one square unit.
It's a piece of land that has one square unit of area, but
it has infinite extension.
You couldn't build a fence around it, could you?
Because the fence would be infinitely long on the x-axis.
But yet, its area is finite.
This is a topic that I think is really kind of stretches
your imagination, of course.
And it's something that is studied in calculus 2, second
semester calculus, or on the BC advanced placement exam.
It's a topic called improper integrals.
Good.
I think we've sort of conquered now how to calculate areas
bounded by two curves.
I hope you sort of see that the underlying principle is
think of representative rectangles and then add them up.
In the next two lectures, we're going to turn to volumes.
And we're going to talk about what are called volumes of
revolution.
For example, imagine a curve like this, and then you
rotate it around, generating a volume of revolution.
A football is in the shape of a volume of revolution.
So are things like donuts and, of course, a sphere.
The technique we'll use is the same idea we've been doing
with areas.
But instead of adding up rectangles, we're going to add
up some three-dimensional objects, some disks.
So it's going to be a lot of fun, I think.
It's going to take some three-dimensional visualization.
But I think you'll enjoy our next lecture on volumes.
Thank you very much.
