Hello again, and welcome to our first of two lectures on calculating volumes.
This time we saw how to find the area bounded by some curves in the X-Y plane, and we used
representative rectangles to mimic the summation process, and that gave rise to some integrals
that we then evaluated.
That summation process will again play a role in calculating volumes.
Today we're going to talk about the so-called disc method, and the idea here is that our
representative elements will be discs, they'll be three-dimensional objects that will fill
up the volume which we're trying to calculate.
So let's see how this works with a simple example.
I always like to begin with a fairly straightforward example to try to show what's going to happen,
and then we'll complicate things as we move through the lecture.
So let's consider the curve, the square root function, say between x equals 1 and x equals
4, and that's in the first quadrant.
So the square root function's a little curve like this in the plane, and now imagine the
following that it rotates around, it revolves around the x-axis, okay?
It revolves around the x-axis, and it creates something like a cup.
If you turn it sideways, you can sort of imagine a cup there or a flower pot, and we want to
find the volume of that flower pot, of that object, that three-dimensional object.
It's formed by revolving a curve around an axis, and by doing that, the cross-sections
of this object are circles, aren't they?
They're circles.
So here's the idea of finding the volume.
Imagine you slice this volume into discs.
Now each disc will have a certain volume.
Its width is dx.
That's the width of the disc, the height of it, or if it's a pancake you're imagining,
it would be the thickness of the pancake.
And then it has a certain radius, doesn't it?
And the area of that circle is pi r squared.
That's the area of a circle.
So the volume of our little disc is pi r squared dx.
Now add them up.
Add them up.
The first pancake, or the first disc, is over there when x is one.
It's a small disc.
And the final disc is over at x equals four, and it's a larger disc.
And you're adding up all these discs, and then of course we do the usual take a limit.
We have an infinite number of discs, or the thicknesses dx approaches zero, and that gives
rise to our definite integral, which we can then integrate.
So let's do the algebraic portion of this now that we've seen the picture.
The volume of our little disc, as I said earlier, is pi r squared.
That's the area of the circle times the thickness delta x.
And in this case, what is the radius?
Well, the radius is the square root function, isn't it?
Because that's the height from the x-axis up to the curve.
It's the square root function.
So what do we have then?
We have the volume will be an integral starting at one, that's where the first disc is, ending
at four, and then it's pi r squared.
Pi times the radius, which is the square root of x squared, isn't that nice?
And of course, this integral is very easy to compute.
Why don't I go ahead and do it?
It's one to four of pi x, square root of x squared is just x.
So that's pi times x squared over two between one and four.
You plug in four, you get eight.
You plug in one, you get a half, and you simplify, and the final answer is pi times eight minus
a half or 15 pi over two.
That's the volume of this flower pot or cup, 15 pi over two cubic units.
So let's kind of summarize what we just did.
We are adding up little discs going from left to right.
We're adding them up, and the volume of each little disc, it has a certain area, pi r squared,
and then a thickness, and that's the total volume.
And that dx tells us that we're going to integrate with respect to x.
It's very similar to the idea of finding area under a curve.
And as usual, the setup of this problem is much more important than the actual integrations.
Because I might do an integration that's particularly interesting, but in general, we'll omit them.
And there's a formula for this that you can find in textbooks, but I don't recommend you
memorize the formula for this disc method.
I think you should memorize the idea of what we're doing, forming discs and adding them
up.
Good.
Let's do another example.
We'll find the volume of a football-shaped object.
So let's take the function square root of sine x.
You'll see in a minute why I took the square root of sine x between zero and pi.
Essentially, that's one arch of the, well, not the sine function, is it, but the square
root of the sine function.
It kind of looks like the sine function, but it's the square root of the sine function.
It still touches at the origin and at pi.
And now I've formed my discs that are perpendicular to the axis of rotation.
We've taken this sine curve.
We rotated it about the x-axis, and we get this football-shaped object.
It's a three-dimensional object, and cross sections are circles.
Now what's the area of a cross section?
It's pi r squared, and the radius is the square root of sine x.
And that's why I put the square root there, because when I square it, I get rid of the
square root.
So here's the algebra for this problem.
The volume is the integral starting at zero and ending at pi.
Those were the discs.
They start at zero, and they end at pi.
And it's pi times the radius squared, which is pi times square root of sine x squared.
And then those cancel, and it's the integral from zero to pi of sine x, all times pi, of
course, outside.
And the antiderivative of sine x is, of course, minus the cosine x.
Isn't it sad that that minus sign is there, but that's just the nature of this course
that sometimes you have these tricky formulas you have to memorize.
The antiderivative of sine x is minus cosine x, and our endpoints are zero to pi.
So we now plug them in, pi times the quantity minus cosine pi, and here comes a little arithmetic
trouble spot, minus a minus cosine zero.
Quite complicated.
A lot of minus signs.
Well, cosine of pi is minus one.
So minus cosine pi is one, and then cosine zero is one, and minus a minus one is one.
So this all turns out to be okay.
It turns out to be pi times one plus one, or two pi.
Now I chose here the square root of sine x.
What if I had chosen sine x as my curve?
The picture would look pretty much the same, wouldn't it?
It'd be the arch of the sine curve, and then you rotate it.
What would make the problem a little bit trickier, though?
Well the integral would be pi r squared, but now the radius is sine x, and you square it.
You have to integrate sine squared x, and at this point in the course, we don't know
how to do that yet.
But trust me, in a few more lectures, we'll actually come back to problems like the integral
of sine squared x, and I'll show you a very easy way of finding its anti-derivative.
Good.
Let's do a slightly more interesting problem.
Mathematicians love to say the word interesting when what they really mean is a harder problem.
Let's take two curves, two minus x squared, that's a parabola opening downward, and a straight
line, a horizontal line, g of x equals one.
So f of x is two minus x squared, and g of x is one.
I've drawn these two curves here.
One is a parabola, and the other is the horizontal line, and they intersect twice at minus one
one, and at one one.
Now here's what we're going to do with the figure.
It's sort of a half moon up there, isn't it?
You can imagine that it's under the parabola, and above the line.
It's the part that's above the line y equals one, and I rotate that not around the x-axis.
This time I'm going to rotate it around the line y equals one, and I've drawn a representative
disc in that figure.
I hope you can imagine it.
The disc starts over there when x is minus one, and at that point the disc is really
small, and then it gets bigger and bigger, and then it gets smaller and smaller as it
approaches x equals positive one.
Good.
So we're going to find the volume of this solid of revolution.
The figure is determined by the two functions, two minus x squared and the horizontal line
one, and then that's rotated around the line y equals one.
All right.
Let's see how to do it.
Well, what is the radius of our pancake or our disc?
Well, the radius is the top curve minus the bottom curve.
It's the parabola minus the line.
So the radius of this disc here is the parabola f of x minus the line g of x, or two minus
x squared minus one, which of course simplifies to one minus x squared.
That's the radius function.
Now you can check to see that that radius function is correct.
Here's a little trick that I like to use in my classes.
Supposedly one minus x squared is the radius of the disc.
According to that formula, what's the radius when x is minus one?
Well, it would be one minus minus one squared or zero.
And that makes sense because over there on the left, the disc has no radius at all.
It's a tiny little disc.
And the same is true on the right when x is one.
What about when x is zero?
What's the radius when x is zero?
Well, it's one minus zero or one.
And if you look at the picture, that's the biggest radius that you would ever achieve
in this problem.
Good.
So the radius function makes sense.
It's one minus x squared.
So what's the volume?
The volume is integrate from minus one to one pi r squared, pi times, and that radius
was one minus x squared.
So it's one minus x squared all squared.
And you have a fairly complicated integration to deal with, but it's very simple in terms
of the formulas involved.
You would just multiply out that polynomial and do the antiderivatives and plug in the
endpoints.
If you do that, trust me, you get 16 pi over 15.
Do you see a shortcut, by the way?
Do you see something you might do that would make the problem a little bit easier to integrate?
Right.
That's an even function, isn't it?
So you could actually integrate from zero to one and double your answer.
Geometrically what that means is because it's an even function, you could integrate half
of the figure, find the volume of half of it, and then double your answer.
So geometrically it makes sense.
Good.
Okay.
Let's complicate things a bit more.
Now we're going to take two curves, and they will form a certain region in the plane,
and then we'll rotate that region around the x-axis.
So our curves are going to be the square root function and the function x squared.
Here's a picture of those two functions.
The square root function is above the function x squared on the interval zero, one.
And those two functions intersect at zero, zero, and at one, one.
And they form kind of a little leaf.
See that little leaf in the first quadrant?
You could find the area of that leaf by just doing the appropriate area formula, but I
want to take it up into three dimensions.
I want to take that little sliver and rotate it around, revolve it around the x-axis.
And you get kind of a funny looking object.
If you turn sideways, you can sort of imagine that, what does it look like?
Maybe like a little dish that you would put some ice cream in or something, if you turn
it sideways.
And I want to know the volume.
How much porcelain is in this dish?
That's what I'm sort of asking.
Not how much ice cream it holds, but rather, what's the volume of the actual material
that makes up the dish?
So again, mathematically, we take the region bounded by the two curves and rotate it around
the x-axis.
Good.
Well, the technique here is called the washer method.
Basically, it's the disc method, but you subtract one disc from another disc.
Look at the picture.
I've drawn a slice of this figure perpendicular to the axis of rotation.
And notice that it has an outer radius.
That's determined by the square root function.
And then you're subtracting off the inner radius, aren't you?
That's kind of the part that's not in the volume.
That's where you put the ice cream.
So it's a subtraction of pi r squared, where r is the outer radius, big r, I'll call it,
capital R, minus pi r squared, little r, which is the inner radius.
So my representative object here is, it's like a washer.
Or maybe if you're my age, you remember something called a record.
And this is like a record.
Records were they had a certain thickness, and then they had a hole in the middle.
And this has a hole in the middle, doesn't it?
It has a hole in the middle.
Now, the hole changes size.
As you move, as x goes from 0 to 1, the hole changes size.
Okay, let's call it a washer, though, because I think that's the technical term that they
use in textbooks.
So we have an outer radius of the square root function, an inner radius of x squared, and
we then subtract the pi r squared, the outer radius squared minus the inner radius squared.
So here's the formula.
The volume using the washer method is pi times the integral from 0 to 1.
It starts at 0, and it ends at 1 in this problem.
And it's the outer radius squared.
That's the square root of x squared minus the inner radius squared, and the inner radius
was x squared.
And so you square that, ouch.
And then you, of course, are integrating with respect to the variable x.
And that simplifies to pi times the integral from 0 to 1 of x minus x to the fourth.
Once again, an easy problem to solve.
If you spend 10 or 15 minutes, you'll get the answer 3 pi over 10.
But it's the setup that is so important in these problems, not the integrations.
So let's do an application.
You're an engineer now, and you're constructing an object.
Let me try to describe this object.
You have a sphere, and the sphere is five inches in radius.
So here's our sphere.
And you drill a hole through it, like this, right through the middle of the sphere.
And the drill radius, the drill bit, is three inches.
So you drill a three-inch hole through the sphere, and you throw away the part you drilled
out.
And all you're left with is the outer rim of your sphere.
You're left with just the outside.
You can fit your hand through the middle of it.
That's the volume of that metal ring that's left over.
That's our question.
Here's a picture of the situation.
There's a sphere, and then we've drilled out a hole through the middle of it.
The sphere is radius five, and the sphere can be obtained by rotating a curve, can it?
And the hole has radius three.
So the outside radius of our sphere is 25 minus x squared, all square-rooted.
Now how did I get that?
I want to look at this as a picture in the plane.
So imagine that you take a cross-section of this sphere and place it on the plane.
And you'll have a circle, a piece of a circle.
Because it's radius five, the equation of that circle is y equals square root 25 minus
x squared.
But then I've drawn the line y equals three, which indicates that we've drilled out the
hole.
And so what's left is a little piece at the top.
And that's the part that rotates around the x-axis, generating our resulting metal ring,
whose volume we want to calculate.
Now let's notice something about this ring.
The two curves intersect when x is equal to four.
Here's how I got that.
Remember that the y-value or the radius of the hole is three.
So y is three.
And if you plug into the equation y equals square root 25 minus x squared, in order to
get three, x has to be four.
In other words, the two curves intersect at four-three and, of course, at minus four-three.
Those are the intersection points of our circle and our horizontal line.
Okay, the rest is going to be easy now that I've got the picture kind of in my mind.
What's the volume of this, baby?
Well, it's pi times the integral.
Well, where does x start?
It starts at minus four and ends at four.
So it goes from minus four to four.
The outer radius squared minus the inner radius squared.
The outer radius squared is 25 minus x squared square rooted, but then I square that.
And the inner radius is very simple.
The inner radius is just three.
So it's minus three squared.
And that simplifies to pi times the integral from minus four to four.
Notice that the square root squared gets rid of the square root sign.
And you have 25 minus x squared minus nine, which is 16 minus x squared.
And that's what you have to integrate.
And that's very easy to do.
And you finally get 256 pi over three cubic inches.
That's how much there is in that metal object that you just created in your factory.
Now, did you see a shortcut again on how to integrate this a little bit quicker?
Yeah, it's an even function, isn't it?
So you could have done this doing that trick with even functions.
So I would like to practice now with three problems that sort of show how complicated
you can make some of these problems.
We're going to now rotate some things around different axes.
I'm going to consider the function f of x equals the square root of x from zero to three.
And I'm going to rotate that around three different axes.
First I'll do it around the x-axis, then around the y-axis, and then around the line x equals
three.
So I'm going to do it three times.
Here's the first one.
I take the curve square root of x, and it starts at zero, and it ends at three.
And I'm rotating it around the x-axis.
Well that's pretty easy to figure out what the volume is.
We're pretty good at that.
It's pi r squared, and the r here is the square root function.
That's the radius.
It's just the distance from the x-axis up to the curve.
So our answer will be the volume equals pi times the integral from zero to three radius
squared, square root of x squared.
That's pi times the integral from zero to three of x, and of course that's nine pi over
two.
That takes a little bit of time, but it's an easy integration.
Here's the second problem.
You take that same curve, y equals the square root of x, but now rotate it around the y-axis.
Whoa, rotate it around the y-axis.
Well now I have to do my disks, actually my washers, horizontally.
I'm going to have to integrate with respect to y now because I'm rotating around the y-axis.
So let's see if we can figure out how to set this one up.
Well the problem is going to be that the function is y equals square root of x, but I'm going
to have to put everything in terms of y.
So remember that y equals square root of x is equivalent to x equals y squared.
x equals y squared describes the same curve in the first quadrant.
So here we go.
We're going to use the washer method, and what's the outside radius that gets rotated
around the y-axis?
Of course that's three.
That's pretty easy, the outside radius, it's constant.
But what's the inside radius?
Hmm, that's kind of weird.
I claim the inside radius is a little more complicated.
The inside radius is going to be the x value that we obtain by taking our representative
element and moving over and hitting the curve.
The left hand point where the horizontal element hits the curve, it hits at x which we're calling
y squared.
Remember we have to put everything in terms of y.
So here is our integral.
The volume is pi times the integral from zero to where?
Hmm, you don't know the upper limit.
Well y starts at zero and goes up, and it goes until x is three which corresponds to
y being square root of three.
So the upper limit of integration is the square root of three.
The outside radius squared is three squared, and the inside radius squared is y squared,
and you square it, so it's y squared squared, or y to the fourth.
Wow, that was pretty hard.
And you can do that integration, just integrate it as normal and you get 36 pi square root
of three over five.
That took me about 40 minutes to do by hand.
By the way, we'll do the same problem next lecture using a different technique for finding
volumes that will be much easier.
And here's our final problem that we'll look at.
Now we're going to take the curved square root of x starting at the origin and going
out to x equals three, and now it rotates about the line x equals three.
It's rotating around a vertical line.
So my discs now are horizontal, aren't they, like they were in the last example.
Okay, that's a little tricky now.
Let's see if we can figure out the radius of our disc.
Well, again, y equals square root of x is the same as x equals y squared, and we're
going to have to do this problem in terms of y.
And I claim the radius is three minus x, or three minus y squared.
Let's check that.
Let's check that the radius is three minus y squared.
When y starts at zero, what's the radius?
Well, it's really big, and three minus zero is indeed three.
That's how big the radius is when y is zero.
Where is the final disc?
It's up when y is equal to the square root of three.
That's how high we go.
And in that case, the radius is now shrunk to nothing.
So you can see that these radii get smaller and smaller as you integrate from zero up
to square root of three.
So that's a lot of talk about how to set the problem up, but I'm the first to admit
these are pretty tricky.
It's hard to find that radius function, especially when you're rotating about a different axis.
And again, in the workbook, you'll have some practice problems where we'll rotate things
around non-trivial axes.
But once you've figured all that out, it's pretty easy to do the problem.
The volume is pi times the integral from zero to square root of three.
We're going in the y direction, and the radius was three minus y squared, and then you square
that.
And so again, you can do the integration in your leisure, and the answer is 24 pi square
root of three over five.
Good.
Earlier I alluded to the football problem when we rotated the square root of sine around
the x-axis.
Let me take a moment here at the end of the lecture to look back at that problem and imagine
that instead of doing the square root of sine x, we rotate sine x around the x-axis.
So then our pi r squared would be pi sine squared.
And I asked, how do you integrate sine squared x?
Well, it's not obvious.
It's not obvious.
Right now, we really don't have techniques to handle this problem unless you're really
good at trigonometry.
Some of you might remember from your days in your trigonometry class that sine squared
x can be rewritten by a trig identity as one minus cosine 2x all divided by two.
That's just a trig identity from elementary trigonometry.
So that's what you have to integrate, and that can be done.
That integral is now fairly easy.
You would just use the integral of one-half and then the integral of cosine 2x over two.
That would be integration by substitution.
Great.
I hope you enjoyed this lecture.
I think it's difficult to explain some of the ideas in calculating volumes of determined
by revolving curves around an axis.
It's complicated because you have the radius function.
You have either the dx or the dy, et cetera.
The lecture next time will also be devoted to calculating volumes.
But this time we'll use a different representative element.
It's slightly more complicated, but I think a lot more interesting.
So I'm sure you'll enjoy next lecture, and thank you very much.
