Hello again. I hope you've enjoyed our lectures on applications of integration.
Last time we approached the problem of finding the volume of a solid of revolution,
and we used the so-called disc method, or the washer method, to calculate those volumes.
And in those examples, the representative element that we used to sum was a disc, or sometimes a washer.
I like to use the word pancake. We were adding up lots of pancakes, and that meant we were integrating across our interval.
Today we'll look again at volumes, and it's a method called the shell method.
And our representative element now is a little more complicated.
I think you'll find it quite interesting the way this method works.
It's difficult to describe, so please bear with me as we look at a simple example of the shell method.
So I'd like to take one of my favorite curves, the square root function, between 0 and 3.
But this time I'm going to rotate it around the y-axis.
So here's the picture. It's the square root function starting at the origin and going out to where x is equal to 3.
But it rotates around the y-axis, and I hope you can imagine the solid that generates.
Well, here's how we're going to figure out the volume of this solid.
Imagine you draw a representative rectangle under the square root function at position x.
Now take that toothpick or representative rectangle. It's width is delta x.
And rotate that around the y-axis. Rotate it around the y-axis.
In a sense, you're generating a can, a tin can, because it's hollow inside,
and it consists of the height that rotates around.
And the question is, how big is that representative tin can, that representative element?
It's called a shell because it's hollow inside.
And I think you can imagine that you fill up the entire volume by taking shells of different radii.
The first shell, imagine that x is very close to the origin,
and you get a tiny, tiny shell whose height is very, very small because it bumps into the square root function,
and the radius is real small also.
And then the shells are embedded, one inside the other, and the shells grow bigger and bigger,
and the final shell, the biggest tin can, is way out there when x is 3.
Imagine that rotating around, and you get a fairly big tin can.
It kind of looks like a tuna can without a top or a bottom.
Okay, so we're going to add up the volume of these shells,
and then we'll take all the shells, and imagine again that we have an infinite number of shells,
or the delta x approaches zero, and that converts the problem to an integral.
So, here's the question. What's the volume of a shell?
Well, first of all, you know, by volume of a shell, I mean how much tin is in a tin can that doesn't have a top or a bottom?
Well, first of all, there's dx, the thickness there. That's part of the volume.
Then there's a height, and the height, of course, is f of x.
It's the height from the x-axis up to the curve.
And now the tricky part is, this shell is going around the y-axis, isn't it?
How much is there when you go around the y-axis?
Well, it's the circumference of that circle, 2 pi r. That's the formula for a circumference.
Here's another way of imagining what's going on.
Take that tin can, that shell, and cut it, like this, and lay it out flat.
What's the volume now of this rectangle?
Well, it's the same formula. The thickness of the plate is delta x.
The height is, or one dimension, is the height of the function, and the other is 2 pi r.
So, I admit that's kind of hard to explain, but let's see now what we have.
The volume of our little shell is, well, it has the following dimensions.
Height is f of x, the function. The circumference is 2 pi x, because x is the radius, isn't it?
So, it's 2 pi x. x starts at 0, so there's not much radius at all, and then x ends at 3.
It's a big radius. And then the width, of course, is delta x.
So, the volume is 2 pi r f of x delta x, or 2 pi x, x is the radius, times the height f of x times delta x.
Add up the shells, which means integrate. So, what's our answer going to be?
Here's the volume formula for the figure that we obtained, the solid we obtained,
by rotating the square root function about the y-axis.
It's the integral from 0 to 3. The shells start at 0, and they finish at 3.
It's 2 pi r, 2 pi radius. That's 2 pi x, and then the height is f of x.
That's the representative element, and I'm adding up those by integrating them.
And the f of x here is the square root function, so it's 2 pi, factoring that out of the integral sign,
0 to 3 x square roots of x dx, which is 2 pi integral of x to the 3 halves.
Good. And now I can integrate that.
x to the 3 halves goes up to x to the 5 halves, divided by 5 halves, which means multiply by 2 fifths.
So, I have 2 pi times 2 fifths, x to the 5 halves between 0 and 3.
Plug in the endpoints while plugging in 0 is trivial.
If you plug in 3, you ultimately get 4 pi over 5 times the square root of 243,
which simplifies to 36 root 3 times pi over 5.
Wow. The integration was a little complicated. The setup was worse.
But maybe you noticed something. From last lecture, we calculated this volume using washers, and we got the same answer.
So, we can do problems sometimes both ways, and hopefully, well, of course, you'll come up with the same answer.
And again, I'm going to stress this lecture, the setup of the problem and not the integrations.
That said, we'll come to a problem a little bit later where I do like or I will like to focus on the integration technique.
So, for those that like general formulas, you can write the volume of a solid with a vertical axis of revolution in the following form.
It's 2 pi times the integral from a to b times a radius function, which we'll call p of x times the height function h of x.
In the previous example, the radius was x and the height was f of x.
And in general, you could have different radii and different heights.
Here's a picture sort of a general shell method setup.
There's a curve, and the height is given by h of x, and the radius is p of x, and it rotates around an axis.
Good. There's also a formula for rotating around the x-axis, and it's very similar looking.
It's 2 pi integral from your limits of integration, say, c to d of a radius function p of y times a height function h of y.
And because you're integrating with respect to y, everything has to be expressed in the variable y.
Good. Let's do another sort of straightforward example to see if we're comfortable with this method.
Let's set up the integral for the volume of the solid of revolution formed by taking the region x minus x cubed between 0 and 1 and rotating it around the y-axis.
Here's a picture of that.
x minus x cubed intersects the x-axis at 0 and at 1.
So it's a little hump like that, and that hump is rotated around the y-axis.
It would be difficult to find the volume using the disc method or the washer method, wouldn't it?
Because your discs would go horizontally, and you'd have trouble figuring out the endpoints of a representative element.
But the shell method's very easy here.
Let's step through it. What's the radius x?
What's the height, the function, and what's the width of our tin can dx?
Pretty easy, isn't it?
So here's the formula.
The volume will equal the integral from 0 to 1.
And the shells start at 0 and they end at 1, 2 pi r, so it's 2 pi x, and then the height is the function x minus x cubed.
And that's a very easy integral to calculate.
And 20 minutes later, you'll get the answer 4 pi over 15 in case you want to test yourself.
But again, it's the setup that I really care about.
Let's look at a problem now where we use both methods to solve it, and then you can select your favorite.
One will be easier than the other. Here's the problem.
Y is x squared plus 1. That's a parabola opening upwards.
And we're going to look at the region bounded by that parabola between y equals 0, or the x-axis,
x equals 0, or the y-axis, and the line x equals 1.
So here I've drawn the curve starting at 0, 1 and going up to 1, 2.
It's that curve in the first quadrant, and it rotates about the y-axis.
So it kind of generates a solid, and you could probably sit in that solid if you wanted.
It's got a curved top there.
So that's the solid that we're generating, and it's rotated around the y-axis.
Let's do it first with the shell method, and then with the disk or washer method.
The shell method, I think, is pretty easy here.
It's just what we've been doing.
The height is, of course, the function.
The radius is just x, and x begins where? At 0.
That's a tin can that's very, very skinny, has almost no radius at all, and the height is 1.
The first tin can has height 1, and then the tin cans get bigger and bigger,
and the final tin can is over there when x is equal to 1, and the height of that tin can is 2.
So the height is the function.
So here's the setup. It's a one-liner.
The volume is the integral from 0 to 1, 2 pi r, which is 2 pi x times the function x squared plus 1.
Wow. Isn't that easy?
And again, you could work this out. You get 3 pi over 2.
I really like this problem because it's very easy to set up with the shell method.
Now let's go back to the disk method.
I think most of my students understand the disk method more than they understand the shell method,
and they tend to try to avoid the shell method.
I don't recommend that. The shell method here you'll discover is a lot better than the disk method.
So now we're going to do this same solid.
Remember, it's that curve rotated around the y-axis.
We're going to do it by the washer method.
Well, we've got some problems here.
Imagine slices perpendicular to the y-axis, and as you go from 0 up to 1,
what you really have there is a cylinder, don't you?
The curve doesn't even play a role from 0 to 1, does it?
That's just a cylinder.
And then from 1 to 2, as y goes from 1 to 2, we've got some action.
In other words, we've got a little horizontal unit there, a horizontal toothpick,
that's going to rotate around the y-axis, and it's the length of that little toothpick that we care about.
Its thickness is dy.
It's pi r squared here, but the outside radius of that little toothpick as it rotates around is 1.
But the inside radius is not so obvious.
So let's get our hands dirty.
We're going to need two integrals, one for the bottom part up to 1, and then the second part from 1 to 2.
Actually, the bottom part, you could just use the formula for a cylinder if you wanted,
but let's go ahead and set up the integral for that.
Okay, the first integral will be pi times the integral from 0 to 1 of the outside function, which is 1,
and of course, there is no inside function, it's just 0.
So it's 1 squared minus 0 squared, or it's the integral of 1 dy.
That gives pi when you integrate that.
That's obvious.
The volume of that cylinder is pi r squared times its height, and the radius is 1 and the height is 1,
so it's pi 1 squared times 1, also known as pi.
Good, so the cylinder is easy.
What about the top part?
Well, the curve is given as y equals x squared plus 1.
We have to write it in terms of making y the independent variable.
So let's solve for x in this equation, and you get x equal square root of y minus 1.
And that square root of y minus 1 is the inside radius of our problem.
So the second integral is the following.
It's pi times the integral from 1 to 2.
We're going up from 1 to 2.
Outside radius was 1, that's the outside radius,
and the inside radius is square root of y minus 1 all squared.
Now, that won't be so difficult because the squared will get rid of the square root sign,
and the entire second integral turns out to be pi over 2,
and when you add them up, you get the same answer we had earlier with the shell method, 3 pi over 2.
So let's vote on which method is easier.
I vote for the shell method here.
It was a lot less work than the disk method in this example.
In general, there are lots of tools that you have for calculating volumes of solids of revolution.
I mean, these solids can be formed in many ways.
You can rotate something about the x-axis, or about the y-axis, or about any axis you want.
And you can use the shell method in some cases, or the disk method in others.
And by disk, I also mean, of course, the washer method.
And it can get very complicated, especially if you have axes that are non-standard,
you know, x equals 6 or something like that.
But the bottom line is, in all of these problems, you have to decide on which method you're going to use,
and then figure out the height and the radius, etc.
And as I've shown earlier in some of the lectures on volume,
it's always nice to test a few x-values, or y-values, to see if your radius function truly makes sense.
Let's now look at a really interesting application.
I think you'll like this.
We're going to find the volume of a donut, or sometimes you might think of a volume of a tire for a car.
Technically, in mathematics, we call such a figure a torus, and we're going to find the volume of a torus.
And here's how a torus is formed.
You take a circle, and I'll take the unit circle, x squared plus y squared equals 1,
and I'm going to rotate that circle about an axis.
And so imagine the circle motoring around.
It generates a donut, doesn't it?
It generates a donut, or a tire for a car.
That's the volume we're going to calculate.
To be more specific, we're going to rotate the unit circle around the line x equals 2.
And then we'll set up the integral for the volume, and then here's a case where I'd like to actually look at that integral a little bit closer.
So here's a picture of the situation.
We have our circle, x squared plus y squared equals 1, and it's rotating around the vertical axis, x equals 2.
And it generates a donut.
I hope you can see that it's a donut.
If you fill in the circle with food and rotate it around, you get your donut.
So what's the volume of this donut?
Well, the first simplification I'm going to make is I'm going to calculate half the donut, the upper half.
I think of this as a bagel.
It's a bagel with a big hole in it.
It's a bagel with a big hole, and I've sliced the bagel in half, and then I'm going to toast it.
And so I'm going to calculate the volume of the top part of the bagel and then double my answer.
So in the picture, I've drawn a representative rectangle, but it starts at the x-axis and goes up and bumps the circle.
So that's my representative element.
Now, imagine that representative rectangle rotating around the line x equals 2.
That's a shell, isn't it?
This is the shell method.
The shell method is much easier here.
That rotates around and creates a shell.
Now, the shells are inside each other, and we're going to add up all the shells.
Where's the first shell?
Well, it's going to be over there at x equals minus 1.
It's a shell that has a big radius, but a tiny, tiny height, doesn't it?
And then the shells get higher, they get taller, and then finally we get over to x equals 1,
and now the shell is a very short shell, but it has a small radius also.
So we're going to integrate from minus 1 to 1 in this problem.
Alright, let me summarize what I've said so far.
We're going to compute the upper half of our doughnut and then double the answer.
And I need to have, I know the limits of integration from minus 1 to 1.
I'm going to need now the height of my shell.
Well, the equation of the circle is x squared plus y squared equals 1.
Solve for y in that equation, that's the height, so y is the square root of 1 minus x squared.
So now I know dx, I know the height, I know the limits of integration.
Here comes the hard part.
What's the radius?
What's the radius?
For a given x value, what's the radius?
Well, I claim the radius in this problem is 2 minus x.
And here's what I mean by checking your work.
Do you really believe that the radius is 2 minus x?
Well, let's check it.
Where did x start?
x starts at minus 1.
And when x is minus 1, the radius is 2 minus a minus 1 or 3.
Does that make sense?
When x is over there at the far left, the radius indeed is 3, isn't it?
It's going from minus 1 and the radius goes all the way to 2, so the radius indeed is 3.
Let's check it some more.
What's the radius when x is 0?
According to my radius function, it would be 2 minus 0 or 2.
Does that make sense?
When x is 0, you're at the middle of the circle and indeed the radius is 2.
And you can also check that when x is 1, the radius is 1.
So that's the correct radius function, 2 minus x.
Great!
We can now set up the formula for the volume of a bagel or donut using the shell method.
Let's put it all together.
All right.
First of all, we put a 2 outside because remember, we're doubling our answer.
And the integration goes from minus 1 to 1.
We basically cross the entire circle.
It's 2 pi r, so that's 2 pi times the radius, which is 2 minus x.
That's the 2 pi r.
And then it's the height, which is the function square root 1 minus x squared and the thickness is dx.
Wasn't so bad, was it?
Yeah, the radius function was complicated, but putting it all together, you've got this integral in front of you.
Let's look at it a little bit closer.
It's 2 times minus 1 to 1, 2 pi times 2 minus x times the square root 1 minus x squared.
Split it into two pieces.
I want to talk about how to actually evaluate this integral.
Split it into two pieces.
You split it at the 2 minus x part.
So the first piece will be 2 times 2 times 2, or 8 pi times minus 1 to 1, square root 1 minus x squared.
Good.
The second piece will be 2 times 2 times x, so it's minus 4 pi integral minus 1 to 1 x times square root 1 minus x squared.
So we have two integrals.
Can we evaluate them?
Let me do the first one.
Well, we don't know the antiderivative of square root 1 minus x squared.
It has an antiderivative, trust me, but it's not one that we develop in elementary calculus.
It's a topic for second semester calculus.
But think of this geometrically.
We're going to cheat.
What does the integral from minus 1 to 1 square root 1 minus x squared represent in terms of areas?
Well, it's a semi-circle, isn't it?
It starts at 1 and goes to minus 1.
It's a semi-circle of radius 1.
So that integral represents the area of a semi-circle, pi r squared over 2, and the radius is 1.
So that integral is pi over 2.
And then you multiply it by 8 pi, you get 4 pi squared.
That's the value of the first part of our formula.
It's 4 pi squared.
Kind of neat. We kind of cheated.
We used some geometric knowledge to analyze an integral without actually integrating it.
How about the second piece?
What do you think about that one?
Well, I'll look at it two ways.
On the one hand, you could do it by substitution, couldn't you?
u b 1 minus x squared d u is minus 2x.
You've got all the characters there.
But let's be clever.
That second guy is an odd function.
And we're on a symmetric interval from minus 1 to 1.
It's 0.
In fact, if you do it by substitution, you'll get 0.
So the final answer, the volume of our donut is 4 pi squared.
Kind of a nice answer, kind of clean.
4 pi squared is the volume of that donut.
Let's turn now a bit to these figures that extend to infinity.
We're going to present something called Gabriel's Horn.
This is in every calculus book, and it's a lovely application of integration.
I think you'll enjoy this.
And we've done a lot of this earlier.
We're going to take the graph of 1 over x and revolve it around the x-axis.
Previously, we found the area under the curve 1 over x between x equals 1 and x equals b.
You remember that we integrated 1 over x and got log of x between 1 and b, and the answer was log b.
And we discovered that the area under 1 over x from 1 to infinity is infinity.
In other words, log of b grows without bound.
There's infinite area under the curve 1 over x.
Okay, now take that curve 1 over x.
Here's a picture and rotate it around the x-axis.
That creates what we call Gabriel's Horn.
It's infinitely long.
It goes out to plus infinity along the x-axis.
And we want to calculate the volume of Gabriel's Horn.
Well, we'll do it the usual way.
We'll calculate the volume out to some point b, and then we'll let b go to infinity.
So here we go.
What is the volume?
Well, it's the disk method.
It's pi r squared, where the radius is 1 over x.
So it's pi 1 over x squared.
Integrate that from 1 to b.
So you get the antiderivative of 1 over x squared is minus 1 over x.
So you get pi times minus 1 over x in between the limits 1 and b.
Plug in those endpoints.
Pi times minus 1 over b plus 1.
Or you could write it as pi times the quantity 1 minus 1 over b.
That's a familiar answer from last lecture.
Last lecture we had a similar problem, and we didn't have a pi in it.
But it's a similar computation.
Now let b tend to infinity.
The 1 over b term tends to 0.
And the volume of Gabriel's Horn turns out to be pi.
Pi cubic units.
Isn't that bizarre?
It's the figure that had an area.
The area was infinite.
And then we rotated that infinite area around the x-axis
and obtained an object with finite volume.
Now it's kind of hard to blow Gabriel's Horn
because the end of it is out there at infinity.
But you could imagine the following.
You could tilt it up on its side so that now it's vertical.
And you could fill it up with milk.
And it would hold pi liters, depending on your unit.
It would hold a finite amount of milk, wouldn't it?
It's a finite volume in there.
Now the milk has to go way down in the bottom to infinity.
But it's still a finite volume.
I hope this seems bizarre to you and kind of wow.
This is one of the great things about calculus.
There's all these sort of very interesting results
that are based on true calculus principles.
I'm not doing any magic here.
This is the actual outcome of this problem.
The area was infinite, but the volume was finite.
And actually, next time, believe it or not,
we'll calculate the surface area of Gabriel's Horn.
And I won't tell you what the answer is,
but you'll be surprised at the surface area of Gabriel's Horn.
So we've finished now two lectures on calculating volumes
of objects obtained by revolving curves around an axis.
We use the principles of summation.
And next time, we'll look at more applications,
in particular arc length, how you measure the length of a curve,
and surface area, like what's the surface area of a bagel.
And the principles will, of course, be the same.
We'll add up a certain representative element.
So thanks very much, and I look forward to seeing you next lecture.
