Hello again and welcome back to our course on calculus.
Today we're going to look at some more applications of the integral.
You'll remember that the last lecture and the lecture before that, we talked about how
to calculate volumes of solids of revolution, and we developed the disc method and the shell
method.
Well, today we're going to look at two other applications of integration, arc length, in
other words, how to measure the length of a curve, and surface area.
For example, given a solid, how would you measure its surface area?
You know, for example, the formula for a volume, say, of a sphere, what about its surface area?
And we'll talk about how to measure that.
Let me add that there are many, many more applications of calculus that use definite integrals,
such topics as fluid pressure, work, centers of mass, many, many more, but they're all
based on the same principle of this summation process of a certain representative element.
And we'll see that idea used again today.
So let's first turn to arc length.
How do you measure the length of a curve?
And the theory here is actually quite complicated, and I'm going to sort of sift through and
present an easier way to understand it.
And then I'll talk a little bit more about the complications.
Imagine you have a curve in the plane, starts at A and ends at B, and you want to know how
long that curve is.
And the curve will be given by a function y equals f of x.
Here's a picture of a typical curve in the plane.
It starts over there at A, and then it ends at B.
I want to know how long that piece of wire is, if you can consider it as a piece of wire.
Well, here's how you do it.
It's sort of the usual technique.
Then dividing up the curve into little bitty pieces.
And each piece will be called delta s.
Think of that as a little piece of arc length, a tiny piece of arc length.
I've drawn one here in the picture, and let's try to estimate how long delta s really is.
Well, if things are small, delta s is approximately the hypotenuse of a right triangle formed
by delta x in the horizontal direction and delta y in the vertical direction.
So we have the formula that delta s, a little piece of arc length, is approximately the
square root of delta x squared plus delta y squared.
That's the Pythagorean theorem.
Now I'm going to do a little algebraic trick on this.
I'm going to divide inside the radical by delta x squared.
So watch what happens.
When I divide inside the radical by delta x squared, the first term becomes delta x
squared over delta x squared, which is 1.
And the second term becomes delta y squared over delta x squared, which is just delta
y over delta x quantity squared.
So now wait, I divided by delta x squared inside the radical.
In order not to change the problem, I have to multiply by delta x outside the radical
because the square comes out as a square root.
So you can check that that equation is correct, and we now have a new formula for delta s.
Well, what do we do?
We add up all the little pieces of arc length, and by that we mean we form the integral,
and it will start at a, x begins at a, it will end at b, and as I take the limit as
delta x goes to zero, what is delta y over delta x?
What happens to that term?
Well, I hope you recognize that's the definition of the derivative, change in y over change
in x as a limit, it becomes dy dx.
Wow, the derivative appears here.
And you can write it as f prime of x if you want.
So we have the formula that the arc length equals the definite integral from a to b of
the square root of 1 plus the derivative squared.
A very nice formula, I suggest you memorize it because it'll be used quite a bit in today's
lecture.
Okay, let's check our formula with a simple example.
One of the things that you like to do in mathematics, you develop a formula for some
concept, and then you like to make sure it works on some examples where you already know
the right answer.
For instance, the straight line from the origin to the point 3, 4, I can easily find that
length using other techniques.
For instance, here's the picture of that line from 0, 0 to 3, 4.
Well, that's a right triangle there in front of us, and one length, the horizontal length
is 3, the height is 4.
So what's the length of that line, 3 squared plus 4 squared or 25, all square rooted, so
the length of that line is 5.
Good.
Let's go back and do it with our new formula to see if we get the answer of 5.
Okay, that line segment, I have to find a formula for it.
I have to turn it into a function.
Well, the slope is 4 over 3, change in y over change in x, and then using the point slope
formula, using the point 0, 0, I get y minus 0 is 4 thirds x minus 0, and then I simplify
and y is just 4 thirds x.
It starts at 0, that's the origin, and x ends at 3, and when noticed that when x is 3,
y is 4.
So that line or that formula on that domain describes our line segment.
What's its arc length according to our new formula?
Well, it says arc length equals the integral from a to b square root 1 plus the derivative
squared.
Okay, so it's the integral from 0 to 3 square root of 1 plus, well, what's the derivative
of that line?
The derivative is the slope, which is 4 thirds.
So it's 4 thirds squared inside the radical.
So it's 1 plus 4 thirds squared inside the radical.
Let me simplify that for you.
How about a common denominator?
So it would be 3 squared plus 4 squared, all divided by 3 squared.
The numerator is actually then the square root of 25 or 5, and we have the numerator
5 and the denominator 3.
So that simplifies down to 5 thirds.
How nice.
And now, of course, the anti-derivative of 5 thirds is just 5 thirds x.
Plug in your endpoints.
When you plug in 3, you get a final answer of 5.
Well, I believe the formula now because it works on a straight line.
The development of the arc length formula took a long time in mathematics.
The Dutch mathematician Huygens actually did a lot of work on developing these formulas
for arc length.
He was also the person who invented the pendulum clock.
And you might remember in an earlier lecture, we looked a little bit at pendulums.
They play a big role, of course, in physics courses.
It turns out that the precise development of arc length requires some fairly complicated
mathematics.
In the first place, the function you're dealing with had better have a derivative because
the derivative appears in the formula.
And in fact, it has to have a continuous derivative.
And if you look in a calculus textbook under the arc length chapter, you'll see that the
proof of that formula that we developed kind of informally, the real proof, as we say,
uses the mean value theorem for derivatives.
So you can see that it's kind of a difficult theoretical topic.
But for us, it's enough to know the formula and how to use it.
So let's see if we know how to use it with a more complicated problem.
Let's find the length of the arc of the graph of this fairly ugly-looking function, x cubed
over 6 plus 1 over 2x between 1 half and 2.
Well I can take its derivative immediately because I'm going to need the derivative in
the formula.
And that's 3x squared over 6 minus 1 over 2x squared.
And then you can simplify that to 1 half times the quantity x squared minus 1 over x squared.
Now you might be saying to yourself, Professor Edwards, why did you pick such a obscure complicated
function for this example?
Well let me give you some inside information.
In general, there's sort of a truism here.
In general, it takes a pretty complicated function to produce an arc length that you
can actually calculate using anti-derivatives.
On the other hand, simple functions like x squared or x cubed, functions that we like
a lot in mathematics, they give rise to arc length calculations that are not possible.
You have to actually use numerical integration.
So it's kind of unfortunate that we need complicated functions so that the formula
comes out right.
You can see that if you were an author of a mathematics textbook, you have to come up
with these functions, and it's not so easy to find functions where the formula comes
out right.
Watch what's going to happen in this example.
There's some amazing algebra here, and we'll be able to solve this problem exactly.
So let's now take our derivative and square it and add 1 to it.
So 1 plus the derivative squared is 1 plus, and in parentheses we have 1 half the quantity
x squared minus 1 over x squared all squared.
That's the derivative squared added to 1.
I'm going to square that out now.
So I get 1 plus, the 1 half becomes 1 fourth, and I square that binomial, and I get x to
the fourth minus 2 plus 1 over x to the fourth.
Look how that 2 appeared there.
When you multiply 2 times x squared times minus 1 over x squared, the x squared's cancel,
and you're left with the constant 2.
Good.
So I've multiplied that out, and now the 1 is outside.
I'm going to stick the 1 inside.
Now watch what happens.
If the 1 goes inside the 1 fourth, where there's a 1 fourth multiplier there, it'll
go in as a 4, won't it?
And 4 minus 2 is 2.
So when I put the 1 inside the part containing 1 fourth, my formula now is 1 fourth the quantity
x to the fourth plus 2 plus 1 over x to the fourth.
And that quantity can be factored.
That's 1 fourth x squared plus 1 over x squared all squared.
That's kind of the miracle of this problem, that you can again factor it, and it's a perfect
square.
Because remember, in these formulas, we have to take the square root of 1 plus the derivative
squared.
Well the 1 plus the derivative squared in this problem is a very simple square root.
So let's finish it off.
The arc length is the integral from 1 half to 2, that was our interval, and it's the
square root of 1 plus the derivative squared, which is nothing more than the integral from
1 half to 2 of the square root of that thing I just calculated.
So it's 1 half, that's the square root of a fourth, and then x squared plus 1 over x
squared.
And lo and behold, that integral is easy to solve.
Wow.
A tough problem gave rise to an integral that we can comfortably integrate.
And you get 1 half, and then the first term is x cubed over 3, the second term is minus
1 over x.
Plug in your end points, you get 1 half times the quantity 13 over 6 plus 47 over 24.
There's some complicated arithmetic there with some fractions, but it's not very interesting.
Your final answer turns out to be 33 over 16.
That's the length of that curve.
Great.
As I said earlier, the integrals for arc length can be very complicated and, in fact, sometimes
impossible to solve with elementary techniques.
Often you need numerical methods like that trapezoid rule we developed a few lectures
ago.
But what I'd like you to memorize and keep in mind here is that in this process of arc
length, what we did was we computed a piece of arc length, and then we added them up.
And that piece of arc length is often called the differential of arc length.
So the delta s is often written as ds, and think of it as a piece of arc length.
And the formula for it, it's the part of the formula for arc length, it's the square root
of 1 plus the derivative squared times dx.
In the formula, that's what you're adding up, that ds.
And you're adding them all up, meaning you're integrating them all.
Let me show you an application of arc length that's kind of a real life problem.
Suppose you have an electric cable that's hanging between two towers.
Here's a picture of it.
The towers are 200 feet apart, so I'm going to put the origin halfway between them.
And this is actually how cables hang, telephone lines and things, say hang like this.
The formula for these kinds of hanging cables is something called a catenary.
And here's the formula for the hanging cable in the example we're doing right now.
It's 75 times the quantity e to the x over 150 plus e to the minus x over 150.
And it's between minus 100 and plus 100.
Sorry that's so complicated.
That's our friend, the exponential function there.
But this is, again, real life.
And real life has some complicated formulas.
We're going to find the length of this curve, the length of a catenary.
You might have seen a catenary if you've been to St. Louis.
The St. Louis arch is a catenary, but it's upside down.
And it has a different formula, but it looks just about like this one.
It has those exponential terms in it.
But it's an upside down curve.
And if you go on and take a college calculus course, you'll see a section on hyperbolic
functions.
And those functions are made up of exponentials, and catenaries can be described with the so-called
hyperbolic functions.
But that's not important in the course today.
So here's our picture of our hanging cable.
Let's go ahead and find its arc length.
We'll have a lot of equations to step through, but you're going to see the same kind of trick
that we saw in the earlier example.
So our function is 75 times e to the x over 150 plus e to the minus x over 150.
Let's take its derivative.
That's one-half e to the x over 150 minus e to the minus x over 150.
How did that 75 turn into a half?
Well, when you differentiate e to the x over 150 by the chain rule, a one over 150 pops
out, and that's what cancels with the 75 to leave one-half.
Now we add one to our derivative and square it.
Now one plus the derivative squared is one plus one-fourth, and then I square that exponential.
Well you get, when you square it, e to the x over 75.
The middle terms again kind of cancel each other, and you get a minus two plus e to the
minus x over 75.
Now bring the one inside, just like we did last time.
It comes in as a four because we're a one-fourth outside, and so that minus two turns into
a plus two.
Four minus two is two.
It's that same miracle that occurred in the other problem.
So I now have one-fourth times the quantity e to the x over 75 plus two plus e to the
minus x over 75.
That factors as one-half times e to the x over 150 plus e to the minus x over 150 all
squared.
All right, whew, I'm tired, that's exhausting.
Let's take the arc length.
The arc length would be the integral from minus 100 to plus 100 of the square root of
that guy.
Well, the square root of that guy is pretty simple.
It's just one-half times the quantity e to the x over 150 plus e to the minus x over
150, and those functions are easy to integrate.
That's the whole point.
We've got a function that we can actually integrate.
Here's the antiderivative.
It's 75 times the quantity e to the x over 150 minus e to the minus x over 150.
Between the two limits of integration, and when you plug those in, you get 75 times the
quantity e to the two-thirds.
Where did that two-thirds come from?
Well, you plug in 100, and 100 over 150 is two-thirds, and then minus e to the minus
two-thirds, and then plug in the other endpoint minus the quantity e to the minus two-thirds
minus e to the two-thirds.
Even if you work that out on a calculator, the final answer is about 215 feet, which
is longer than the 200 feet between the poles, because it's sagging a little bit.
Okay, tough going.
I admit, calculus has some hard problems in which there's a lot of algebra mixed in.
We did a lot of work with exponents on that problem.
Good.
Let's now turn to surfaces of revolution.
Here's how to think about this.
Remember that we had a piece of arc length formula, and it was the square root of one
plus the derivative squared times dx.
What we're going to do, suppose you have a curve from A to B, and I've drawn a picture
of one here, and you want to know the surface area.
If you had to paint this object, how much paint would you need?
Here's how to think of it.
The little piece of arc length wraps around a circle.
What is the length of that sort of, it's sort of a ribbon.
What's the length of that ribbon as it goes around the y-axis?
Well, it's nothing more than 2 pi r.
Well, what's the radius?
2 pi r, the radius is the x value, because that's the radius of my circle there, times
the length of that piece of arc.
So it's 2 pi r times the square root of one plus the derivative square.
So we now have the formula for the surface area of a surface of revolution that's been
revolved around the y-axis, and we usually use a letter capital S, and it's 2 pi times
the integral from A to B of x, x is the radius, times the square root of one plus the derivative
square.
It's not, you don't need to memorize this, just keep in mind that you're spinning around
a piece of arc length, and the length of that circle that you're spinning around is 2 pi
r.
What if you went around the x-axis this way?
What would change?
What would change now?
Well, again, it's a piece of arc length, ds, but now the circumference is not 2 pi x, but
rather the radius is the function value, isn't it?
It's f of x.
So you get the formula for rotation around the x-axis as capital S equals 2 pi integral
from A to B, and now f of x is our radius times the square root of one plus the derivative
square.
Again, don't memorize these, just keep in mind the formula for the piece of arc length,
and that you're wrapping it around a circle.
Good.
Let's do an example to confirm that all of this makes sense.
Here's a fairly easy example.
Let's take the curve x cubed between zero and one, okay?
So I've drawn a piece of it there, and let's spin it around the x-axis, okay?
We could find the volume of that, but no, I want to focus now on its surface area.
How much material does it take to make that, it looks sort of like a cup or something.
It could be a glass if you turn it right side up, otherwise it would spill.
How much glass is in that little cup?
What's the surface area?
Well, the formula's pretty straightforward.
We're going to need the derivative, and that's, of course, 3x squared.
So here we go.
The surface area, capital S, is 2 pi r.
Well, what's the radius?
The radius is f of x because we're going around the x-axis.
So it's 2 pi integral of x cubed, and then it's our ds, our differential of arc length,
which is the square root of one plus the derivative square, and the derivative is 3x squared.
And the limits, of course, are zero to one, and that simplifies to 2 pi integral from zero
to one x cubed times the square root of one plus 9x to the fourth.
And now we pause, and we think to ourselves, hey, can I integrate that with techniques
that I know about?
And I hope you answer, yeah, let you be one plus 9x to the fourth.
And the derivative is 36x cubed, and whew, I've got x cubed there, don't I?
All I'm missing is a 36.
So this is doable.
And when you finish it, you'll get the final answer of pi over 27 times the quantity 10
to the 3 halves minus one.
Not a pleasant answer, but that turns out to be about 3.563 square units of surface area.
Great.
OK, in that problem we just did, if you rotated that figure about the y-axis instead of about
the x-axis, what would change in the formula?
Well, look back at the formula.
It was 2 pi r, and around the x-axis, r is x cubed.
But around the y-axis, it would just be x.
So the only change in the formula would be replace the x cubed with x.
Good.
Let's move on now to our old friend Gabriel's horn.
We've talked about this problem, well, we talked about it last lecture, and I've talked
about this issue of areas or volumes going off to infinity a couple of times.
I think it's really a neat topic, and it'll kind of, I think it's so surprising.
So let me remind you what we're dealing with.
It's the curve 1 over x between 1 and some constant b.
Here's a picture of 1 over x, and it starts at 1, and it goes out to some point b.
And back in lecture 29, we found the area under the curve 1 over x between 1 and b,
and it turned out to be log of b, just integrate 1 over x.
Then we rotated it around the x-axis, creating Gabriel's horn, or part of Gabriel's horn,
because we're up to b.
It stops at b.
And we found its volume.
That was in lecture 31.
Its volume was pi times the quantity 1 minus 1 over b.
And then we said, suppose b tends to infinity.
So the picture, Gabriel's horn, goes off forever.
It's a very long horn.
Well, the area, of course, will go off to infinity because log b keeps growing, but
the volume turns out to be pi because the term 1 over b tends to 0.
So we had the following fact.
The volume of Gabriel's horn is finite.
It's equal to pi.
Well, what about its surface area?
What if I wanted to paint Gabriel's horn?
I know I can fill it up because it's a finite volume, but let's paint it now.
So what's its surface area?
And here's a very interesting argument here.
I think you'll enjoy this.
Let's do the formulas.
The function is 1 over x.
Its derivative is minus 1 over x squared.
1 plus the derivative squared is 1 plus 1 over x to the fourth.
And so the surface area is 2 pi integral from 1 to b of the radius, which is 1 over x, and
the square root of our complicated differential, 1 plus 1 over x to the fourth dx.
And that integral looks pretty complicated.
It actually can be solved with techniques that we know, but I'm going to show you a
much better trick here.
I think you'll like this.
Observe that that radical, 1 plus 1 over x to the fourth, is bigger than 1.
Of course it is.
It's 1 plus something inside the radical.
So I'm going to replace that radical with the number 1 and observe the following.
That the original surface area formula, 2 pi integral 1 to b, 1 over x times the radical,
is bigger than the new replaced value, 2 pi integral 1 to b, 1 over x.
I've replaced the radical with the number 1, and the integrals are then in that same
kind of inequality, OK?
Now that latter integral, 2 pi 1 to b, 1 over x, integrates to 2 pi log b.
The antiderivative of 1 over x is, of course, log x, and you plug in b.
So what do we observe?
If b goes to infinity, the surface area goes to infinity.
The surface area is infinite here.
Notice how subtle this argument was.
I took the formula for surface area, I replaced it with something that is smaller.
The smaller one I could calculate, and it went to infinity.
So the bigger one must also go to infinity.
So the surface area of Gabriel's horn is infinite.
So I ask you, and you might lose sleep on this question, how do you paint Gabriel's horn?
It has infinite surface area, so you couldn't paint it, could you?
It would take an infinite amount of paint.
You'd be painting and painting and painting, and it's infinite surface area.
Well, I'll show you how you paint Gabriel's horn.
You fill it up with paint, remember, it's finite volume.
So you fill it up with paint, you kind of turn it on its edge like this, turn it up,
and you shake it so the paint goes all the way down to the bottom, well there is no bottom,
but the paint goes all the way down, and it soaks through the horn, and it's painted.
Yeah, I know.
Pretty bizarre, but this is sort of the nature of some of these mathematical ideas.
It's very, very curious.
I'm not lying to you here, these are results that are valid in mathematics.
There is no such thing as Gabriel's horn.
You cannot construct Gabriel's horn because it has infinite extension, but you can do
these formulas as we did, and the answers are as we obtained.
Kind of interesting, I thought.
Well good, we finished now our set of lectures on applications of integrals.
We saw volumes, we saw some area problems, and today we did arc length and surface area.
There are a lot more of these in calculus textbooks.
This is the heart of engineering, this is what engineers study and do.
They apply calculus to real life problems.
Next time we're going to go back and look again at integration techniques because we
see we have to know how to integrate to solve a lot of these problems.
Thanks very much, and I look forward to our next lecture.
