Hello again, and welcome to our final lecture in our calculus course together.
Today's lecture will be devoted to applications of differential equations.
You'll see some real-life models involving differential equations, and I think you'll
find them quite interesting.
These problems are often difficult because their word problems will have to read some
information, translate it into a differential equation, and then solve that differential
equation.
I'd like to look at three different models today.
One will be radioactive decay, the second model will be population growth, and the third
model, perhaps my favorite, will be Newton's law of cooling.
So let's quickly remind ourselves what a differential equation is.
It's an equation involving derivatives, and our goal is to find the solution, find that
function which satisfies the differential equation.
As I've said many times, there are many, many applications of differential equations.
The ones we'll do today are fairly simple, but I think it'll give you a taste of the
power of differential equations in modeling real-life engineering problems.
Good.
So what is our model that we'll use for the first two examples?
This is what's called a growth and decay model, and the underlying physics is as follows.
In many, many applications, like radioactive decay, the rate of change of a quantity of
a substance is proportional to the amount of that substance present.
Mathematically that says the following.
If y is the amount of substance, say of some radioactive material, then the rate of change
of y, dy dt, is proportional to y, and I'll use k as that proportionality constant.
So our equation for growth and decay models, our differential equation, is dy dt equals
ky.
Now, that differential equation can be solved.
You could use separation of variables which we saw last lecture to solve it, or you can
trust me when I say that y equals ce to the kt is the solution.
In fact, if you don't trust me, take that solution and plug it into the original differential
equation, and you'll see that it works.
In other words, the derivative of the solution would be k times ce to the kt, and that equals
k times the original solution.
So in summary, the differential equation is dy dt equals ky, and its general solution
is y equals ce to the kt.
Now there are two constants in that solution.
One is k, and that's that proportionality constant.
Sometimes that constant will be positive, and in that case, the curve will be an exponential
function that is growing.
That'll be used in population growth models.
Or that constant could be negative, and in that case, we'll have a decaying exponential,
and that's the kind of model we'll see in radioactive decay.
And that'll be our first example, in fact.
Notice that the constant c out in front is the initial value of y, because if t is 0,
then e to the k times 0 is 1, and y equals c.
So c is the initial amount of either population you have or radioactive material you have,
and then that decays off or grows with time.
Now before we look at the actual models, I'd like to spend a few seconds showing some
precalculus that we'll need in today's lecture.
And it's really all to do with manipulating logs and exponents, remember those are inverse
functions of each other, as well as some issues dealing with exponents.
So let me show you four equations here, and show you how you can manipulate these.
The first equation is 1 half equals e to the kt.
Well how could I get the kt, which is now in the exponent, down stairs?
Well if you log both sides, then the left side of course is log 1 half, and watch what
happens to the right side.
It's log of e to the kt, and remember log and e are inverse functions of each other,
aren't they?
So when I log the exponential function, you have cancellation and you're left just with
kt.
So we have the final equation there, log of 1 half equals kt.
And if you then wanted to solve for k, you would divide by t.
And if you wanted to solve for t, you would divide by k.
Here's another thing to keep in mind.
Log of a half can be simplified as log of 2 to the minus 1 power, which is minus log
2.
Remember, you could move an exponent out to the front.
And so log of a half is actually a negative number, isn't it?
Because log of 2 is positive and minus log of 2 is negative.
Here's another simplification we'll do.
Suppose you have an equation e to the 10k equals 3 quarters.
Well, take logs of both sides, and you then have 10k, remember that cancellation, log
and e are inverses, equals log of 3 quarters.
And of course note again that this would be less than zero.
And finally, here's a different simplification that we'll use, and we've seen this one before
actually.
We might have an answer that looks like e to the power kt plus a constant, which I'll
call c sub 1.
Well, you can split that up into e to the kt times e to the c1.
That's a law of algebra, of how to deal with exponents.
And then you notice that e to the c1 is itself a constant, because e is a constant, about
2.7, and so e to c1 is another constant.
So I'll compress those and call that constant big c.
And so I have the final answer of c e to the kt.
We'll see that used in a moment.
Good.
Enough pre-calculus.
Let's look at our first example.
Here's the setup.
Let's suppose that 10 grams of plutonium isotope P239 was released in the Chernobyl
nuclear accident.
How long will it take for those 10 grams to decay to 1 gram?
So 10 grams you've got here, and I want to know how long it'll be reduced to 1 gram
of plutonium.
And we're going to use the known fact here that the half-life of plutonium 239 is 24,100
years, about 24,000 years.
Now what is half-life?
Let's remind ourselves what half-life means.
If you have these 10 grams, in 24,100 years, it will decay to 5 grams.
And then in another 24,100 years, it'll decay to 2 and a half grams.
It goes down by a factor of 2 every 24,100 years.
That's what half-life means.
And this is a true description of radioactive decay.
This is how it works.
So let's solve this problem.
Let's let y represent the mass in grams of the plutonium.
And we're using our growth and decay models, so our function that models this situation
is y equals ce to the kt.
And we need to determine those two constants, c and k.
Well, first of all, remember that when time is zero at the beginning of our experiment
here, the amount of plutonium was 10.
So if you plug zero in for t, you get 10 equals ce to the zero power, or in other words c
is equal to 10.
So we now have an updated model, y equals 10e to the kt.
Well, how can we get k?
Ah, we can use the half-life fact.
Remember that the half-life is about 24,000 years.
So after 24,100 years, we will have 5 grams of plutonium.
So let's plug that into our model.
Let y be 5, and that equals 10e to the k times the time 24,100.
And here's an example of an equation where we want to solve for k, but k is hiding up
there as an exponent.
What do we do to find it?
We're going to ultimately take logs of both sides.
We first divide by 10, so we have 1 half equals e to that power.
Now take logs of both sides.
So on the left, we get log of a half, and on the right, by that cancellation problem,
we're left with 24,100 times k.
Good.
Well, what's k?
Divide by 24,100, and k is 1 over 24,100 times the natural log of a half.
Then on my calculator, you punch that in, and that constant is approximately minus 0.00028761.
Wow.
That was just a calculator that did that.
We're talking about decay here, aren't we, because that constant k is negative.
Thank goodness.
We don't want the amount of plutonium to get larger.
We want it to decay off.
Okay.
So now we have an updated model again.
y is equal to 10 e to the kt, and I can put that value of k, that decimal approximation
of k in my model.
So what was the question?
The question was, how long would it take for the plutonium to decay from 10 grams down
to 1 gram?
So let's put 1 in for y on the left-hand side of the equation and solve for t, the time
needed to reduce to 1 gram.
So my equation becomes 1 equals 10 e, and there's that very awkward exponent, minus
0.00028761 t.
I'll try not to have to repeat that too many more times.
Okay, t is hiding again as an exponent.
We need to get t down to the ground.
Well, we do the usual trick, take logs of both sides, the left-hand, well, sorry, first
divide by 10, and then take logs of both sides, and the left-hand side would be log of a tenth,
and the right-hand side would just be the exponent, so it's that decimal times t, and
now what's t?
Divide out.
t would be log of one tenth divided by my decimal, minus 0.00028761, and that turns out
to be about 80,059 years, about 80,000 years.
Kind of a long time, isn't it?
It takes a long time for a plutonium to dissipate.
This half-life is very large.
Let me make a comment about this problem.
You can sort of see that the numbers are fairly ugly, and this is the nature of real-life
models.
You have decimal approximations and not real-pleasant numbers.
You definitely need a calculator to be able to do these models by hand.
Great, that was a nice model, I thought.
Let's look at another one, a little bit simpler, I think, with exponential growth, and I'll
word it this way.
Suppose you're a biologist and you have a population of fruit flies, and they will be
increasing according to the model of exponential growth, and suppose after two days you notice
you had 100 flies in your bottle or something, in your container, and then after four days
you had 300 flies, and then you ask yourself, how many flies did I have initially?
What was the original population?
In a sense, you don't know what you started with, but you walk into the room two days
later and there are 100 flies in there, approximately, say, and then you go back two days later
and there are 300 in there, and you sort of say to yourself, well, I wonder how many there
were at the very beginning, two days before I even started.
Well, let's find out.
The model again is y equals C e to the kt.
I hope this time k is positive because we want growth, the number of flies is increasing.
And it's kind of interesting, we want to know what C is, don't we, because C is the initial
amount of flies.
Hmm, this might be difficult.
Well, let's plug in our two pieces of data here.
First of all, we know that when t is 2, there are 100 flies.
So 100 equals C e to the 2k.
I put t to be 2 and substituted y for 100.
And after four days, there were 300 flies.
So 300 equals C e to the 4k.
Now look, we have here two equations and two unknowns.
The unknowns are C, which is what we're after, the initial amount, and k, which is the proportionality
constant.
Now, in general, in algebra, when you're confronted with two equations and two unknowns,
it's generally possible to solve it, not always.
And one of the strategies for solving these kinds of problems is eliminate one variable
and then determine the other variable.
So why don't we solve for C in terms of k first?
Let's take that first equation, 100 equals C e to the 2k, and multiply both sides by
e to the minus 2k.
And that will give you C equals 100 e to the minus 2k.
In other words, I divided both sides by e to the 2k.
So now I have a C value.
Let's plug that C value into the second equation.
So I'll have 300 equals C, but now I'm using 100 e to the minus 2k as my C value, times
e to the 4k.
And the exponentials collapse, and we have 100 e to the 2k.
Good.
This is an equation just involving the variable k.
It's in an exponent, but we know how to solve that.
Just divide by 100 both sides, and you have 3 on the left, equals e to the 2k.
Take logarithms of both sides, so log of 3 is 2k, so k is 1 half log 3.
Great.
That number on my calculator is about 0.5493, trust me.
So I know the k value.
But I was really after the C value, wasn't I?
Well, go back to that equation for C that I used right at the beginning.
C was 100 e to the minus 2k, and plug the k value into that equation.
And you get C equals 100 e to the minus 2 times 0.5493, and that's approximately 33.
So let's step back now.
What did we discover?
And at the beginning of our fruit fly experiment, there were about 33 fruit flies.
Two days later, there were 100, and two days after that, there were 300.
Do you sort of see what's happening to these fruit flies?
Every two days, they triple.
Kind of neat, isn't it?
They triple every two days, 33 to 100, that tripled, 100 to 300, that tripled.
In two more days, how many will there be?
900, it'll triple again.
Okay, nice problem, I thought.
Let's now go to my favorite problem.
This is Newton's law of cooling.
I actually do this example in my classroom when I'm teaching calculus.
Students tend to be very interested in it.
Let me first state Newton's law of cooling, and then we'll model it with a differential
equation, and I'll do a specific example using a coffee cup.
So here's Newton's law of cooling due to Isaac Newton.
The rate of change of temperature of an object is proportional to the difference between
the object's temperature and the temperature of the surrounding medium.
Let me give you an example.
You're baking a pie in a hot oven, and you pull it out of the oven and put it on the
table.
So that pie is going to cool, it's going to get colder and colder.
And the rate of cooling, the rate of change of temperature of the pie is proportional
to the difference in the temperature of the pie and the temperature of the room where
it's sitting.
Okay, you sort of see how that works?
Here's how I do it.
I bring in a coffee cup at the beginning of a calculus class, I'll put it here.
And it's full of coffee, and to make the numbers come out nicely, let's suppose the
coffee's 100 degrees.
I have a device in my classroom, a little thermometer, and I can put it into the coffee
cup, and then on the screen behind me, it shows the temperature.
And let's assume my classroom is 60 degrees, kind of unusual in Florida, but let's just
assume it to make the numbers come out right.
So the coffee comes in at 100 degrees in a 60 degree room, and it starts to cool.
And the temperature gauge there will show the cooling 100 and then 99 and then 98, and
it goes down.
Good.
Here's the question we'll pose, we'll be very specific here.
Letting Y be the temperature of course in Fahrenheit here, suppose again the room is
60 degrees, and let's suppose my coffee starts at 100 degrees, and 10 minutes later you notice
that it's down to 90 degrees.
So it's cooled 10 degrees in 10 minutes.
And here's my question.
The question I ask my students, how much longer will it take for it to cool to 80 degrees?
In other words, it took 10 minutes to go from 100 to 90.
How about from 90 to 80?
And I ask them, what do you think the answer will be?
And many of them say, oh, 10 more minutes.
If it took 10 minutes to go for the first 10 degrees, it might take 10 more for the second.
But let's think about this.
Remember the rate of change is proportional to the difference between the temperature of
the coffee and the temperature of the room.
And as the coffee gets cooler, that difference gets smaller.
So let's go ahead and start solving the problem.
And then we'll see what the answer is.
The model for Newton's law of cooling is as follows.
The rate of change of temperature, that's dy dt, or the derivative of Y, is proportional
to, so there's a constant of proportionality k times the difference of the object, the
coffee Y minus the surrounding temperature, 60.
So it's Y prime equals k times the quantity Y minus 60.
That's the differential equation we need to solve.
And we haven't seen a differential equation like this yet, but we can solve it with separation
of variables.
And we saw that technique last time.
Let me remind you how it works.
Write your differential equation as dy dt equals k times Y minus 60, bring all the terms
involving Y to the left, and all the terms involving the other variable t to the right.
So the left is 1 over Y minus 60, and the right-hand side is just k, just sitting there
by itself.
And now integrate both sides.
So the integral of 1 over Y minus 60, oh, that's our friend, the natural logarithm.
So it's log of the absolute value of Y minus 60.
And the right-hand side is kt, that's the anti-derivative of k.
And then there's an arbitrary constant on both sides.
But I'm going to combine those constants into one constant, and I'll put it on the right-hand
side.
So there's one arbitrary constant.
I'm going to call that C sub 1.
You'll see in a minute why.
OK, notice first that because the coffee is warmer than 60 degrees, you can drop the absolute
value sign because Y minus 60 is always positive.
So we have log of the quantity Y minus 60 equals kt plus C1.
OK, we now want to solve for Y.
So raise both sides to the e power.
And e to the log of Y minus 60, well, those cancel, don't they?
Because e and log are inverse functions.
So the left-hand side is just Y minus 60.
And the right-hand side is e to the kt plus C1.
And now I'm going to do that trick I alluded to earlier in the lecture.
e to the kt plus C1 can be split into e to the kt times e to the C1.
e to the C1 is also a constant, which I'll call capital C. And I'm down to the following
model.
Y equals 60 plus C e to the kt.
Good.
Now there was an initial condition here.
We can start determining these constants.
Y was 100 when t was 0.
So plug in t equals 0 into your model.
And you get on the left 100, and on the right you get 60 plus C e to the k times 0.
And that means that's 60 plus C, because e to the 0 is 1.
And so now we have a revised model.
We know the C value.
C turns out to be 40.
And our model is 60 plus 40 e to the kt.
So how can we get k?
We know some more information.
In 10 minutes, it dropped to 90 degrees.
Let's plug that in.
So 90 equals 60 plus 40 e to k times 10 times 10.
And now solve for k.
Well first subtract 60 from both sides, and you get 30 on the left equals 40 e to the
10k, divide by 40, and then you take logs of both sides.
So we have e to the 10k equals 3 fourths after I divided by 40.
And then I log both sides.
The left-hand side will be 10k, because log and e cancel each other.
And the right-hand side is log of 3 quarters.
So finally, we have our k value, 1 tenth log 3 quarters, which is a negative number because
log 3 quarters is less than 0, minus 0.02877 approximately.
OK, here's our complete model.
Finally, it's a y equals 60 plus 40 e to that decimal minus 0.02877t.
Now with that model, we can answer the question.
We wanted to know how long it would take to get to 80 degrees.
Plug in 80 for y.
80 equals 60 plus 40 e to that power.
Subtract 60 from both sides.
You have 20 equals 40 e to that same power.
Divide by 40, and now you have 1 half e to the power.
This is getting a little redundant, I think.
You sort of see the patterns here.
Take logarithms of both sides.
So the left is log of a half, and on the right, we simplify to minus 0.02877t.
Wow, solve for t.
T is log of a half divided by the decimal, and it turns out to be about 24.09 minutes.
So it wasn't just 10 minutes.
Here's how this experiment goes.
In the first 10 minutes, it goes from 100 to 90.
In the second 10 minutes, it went from 90, actually in the next 14 minutes, 14.09 minutes,
it went from 90 to 80, and in total, it took 24.09 minutes to go from 100 to 80.
So it took 14 minutes approximately for that next 10 degrees of cooling.
Let me ask you a question about this.
Look back at the model, 60 plus 40 times e to that power.
What happens after a long, long time?
What's the temperature of my coffee cup after many, many hours?
Well, I think you see that the exponential term, because the coefficient's negative,
will decay to zero as a limit, and the horizontal asymptote is 60 degrees.
In other words, ultimately, the coffee cup will get closer and closer to the temperature
of the room that it's sitting in.
As I said, my students tend to love this problem.
They make bets on how long it'll take to reach a certain temperature, and they really
like it when I spill the coffee cup onto the floor, which happens about half the time.
Well, good.
Let me say congratulations.
On finishing this calculus course, I've really enjoyed our 36 lectures together, and I hope
you have too.
Throughout the course, I've tried to give some study hints, some advice on studying,
and let me repeat that over and over.
It deserves repeating.
Please take some time to practice your calculus skills.
Our workbook has some exercises you can try.
Students have lots of extra exercises, and you can go back to the video and look at the
examples I've gone over, like today's problems, and you can try to do those again on your
own.
Another aspect about the workbook that's quite useful, I think, is that in the back, we have
a summary sheet of key formulas, key theorems, and you might want to try to memorize a lot
of those, which will make your test-taking experience a little more comfortable if you
have in the back of your mind some of these integral and derivative formulas.
As I said, you can repeat the lectures in this video course.
It's one of the great advantages of the video delivery of content.
My students, when they're taking a class with me, can't just stop me.
Professor Edwards, would you go back those last 10 minutes and repeat your lecture for
me, because I was doing something else.
I fell asleep, and I'd like to repeat those final 10 minutes.
You can't do that.
In other words, you can't rewind me as a live professor, but you can rewind me on the video,
and it won't hurt my feelings if you do it.
Now, let me also add that you've probably noticed throughout this course that I'm very
enthusiastic about mathematics.
Let me admit it to you.
I love math.
I love my job as a mathematician.
I love teaching math, and I love doing math, doing problems, and reading about math, etc.
So I hope some of that has rubbed off on you.
I really do.
I hope you've gathered up a little extra love for the discipline of mathematics.
So finally, let me say thank you again for joining me in our study of calculus.
