Okay. This video is going to be an overview of Parr, Pazulo, and Friston's 2022 Active
Inference textbook, Chapter 10, Active Inference as a Unified Theory of Sentient Behavior.
I'll read the quote, and then I'll please feel free to give your first overview take
on the chapter. In general, we are least aware of what our minds do best, Marvin Minsky.
What is Chapter 10 about?
Okay. So Chapter 10 is, by far, my most favorite chapter in the whole book, but at the same
time, it differs from all the other chapters in the sense that it tries to connect Active
Inference to so many other disciplines and also provides some kind of unifying themes
in order to tie many of the loose strands of the theoretical work that's been done so far,
at least until, I mean, the book's publication. So it's a pretty enticing chapter in terms
of, I mean, providing many promising or introducing some future research trajectories or at least
promising research trajectories for the future. So for anyone who wants to pursue Active Inference
research, I believe this particular chapter here can provide, I mean, quite a bit of interesting
ideas to pursue.
Yes, this will just be a quick overview. They're going to connect a lot of dots. They abstract
away from the specific Active Inference generative models discussed in previous chapters and focus
on integrative aspects of the framework, which, as Ali mentions, is one of the most exciting
and motivating and inspiring parts. We're going to find out by the end of the chapter whether we
have what we saw after a unified perspective on problems like perception, action selection,
attention, and emotion regulation. All these topics, which are studied with obviously a
diversity of methods, but also on the theoretical side, essentially in commiserate frameworks.
And so Active Inference here is being positioned as a way to integrate across these different
cognitive phenomena. And on the more historical or philosophical side, how established theories
like cybernetics, idea motor theory of action, reinforcement learning, and optimal control
can also be understood within the integrative stance that Active Inference provides.
Section 10.2, wrapping up, is like a speedrun on the book itself. They summarize. Chapter one,
Active Inference has a normative approach, a chapter with a lot of similarities to Chapter 10.
Chapter two, the low road to Active Inference, how? Bayesian statistics.
Chapter three, the high road to Active Inference, the free energy principle and the imperative
to exist. Chapter four, the formal aspects of Active Inference with a focus on
variational inference on generative models. Chapter five, they developed from the abstract
perspective in Chapter four, and went into more detail on the process theory about how the principle
may be implemented by the brain. And they gave a bunch of examples of systems of interest and
related work on the mammalian nervous system. Chapter six, the recipe to design Active Inference
model. Chapter six kicks off the second half of the book and takes a pragmatic turn towards
hands-on application learners building their own generative models along the way.
Chapter seven and eight are very curtly summarized here. This pair of chapters describes the continuous
in Chapter eight and discrete in Chapter seven, generative models. And Chapter nine,
on empirical model-based analysis, looks at how to connect data to generative models. So any
comments on that or continue on with Section 10.3, Connecting the Dots?
I think we can go on to Chapter two, Section 10.3, because you provided the basic summary of Section
10.2 perfectly. So what about 10.3? Okay, so 10.3 is about going beyond some specific
aspects of, I mean, cognitive facilities of the agents and try to somehow integratively model
the different subsystems of cognitive, of the particular agents' cognition. So for instance,
we can model memory, attention, perception, and all of these different aspects of cognition
in this integrated formalism of Active Inference within this integrated formalism
of Active Inference and try to somehow see the relationships between all of these
different aspects of cognition. And I believe this integrative work can provide many illuminating
insights about how various aspects of a given agent's cognition is related to each other,
which is, I believe, a very important open question in cognitive psychology as well.
Great. And the first paragraph references this direction in cognitive science, which is rather
than to develop a simple or advanced model of one cognitive phenomena separated out from the others.
The suggestion of Daniel Dennett in 1978 was to model a whole iguana, a complete cognitive
creature, perhaps a simple one, but 10.3 reiterates the way that Active Inference can be used to
connect dots and integrate across cognitive phenomena. Okay, 10.4, predictive brains,
predictive minds, and predictive processing. What would you say about this?
All right, so this is also a recurring question among the people who were introduced to Active
Inference for the very first time, namely, what is the distinction between Active Inference and
all the other related theoretical frameworks, such as predictive, predictive processing,
predictive coding, and so on. And this particular this section gives some hint about
these similarities and also the differences between all of these different approaches
and how they relate to each other, whether they're one of each other or they're distinctly
different and fundamentally different from each other. So this section here at 10.4,
I believe, can be helpful to anyone who wants to understand how Active Inference fits into this
general framework of recent predictive way of doing cognitive psychology research.
Great, and one nice quote here.
Active Inference creatures fulfill two imperatives, epistemic and pragmatic.
That's in reference to the expected free energy.
All right, section 10.5, Perception.
Okay, so if we remember from chapter 10, we were introduced to Active Inference first by
observing how it can model the phenomenon of perception of an agent as opposed to
modeling its action. And then we saw that they're basically, I mean, their mirror image of each other,
the equations that describe those phenomenon are basically the same equations, but
just flipped for the situation we want to model. And here, there's this generalization of how to,
how does it mean to model perception as opposed to action? And in particular,
what's the Bayesian brain hypothesis? I mean, what is the particular approach taken by Bayesian
brain hypothesis for modeling perception as opposed to some other conventional approaches
to model the same phenomenon?
Great. 10.5, Perception flows into 10.6, Action Control. So these two sections describe
the perception and action view of Active Inference. In this action theory, there's subsections on
idea motor theory, which is a theory with a long history that relates to how cognition
influences action, cybernetics, Active Inference is closely related to cybernetic ideas,
and optimal control theory, another framework for thinking about action selection.
These sections differentiate some distinctions of Active Inference and
optimal control theory, cybernetics and idea motor theory. However, largely, as their systems
of interest tend to be overlapping, there's more in common with these approaches that students
of them will find quite familiar in Active Inference. But again, the authors take care
to distinguish what Active Inference does differently than these approaches as well.
Anything else to add there?
Nothing in particular, thanks.
All right, 10.7, Utility and Decision Making, Action Expresses Priorities, Mahatma Gandhi.
Okay, so here in this section, there's also this kind of comparative analysis between
Active Inference theory and many various, a few different approaches used in machine learning.
So for instance, we have reinforcement learning and, I mean, various ways of doing,
modeling the planning and decision making, such as the general Bayesian decision theory,
which is a super set of many different approaches used to model the decision making process using
Bayesian inference. And also, there's this planning as inference, which is something
that Active Inference emphasizes as, again, as opposed to some other traditional or conventional
way of modeling decision making. Because here, as I mean, it's not just simple planning as a
consequence of inference, but I mean, planning itself is considered, I mean, the inference
is considered itself as a way of constructing the expected free energy. So in this way, we can
regard planning as inference itself. So this is one of the novelties of Active Inference,
compared to any other approaches as also explicitly stated on page 211.
All right. 10-8, Behavior and Bounded Rationality.
Okay, so this section also points to some interesting work with regards to how we can model
different conceptions of rationality and specifically bounded rationality. And there are some interesting
papers which came out after the publication of this book, in which some researchers pursue this
line of research in order to model even the way people believe conspiracy theories or the way people
do or make apparently irrational decisions and they manifest some irrational behavior and so on.
So this section points out to some tentative ways that Active Inference can be employed
to model rationality as well. So it's not just about modeling perception and action,
which is a well-established way of using Active Inference. But from this section onwards,
we gradually move towards some unchartered territories, which I mean, admittedly, some of
them are still at their very nascent stages. Awesome. Section 10-9, Valence, Emotion and Motivation.
Okay, again, as I already mentioned, this is also one of the recent developments of Active Inference,
how to model emotion within Active Inference framework. So I believe one of the earliest papers
that did this kind of modeling was, I forgot the title, but it's a way of modeling an agent's
behavior in terms of the positive or negative balance, which directly reflects the emotional
state of that agent. So by agent, it doesn't necessarily mean a human agent, but we can see that
this kind of balance in terms of positive and negative balance and how it can motivate the
behavior of the agent can be captured within Active Inference framework using
the same techniques we've seen for epistemic for agent and so on. So it's an interesting way of
connecting those two sub-disciplines. Yeah, I think it's deeply felt affect. There's other
related works there. Yes, that was it. Again, another sort of complex or composite
life phenomena moving from emotion onto homeostasis, allostasis, and terreceptive processing.
This section conveys work from a variety of authors that's been continued on
about homeostasis and allostasis, which is the anticipatory
steering towards preferred states. And section 1011, attention, salience, and epistemic dynamics,
again, approaching a sort of cognitive phenomena, nexus, and differentiating, similar with rule
learning, causal inference, and fast generalization. Here, moving slightly more towards the
computational cognitive side. Anything to say on those sections, 1012, 1011, or 1010?
I just wanted to point to the way that some, so up to this point, we've seen mostly the
application-oriented research of Active Inference in order to deal with various sorts of scenarios.
I mean, from modeling the very basic cognition of sentient agents to
modeling some even social and cultural phenomena. But I just wanted to point to some
interesting theoretical work that's been going on in parallel with these application-oriented
works, which I believe can open up even more opportunities and probably even,
I mean, drastically change the view of Active Inference in terms of how to approach
different scenarios and different phenomena. So, yeah, this kind of philosophical and theoretical
aspect of Active Inference, although it's still in its earliest stages,
is beginning to lead to some very interesting results in terms of applicability of Active Inference.
Awesome. And then, section 1013, Active Inference and Other Fields, Open Directions.
As the title would seem to set off, this section goes into some of the extensions and elaborations
that are quite ongoing in Active Inference, especially related to social and cultural dynamics
and machine learning and robotics. So, subsection one, social cultural dynamics,
subsection two, machine learning and robotics. Anything to say on that section?
Nothing other than there are lots of interesting development in these particular domains,
especially after, I mean, the explosion of LLMs and generative AI. We can see the application
of Active Inference even to these cutting edge technological developments as well.
Cool. And then, section 1014, Summary. I'll read the Lord of the Rings quote and then
look forward to your take on this last section. Home is behind the world ahead,
and there are many paths to tread through shadows to the edge of night until the stars are all
alight. Great. So, obviously, this is the last chapter of the whole book. And personally, for me,
reading through this book, I mean, reading it multiple times, have always been,
I mean, an increasingly enjoyable journey for me. So, each time I look at, I mean,
different sections and different chapters of the book, I feel that there are lots of
interesting potentialities that can be pursued further to, and probably, perhaps even lead to some
I don't know, some spin off theories and some branch to some interesting new fields
that is related to Active Inference, but they somehow begin to follow the life of their own. So,
the main strength of this book, in my opinion, is exactly in providing these kind of
ancient ideas to develop further. And this is, in my opinion, one of the main indicators of the
great book, which, I mean, much more than trying to answer the questions, it provides some fertile
questions in the mind of the reader. Great points totally concur. Time and time again,
we've delighted in this work. It's a two paragraph section. The first paragraph is worth reading
from. We started this book by asking whether it is possible to understand brain and behavior from
first principles. We then introduced Active Inference as a candidate theory to meet this
challenge. We hope that the reader has been convinced that the answer to our original question,
whether it's possible to understand brain and behavior from first principles,
is yes. We know what side they're on. How do you feel? And then the second paragraph is a quite
direct perforation of the fourth wall. And they make a really pragmatic
day to day point about our lives as people learning and applying Active Inference, which is
it is important to emphasize that Active Inference is not something that can be learned purely in
theory. We encourage anyone who has enjoyed this book to think about pursuing it in practice.
Important rites of passage in theoretical neurobiology, and eventually so many other fields too,
are trying to write down a generative model, experiencing the frustration when simulations
misbehave and learning from violations of your prior belief when something unexpected happens.
And this is something that comes up all the time. There are so many incredible,
high flying philosophical questions. And in the abstract, quite philosophical they are.
However, once there's a generative model on the table, once chapter six has been engaged with,
a lot of times the abstractions and generalizations are left out. And you can actually say, well,
how is attention being dealt with in this generative model? Or what other ways could it be
done? And so making the generative model is a huge moment. And they emphasize that that's
how you can learn by doing, but it's not the only way that you can pursue and engage Active
Inference day to day. It could be in the time interval that's subliminal and between isocades.
It could be having what you expect and prefer for dinner. It could be allostasis, embedded,
extended, enacted, and cultured allostasis. And the authors are confident, which is to say,
precise in their beliefs, that we will continue to pursue Active Inference in some form.
Any closing thoughts on 10, Ali?
I just wanted to attest to the last sentence of the book, because definitely after getting familiar
more and more with different aspects of Active Inference, I can see it, I mean, realized or
or to say it in a better terms, I can see it relevant to many, many different aspects of
life and not just empirical or scientific research, but every aspect of life.
Awesome. All right. Well, thank you for watching this overview video or playlist. And we hope to see
you engaged in a textbook group. Thank you. Thanks.
