Hello, everyone. It is August 2nd, 2023. We're in the active
inference for the social sciences course. I'm Daniel
Friedman. And this is going to be a lecture on collective
behavior. Now, of course, disclaimers could abound. And
there's so many ways to go about this topic of collective
behavior that in actuality, in enactment, I really hope it
is multi scale and collective. I'm really looking forward to
your comments and your engagement with this area with this
lecture with this course. So if you're watching live, you can
add comments into the live chat or questions and I'll check them
out at the end. Also in the YouTube live chat. And in the
video description, there is a link to where you can submit
questions for all of the teachers of this course. That's
going to be a code of form. And just more generally, let's have
fun enacting ecosystems of shared intelligence together. And I
hope that this lecture can be something like one attempt to
make that happen epistemically. We're gonna have many fun
things to talk about collective behavior. What
differentiates it from simply behavior? I mean, aren't all
behaving systems assemblages is not the brain composed of
multiple parts brain and body, multiple people. What are we
really talking about with individual behavior? Why do we
need adjectives at all for behavior? What is a collective?
And how would we even know it except through its behavior? So
they're going to be all kinds of fun topics.
Avell provided me with this image and suggested that it would
be a great place to head towards. And so we can think of this
as where we're going. And where we're going is understanding
the agents or the human in a social relationship through
social action and the recipient of social constraints and
observations. Through that interface, or blanket or
holographic screen, the agent or the human is engaging on this
socio cultural landscape. And so we can think about that
agent of engagement with a social world and the dynamic of
socio cultural constraints. Now that's where we're going. And
that's how someone else has framed where we're going. What
I'll tell you here is how we're getting there, how we're
getting there. It's going to be a lot of fun. There's going to
be a lot of ants, and doors going to be wide open. So
everyone is an estimate on this slide. And we're going to be
with our regimes of attention, and our Stygmurgic trails just
absolutely up, down, left, right, all over this socio
cultural landscape. All right. So here's the plan for the
collective behavior lecture. It's going to be presented as a
sequence of views. Each view or perspective is going to consist
of at very least a central citation, and then one or more
reflections on that citation. Four views on collective
behavior taken as a bundle will constitute a main section of this
lecture. And there are going to be three main sections of this
lecture split on one hand into three groups of four. And on the
other hand, into two groups of six. Splitting into force, the
main three sections are going to be background in context, which
is going to provide some views and insights that are from
outside of active inference, because surprise, surprise, what
was true before active inference or outside of active
inference is also true within and after. Then we're going to turn
to active inference, specifically, we're going to talk
about active inference insights and fundamentals for collective
behavior, and applications and implications of utilizing or of
conceptualizing of a social system as an active inference
system. So those second two sections are each going to
center around also specific recent work in the field. To
split it into two groups of six, the first six views that are
presented, so all of background and context, and then half of
the insights and fundamentals are going to be in support
linguistically or rhetorically of a declarative statement. Whereas
the latter six views are going to support or open up to a
question. And that'll lead us to the final section, the fourth
section, which is some open questions. At that time, I will
look at the live chat and review any questions or thoughts that
people have. And I'll also just open the door and leave it open
with asking questions, because that's something that we're
going to be engaged in for so so long. So let's go right into
the first section, background and context. Here are the four
views and the four declarative statements. Big picture, many,
if not all of the concepts, discussions, questions and views
on collective behavior from before or outside of active
inference, also apply after or inside active inference, or in
the active inference ecosystem. And so to support and to build
out that point, I'm going to talk about four different works
and some takeaways. First, watching behavior is complex.
Here we'll look at Deborah Gordon's 1992 paper, Vickenstein
and Antwatching. Second, all intelligence is collective
intelligence, which was a presentation of the same name
by JF Cloutier earlier this year, referencing a paper of the
same name. Third, we have never been individuals, a work by
Gilbert et al from 2012, a symbiotic view of life, we have
never been individuals, little bit of a play on we have never
been modern. And the metaphors and frameworks and language that
we use to talk about behavior to talk about collective behavior,
what adjectives we put in front of what nouns, that matters. And
a great work that Ali shared with me that I think makes this
point super well is by Navarro and Gabriella Edis from 23. And
that work is the morphology of collective intelligence, network,
swarm, multitude or assemblage. So let's head straight to
Professor Gordon's 1992 work on Vickenstein and Antwatching. And
so just also for context, Professor Gordon was my PhD
advisor. And so I was able to engage with this material and
perspective through asynchronous means, such as this paper, but
also seeing it actually play out on a sociocultural landscape in
the desert in Southeast Arizona. That's where the complexity
really flowered. And so research in animal behavior begins by
identifying what animals are doing. In the course of
observation, the observer comes to see animals as performing a
particular activity. How does this process work? How can we be
certain that behavior is identified correctly? Vickenstein
offers an approach to these questions, looking at the uses
of certainty, rather than attempting to find rules that
guarantee it. Here, two stages in research are distinguished.
First, watching animals. And second, reporting the results to
other scientists. Certainty about what animals are doing has
different uses at each stage. And this is really a beautiful and
subtle point. By distinguishing stages of the
Ethological Encounter, the Behavioral Scientific Encounter,
whether we're talking about ants on the ground, or people in the
cities, separating out the observational moments and the
uncertainties that are always at play there, from this secondary
communication about behavior, at which point, having really
clear, defined articulations of behavior becomes so important
for scientific reproducibility, integrity, accessibility, and
so on. Personally, I find that this paper anticipates a lot of
the specifications that today, we would consider part of the
metabasian perspective, which is to say, we're making
inferences, as cognitive systems, about other cognitive
systems. She wrote, my questions about ant watching do not arise
when I'm watching ants. Most of the time, I do not think much
about certainty when ant watching, replace that for the social
human setting with people watching. Sometimes we're just
watching people and that's okay. That's part of the moment. I
do not think much about certainty when ant watching. I
enact it. The questions do not come from doubts about the
certainty of my seeing, but from the ways that doubts about the
certainty of seeing have shaped scientific practice. The
resolution of the problem would come from changes that would
allow observers to talk about what they are actually doing when
watching animals. Truthful accounts of scientific animal
watching don't yet exist. This truth is not yet formed because
we have not yet learned to talk about it. What a wonderful
expression. And delightfully, I came to see the confused
foragers as patrollers searching for new food. I saw the other
foragers as already decided about their destination, not
available to be distracted by a new source of food. And so we
have this really fascinating dialectic where in the moments
we're observing in this pre definitional space, not
questioning, though maybe we went to the field site to ask and
answer a question, get data about a question. But in the
moment, we're in the flow of observation, and not asking
questions, though the uncertainty may be the highest.
Afterwards, when we're communicating to our scientific
colleagues, I defined an outgoing forager as a forager with
as an estimate with no object in the mandibles, and heading off
in a straight line, passing a demarcated point three meters
from the colony entrance. Then people will why three meters,
why not two meters? Or why can't it be carrying something on
the way out? Those questions arise in that precise space of
communication. And I wanted to open the lecture with this view,
because it puts a space between, I see that person putting out a
fire. They're a firefighter. In that space between is the
interpretive moment and possibility, and reimagining
the social has so much to do with this process of, let's just
say, ant watching. Second view in this background and context
section. And here I wanted to draw from a wonderful
presentation that JF Cloutier, facilitator and participant at
the Active Inference Institute, presented as part of his Robotics
and embodied project, where yes, he's building Lego robots that
do symbolic active inference, but also opening up some great
philosophical directions, and ones that have a lot of
implications for how we think about natural, artificial and
synthetic intelligence. This presentation is called All
Intelligence is collective intelligence. And it was based
upon the title and drawing upon a recent 2022 citation by
Fallon days at all. And some of these maxims or expressions that
JF provided, I thought were so provocative, and also brought us
back to that initial question. Why collective behavior? I mean,
what system isn't a collective? So why do we need the adjective?
If we're talking about behaving systems? What is individual
behavior? Individual, what? Oh, just one bird. Oh, just one
person. Okay, made up of what? And so JF wrote some expressions
and you can see from the link and look a little more with some
images and more of what he wrote. But a few of these, I
thought were just excellent. Intelligence is a process enacted
by interacting parts, not a property of individuals. Again,
whatever that would even mean. Inaction is death. Being by
doing action without prediction is reckless. No prediction without
sensemaking. No sense made without a self versus the world. Or
self in the world. A collective is differently intelligent than
its members. Maybe trivially different, maybe better in every
way, maybe another direction in every way. Why do individuals
participate in collectives? Why are people in groups? Because
sacrificing the autonomy to the collective provides benefit,
survival or even thrival benefits. That's that I to we. No
making of sense without the self acting in or on the world. It's
not just some essence that's disembodied. This is what
embodiment is all about. An autonomous agent is a self
organizing collective of parts. Parts of a collective can
themselves be autonomous agents. Collectives form to improve the
chance of survival of their members and an agent in a
collective benefits from the intelligence of the collective.
So to me, this presentation and line of research pursued by JF
and others absolutely puts a bow on the what is an individual?
What is a collective? Why do we even talk about quote
individuals or quote collectives when we recognize the
multi scale nature of complex adaptive systems? Third
perspective, a symbiotic view of life, we have never been
individuals. This is a 2012 paper by Gilbert sap and tower. And
just to read a few aspects of what they wrote in the abstract,
the notion of the biological individual is crucial to studies
of genetics, immunology, evolution, develop anatomy and
physiology. Each of these biological sub disciplines has a
specific conception of individuality, which has
historically provided conceptual context for integrating
newly acquired data. Few descriptions. Animals cannot be
considered individuals by anatomical or physiological
criteria, because a diversity of symbiotes are both present and
functional in completing metabolic pathways and serving
other physiological functions. Similarly, these new studies
have shown that animal development is incomplete without
symbiotes. Symbiotes also constitute a second mode of
genetic inheritance, providing selectable genetic variation
for natural selection, which connects it to the evolutionary
concept of an individual. So if we pursue the metabolic Oh, it's
it's all the the metabolic networks and how they're all
connected. That's the individual. All right, well,
that includes the microbiome and symbiotes. Well, no, it's the
physiology and the decision making and the neurophysiology.
Those are also in play with the symbiotes. Well, at least
evolution only selects upon the germline, right? Well, no,
actually, there are these multiple mechanisms of
inheritance, whether they're relevant in a given situation or
not, is situational. But in principle, they exist, and they're
increasingly coming to be recognized. Additionally, for
the immune system, commonly described as quote, self versus
non self, or self identification, or self other
discrimination. After all, we talk about auto grafting and
allografting. But of course, there are aspects of quote,
self or self under some definitions, like an epitope
from a protein in cartilage, then auto immune disorder might
target. So the immune system is mobilized against self under
some definitions sometime, and is not mobilized against other
under some definitions, sometimes, like we're not
constantly mounting a massive immune response to our gut
microbiome or skin microbiome. Recognizing the halobiant, the
multicellular eukaryote plus its colonies of persistent
symbiotes, as a critically important unit of anatomy,
development, physiology, immunology and evolution, and
cognition opens up a new investigative avenue and
conceptually challenges the ways in which the biological
sub disciplines have here to four characterized living
entities. Here we have the cover of the famous work Leviathan.
It's a large person constituted of other people, really making
the point clear. But if we zoomed in on quote, an individual
person, wouldn't we find something like societies of
cells? What is an individual? When is an individual what? And
what's on the line? I thought, those are such big questions.
Maybe could we connect it to a little bit of more of a bibliographic
piece of data just to show a snapshot and to open up this
discussion to you all about what's on the line with what's an
individual. And so what I did is I searched for some literature
trends on PubMed. And here is the results per 100,000 citations
for collective behavior. And so we see collective behavior first
being mentioned in the 1950s, at least in this literature
database, and rising up on through around 500, or 400 or
500 per 100,000. So 1000 out of 100,000 would be 1%. So half of
percent of all the citations on a major bio little literature
database have collective behavior in them. So that's that's a
huge amount of work. And it looks like it goes down. But when
you actually look at how many citations there are, it's been
about four to 5000 publications per year. It's just that the
rest of the literature database may be expanding at a faster
rate. So 1000s of paper per year, and an appreciable fraction
of work has to do with collective behavior. And so I thought,
wow, that that's, that's exciting. That's great. Well, how are
we doing compared to behavior? Now collective behavior is this
lower line in red. And yeah, there's a blip. But behavior is up
between 15 and 20% of citations in PubMed. Now, maybe behavior is
also referring to the behavior of a given material that may or
may not be a superconductor, or might be using different
understandings of behavior. But what what what can we say? And
what can we know about the difference between individual
and collective behavior? Now, interestingly, here, I searched
for individual behavior as as a specific term. So we see a lot
lower. But individual behavior, I mean, can the tide have
already turned? Can it really be the case that after 2020, this
is a real meaningful decline? I don't know. It's too early to
say, we can't do technical analysis just like that, but
very provocative, and gives us some ways to look at the
broader scale, or collective scientific cognitive process
associated with these incredibly important, philosophical, and
biological questions about individuality, because of course,
to distinguish collective behavior from individual
behavior, or why will you why would you even need an adjective
at all? It's going to come down to what is an individual and
what's on the line so much. And the last view here, drawing
upon the work morphology of collective intelligence, network
swarm, multitude, or assemblage, and Tony DeVaro and Alejandra
Lopez Gabrales wrote, Network swarm and multitude are some of
the different metaphors that have been used to understand the
concept of collective intelligence. All of them have
reflected our relationship with the internet and its
development. With the advent of artificial intelligence AI, we
wonder about other metaphors that might offer a new
understanding of collective intelligence to address today's
environmental and socio technical challenges. They bring up
network swarm and multitude to advocate for the fourth option,
assemblage, understanding collective intelligence as an
assemblage allows for the inclusion of different human and
technological agents and overcomes the anthropocentrism,
human centrism, human exclusionism of other models based on
human will, whether extended as in the multitude or suppressed as
in the swarm, connotations here. In this way, ethical decision
making and responsibility are distributed among different
cognitive actors with a capacity to choose and interpret. And to
the extent that they make decisions, albeit algorithmic
ones, they're also accountable. And I love this and I think it
foreshadows where we're going to be going with active inference,
which is different cognitive actors have the capacity to
choose and interpret. We might connect that to sensory and
internal states of an active inference agent, but perception,
sensemaking, signal processing, inbound information, and
decision making and responsibility and accountability. And the
accountability that we associate with human socio technical
systems, that's the action selection, control theory,
outgoing dependencies in the Markov blanket. So right there,
coming from outside of active inference, we see the
identification of the need to have flexible frameworks,
including linguistic and metaphorical, that allow us to
talk about heterogeneous, diverse, cyber physical systems,
where different entities are engaged in different practices
and ways of incoming sensemaking and outgoing
decision making. And it's going to turn out that active
inference is an incredible and flexible expressive framework
that's going to allow us to talk about those kinds of systems
pointed to here. And it really matters, they point to some of
the most important aspects of issues today. On to active
inference, insights and fundamentals. Well, here, as
in all the other areas, there are so many pieces of literature
that could have been drawn on. That's why I restricted myself
to just for views. Also, this section is going to mark the
midway point, we're not there yet, don't worry. But the midway
point of the lecture, where we move from the six declarative
expressions on to the questions, because it's more open than
not. And there's more space for you to respond than you may
imagine. But what are the views going to be here? And what are
the literature that support that point? So first, active
inference and the free energy principle, which is a principle
that provides a lot of theoretical grounding and physics based
perspective on active inference, but we're not going to go too
much into it today. Active inference and the free energy
principle are scale free formalisms for cognitive
systems. With collectives, as with individuals, the general
framing in itself does very little. However, with properly
constructed generative models, we can get explanation,
prediction, design, influence and implementation tools. And here
I'm going to draw on two pieces of work, epistemic
communities under active inference by Mao and colleagues in
2022. And just from a several days ago, the work by Connor
Heinz and colleagues collected behavior from surprise
minimization. We'll unpack the point more when we get there.
Second, collectives can be understood of consisting as
consisting of action perception loops, which subsume, entail or
supervene upon individual level action perception loops.
Niche modification, Stigmergy can also be modeled this way. We'll
draw upon the paper Active Inference, an active inference
framework for colony behavior by myself and colleagues in 2021.
And then we'll move into the questions and things will start
to open up. So if it feels like we've been climbing uphill,
we're two thirds of the way with the uphill climb feels like
we've been going downhill, we're two thirds of the way with a
downhill. How do the concepts of generalized synchrony and
homeostasis, which are so core to active inference relate to
collective behavior? Here we'll discuss the work by Raph
Kaufman at all from 2021, an active inference model of
collective intelligence. And lastly, in this section, how can
active inference be used to explore the balance between
individual and collective behaviors and the bi-directional
influence of collectives on individuals and of course vice
versa. Here we'll draw upon the computational boundary of a
self, developmental bioelectricity drives
multicellularity and scale free cognition by Mike Levin in 2019.
So let's get right into the work by Mao and Connor and
colleagues. First, I'm just going to bring this paper up.
However, first, you can watch more about it in guest stream
17.1 from March 2022. Here's two two collectives right here.
And also now we'll be covering this work in a lot more detail
later on in the course. I just wanted to bring it up because I
think it's one of the exceptional examples that can be
deployed to show like, hey, just thinking about the social as
an active inference system is awesome. It's an intuition pump.
It brings us into the active inference ecosystem. But then
what do we do when we're there? And what we do when we're there
is we develop generative models that actually take us towards
where we want to be. Again, framing a situation as being
related to active inference, or you could do an active inference
model of that does very, very little work by itself. However,
making generative models of situations, even if they're
speculative generative models or qualitative or hypothetical, that
can start getting towards doing work. But if someone said, well,
that health condition, you could do a linear regression. Okay,
but which treatment do we do? Well, it could be done with a
linear regression, we could use a linear regression to figure
out what method to use. Okay, but you know, more or less, how
to room or cold to room or just use a linear regression. So
that's the conversation that we're having a lot with active
inference. A lot of times people are talking about whether a
given situation can or cannot be modeled active inference or just
in the abstract, what does active inference say about this
situation? And again, the framework itself is general to the
point of doing little work. And we love it that way. It enables
us to move into systems of interest and deploy generative
models. So what they did in this paper was leverage the active
inference framework to provide an in silico model on the
computer chip model of confirmation bias and its
effect on echo chamber formation. They had a system of
interest, people's social engagement on so called social
media, and they had even a phenomena of interest, which was
echo chamber formation. They built a model based on active
inference, where agents tend to sample information in order to
justify their own view of reality, something we call self
evidencing. We show that once agents have reached a certain
level of certainty about their beliefs, it becomes very
difficult to get them to change their views. The system of
self confirming beliefs is upheld and reinforced by the
evolving relationship between an agent's beliefs and
observations, which will over time, will continue to provide
evidence for their ingrained ideas about the world. Well,
where I'm from, we drive on the right side of the road. And so
you drive on the right side of the road, I drive on the right
side of the road, we're not going to have an issue.
Everywhere I look, I see cars moving around, I see people
passing on the right on the sidewalk. It's all making sense.
We're bounding surprise, we're doing active inference,
surprise minimization, goals, reward, never need to come into
play to give an account of how those systems could arise and be
stabilized. These epistemic communities are consolidated by
those shared beliefs, and in turn tend to produce perceptions of
reality that reinforce those shared beliefs. And on the top
right, is just a little teaser of what a Bayesian graphical
model looks like of the kind that they deployed in this paper.
And here, we see some of the results from their parameter
sweeping, exploring different combinations of parameters, and
looking at topics like polarization index, and
re attendance rate. And so all kinds of statistics that can be
drawn upon connected to the generative model, and also all
kinds of opportunities and interfaces to relate this to
empirical data, as well as suggest experiments. So Mao is
going to talk more about this and it's awesome work. And then
late breaking news, only several days ago, five or so days
ago, an amazing new preprint was put up by Connor Heinz and
colleagues. And it was just too cool not to include here and
reflects the very rapid pace of collaborative development in
the active inference ecosystem. And this is their work collective
behavior from surprise minimization. And they made
every point I wanted to make here and now. collective motion is
ubiquitous in nature. Typically, such macroscopic patterns
arise from decentralized local interactions among constituent
components, e.g. individual fish in a school. There's that word
individual again. Preeminent models of this process describe
individuals as self propelled particles subject to self
generated motion and social forces, such as short range
repulsion and long range attraction or alignment. Hmm.
However, organisms are not particles. They are probabilistic
decision makers. They're cognitive particles. We
introduce an approach to modeling collective behavior based on
active inference. This cognitive framework cast behavior as the
consequence of a single imperative to minimize surprise.
Again, if you want to, you can contrast that with reward
learning where the imperative is to maximize reward. Inactive
inference and the free energy principle, we're taking a path
of least action, not the laziest path or the most passive
one, but a little bit more technically a path of least
action. And we're minimizing surprise. We're bounding
surprise with variational free energy. And it turns out that
that helps us minimize surprise and maximize model evidence. And
it can include things like novelty and curiosity seeking
very naturally. So this doesn't mean we're squeezing the juice
out of life at all. We demonstrate that many empirically
observed collective phenomena, including cohesion, milling and
directed motion emerge naturally when considering behavior as
driven by active Bayesian inference, without explicitly
building behavioral rules or goals into individual agents. No
reward, no goal, no master of the collective. Furthermore, we
show that active inference can recover and generalize the
classical notion of social forces, as agents attempt to
suppress prediction errors that conflict with their
expectations. By exploring the parameter space of the belief
space model, we reveal non trivial relationships between the
individual beliefs and group properties like polarization, and
the tendency to visit different collective states. We also
explore how individual beliefs about uncertainty, metacognition
beliefs about beliefs, determine collective decision making
accuracy. What if when you voted or shared your perspective on
what we were going to have for dinner, you also conveyed an
uncertainty estimate? How confident are you about that being
the case?
Finally, we show how agents can update their generative model
over time, resulting in groups that are collectively more
sensitive to external fluctuations and encode
information more robustly. From a distributed systems
perspective, you can imagine two different kinds of distributed
systems or networks. One of them has a dampening like quality. So
something that enters on one side, if dampens as it diffuses,
we can also contrast that with another kind of distributed
system or another kind of input or stimulus or context that
amplifies and the goal or one nice property to have a systems
would be like, we want to dampen what we don't want to pay
attention to, and up signal or increase the cascading
availability of what we do want to attend to. Now, that's a
little circular since in some ways that's the definition of
attention. However, making unified models like they do here
gives us integrated approaches to explore a broad range of
collective phenomena here in spatial movement, but also
involving the cognitive states of the particles. And they make a
really nice representation here to connect to other approaches. A
traditional approach to classical self propelled particles
is agent environment agents take rules, and they make decisions
based upon those rules that are either given or learned. You
know, when you're this close to the bird next to you do that.
And when you're this close, do this. And then social forces of
these kind of as if or actual constraints that then modify the
agent's perspective. And what we see in the active inference
setting is that the agent and the environment are mediated by
an interface, the Markov blanket. This is the sensorium. This
is on the inbound side perception, and on the outbound side
action. And they give some more details. It's a really exciting
paper. And it just cool to see again, that even in the
preparatory days of a lecture like this, like, there's always
new collective activity in the ecosystem. And that's what makes
it fun. Last of the declarative sections of this lecture,
colonies here, but more generally, collectives can be
understood as consisting of action perception loops, which
subsume, entail or supervene upon individual level action
perception loops. Niche modifications or stigmergy can also
be modeled this way. What we did in this paper was bring
something new to active inference in at least two
different ways. First, it was the it was the first model of an
ant system of interest. Now for some of us mere macologists in
the audience, all of our broader entomology colleagues, that
may be enough. But what was also really interesting about this
work and the opportunity to collaborate on it was it was the
first active inference model presented with explicit stigmergy,
not just the philosophical consideration of the traces that
agents leaving in the environment might then have them change
their behavior in the future, but but explicitly engaging with
this process of multi agent, stigmatic behavior. Active
inference may be informative in the study of ant colonies at
three distinct temporal scales, nest mate behavior, which is to
say emergent among tissues of a nest mate. You could keep on
going collectively down and interactions with the biotic or
abiotic environment. So first level at the level of a nest mate,
one of those things with six legs that looks like an insect at the
level of the colony, colony development is emergent among
nest mates and their interactions with the niche. That is where
many people would traditionally assign collective
behavior. It's a well, well, one nest mate walking around is
individual behavior, that's the individual ants. And then the
colony is where collective behavior comes into play, right?
And we're going to see that reified very soon. But lastly,
we point to the evolution of populations, which is an emergent
outcome amongst colonies within an ecology. In this work, we
focused on the connection between the first two levels of
analysis, focusing on the case of stigmatic colony foraging,
using a modification of previous active inference
computational implementations. We didn't use the word
individual. And there's a reason why. Because we're saying what
we mean more clearly when talking about ants, when we talk
about nest mates, colonies and populations of colonies, that
sidesteps or transcends the discussion of what is an
individual and what is a collective because with respect
to the colony as an individual, if you want to use that word, the
population is a collective with respect to the nest mate, the
colony is a collective with respect to the tissue, like the
brain or the mid gut, the nest mate is a collective. So we don't
need to play the adjective game, we can just articulate what
we're interested in about these systems of interest and complex
adaptive system phenomena. And so what we did was we explored a
kind of classical behavioral setting, which is food being
placed between the arms of a teammates. And in this case, rather
than a rat, I'm just pausing for a second while I believe that
my internet is reconnecting and we should be back. Each ant was
described by an action perception loop, an active
inference action perception loop. And they were able to move
within a three by three grid, as well as perceive pheromone
density within a three by three grid. And then they laid down
pheromone, they added stigmatic trace on the way home, if they
had found a seed. And so this does a few interesting things and
and live stream 29 is where we unpack this a lot more, but I
just wanted to make two more points here. The first is that in
a reward centric perspective on ant behavior, the pheromone is
seen as a semi audit queue. And the seed or the food is seen as
the reward. And so then we got to use the cues, we got to use the
pheromone density to like figure out where the good stuff is
that's that paradigm. We flipped that with active inference. Now
the preference, we don't need to say reward, but the preference
that which is sought after, proximally, but teleologically
that which is sought after preferred over is the pheromone.
The seed becomes the semi audit queue, that it's time to turn
on your pheromone depositing and come home. And so that flips are
approached understanding what foraging is about from we're
lost in the sauce, trying to figure out where the good thing
is out there to we're surfing the 100 foot wave, and we'll know
it when we see it, and then we'll turn around. Very different
perspective. And then one other point that I had to make for the
context, was that we used a modification of a previous active
inference computational implementation. What was the the
paper that we drew from? In fact, it was the acquisition of
culturally patterned attention styles under active
inference, with Axel and Alex at all. And what this paper did
was they looked at the situation of visual foraging on a
vase, a piece of pottery, where the eye was only able to
perceive a three by three matrix of pixels. And then the eye
scanned around, looking to recognize broader patterns that
were then culturally acquired. So maybe one culture or one
subculture likes the checkerboard pattern. And
another one likes vertical lines, another one likes horizontal
lines, or these other kinds of repetitive structures. What's
so interesting is that the eye, when it is foraging, does not
leave a trace, though it can feel like it doesn't. But the eye
forages around, in order to get the bigger picture, based on
local information. What we did is we said, well, instead of
imagining that as the gaze location of an eye, let's imagine
that as the skin in the game, exoskeleton on the ground of a
forager. So let's think about that movement as something that
an embodied forager does with its real body. And then
conditional in this setting upon it touching the seed or the
food, it can lay down a pheromone trail, which the eyes can't do,
per se. And so just really interesting, because it's not
like, this was an ant paper, and now we're going to try to
cram it into social sciences, it's actually like, computational
work in the social sciences, was able to translate to mere
macology into ants research. And so it's a very fruitful and
bidirectional relationship between studying ants and
studying people. Now we're going to move into the openness of
questions in this second half of the lecture. So how do the
concepts of generalized synchrony and homeostasis, which are
core to active inference relate to collective behavior? And here,
we can draw upon the work by Ralph Kaufman, Pranav Gupta and
Jacob Taylor, from 2021, called inactive inference model of
collective intelligence. And this was also unpacked in
guest stream nine. And so here's a little collective over here.
And that was about two years ago, way back when what they did
in this paper was they considered a setting with two trolley
cars, moving around a wheel. And so here's how they contextualize
that work. Formal models of collective intelligence have
lacked a plausible mathematical description of the
relationship between local scale interactions between autonomous
subsystem components, individuals, and global scale
behavior of the composite system, the collective. So they do a
really great job faking out what they mean by individual and
collective. In this paper, we use the active inference
formulation, AIF, a framework for explaining the behavior of any
non-equilibrium steady state system at any scale to posit a
minimal agent based model that simulates the relationship between
local individual level interaction and collective
intelligence. Then they had a really creative approach to
disentangling how different capacities translated to different
collective outcomes. And here's what they did. We explore the
effects of providing baseline active inference agents, model one
with specific cognitive capabilities. Model two added
in a theory of mind. Model three added in goal alignment. And
model four added both theory of mind and goal alignment. What
does that look like? Again, we're not going to go into all the
technical details here. But broadly, this is what it looked
like. Here was their simplest baseline active inference
formulation case. And then in the subsequent experiments, they
added in either one or the other or both of the cognitive
capacities that they described. They studied the single dyad case,
and they very cleverly expanded that into a large scale
multi dyad case. They utilized their own representation of the
active inference partition in order to facilitate the
construction of this model. And so in this case, we see the
blanket with the sensory states coming in, the active states
going out, Markov blanket. Here we see the environment, and then
internal belief states or cognitive states. So very cool
work that helps us get a vocabulary around not shut the
book on the focus on how how do different agents come to
synchronize? What is generalized synchrony? Well, it
doesn't mean lockstep. Turn taking is generalized synchrony.
Because these two agents, the time that they're talking has
very high mutual information on the other, even though the
correlation with their speaking might be negative. Agent A is
speaking when B is not and vice versa. So from a linear
regression perspective, there's a negative correlation. But
from a mutual information perspective, where you can't
ever have below zero information, at worst, it's just noise.
You always have zero or positive amount of information of
systems about other systems. And so that opens the door to
understanding generalized synchrony, which is a broader
conception of how individuals in collectives are interacting.
And homeostasis, maybe we could even imagine that these are
multiples cells in the pancreas, and they're trying to
coordinate on insulin sensitivity. Or maybe this is
multiple people who are securing the defense of a
community. And they also need to coordinate synchronously and
asynchronously. And so there's a lot of ways in which this very,
very lightweight apparatus of the active inference partition
helps us bring together and compose all these cool what ifs.
Well, what if it had theory of mind? What if it had goal
alignment? What if agents had theory of mind and goal
alignment? And what if we put them in a in a five by seven
grid? And then we did this and and and and. That's what we get
to do with active inference. And lastly here. How can active
inference be used to explore the balance between individual and
collective behavior and the bi-directional influence of
collectives on individuals? And so here, I draw upon the
amazing and singular work of Professor Mike Levin, who wrote
the computational boundary of a self, developmental bio
electricity drives multicellularity and scale
free cognition into 2019. This was also explored in live
stream 25 series. So just to pull out a few of the great
pieces of this article, and there's a stigmatic trail of
many other papers for those who follow. Professor Levin
writes, I propose a definition of an individual based on its
information processing structure. The scale and types of
goals that a system can pursue defines or determines the
boundaries and the content of the putative agent. On this view,
what defines a coherent unified self out of its constituents
components and the surrounding environment is the set of parts
that operate towards reaching specific goal states. So this is
a teleological or a functional or anticipatory or sentient or
adaptive or informational concept on individuality, which we can
add to the earlier consideration raised by Gilbert at all. Here
they discuss some of the more mechanistic biological
considerations like genetics, immunology, evolution,
development, anatomy and physiology. What Levin has done
here, and consistent with this is the informational theory of
individuality by David Krakauer at all is connect this more
generally to system capacity. And so there is what is here
represented as like a time diamond, where the scope or the
scale of the system in the now is like the radius or the
circumference on this diamond. And then the part of the diamond
that recedes off into the past that's retained from the past
is memory and history. And the part that advances or protends
into the future is the anticipatory or the planning
capacity. This opens the door to describing diverse
intelligences, including possible alien, artificial
intelligence or synthetic intelligences, as well as nested
or compound intelligences. So here, the example is the colony.
So here we have cells, these little pinkish diamonds nested
within a nest mate, which is the green diamond nested within
the colony, which is the blue diamond. Now, notice that the
nest mate is called an organism. I couldn't help but to
connect this to Wheeler 1911, whose work is the ant colony as
an organism, super organism came later, the super organizational
framing on the ant colony, reifies the concept that the
nest mate is the individual or the organism. Because why else
would you need to call the colony a super organism? I mean, I
think colonies are super. I think it's great to call them
whatever you want to call them. And they probably don't mind
either. But the idea that a super organism is composed of
other organisms means that the nest mate is an organism,
whereas this diagram, in my perspective, would be as accurate
or more to say nest mate here, because under different concepts
of organismality, which is to say individuality, if we want to
connect it there, the colony can be considered as the organism.
And of the so many other pieces of this work that are fun to
bring out, the way that Levin clarifies his assumptions gives
us, first off, some planks that we can jump off of for good and
helps us come to terms with maybe like, how do we, what do we
assume about behavior, about collective behavior? How do we
want to show up when we're studying collective behavior in
general, and when we're studying social behavior after all,
wearing active inference for the social sciences? And so Levin
writes, the ideas are explored here from the perspective of
the following three core assumptions. First is a commitment
evolution. Every capacity has a natural history and emerged
from simpler variants. Second, it is assumed that all metaphors
are to be judged by their utility in driving scientific
progress. There is not a binary categorization of scientific
pictures, which should be taken literally or not, which can be
decided a priori upfront. Third, much of the discussion
centers around goals related to teleology, a hotly debated
topic. Here, goal directness is taken in a non magical cybernetic
engineering and control theory sense of a feedback system that
operates to maximize some specific state of affairs, which
can be modeled as a dynamical system with attractors in its
state space, and later work by Levin and Fields and others
expanded this concept of intelligence just to phenomenal
heights and flavors. So, active inference helps us understand
that cognitive glue, maybe it's mechanistically enacted by
bioelectricity in a given system or at a given scale, but
active inference gives us the analytical glue to approach
those systems with an open mind and an open scaffold.
And so, those are some of the insights and fundamentals of
active inference as applied to collective behavioral systems.
Now, on to the last third of this lecture, applications and
implications of active inference for the social sciences
regarding collective behavior. This is really
where it is wide, wide, wide, open.
What kinds of insights can active inference offer about the
role of learning, adaptation, conflict, and cooperation in
collective behavior? And how can we approach that from a
cognitive security perspective? Here, we'll draw on the work
of Scott David and colleagues, active inference in modeling
conflict. What implications does active inference have on the
study of human collective behavior, particularly in
social, economic, and digital contexts? Here, we'll draw on
the work by Poirier et al. Communication as socially
extended active inference, an ecological approach to
communicative behavior, Livestream 4.0 series.
What considerations that are relevant for thinking about
assemblages and interactions, what considerations are
relevant for thinking about assemblages and interactions
among different entities in cognitive ecosystems?
Here, we'll turn to the work of Friston et al et al, 2022,
designing ecosystems of intelligence from first principles.
And how does active inference accommodate collective behavior
within and across generations? And here, we'll look at a
variational synthesis of evolutionary and developmental dynamics
by Friston et al in 2023. So, when it comes to applications and
implications of active inference in social sitting,
sittings and settings, again, there's so much to do, there's
so much to learn. So, we welcome everybody who's curious.
This is the time to write your live chats, submit your questions,
prepare yourself to explore and to be an active forager in this
space. And if you're listening, you know that you already are.
So, in the work active inference in modeling conflict,
Scott David, RJ Corday and myself asked, what kinds of
insights can active inference offer about the role of learning
adaptation, conflict and cooperation in collective behavior?
Now, as with all these other papers, there's always so many
things that can be said. What we did is we tried to connect
beyond the very classical Markov blanket and
agent environment partition, which we've seen many, many, many
times, we tried to connect this to the specific kind of
generative models that we use in modeling. So, here we led early
by clarifying, this is what we're talking about with active
inference generative models. It's not like something I'm
hiding in my pocket and maybe I'll show you if you say the
shibboleth, this is what we're talking about when we're
talking about applying active inference models to social
settings. It's a discrete time generative model here, just a
motif. We applied that kind of generative model
architecture to one of the most well-known models of sense
making and decision making, which is the UDA loop, Observe
Orient Decide Act by John Boyd. Now, this may seem to some
like a quite sparse framework, like, yeah, you get the
observation, you figure it out, you make a decision, you take
the action. It doesn't do that much work by itself either.
However, UDA is used in tactical and strategic settings
every single day. And so, we wanted to connect UDA loop to the
generative models that we use in active inference. And so, we
highlighted on the generative model where different stages of
the UDA loop occur. Perception happens in the sensory
states. Cognition or the orientation happens in the
perceptual inference, the downstairs of that part of the
figure. And then decision making happens in the upstairs,
with the expected free energy calculation in this case. And
finally, action is selected and enacted. And that results in
impact and the cycle begins again. Now, in active inference,
it's more like an unfolding flow, but to a first pass
approximation, it does the trick. What does that really
matter that we understand the mechanics of decision making?
Well, we're talking about active inference in the social
setting. That means we're talking about two sophisticated
cognitive entities, maybe two businesses, maybe two
individual humans, maybe a person and a business, maybe
different kinds of systems that we don't even know about or
we haven't even seen yet. And that generative model is the
internal states that is then participating in this minimal
dyadic collective behavioral encounter. We can expand that to
thinking about comments, resource comments, attention
comments, open source ecosystems. And for this, we
utilized one of Scott David's favorite acronyms, of which he
has so so many, which is bolts, business, operation, legal,
technical and social. Bolts is not an exhaustive acronym,
otherwise we would need everything. But it's a heuristic
that encourages us to think holistically about different
systems. Let's just say that we were a business or a person and
we wanted to see if a given policy was a good way to go to
complete our mission. And it looks good, except it can't be
done operationally. Well, then that has to be taken into
account or everything works out, but it's illegal. That's not
the way to go. Everything works out, but the business doesn't
check out. It's not going to be sustainable financially. Or
technically, it can't be done. Or socially, it's not palatable.
All these features of socio-technical systems, which
again, we just make a little mnemonic of with bolts, need to
be taken into account for comprehensive and high integrity,
high reliability systems design. In this setting, we have
entity A and entity B interacting through the bolts
niche. They each have their own blanket states, sense and
action. And the niche, where those nest mates were laying
their pheromones, the niche is bolts. And so you could make a
restricted model where it's just two entities engaged in a
financial dealing, just a business only engaging on B. Or
you could think of this multi domain full spectrum
situation in terms of bolts. Then you would have a larger and
a more complex interface between these two entities. But we
also wanted to think about the case where there might be
cooperation between these entities, or there might be
conflict. And so here we have entity A and B. The dyad is in
the spotlight. Entity C is a non belligerent state, or it's a
bystander, or it's a witness, or it's a referee, or it's a
friend, or it's a colleague. But entity C is also engaging
only through their blanket states on bolts. And lastly, we
connected to the abiotic niche, which they may not care how
much you're buying or selling a gallon of oil for the abiotic
niche may have its own dynamics, we may use active inference to
model that or we might use some other approach to model it. And
so this sets a really, really general state space for us to
understand conflict and cooperation. And where we
situated that work, lastly here, was in relationship to other
work, exploring strategic and tactical decision making. And
so on the lower end of this image are tactical and
operational frameworks that are used in decision making. On
the top are strategic or scholarly frameworks that are
used for more of like geopolitical considerations. And
then from left to right, we have more qualitative approaches
going to more formal and quantitative approaches. And we
believe that the application of active inference through this
type of model, the active inference conflict model, helps
us touch the qualitative natural language and graphical
composable aspects, and the quantitative and formal aspects
as well. And similarly, through nested decision making
cycles, we can talk about tactical operational
activities, and the broader nested strategy, just like we
looked at the nested cones from Professor Levin's work.
Next, what implications does active inference have on the
study of human collective behavior, particularly in
social, economic, and digital contexts? Well, there's a lot
to say about this, but Tissonne and Poirier wrote in 2021,
the paper, communication as socially extended active
inference, an ecological approach to communicative
behavior. And this was in the live stream 48 series. Here's
Remy raising his hand so that we knew that he wanted to
speak. They introduced an ecological account of
communication, according to which acts of communication are
active inference, achieved by affecting the behavior of a
target organism via the modification of its field of
affordances. Constraining a target organism's behavior
constitutes a mechanism of socially extended active
inference, allowing organisms to proactively regulate their
interstates through the behavior of other organisms. In this
general conception of communication, the type of
cooperative communication characteristic of human
communicative interaction is a way of constraining
interaction dynamics towards the goals of a given joint
action by constructing and altering shared fields of
affordances. This account embraces a pragmatist view
according to which communication is a form of action aiming to
influence the behavior of a target and stands against the
traditional transmission view according to which communication
fundamentally serves to convey information. Understanding
acts of communication as active inference under an
ecological interpretation allows us to link communicative
and ultimately linguistic behavior to the biological
imperative of minimizing free energy and to emphasize the
action-oriented nature of communicative interaction.
This is really a rich and excellent work that Remy and
Pierre produced and there are several pieces that I think
add a lot of meaning and value to the ways that we think
about communication but most broadly what is communication
for? Who do we talk to and why? What do we like to talk about
and why? Why would anyone say that and why? How does
technique consider broadly technology and technique,
whether it's digital or social or cultural technique,
mediate and influence communication? The media is the
message. The medium is the message and think about
everything in that area too and how can active inference
beyond just giving these incredible composable formal
tools, how can we think about joint action and
co-modification of fields of affordances? Hey could you
could you pick that up from from that shelf? Okay I'll open it for
you. Now let's hand it to our friend who's going to make the
food. All of these ways in which individuals shape each
other's field of affordances is something that we can talk
about really fluidly with an active inference.
Penultimate view. What considerations are relevant
for thinking about assemblages and interactions among different
entities in cognitive ecosystems? So here was a
large multi-authored paper from Carl Friston et al
and the versus colleagues designing ecosystems of
intelligence from first principles from December 2022.
And the big picture as I see it here is what is the role of the
social sciences after all the course that we're in now
in ecosystems of diverse heterogeneous synthetic
intelligences. By synthetic intelligences I refer to
assemblages with intelligence whether it's natural or
artificial leave that debate for another day
because in their application we're talking about synthetic
intelligence. Synthetic intelligence needs cognitive
security, cognitive security needs cognitive science.
And they began this paper with the following. This white paper
presents active inference as an approach to research and
development in the field of artificial intelligence, AI.
Artificial. With the aim of developing ecosystems of natural and
artificial intelligences. The path forward in
AI is often presented as progressing from systems that
are able to solve problems within one narrow domain,
artificial narrow intelligence, A-N-I, to systems that are able to
solve problems in a domain general manner at or beyond human
levels. What are known as artificial general
intelligence, A-G-I, and artificial superintelligence,
A-S-I. We believe that approaching A-S-I or for
reasons outlined below even A-G-I likely requires an
understanding of networked or collective intelligence.
Now, intelligence in action is behavior. So we're talking about
collective behavior. And they laid out their timeline and the
stages that they see in terms of sentient, sophisticated,
sympathetic, and finally shared intelligences. But I think
it's worth to dwell a moment on the one figure of this paper.
Figure one, belief updating on a statistical manifold.
And so here we have some curve in an information geometric
space. It's a parameter space of a probability distribution.
And on this manifold, on this line on a plane, lower dimensional
manifold projection, there's a temporal process, belief at time
t, t plus one, t plus two, where initially this
Gaussian that's very distributed becomes updated
to a sharper peak distribution that's going to be resting
basically at some special point on this curve.
Whether you're very familiar with accelerated optimization
on information geometric manifolds or not,
it's really interesting to consider why they went with this image.
And for those again who are familiar or just coming to be familiar
with some of the formalisms of active inference,
this is what this very talented and transdisciplinary team
went with when seeking to provide some of the only
non-textual descriptions of their work. So I think it's really
interesting. And the big question is, well, what is the social?
Reassembling the social, Bruno Latour. What is the social? What is social?
Does social mean only adult humans talking with each other?
Does social include non-human species? Does social include
non-biological intelligences? These are all things that are not just
questions of theory. And so connecting flexible, extensible frameworks like
active inference and all that comes along with it
to this bigger question about applications and implications
of applied active inference in the social setting.
That's what I hope we can explore in the questions at the end of this live
stream and in the discussions that we have in a couple of weeks
and ongoing. And lastly, how does active inference
accommodate collective behavior within and across generations?
And so here I'll draw on the recent work of variational synthesis of
evolutionary and developmental dynamics with Carl Friston, myself,
and others. And we had two images in this work which
otherwise had a lot of prose and formalism. On the left,
we see that active inference, particular partition,
external states, internal states, blanket states.
Here at the organismal level, one worm, and in an nested
deeper system, the population, which gives rise to the starting
positionality of the organisms. Think about drawing an organism
from a gene pool, from a birth pool, and the impact that those organisms
have on the bigger picture. Maybe it's a bacteria
that is fermenting. So it changes the pH or the ethanol
concentration of the kombucha. That is this kind of multi-scale
interaction that we believe provides an approach to
understanding eco-evo-devo ecology, evolution, and developmental
interactions. And the other visualization that we use here
is of nested systems. So contrast that with the kind of time
diamond that we saw from Mike Levin. Now here,
imagine that we're going to cut across the center of this diamond.
And now it's going to look like a muscle fiber, fibers of fibers.
Because we have, let's just say, this outer blue
line, maybe the colony. And then each of these
smaller entities is an estimate. And they're composed of cells. And cells
have constituents too. And here we utilized the apparatus of
the renormalization group, which draws upon physics,
to articulate the separation of scales so that we can be clear. When are we
talking about multi-scale systems, which we can articulate and
renormalize across vertically to use an encultured metaphor?
And then within a given scale of analysis,
what is the lateral or collective behavior?
So how do we get those interactions amongst nestmates
that are both constrained by the colony, top down,
again using a spatial and encultured metaphor,
top down, scaffolded or enabled or constrained by the colony. But then
what nestmates do matters? And that influences the colony.
And we used a few new pieces of formalism,
primarily developed by Carl, to help express that setting. And again, we think
it's going to be really useful for describing otherwise
quite challenging scenarios in ecology, evolution and development.
And so we come right back to that, what is a self? What about nested
selves? And with that, I turn to some open questions.
What can be said other than there are so many open questions to discuss?
There's many things we can explore in the discussion that I'll be
facilitating in a couple weeks and of course beyond.
We have a COTA interface for you to submit questions
that all the course teachers will take a look at and give their best attempt on.
And conversation is collective behavior. Now, sure, keeping it inside of your
head is also collective behavior, no matter how you think about it.
But when we enact in the social, then we're really making it happen.
So with that, I will just show my citations
and the slides will be shared too. Also, there's some extra readings that
various individuals along the way suggested to me.
So that includes social ecologies and abductive logic,
enacting like a state. These are not the titles. The titles are
inactive dynamic social cognition, inactive inference, that was live stream 47.
Thinking like a state embodied intelligence in the deep history of our
collective minds, that was live stream 33. Active inference, applicability to
different kinds of social organizations, explained through reference to industrial
engineering and quality management, that was live stream 27.
Resonating minds, emergent collaboration through hierarchical active inference.
Jelle Broombergs and Eric Rietveld's work on self-organization, free energy
minimization and optimal grip on a field of affordances.
And the well-known thinking through other minds work by Vestierre
at all, thinking through other minds, a variational approach to cognition and
culture. Well, I hope this has been an interesting
and relevant lecture for you. It was fun to prepare.
There are so many perspectives and so much territory that
there's a lot in collective behavior. But again, I'm just really looking forward
to the discussion that we can have in a couple of weeks.
I encourage you whether you're listening on your timeline
at a moment that enables you to join that live conversation,
I would encourage you to join or to join the live stream so you can
participate through chat or whether you want to find some other
way to get involved. It's been a great time and with
that, I will close. Thank you very much. Until next time.
