Hello, welcome everybody. It's November 1st, 2023. And we are in the closing discussion
section for this first instance of active inference for the social sciences. It's been
a journey. I'm sure we'll have many fun things to talk about and explore today. So Avil
please take it from here and maybe give an overview of what we're going to do and talk about today.
Okay, so this is the conclusion session for course on active inference and for the social
science. We have talked extensively about active inference, maybe less extensively about for the
social science parts. So the goal of the session would be basic to assess what we talked about
and how it is relevant or not to the practice of social sciences. Basically, we will, this is a
discussion session, so there is no clear plan, but I'd like to address how formally active inference
accounts for agency and normativity and identity as a kind of integrated phenomenon,
how it can compare our ads to our grounds, our clash with, I don't know, sociological and
political model of agency and of social evolution and of etc. etc. All the topics that we addressed
which are numerous and discuss about the plausible future for active inference, what it can be used
to, maybe what it will be used to, certainly how it may change and how it's relevant to the
discussion. So that is the crux of it. We have brought in Alexi, who is a philosopher interested
in social ontology, specifically the study of social kinds, which is from Cairo's research,
and I do not know who Colin is, but he's with us. Hi Colin. So how should we proceed,
Daniel, what do we do? If you'd like maybe pose a specific question or prompt, which could be
preceded by a statement, and then we can all hear everyone's voice on that. Okay, so a good
question would be, active inference describes agency and normativity and identity as a kind
of integrated phenomenon. I think we should go over how precisely it works. So yes, let's do that.
I will find some, do you say, illustration that will make it easier, but let's hear people
start on that, please. Can you pose your question just a tad more clearly? How are agency, normativity,
and identity addressed separately and together in active inference? Mal, go for it. So I think we'd
like to look at things in terms of interrelations. In active inference, nothing is defined by
itself. It's defined in relation to other things. And this definition in relation to
other things also defines the types of constraints that will be pushed on the thing which is
separate from other things. Once you have this, you necessitate these interrelationships to be
formative, ontological, and fundamentally contextual. So nothing, no relationship is perfectly
reproducible across a different context. It will take on a hermeneutics semantics, given the
exact context of the spatial temporality of the entities. Those are some first thoughts. Does
anybody have big objections to what I just said?
Okay, so let's start.
Yeah, please continue. Sorry.
Let's start with the concept of agency, for instance. Agency is just action selection. So
agents are modeled. They have a generative model, and they use it to predict sensory inputs based
on possible actions. They try to minimize the difference between predicted and sensory inputs.
So they're just trying to minimize free energy. And this minimization is fundamentally due to the
relationship of constraints in their environment. So let's imagine that I am an individual who,
sorry, I saw a comment and I didn't. So yeah, so you have an individual that tries to exert
control over the environment. Now if you scale this in nested structures, you can try to think
of power structures and how agency within those power structures is modulated by the
different kinds of constraints that are both embedded within the environment itself,
within the materiality of the environment, and also within the normative aspects of the nested
structures, which pull and push an individual within certain paths through some kinds of
deontic cues. So that's how you get to the notions of encoding agents, beliefs and preferences
about the world within the generative model through a form of normativity, which is just
a higher precision over a specific type of outcome or mapping. So your prior beliefs here
come from different layers in the hierarchy, and these act as what we call culture or normativity.
I could start here if you want to say something, Aval. So I agree with what you said at a high
level conceptual scale, but I think it's important to be clear about what formally
governs the statement, because what we have formally is much more limited than
what we agree that interpretation could be. So can you see the screen I'm sharing?
Can you see the mouse doing AIDS? Yeah. Okay. So at core, Active Inference is a framework
that provides geometry for chemical systems. That is not a very straightforward way to put it.
But what we have is a system with a space of states, and we have a flow of the system. A flow is
a function that basically tells you where a specific point goes with time. And what Active
Inference says is that given specific patterns of demical coupling and of statistical dependencies,
we have agent-like behavior. So the simplest kind of the basic requirement of Active Inference,
of sorry, the French principle, which is a core motivation for Active Inference, is that you
have a demical system, so something with states and a flow and some noise, because we need noise
to get information. And it has a boundary in the middle of it that statistically separates
the external internal states. By statistically separate, I mean that every information about
what's going on there that is in there, it disappears when conditioned on there. So
of information I have about this, that I could read here, I can also read there.
And that's subtly different from a demical coupling, but this is formalism, let's not
get too much into this. And then you have more complex behavior when you can partition
sensory and active states, and your particle, it can do things. In this specific context,
we can write, basically, we can write a geometry for the fluctuation of the system.
And this geometry entails belief over external states. So these internal states, it knows
things in a sense about what's going on out there through its coupling, through sensory and active
states. And the flow it has internally, the way its internal states move, they entail
a displacement of their belief. And this displacement happens to be near optimal, given
base constraints, blah, blah, blah. And the real interesting stuff happens in the case of
strange particles, which are particles where, as you can see, there is no direct effect of
from actions, active states, to internal states. The only action you have is mediated by sensory
and external states. In this case, the active states themselves, so the policy of an agent,
it becomes the subject of beliefs of the agent. And if it becomes the subject of beliefs,
you can have statistical inference. This is the crux of the framework. And if you can have
statistical inference, you can have complex, multi-level statistical inference over re-reactions.
And those are, basically, what we call decision-taking or what we call planning.
So what we have here is a formal architecture that can derive the kind of complicated
agency, not only agency, but agency that is embedded in a specific conceptual framework
that is relative to the specific structure of an agent and their environment and the coupling
in between. All that is traced back, basically, to dynamics. So we have a proof of existence
that in the world that everything is dynamics. We can have agency, we can have complex decision-making
under the form of inference over one's own actions. And then you have complications to
apply directly, of course, because the world is likely not in its various form, a chemical system.
It does not have a list of states that are, okay, there is not a list of states that are
possible and that's it. And there is one coupling that takes those states themselves
and nothing can change ever. This is not likely to be the case. But we have a minimal model of
agency that is purely physical, that is purely based on the causal relationship in the most minimal
way we can possibly represent it, and this is quite huge. And this tells us, this gives us a
very, very strong prior over what we can, what is the stuff that agency is made of, and the stuff
that entity is made of, at least higher-order agency that we like. Think about here in the
social context is belief over oneself. And so to control actions is to control belief over oneself.
And this is this duality, this like dual aspect of statistical organization as a complex cognitive
agent that is, in my opinion, at the moment, given the capabilities of modeling and formalism we have,
the core contribution of active inference to social senses written largest in psychology,
neuroscience, like sense of social stuff, because it gives you a very strong prior
over what agency is made of and the kind of stuff that can exist out there
in the social world and the kind of dynamics that bring about its stuff.
So, but there is a quite big bridge to be made between the pure,
dimical system formalism of active inference and the kind of toponality evolution that happens
out there. And I do think there is a high level of precaution to be taken when we talk about this
kind of stuff. And yes, does anyone want to react or agree or disagree violently because I just
attacked the common creeds?
I'm sure I perceived an attack perhaps from what I understood of what you said, basically
you have information geometry. It formalizes a belief space in a sort of geometric manifold.
The points represent possible belief systems that an agent can have. And the distance between
the points in the space can be interpreted as a measure of how different two belief systems are.
And this is necessarily tugged by the priors given by the environment, which also push
the agents to act in a certain way, given the type of thing that it is in order to maintain
itself, given the actions that it knows it has available.
And this becomes normative because of the strength of the attractors within the belief
space, which become the geometric landscape basically. So we can sort of model the attraction
through the curvature of the space around the attractor. And so high curvature means a strong
normative force, which pulls the agent to adopt a certain, I like to say social scripts because
that's what I've worked on, but you know, any sort of policy and or phenomenology norm.
And so in this context, the agents agency is kind of complicated because it's both
the ability to sort of navigate the landscape to move closer or farther away from the attractors.
And so the degree to which an agent has agency is a degree to which it doesn't go
necessarily directly towards the attractor, but has some degree of reflexivity over its own
action space in order to navigate that the different kinds of
tractors that may be available to it. And so we could see that the momentum would be like
affected by personal experiences, education in the tendencies, or even, you know, the tendency
to resist or yield to social pressures. I could go on, but I know that, A, you have your hand up,
so why don't you go? Okay, I guess Avel could answer before I talk a bit. So I was just trying to
have my hand raised before talking. So if Avel wants to answer you and afterwards I can talk.
I'm okay. I don't have anything specific to answer.
Okay. So you talked about the dual aspect of statistical organization of complex agents.
And you said that it was a core contribution of active influence to social sciences.
Can you dig a bit on that? And yeah, just articulate it a bit more, so we could grasp it
better. And then I could ask questions. Do I share my screen? Yes. So basically what we
quite we have in here is the formalism that builds from very basic dynamics in the,
like, just space. And there is stuff that depends on the space.
Zero level physical representation of literally anything can go there. And from there, we build
a model of first self-organization. Not quite that. Agentive self-organization, let us say,
something that can build a specific stable ecology and maintain itself in this ecology,
that is what we have here. And then, given the lack of coupling between active and total states,
we can build essentially more complex stuff that can implement a higher-order beliefs about
themselves and what they do and, like, do decision-making that is conditioned on information
they have on themselves, and a clarification under the form of beliefs over their own action.
And as such, this is, like, this is just math. This says nothing about the world
in and of itself until we claim it corresponds to things in the world. And we can claim that this
is a basic conceptual model that maps well into enculturation, basically social organization,
engagement with the social cultural world, because then we can account of the human ability for
very, very, very wide, open-ended learning as something that comes from there, as something
that allows us to infer things about ourselves and then develop complex policies and like them,
blah, blah, blah. And because, to my knowledge, there is no competing model that accounts for
anything near that, like the only competition, like the competition. I should not talk of
competition, but the other models of cognitive organization and enculturation that exist that
are trying to ground themselves in physics, like an chemical system. They are just talking about
dynamics. They are specifically avoiding talking about anything like content or semantics. So,
the fact of this piece of math as a monopoly on building semantics from the ground,
and what it tells you is that agency and identity and relativity, it's all the same
phenomenon. It's conditioned by a self-belief, basically, that is constructed in this specific way.
We can, how to say, because this is the only way that we can account for higher-order agency,
then we have, at least I would argue, we should have strong priors for a series of agency,
either mechanical or conceptual, that vibe well with that picture. So, this is the claim I'm making.
Yes, I want too much detail, so I hope this is enough.
Okay, so I have some, maybe not questions, but some points to make now. Thank you.
So, from what I see here, we could put the active inference paradigm into the individualistic
methodological individualism framework in sociology. So, the idea is that you try to model
an individual, and then when you have the good way to model the individual, you can generalize
to what everyone is doing. So, for instance, if I'm working on something in a certain way,
then I could generalize about that and say, okay, sociologically, I have this constraint
to work on this stuff. And then, not like everyone is doing that, but it could go like that. But
what is interesting here is that it's not only about one individual, but also that,
for instance, let's take the external states. You could say that external states here are other
agents, and also that, okay, so you have the active state in the internal states. So,
we could say that your internal states are totally influenced by another agent. So,
we could do something like that with two individuals, I guess. So, one is one of the
agents here, and the other drives the internal states of the model, because they are really
influential on yourself. So, there are some limitations about this kind of way of thinking,
because in general, in sociology or in sociological sciences, what you would like to say is that
there are some agents at a higher level than only individuals such as you and I. So, the trick
could be to say that some states, for instance, are some firms or agents for and by themselves.
So, you have agents which are not individuals or persons. How about you talk about
the approach to social histories? I don't understand what you tried to say, Avelis.
I was just trying to react to your slide,
because I don't see how it connects with my own work here. Oh, I'm talking tomorrow. Okay, nice.
So, if now you have something to say about what I just said, about how we could have,
let's say, two active agents trying to talk together.
Yeah. So, we have such simulations that already exist. Over various kinds of scales,
we have two agents coordinating that are animals like birds singing and over time
coordinating over the song they're going to sing. We have several models of leader follower
where you have one agent, two agents starting from relatively the same point, but one agent
developing more confidence and therefore developing a dynamic of leader follower with the other
agent. This is work that's possibly going to be followed by Francesco Balzan who is working on
models of education and how maybe the teacher and student dynamic may be cast under these terms.
I've done work with Axel Konstant and Axel Ramstead in terms of active inference in social
scripts. That's what Avelis was mentioning. And this notion that through the cues of the
environment, your own model is shaped both by the environment which includes other people
and the way in which you self-evidence within this environment. So, for instance,
there's two ways we can understand your question first. We can say that
minimizing free energy is basically an agent that has a form of autonomy and it's constantly
updating its model to align with the environment. So, by virtue of doing this, it's not fundamentally
individual, but that each agent has its own model of the world. Each agent reflects
a perspective, a very unique moment in space-time that will
incur some errors relative to others. So, it's not that they necessarily interpreted things wrong,
although they might have, but because their perspective is slightly off from somebody else,
there's necessarily a degree of incommunicability in this sense. So, here self-evidencing really
entails that you create a sort of identity here through the fact that you may have different
preferred states from somebody else based on your values, belief, your social conditioning.
But again, these beliefs and values and social conditioning have been shaped. And again, what
we're talking about, these trove of retractors by other people. And so, we try more and more to
challenge this notion of individualism by emphasizing the relational aspect of identity,
which means that identity is not pre-established, but continuously formed through the interaction
with other agents. And again, if we go back to information geometry, the geometry of the
information space influences how agents perceive their paths towards minimizing free energy and
affect their choices, which again, give you the possibility to understand how agents might be very
strongly pushed by other agents. Let's imagine an agent that has more power than you and is
trying to influence you to do something, someone that has very high charisma or someone who has
the power to say, destroy your life. You are more likely to shape your beliefs to align with
you. And therefore, we can understand individualism under a very, very different light here.
Agal, did you want to add something? Colin is waiting to speak since the moment.
Hi. Can you hear okay? I just wanted to pick on a couple of the things that Mahal was talking about
and just now and in her talk. It seems that you seem to be saying that for social conditioning
and the way in which we are socialized, the importance of social scripts appears to be greater
than the influence of individual upon individual. And that's interesting because it's not something
that we would tend to think as individuals that we are integrating with scripts. In fact,
the whole idea of seeing a script as something which is social was something that I found that
probably most people would find a rather strange idea off the top of their heads. So is that a
fair assessment of what you're trying to say? And the other thing I wanted to ask about was
a few times in talks recently and here today, I've heard people talking about identity and
the active inference view of identity. I'm not sure that I really understand what identity
means within an active inference framework as distinct from just our internal model of who we
are. Is there an other idea that we are thinking of here? And more particularly, the word identity
has a lot of baggage and usage in current contemporary society. Are we using it in a
different way? And if so, how is it different? And potentially, how does that give us insight
and the ability to engage with the ongoing discussions in society in a potentially fruitful way?
So I think I lost you for the last part of your question, which seemed to be about the difference
between our conception of identity and the conception generally used, if that's correct.
You're muted, Colin.
So yeah, I was referring to the concept of identity as used in society.
Right. So I mean, I'm not going to speak to every use of the term identity, because it's a very,
very useful term that's used in law, that's used in physics, it's used in sociology and
psychology. So it's used a lot. All I can do is explain roughly how we consider identity formation.
And then if you have a specific definition in mind for a specific field, we can maybe tackle that
one. Does that sound okay? Yeah, to be clear, I was thinking specifically about identity as
determined by group membership in sociology. Okay. Okay, so I'm going to tackle social scripts.
Yeah. I'm going to tackle social scripts first, and then I'm going to come back to identity because
I think it fits. I've worked on that as well. I know that Daniel and Avril have some work that
relates to this as well. So your first question was on the importance of social scripts and what
it means for cognition, if I understood correctly. So from an internalist perspective,
social scripts are cognitive structures. They guide behaviors. They're acting like
brackets. We use the word constraints a lot. It's not a perfect guide because no semantic
marker is a perfect guide. Everything is up for some degree of interpretation. It's just that
there are some interpretations. They're so strongly linked to some degree of embodiment
that they sort of anchor the rest of our semantics. So for instance, I can't stop breathing. If I
want it to, I can't. I will stop, but eventually my body will restart on its own. And so there's such
kinds of natural laws here that create these bottom layer guidelines that can then be sort of derived
to infer other things, and social scripts are just representational
social extensions of these constraints given a historical context. So they model and
did maldrop or did I drop?
I guess it's given to you. Like somebody will actually tell you what to do and show
it to you. And sometimes they won't be. Sometimes they're just things you observe. Sometimes there's
things you infer because you made a connection between a weak script and another weak script.
So if you see something that resembles a chair in a room, you infer that you have the affordance
to sit on it. So that's a form of script. And then you see other people doing the same in the script
sort of cements. And so now you associate this to another part of a sequence and this becomes
something that allows you to temporalize and basically leverage your B matrix in order to
exist in the world in a way that doesn't cause friction with other people. This also gives you
action triggers. There are things you see in the world that now tell you this is the thing you
should do now. So there's this sort of recursive loop that's very inactive that pulls you in a
direction. So the attractor isn't just a state. It's a path. You're going to go down a path.
So for now, does that answer the first question?
Yes, thanks. That's helpful.
Okay. Go ahead.
Thank you to get back on the like you talked about an active loop. And I think that's a critical
thing to analyze, which is that the engagement with the world is a circular process. It construct
its own conditions. And so there is no measure of power of structure versus power of agents
because the structure is embedded in the agents and the agents are embedded in the structure.
So I'd like to share my screen again to give some detail over what this entails.
Do I, can I? Yes, good window. You should see a PDF with a tiny man, a person, a mountain,
and loops. Is it okay? Is it okay? Yes, I see yes. So this is a presentation I did recently
about the Inification Church, which is like when you want to be published, you say new religious
movement, but you can say cult. It works. Which originated, I think, in Japan and is now spread
between Korea. Japan, it says mostly we don't have numbers, but it seems to be the places where it's
most implanted. And it was very, very, very remarked because of the personality cult around the
Rev. Moon, the founder, and the very overt, exhaustive practices of the cult, like asking you for the
equivalent of 10 years of salary at the time to take your ancestors from hell and put them in
paradise by getting money to Rev. Moon specifically. And they were the topic of a very, I'd say,
aggressive and excessive anti-cults movement in the 70s, 80s. And now they are becoming a bit
noticed again by vice, not only vice, but not only vice, because you have very strange, strange
things like mass, MAGA weddings with people waving rifles. And that is a very, very strange
organization. And at the time, you had a very moral panic, we say now, around the cult. You
had basically a model of influence that was that evil people would brainwash you, and then you
were commanded by the cult and or Soviet secret agents from afar, and they could like say to you,
horse, and this triggered homosidol mania in which you blah, blah, blah. So things that are
unnaturalistic, I will say, and not having reaction to the moral panic, you had the movement
by ideologies of religion that would try to understand how exactly the cult worked. And the
most famous sociologist to do that was Aileen Barker. If I remember well, she was, she warned
the money she was coming, so you can question her methodology. But she seems to have done the most
thorough and well received analysis of them. So it's an important thing. And she questions that
there is such a thing as brainwashing. There is a construction of a specific social context
that you have to comply to if you want to come. But they can force you, they do not have the
capability to torture you and make you into a RC radio commanding thing. That does not work.
And so I forgot the name of the, so David from Taylor explains the influence of the church in
terms of choreography of total participation. So basically you have a very huge, very emotionally
investing ritual that you just have to take part in to be a member of the community. And if you
are a member of the community, you will be helped, you will be loved, you will be supported, you will
be constantly encouraged in a slightly coercive way to invest more of your time and money in
whatever organization. And if you don't, then all the support just leaves because you know,
you're a traitor. You have done a treason of the true parents who were kindly out of this
own arse trying to save you like Jesus did, but better because Jesus failed by not having children.
That is very dramatic thing to say. And that is what they say. And because of the way the
organization is set up, there is, you cannot possibly question that. Your questioning is not
accepted. There is no private time in which you can privately question yourself. You are always
engaged with people who are either formally or informally, depending on your seniority,
watching you. And so you're basically a context that makes it very, very, very easy to align
with the cult values. And it just happens that those values, they, they entail self-sacrifice
for the organization, but also for new members and total deference to the cult and its leadership
and anything they tell you to do. So you, you know, it's not kidnapping, but it's also not
exactly free consent to a specific context. And from a purely, I don't know how to say,
mechanical perspective, they can, they can make you agree when you are there,
but they cannot make you go there. So a question is how precisely they can, you know,
elicit compliance away from the direct context of the choreography of participation. And there is
a, like, simple answer in my sense, which is that we have, we have a coherent sense of identity. We
can't, we can wholly think of ourselves as a good money, one minute, and then step out of the meeting
and not think of ourselves as a good money that doesn't make sense either we are or we are not.
At least most people tend to have one integrated sense of themselves as someone who is embedded
in a specific social context and has specific norms and bears in such, such way. And so the,
the coherence of self identity, it provides a key coupling between your public and your private
beliefs, what you are expected to do in social context and what you will effectively do and
perceive the world as privately. And this, I would say, an example of the moonies, but in other
historical examples, like the emergence of nationalism, it is a very straightforward
confirmation that, indeed, coherence of self identity, like the coherence between what you do
and what you think of yourself as doing, is a very important process in the, in the structure of
societies. Generally speaking, at least contemporary studies, maybe it was not the same before,
and so I do not think, like, the context in which it's mobilized, of course, it changes,
but the mechanism, I don't think it's new. And I'd like to get back on Alexis' point that,
sorry, A's point, that's the approach we have is individualistic. I do not think it is the case,
because if we are correct, there is a landscape of social cultural affordances, constraints,
things well out there, and we engage with it. And there are mechanisms that makes this landscape
not necessarily identical, but very coherent between individuals. And those mechanisms are
language, and the material symbolism, developing ritual, which is also symbolism, also meaningful,
but maybe less than language, I don't know. I just mean that the mechanism is the same. And the
inter-culturelly robust practice of role-taking and sharing functionalities of trying to do stuff
together, given a specific model of the attribution of tasks within the shared goal. And so these are
human invariance, and all would be pretty good candidate to force the integration of a common
model of material and cultural niche. And so I think that there is a pretty coherent social
material niche, and I think that we can, we all engage with it, and we all modify it, and we maybe
do not perceive it as the same, but there is still a strong enough constraints
on the coherence of this landscape between individuals for it to make sense as a specific
entity. And then the proper respiratory scale of what we do is not the individual minds. It is
landscape that we happen to experience because of our individual minds. So by the
plateau academia of Stanford on the Holism, basically Holism is a theory where you agree that
there are explanations that are not mediated by individual states. And I say there are
explanations that are not mediated by individual states. And not only that, but I can point to
organizations that control people while being absolutely not worried by individual states,
only creating a certain context and then allowing them to engage with it. And that
would be compelling, in my opinion, to say that the model we have is maybe not Holist,
maybe a secret third thing that is multi-scale, but certainly not individualist, at least in
the sense that you are mobilizing. So thank you. I talked more than I wanted. So Mao,
you were raising your hands. I am, but I think Lorena wants to go. I will go after Lorena.
Hey, guys. Yeah, I think that goes like directly into the idea that coming a little back, coming
back a little bit to the point that identity that we were talking before. And if you think about
the model that we have, we have external, the external states and different agents, they are
always actually very local when situated in the same local environment. So your external agent
is going to be part, the other agents are going to be part of your external states,
and you are part of theirs. So the idea of laying down a path and creating a specific type of dynamic
that reacts to the same type of input that you are receiving and driving these dynamics
will generate this sort of embeddedness, because you do have the same,
or no, it's not necessarily the same, but they are very, very close to each other,
they are very approximate. So the idea of dynamic here, if you think about
describing that in terms of a laplace and like in terms of the dynamics, you do have very different
like Lorena's butterflies, for instance, each one goes through the same type of route. However,
they are not identical, but they are very similar. They are doing something very similar.
And that similarity sort of constraints, again, the construction of that environment.
So if you think about symbols and roles and types of environment that you find,
they're going to be as concrete as something else that you find in your environment,
constraining and pushing you towards the same direction, or at least a very similar,
you can describe dynamically in a very similar type of geometry, if you like,
or a very similar, or with a tractor, we will drive the very similar type of path.
We'll describe the similar type of path. So which goes exactly to the,
Avail, can you go back to that other,
yeah, the other figure that you have, the one with the environment as well,
made by, yeah, that one. So exactly that creates like a dynamic that they can be then forgotten,
like in a way that will be described through a specific microflank that will develop
agents together. We'll push them, constraining, they're going to be constrained together and
they're going to have a constructive kind of role in this very embedded normativity.
But yeah, you go all.
Thanks. Yeah, so I think there's a nice way to tie all this as well to the internal nature that we
seem to be dispelling, but we're not. We have to talk about specifically in what ways
internality is cast here. And I like to think of that the effect of self esteem here.
Self esteem to me is the degree of fitness relative to your perception of how well you're
managing to exist within these constraints and interpret them in a way that gets other people
to validate and minimize the friction you're getting from other people. So
it aligns with the concept of sociometer theory. It taps into this notion of cultness.
So if you consider that there's effective states that enable an individual to track and respond
to discrepancies between self perception and social expectation through these effective states,
such as anxiety or positive affect, we can see that there's a dynamic nature and self
organization of self esteem, which is continually shaped and reshaped by experiences and interactions.
And so under active inference, we can formalize this by saying that a model that is more precise
effectively captures the hierarchical structure of the moment to moment variation of more stable
traits such as what we consider to be self esteem. And so basically we can see that identity and
group membership here are fundamentally related to the effective experience of
being fit for the group membership. And so once you're there, you can grow in social cohesion
and this will lead you to potentially try to maintain the group. It will lead you to try to
justify the beliefs of the group such that you have a form of confirmation bias, but also you
maintain the epistemic reality of this group, the symbolic reality of this group, which would be
more costly to destroy than to actually support. It's also integrated into your self esteem,
therefore destroying the group would mean admitting that you are potentially not fit
for the environment, that you are potentially some degree of wrong. And so this leads us to the
possibility that if someone has low self esteem, what do they do? They can either stay in this group
and accept that they are unfit for the group. And they would try to remove themselves to some
extent from the group to avoid all that friction, or they can try to join a different group, one which
will support your beliefs about the world if your beliefs are too far from where the group you're
supposed to belong to currently is. And this is where we get to these subclusters forming these
little subgroups that potentially can even come sometimes violent and sometimes really not,
sometimes it's just some tumbler group. But it has power because it gives the individual this
feeling, this valence of now being fit to a group that supports their model.
So I wanted to give a space to talk.
Yes, thank you. So I would like to go back a bit on what I said about individualism.
So yeah, I agree that I was wrong about associating active inference with individualism because
what is interesting here is that there is an individuality through active inference,
which emerged from the collective. And you can justify or describe individual actions or else
through the landscape as you did just now and then go the other way around.
So here we seem to grasp the interaction between the individual and the group and vice versa,
which is what I found interesting here. And okay, more over, there is what the individual
adds to a group. I see that here it seems to be captured as we take the individual as a
how to say that a unique perspective. This is what you said before now that
each person is a perspective, a unique one. And yeah, it's not all what I wanted to say,
yeah, Lauren, you talked about the beliefs that exist. And I think this is one interesting
thing also in active inference is that we take belief as a material thing that influences us
and that we can also influence or create in a way. Even yeah, independently of if it's right,
wrong or whatever we judge it is, like what we talked about with the moon sect
and the unification church. So there are people with crowns and we say that they are the big
boss and we have to deal with it or to go away from the landscape. And yeah, it was like that in
the social world, indifferently of if the person is really the chief of the cults or not because
they said they were and people were just following them. So in the end, it happened to create a
landscape in which one person is the person who has power. So yeah, I don't know what to say more
about all of this. I guess I agree with what you said just before. So yeah, that's it.
So maybe we should move to like challenges and opportunities of active inference.
So
two points. I think, like I just put them out there, you can react. I think that one active
inference may give us computational models or even like thorough running the conceptual models
of social organization, specifically the like semantic dimension to social life.
And I also think that in its current formulation within the medical system theory,
it is inept to represent the evolution because the system entail the formulation of
set of states that do not change through time. And the chemical flow that does not either
change through time. So there are opportunities to apply the model to
the framework to ground the meaningful, semantically complete models of social evolution.
But this model, if they come from evolution, they will not really vibe well with the math
that we invoke to say our computational model are meaningful. And that's like rise and error
of questions, I guess. So does anyone want to react to these two statements?
Could I make a comment? More specifically, I'm interested in the ways in which
the ideas of active inference impact on the way we think about society and the way society works.
And I can see from my reading and from listening to the discussion that there's a very rich
new lexicon and vocabulary set of concepts for the thinking within active inference thought.
And as we just commented, it's quite heavily mathematical. So the barrier to entry for full
active inference worldview is for time, these ideas will permeate out into the mainstream
and they will change the way people think and talk about society. I'm interested in the ways
people who've studied a bit more than I have see potentially how this will change the way
society works or the way that we have discussions or envisage society more widely than just an
academic discussion, obviously. Maybe the question's a bit too big.
I think everyone is just waiting for the other to talk first. Mao, talk first.
So I think I want to tackle a little bit what you said about the open-ended nature,
the open-ended evolution of state spaces, basically. I think under the path formulation,
this open-endedness is actually just a perceived open-endedness. It's just a function of
the timescale being considered and the motion along that timescale.
I think we can go a little bit more into depth about this.
I think it's a very large topic. Effectively, if we go into quantum formulations, there's
some degree of irreducibility and anything above that is historically contingent. So
obviously some things will, some marker blankets will dissolve and reform and dissolve and
reform and through this dissolution and reformation, you get a new potential for mapping
of observation to states. So there's always that possibility. But I think some challenges
for active inference that are coming is, for instance, the complexity of social behavior.
We can extend active inference to capture the nuances of social interactions,
but effectively active inference is about abduction. So it's the best guess for now.
And it requires for us to put into the models what we think are useful variables,
what we think are the right variables. And it's possible that we're always going to follow
just a little bit short. We're always, we can either throw a bunch of data out of problem and
be like, okay, well, just remove the noise, only pick up the signal and figure out what's
happening, but that's no better than big data deep learning. So we have to figure out a way
to move forward and understand the variables of interest and do this
across scales. So identify the priors that take over at a given moment, but they won't take over,
even if they're higher in the hierarchy at another moment, because in this hierarchy,
you've actually switched states, like you've moved. And this is only predictable
once you've understood the effect of those priors. And you can't just consider that you
have the priors to begin with. So yeah, as far as integration with this existing theories,
I think we have a nice opportunity ahead of us. It's basically what you said. Colin,
I think we're going to be able to more and more through the alignment of certain kinds of language
and the formalism under that language, we're going to be able to pull more and more theories
and find what's at the core of the connection between these theories, active inference is
supposed to be scale free. So it describes or it is possible to help us describe the phenomena
basically from sociology and literature to biology. So if we understand this, we understand
that there's a possible touchpoint, a convergence of all these fields that are tapping into the
same ideas, or into some connecting points that allow us to understand how we maybe do away
with these different fields, remove the silos and come back together with something that feels
more integrative. But then again, we're back to the computational limits, obviously, like if I
want to compute the prediction for an entire country, what is the granularity level at which I
should compute the right variables. And if we understand that individuals are formed by the
group, etc, do I just do a mean field over the entire group, in which case am I losing out on
some of the variables that may actually impact the outcomes? I think these are the key questions
that remain to be answered to some extent. So I agree with what you said now.
I agree that we can't like represent things and not somehow not cut anything, even to the thing.
When we model or we represent, the point of it is to have a more compressed way to engage with
the thing with our knowledge of the thing than the actual thing. So we will just cut information.
That is the point of modeling or representing and maybe in a very simple system such like
such as say perfect gas model in physics, there is information we can cut and lose nothing.
We can cut information about which particle is where because the different particles of the same
atom as at this scale, the same properties. So we don't really care what atom does what.
But in the case of human societies, we have like patterns of engagement and the
like specific information that is accessed by a specific agent is important. And whatever we
choose to cut for a model, it will be relevant at some point. At least it will probably be if
like the information we cut is not specific to a bunch of agents that will die of carcassums or
something. If any kind of information, the type of information we may want to abstract out will
be relevant somewhere at some point. So yeah, we are dealing with complex systems. We are not going
to model everything. But it is a huge deal that actual inference is capable to fill in the semantic
contents from dynamics either from the dynamics of component systems, say neural dynamics and
biological dynamics or dynamics of a certain context with the modeling of actual inference
agent as things that navigate the world and make inference and stuff. And to my knowledge,
we do not have any other theory that makes the bridge between just dynamics and semantics.
We have other neurological, like cognitive neuroscience people who talk about dynamics a
lot and how we can bring back the activity of cognitive systems to dynamics. But usually it is
in a way that insists that we should just look at the dynamics. We do not really need to worry
about the semantics. If we need to worry about the semantics, they somehow reduce to the dynamics.
The dynamics is what exists and is important and what we should worry about. And so another
framework that is relevant to just study the evolution of norms or presentation or mental
content in a certain context, I cannot think of one. One that is thoroughly grounded in
at least that attempts to thoroughly ground itself in mathematical physics. There is the
reason for the one. And so that is a huge deal. But there is a very important problem, which is what
I said and you said and we're grown, which is that the openness in the path integral formulation
in early formulation in the FEP, it is illusory. It is about like it. So maybe to give a bit of
context, the path integral formulation of the FEP is just when you do the FEP, so the bit of math
we make a huge deal about. And we apply it not to like the dynamics of the particle per se,
like how it affects the particle at point T, but how it affects parties of a particle.
For mathematic reasons, reframing a problem in the path integral formulation is a huge deal.
It is what makes the difference between a Newtonian. You push something and it moves
and full-fledged quantum gauge theories that underwrite all of contemporary physics.
So yeah, path integral formulation is a huge deal. But to write it, you still need to write
an analytic space, like to make the list of all things that are possible. And like if you
think that there, this is a correct model of the world and a complete model of the world and this
is everything there is, you have to agree either that cause do not exist or that there is a place
in the primordial wave function that existed before universe did, before time did. There is
a place where conus lies. And I think cause exist and I do not think cause are basic properties
of quantum mechanics. So cause must have happened along the way somehow. And to represent that,
being to represent open-endedness. So we need open-endedness in math and the FEP is not one-ended
and it like structurally it's very hard to account for open-ended evolution. And at a more
prosaic level when we look at engagement with social dynamics, with the social world, we look
at open-endedness because there is always a integration of norms. There is always a loss of
information, but also that is constructive of new norms. There is no like writing happen at some
point. And then we did things differently, change the structure of societies. It's an able
administration to exist as a non-trivial causal power of society that's actually
mattered in civilization. And yeah, so new things happen. And if we want to look at social
engagement, it is critical to look at how new things happen. And currently the FEP doesn't do
that in active inference. I don't think it does that. Maybe it can at a computational level
without a grand formal pretension, maybe, but I did not see it. And that's a big challenge that
we have had of us. And by we, I mean everyone, not just active inference people. Everyone should
tackle that at some point. Daniel, we were in your hand. I'll add just a few notes to Colin's
question. Certainly it's something that we all ask ourselves and many viewers and participants in
the ecosystem ask like, so what, what then, what does it really mean for active inference to be
applied to or by or in the social sciences? So I think that's a big open question, certainly one
that's not only addressable by one perspective or even with words alone. But I think there's a few
key pieces, especially that differentiate it from just the broader or adjacent project of
quantitative social science or formal social science. The question we should seek after is
what does active inference bring in? And again, probably many ways to say it, but we know for
an active inference agent, as a scale free statement, free energy can be bounded by changing
the world or changing the mind. So having continuity of social systems with all other
systems, spatial, temporal, arbitrary material, and so on, gives a continuity and an interoperability
that without a scale free first principles approach is essentially not even on the radar.
So that's one massive piece. And then I think where that begins to bear or modify fruit is
essentially the scientific and professional development of cognitive engineering,
understanding that the cognitive constraints and scaffold scripts, all of these tasks,
implicitly, and then more recently explicitly and most recently, quantitatively and formally
are examples of cognitive engineering. So whether it's a stop sign and what that comes to mean in
different social locations or language as a complex phenomena, these are examples of cognitive
engineering in the same way that building a stack of rocks is both an example of material
engineering and cognitive engineering through semiotics. And now when the scientific process,
the professional process, enters into this reflexive and relational posture through active
inference, that is kind of a saddle point into a different dynamic, I believe. Lorena?
Lorena, then go for it.
Yeah, I'll just make one comment, what you said, like keeping in mind that active inference can
understand beliefs and signs and this kind of semiotics as material and concrete, because
constraints, they constrain the evolution of the system, like how the system complexifies, right?
And the constraints are material, has this material effect on the dynamics, right? You cannot really
believe that, of course, belief is materialized as a table, of course not. But for the system,
in terms of constraining and understanding how things scale up and how they complexify,
they have that kind of role. And that helps to understand a little bit what are the values
bringing about, how you can bring new values and parameters for the dynamics that are being
described by the mathematics of external and internal free energy principle updating, right?
And that is a way of tackling this novelty for this kind of thinking over time. But you don't
have a proper account on how to predict what is going to constrain the system next, right?
Yeah, Mao, go for it. And then we'll all kind of give a closing round slash thoughts.
Okay, well, there was a question in the chat at one point. So I just wanted to potentially
address the question if that's okay. So the question was, so would the generative process
of modeling the social system enclose multiple agents on one market blanket, or I assume inside
or under one market blanket? So we like to think of active inference as nested in hierarchical.
That's one thing that Maxwell Ramstead definitely pioneered, where each agent has its own market
blankets, but there is a higher level market blanket that encloses the social system and like
so individual agents can interact with each other and the environment, but the social system as a
whole also interacts with the broader environment. And this is where semantics and semiotics come
into play. And then the narratives around certain groups start shaping how they can interact with
the other groups, which have a perception of these narratives. So there's in-group and out-group
dynamics. So it's a little bit akin to how cells within an organism have their own boundaries,
but are also part of a larger organism. So yeah, I think that does that answer the question from
the person who asked that question? I think it does. Yeah, nice. So perhaps A. and Colin,
feel free to give in your marks and then we'll pass around the instructors.
It can be as long or as short as you like. Okay, May I go first? So I would like to say that
the key issue we are trying to grasp is that effective inference has social and political
implications due to its scale-free structure and how we can apply it to the social world.
Then there is the self-referential question that happens, which is what is the
structure of active inference as a social construction itself and a political construction
itself? And what is our own political power and social power in this social and political world?
And this is the fact-alike thing that is going on, because afterwards, what is my own social
and political implication in this thing? And the more you get your own agency and the agency of
active inference, the more it becomes like a lot to process. And the more you grasp your own
identity and the power you have and the responsibility you have. So I guess this is
one of the key points we are trying to get here. I guess that's the point I wanted to make.
And to finish with that, the game we are trying to play is to try to find our own blind spots
in this game. Like, what is the limit of the model and does it have a self-referential limit or not?
Yeah, I would endorse that. I feel the same way. I found that in my reading just in the last year
or so of active inference ideas, I found it very empowering. The ideas of active inference in
relation to the individual mind are quite well developed. And it's very empowering to be able
to look at yourself through the active inference paradigm and understand the thought processes
that is you. It's a very empowering thing. And as I was saying, just recently starting to look
at the idea that we can incorporate an active inference concept of the way the social world
around us is structured, which is part of that paradigm too. I think is potentially more empowering
but it's early days yet. But I look forward very much to a more developed world where people have
discussions with each other, not just about what I'm thinking and how I think, but how I think about
society and how we think about society together. And it's embedded within that paradigm. I feel
that's potentially something which is very empowering. And I look forward to it. And I
thank the speakers all for their contributions to this series of talks.
Thank you, Colin. So with the exception of Ben, whose lecture and contribution
kicked off this course, and we're excellent also, we have the others of the instructors here. So
how do each of you want to kind of conclude this chapter?
Yeah, Mao, then Lorena Ravel. Yes, I think
that's a good question.
Of entities which are the capability of interacting to maximize
the information they gather from the environment such that as a whole they can self evidence
to maintain the phenotypes they believe to be similar to their own and therefore themselves.
And how this leads to, over time, the sedimentation of norms and activities and eventually the
reference to these norms and activities through the semantics and the scripts and effectively how
this leads us to all the complexities of language and how we may now be at the point
where we have a simulacra that represents nothing. We just have these shells of representations
and these shells of semantics which potentially have lost their anchoring in reality.
So I think that was the through line of the course. I hope we made a good case for it and
how Active Inference allows us to model this entire path not only across scale but across time as well.
So yeah, that's how I think I'm going to close.
Yeah, I think this is me now. Yeah, I really like the story as well that we are building throughout
the whole course starting with a very general idea of what is Active Inference with Ben
and then trying to like build up this collective notion of how we contain information in a certain
way that it's always synchronized. So this is always sort of meaningful that can be described in
certain ways by the mathematics of Active Inference. And then understanding these questions,
the hard questions that are asking now like how we can bring new variables, how can bring
novelty into the system, which is something that we don't have an answer yet. But I find
that it's really cool that we don't like hold back in asking that because that I think that's
the next step for Active Inference, like understanding this, how complexification comes
about, how can we describe that process. And yeah, and thanks Savel and Daniel for putting
this together. It was pretty cool. And I hope you guys also have enjoyed it.
Thank you, Lorena. Athel?
So, thank you, Lorena. You are welcome. I think I put his finger on something quite deep,
as usual, which is that if we want to have a coherent theory of nature that is not based on
just here are the things that can be, and we will draw data mix on that, that is compatible
with operative evolution, we need to address self-affirmationality. We need to address,
like, what comes to reality, but recursion and the possibility for recursive individuation of
physical beings. And that's tough. And that's very tough because the basis of presentation is just a
list array of things I want to represent and I represent that. But if things can just happen
that are new and that are by definition not in the field of possibilities that pre-existed then,
we are fucked. There is no way we can represent that. And there is a
family of approach in quantum information theory that tries to tackle that, how to draw physics
without being rolling in a specific set space. And just I'd like to explain the story of that.
So, the math, it draws from algebraic topology. So, we study surfaces, but not by studying
surfaces, by studying transformation within those surfaces. But then we remove those surfaces and
we keep only the transformation over what I don't know. But somehow we can, I guess, reconstruct
coherent mathematical entity from that. And I'd like us to take a look at
how this look, what the math look like. So, can we see the screen? Okay. So, this is the structure
of the quantum information formulation of the FEP. These are dimensions of interaction between
system A and system B. What defines the scope and the model of this interaction, I don't know.
And this is a con-cocon diagram that represents an agent together with the representation that
develops. And I could tell you the words that correspond to a thing within this diagram,
but I do not know what they mean. So, it would be a hard thing to do. And the math that is capable
to tackle the self-facility, like maybe because I do not see any proof that it actually does, in fact.
It's not tractable for humans. And I exclude mathematical physicists from humans there
because of the sheer abstractness of what is going on. And because of the lack of any abuse
reference from anything we understand in this. And the work that we have to do if we want these
to move forward and to have a self-coherent theory of social evolution is to somehow entangle from
that concrete meaning, things that apply to the world, and conversely use the way that we
can think of it as concrete interaction in the world to further specify the mathematics and
prove that it is actually self-coherent and applies to stuff. And this is a big work, in
fact. And this is kind of exciting, I guess. What I wanted to say is active inference is
dead, long live active inference.
Wait, well, it was a fun course. And this closing section and slide kind of brought this unity
between Chris Fields' quantum work and this social science, which in the disciplinary paradigm
are seen as distant or with different systems of interest. And you can't get there from here.
But in a scale-free first principles paradigm, it's not even just that we can hold them side
by side. It's that they are more than juxtaposed. So it's been awesome and its own great experience
to work with all of the instructors who shared their amazing and youthful and energetic perspectives.
And we explore new format in a new way. We're going to process the proceedings of
the lectures and the discussions, plus any final submitted question and answers
through the syllabus website. Bring that together into a open access publication of some kind.
So for people who are interested in that kind of editorial or curatorial work,
the active inference journal is for them. And then in 2024 and beyond, let's see where
active inference is, see where social sciences are, and hopefully as people are interested in
taking it from there, we throw in many fun ideas, but I guess we'll leave it
until then to find out.
All right. Thank you, everybody. Bye.
