Alright, hello and welcome everyone.
This is the course active inference for the social sciences in 2023.
It's August 30th or maybe a different date depending on where you are.
And today we're in the semiotics and semantics section.
We'll be hearing a lecture from Lorena Zaganzerla and then we're going to have a little bit
of a discussion.
So Lorena, thank you a lot for joining and off to you for the lecture.
Okay, hello everyone.
I'm based in Australia, yeah, I'm Lorena, I'm doing actually my PhD in philosophy here.
I work in cognitive sciences and philosophy, I work with them from concepts or notions
of information.
So I'm very interested in foundational understanding of cognitive sciences and information and
how these kind of things cash out.
And this is why I was interested in talking about semantics and social cognition to see
how these things cash out.
I have a few ideas on how semiotics can be compatible with active inference.
And I try to organize a little bit of this semiotic notion and active inference to see
if they can out.
Maybe they don't.
So let's see how it goes.
So I'll let's talk about active inference for more semantics and social cognition.
What's up with it?
Okay, I cannot move my slides, now I can.
So I will first have a very short introduction for you guys I have out here.
So what are you going to do?
Like we have a short introduction, I'm going to talk a little bit of theories of meaning.
And then we're going to talk a little bit the free energy principle and active inference
and how shared symbols and social cognition can be taught together.
I bring one case that I find interesting and then we draw some conclusions.
So let me know what you think in the comments and after we can have a little discussion
or in the next session.
So the background introduction that I want to first point to is we're talking about biological
agents and how they act.
So we're always thinking in terms of biological agents acting to express in a way that express
information of sensitivities to context-dependent relevance to their environment and things
that involve communities.
However, how this very minimal way of talking about what motivates and what is relevant to
people becomes stable enough as a self-sustaining pattern of interactions.
Like are they stable and how they become that stable?
How can those information sensitivities ground values, norms and goals like consistently and
over time?
Assuming that those values and goals are necessary for meaningful interactions.
So we have to align motivations to behavior, right?
That's not really obvious and ultimately how meaning is brought about.
I don't think I'm going to answer that, but I want to point to some directions and how
people have been thinking about these questions over time.
So the problem of meaning has a brief account, right?
Like traditionally approaches to cognition localize meaning inside individual organisms
and more specifically inside their minds.
So meaning pertains to mental content and these kind of things.
So meaning have, however, like meaning have a developmental history.
It's hard to catch those two things together if it's inside people's minds.
How we can have an evolutionary and developmental history.
Assuming that meanings are same things that we can learn over time and they happen in
shared context.
They don't happen out of nowhere in a vision from nowhere.
In a sense, like we can say that it's not really trivial that conventionalized words
like, for example, meaning, the conventionalized meaning of a word, for instance,
catch means catch, have evolutionary histories.
One thing does not come from the other.
We need a broader understanding to cash this meaning out and that's where I'm stepping
from like that's my grounding.
Like we need to cash these things out in terms of community of language users.
Which brings a problem, right?
We have goals and values that can be defined in terms of those communities and you have
material and body factors.
So how these two things are together or how goals and values affect and motivate material
and embodied agents.
To answer this kind of question, like over time, there are a few preferred ways like some,
I would do a brief overview of some theories of meaning.
They usually in terms of cognitive sciences and any philosophy of mind, that's what I'm
interested in how they cash it out.
They usually try to think of those things in terms of syntax, like concerns with form
as an abstract organizing kind of rule.
It's a type of grammar and how the order of things and how the logical unfolding of those
symbols, how they become meaningful.
But the syntax itself is not really enough to cash out meaning in semantics.
So then in that sense, syntax evolve into a field that we call semantics in which meaning
and mental content are organized throughout this instructional syntax.
Then we have propositional knowledge and truth conditions in which allows
these organizational story of meaningful words to make sense.
And they're going to point out into the outside world.
And we have a third option.
It's not so new, but it's not so famous, which is semantics or more importantly,
euphoricism by semantics.
They use, it concerns with the use of symbols, like how they bring about meaning in terms of
pragmatics.
And that will be a little bit different and we'll cash it out in different terms
in relation to its peers, like semantics and syntax.
Well, syntax is pretty clear in terms of being rules, right?
So what is semantics talk about?
So talk about mental content, about intentionality, about mental representations.
In the sense, we have semantics that have specific key concepts.
They're reference, truth conditions and denotation.
So if you have mental content and if you put these meanings inside the organism,
it has to refer to something else and how this cognitive penetration happens.
Like how can meaning come about inside the mind and how that refers to something outside
in the world and how this observational viewpoint of you thinking about something in
front of you can be actually true.
So we need truth conditions that denote this specific relationship.
And that is represented like it's in terms of mental content.
Contemporarily, there's like very ways of catching this up.
Like that can be functional.
That can be more an internalized mental specific type of representations grounded in vehicles.
There's a very rich discussion and I don't want to go into all that.
But just want to point it out that science and neuroscience use those terms to study
and to build models that relates to mental representations in terms of
neural representations because it kind of makes sense for us like brain activity.
You can see them in terms of what happens by studying human beings and by studying animals
and how these mental representations relate to something that happens in the world.
You can see that one behavior elicits specific activities and they have a correlational
relationship and that is highly debated.
But there we go.
We have many types of catching out neural representations and concerning to this
relationship of stimuli and the interpretation of the stimuli and how
they motivate action.
That's our idea.
Very much weaker claim in relation to mental content and things being inside organisms,
but it is still in the same line of reasoning.
And there is also biosimiotics, which I want to focus a little bit more,
because it concerns the use and interpretation of science and symbols,
which also emphasizes the embodied nature and the situated nature of meaning.
So you don't have meaning without those practices and without the use of embodied agents.
So we have to reject the idea that meaning are abstract symbols or they are going to be
something that has to be in your mind and referred to something outside.
They are going to only exist in this type of relationship.
And they can take many forms, including chemical signals, like visual clues, behavior,
words, like the word catch.
You can have, and how we organize the word catch.
They are all symbolic and that fits also in that kind of structure.
So they are very important for communication, obviously, because we do communicate in terms
of pointing to the same shared notions of symbols in words and also other types of
symbolic meaning. And we coordinate life around them.
So living systems are then here characterized by the biosimiotics,
but the ability of creating and interpreting and using these symbols in terms of their practices.
The fathers, like the biosimiotics, started probably in the 19th century,
and Oak School is one of the most famous representatives.
Currently, we can find new authors like Hafenmeyer or Baker.
So I try to organize a little bit in a specific model, in a type of model, in a visual story,
how these two types of understanding meaning are being applied in terms of
theories of meaning historically.
So in biosimiotics, we have the pragmatics and you have the practice,
and they relate to dynamics and context dependent.
So you can see here on the top of the screen how we have the agent relationship with its
psychological and social aspects, and biosimiotics is somewhat concerning how correlation
leads to prediction and beliefs, and that leads to expectations.
And we also have other types of theories, like biosimiotics and theories of computational
syntax that tries to understand the dynamics and the mechanism of this relationship.
And they are not really crossing each other, they are not in the same,
they're not talking about the same necessary things.
So how can these things be brought together?
That's when I was thinking how we can bring this free energy principle and active inference
in terms of those relationships.
So well, the free energy principle and active inference as we know and I have been talking
about probably in the past two classes, it's a model that is interesting for that because
it has like very minimal assumptions. So it starts off from the idea that organisms act to
maintain themselves in their expected biological and cognitive states.
So you're always talking, you're modeling and using these mathematical to ground
biological agents in a very embodied sense, and they do so by minimizing their free energy,
so they have these metabolical states that have to be minimized in terms of
expenditure, in terms of uncertainty, given that the long-term average of free energy is
entropy, they want to minimize their uncertainty in terms of their metabolical states.
What that entails, that they have a specific range of states they want to stay in, like
minimally to stay alive, to stay alive, you have to do a bunch of things as a human being,
but every single embodied agent would you prefer to stay alive? So there are some preferred basic
states that we've defined how action will be taken first to maintain it, metabolical states,
and how that coordinate with the environment.
Which entails that organisms and agents can be described in in those terms like
an active inference tries to bring out those minimal assumptions in mathematical terms,
that try to express how reducing the probability of these non-anticipated states, or states
they are not favorable to maintaining their minimal metabolical needs, will be reduced.
And that can be cashed out in terms of a generative model, as we've been
saying throughout the past actions, how this generative model
sets specific times and organizes around specific parameters that can be described as
trying to maintain those parameters within reasonable range.
So by minimizing free energy on average and over time, this system will self-organize,
so we'll bring out the parameters of its internal states that occupy
a limited number of possible states. We will set into a specific range that will then be
then will be used as somewhat the base and the guide for this behavior. You have two
kinds of dynamics happening here, right? That's what I want to talk about a little bit.
So we have then a phenotype that exists in a specific type of states, but that will have to
coordinate two different kinds of dynamics. They're going to be stated here as complementary,
right? You have flow states and have belief updating. So with flow states, you have one type
of modeling, which is the normal equilibrium steady state. Then we use intrinsic, is named here,
intrinsic information geometry, and you have belief updating that can be treated as
extrinsic information geometry, and that those are different types of modeling
or the different types of thinking about those processes that's most important, right?
So in terms of flow states, we can talk about a dynamical system and how you settle and self-organize
specific parameters. And in terms of belief updating, we will be talking about Bayesian
mathematics and Bayesian cognitive cognition and specific ways of catching how an agent
will change and behave over time in relation to the dynamics that
is set into place in this state space of possible actions.
So while dynamical systems will explore temporal and contextual dependence between environment
and agent, we'll set this specific state space that has temporal dimension and has contextual
dimension. And once this state space is sort of established, we have more or less,
it's a more or less deterministic approach to what, what can possibly unfold. So how changes
and how behavior can be cashed out in terms of non-deterministic behavior, and that is defined
by the different type of probabilistic thinking, which is the Bayesian mechanics of belief
updating. So we have then a process of belief updating throughout weighted interactions within
this range of possible states. So we do have dynamics and we do also have Bayesian process
unfolding together in terms of mechanisms. And with that, we do have mathematical statements
providing a unifying perspective on formal approaches connecting behavior and dynamics.
So that's what active inference should be bringing about as a novelty in relation to older forms
of understanding organisms, which can also can either cash things out in terms of behavior or in
terms of dynamics. So trying to bring these two things together is quite interesting to understand
how symbols and what is semantics, for instance. So that's the question I will be asking right now.
Let's talk a little bit about that. I'm drawing here from quite interesting paper
from Maxwell-Humstead and in Asia-Polytus, who is a principle for formal semantics.
So what would be formal semantics? It sounds like an oxymoron, right? Like how semantics can be
formal. How can you formalize it? So semantics, the theory of meaningful things. So how can that
be empty of content? Well, it has a few principles in which you can explain what a formal semantics
should be. How a formal semantics should be understood. First off, we have Bayesian formalism
that does not necessarily have to commit to classical notions of representations which
are propositional in nature, have propositional semantic content. So the idea is that you can
you can use the notion of representation in a way that is not necessarily contentful. So how
that is going to be. So under the free energy principle, representations can be formal. That's
the argument they are bringing. Under the physics of flow, specifically dynamical system theories
and information geometry, you can have mathematical statements that only represent possible
specific ways of interacting. How these correlations will affect each other over time
in this variational-based type of caching out mathematical functions.
In this sense, we can talk about representation. How we can be understood under this formalism
and what they are saying is that they are best understood as internal structures that enable
the system to parse out their sensory sensitivities or the sensory streams.
So to organize them in specific parameters and also in the terms of their own markup
blankets in their blanket states. Which is interesting here, which is the new
genealogy of these papers that ground in a mathematical model in these mathematical
properties of the system. We will avoid grounding these properties in terms of
the properties of symbols and thematics in abstract subjective notions of mean
but impossible ranges of action. So summing up what we had before was a type of computational
model that had specific components that does not allow for the intelligibility of cognitive
component, which is intention, which is motivation. We have new and cognitive activity often seen
as a transfer of symbolic information and cognition then the snapshot of this transfer.
So it's totally dependent of that kind of symbolical transfer, which is really difficult
to explain how that's going to be biologically plausible. And there's a lot of effort trying
to do that. So if you're interested in this, there's a very vast wealth of literature,
but they have to answer to this problem. So how do my brain needs to produce an
impromptu response to inputs of the external environment all the time? And the idea of this
formal semantics, the author is trying to explain, is trying to include this component into the model.
So you have a deflationary model about content. So you have a formal semantics, you have semantics
without content, interestingly, and formulated as a variation of free energy functional.
So those structures that embody those process correspond to status states in the system.
And we also have the ecological component that can be
formalized in terms of this tool, informational geometry that we use to densities,
do probabilistic densities, one from the dynamics and one from the Bayesian describing behavior.
And now watch. So how can active inference be compatible to biosemantics? Can it be actually
compatible or is it even necessary? Well, active inference is a very general framework
and then it does not really give us the tools to understand how encoding can happen in terms of
symbols, how they can be broadcasted into collective action.
Because prediction alone does not explain how do they come about. So in this sense,
we do have meaningful correlations that refer to the dynamics of one or two or more systems
in terms of informational geometry that needs to be cashed out with predictive value. So how
is this possible? Well, we can talk about that in terms of shared attention. That's one form of
this kind of model of chip cash design. So we have active inference capturing relevant statistical
relations between environment and net in aging. And why I'm trying to think about here is how
biosemiotics offer tools for these informational sensitivities and statistical relations
to cash symbols in terms of use and interpretation within communities of language users.
How about? And that can only happen in the sense via directed action. So the problem now
will turn into how is it possible to specify the factors that are sufficient to constrain
action and direct that into specific
interests. And through the history of action.
But through the history of action.
About is European forward street. I'm picking this sample from a very
like this. I really recommend kind of seeing tells the story about how coordinated action,
how state coordinate specific collective actions. But that's not the point that I want to talk here.
So here, let's unfold that a little bit in terms of the design of scientific forestry and think
about scientific forestry as a practice. And a practice that has an organizing principle
that will like that will be the main important articulating story that can connect together
how agriculture layouts, foundations in specific ways and how collect collective farms will make
specific choices in terms of this organization and how villages can structure themselves
around one specific notion or one specific organizational principle. And how everything
can be calculated to make once one type of practice, which is agriculture is very general,
more legible and more manipulable for different kinds of communities. So in that we will both
manipulating the very concrete aspects of the land, the terrain, the products, the workforce.
So it has a very encompassing effect over time and in a very concrete sense.
And interestingly, when you talk about European forestry and how European forestry was modeling
the terrain and how it's catching up value of these terrains, they were not trying to do that,
to successfully depict the full range of diversity of the actual social activity and
the actual activity of agriculture or the richness of the vegetation or they are not even trying,
they didn't intend to do that. That was not the point of this kind of modeling turned into a
practice, right? Those models generally represent specific slices of nature that were interesting
for one specific official observer. And that point is really important because that will
shape how all these communities and how the terrain and how the forest will unfold over time
within this specific perspective. So I bring here a quote that I really, really like because it tries
to flesh this out in simple terms and very useful ones. So thinking that exaggerating only slightly,
one might say that the interest in forest was resolved through one fiscal specific single
number, which was the revenue that from the timber that was extracted annually.
Well, that's okay, that's understandable, that's intelligible and that happens
still every day in terms of how we understand our economy. But what is interesting about this
quote is like the best way to appreciate how heroic was this constrictional vision is to
notice what falls outside the field of vision. So what is missing from that is not the organizational
principle of timber being valuable, but everything that was not there or was being excluded,
trees and bushes and plantas and plants that hold little to no potential for that purpose.
So missing out of that is flora diversity, foliar, fruits, et cetera, twigs and branches,
missing out of that are insects and small animals depending on the diversity. All this
ecological organization falls out of the organizational principle. And that has very
concrete consequences that we still suffer. We still live in the height of this
climate crisis that also starts from this kind of thinking. So it has really very
material consequences for us and had for them at the time, if you read more about it,
you know that a timber by like by trimming and domesticating nature so much, like decreased
in quality and then eventually decreased in value, which prompted them to try to reorganize that kind
of story. And what I want to call attention with the example is that also to bring some
specific ways of talking about it. This brings vocabulary for that only exist in terms of this
type of practice specifically. So this vocabulary constrains nature in a way by pruning what can
what cannot be used. So it generates more than eligible nature, but then way of making nature
intelligible and intelligible in a very specific certain way. And we make that happen in terms of
symbolizing things in specific terms. But the symbols, they don't exist in themselves, they
exist only in organizing this social practice around them. So when you replace nature with a
term called natural resources, we are doing exactly that is specifying from a generalized
notion of nature, like flora and fauna becomes something valuable becomes a commodity.
But not everything, right? It trims the practice. It separates competing species from valuables. So
plants are symbolized as crops. And what is what the competing species are symbolized as weeds,
they are not necessarily crops or weeds or anything like that in nature, but they are that for the way
we talk like that because we practice agriculture in a certain way that also help that that's the
same for insects or small animals that consume these interesting crops. So
the material effect of that and how that only gains traction in the practice over time.
And how we have specific intention that has unintended consequences are necessarily here
situated contextualized and embodied in terms of trimming specific types of attention.
And this attention will only shift to try to repopulate insect population, for instance,
when you realize that this practice like brought this specific effect in a certain way
that affects the value of our understanding of nature.
And that generates exactly a type of social coherence and social coordination and
how constraints create this coherence, right?
Well, now let's talk back again, like cement about formal semantics,
while this formal semantics and active inference sort of embeds one type of mathematical formalism.
Seals can only be grounded in specific concrete practices or inaction.
So, while active inference can be used as a tool to explain social understanding,
it does do that in terms of generalized synchronization, okay, in a model of combination
that can be inactive and dynamic, but is still very general. In terms of biosemantics, we can
think of it as a framework that might be compact compatible with active inference
in terms of explaining the materiality of the environment in a non-reductive,
in a non-reductionist way that tries to retain some naturalistic credentials.
So, how that conventions are affecting and affecting the embodied agent in terms of forming
those symbols and caching out those epistemic values.
And, well, social interaction in this sense is not reduced to prediction,
because in this sense, the prediction will not be primitive, but it would be a result of a specific
participatory construction of the social scene over specific organizational principles and actions
that through the synchronization of these generative models or the synchronization
of those agents that can be described in terms of those generative models gain predictive value.
And when you model that, then you have this type of understanding the value of prediction in those
senses. So, that allows us to say that social actors in this sense can behave as if they have
a generative model that synchronizes with that symbolic state of affairs, allowing them to
understand each other's behaviors or to develop approximates as informational sensitive or
responsiveness to the same symbols and goals. They approximate because they're obviously not
going to be the same, but they have the same approximate orientation. So, in this sense,
we don't have ever a view from nowhere. We don't have ever this view that is only
cashed out in terms of specific types of minds, but you also have types of minds shaped in terms of
these very concrete organizations. That happens in the community, like for humans, at least it
happens in community of language users. So, the relationship with symbolic cues helps to select
attention at that specific time as well pruning what should be ignored in socially constructed
environments. So, within a specific community of language users, some types of actions will be
desirable and will be deemed as true in that specific type of community and can be only evaluated
under those terms. So, you can provide reasons for actions in that specific
in that specific context. And you can talk about how
rational that action is in terms of the conditions set by those communities.
And that brings us to the idea that human cognition in this sense is never decoupled
from these cultural norms that like pushes and orient them over time. So, in those
scale of behavior, and that's the interesting thing, and that's why active inference can be an
interesting tool to model this type of human communities and this type of behavior, because it
can come from the very dynamics, the very basic of dynamics to specific types of perception
and scale up and more.
So, when you have the problem of symbols, like in these two decoupled, possible
community of users and symbols and embodied agents and things that do not combine, we can try to
model our agents in a way that we don't have this problem anymore because you're trying to include
that very component into the model. So, in this sense, we have active inference used as tools
to explain social understanding as generalized synchronization and in understanding others
in that sense, because of this generalized synchronization model and assumed by those types
of organizational principles, we can also engage in terms of need construction. So, we have a more
or less deterministic way of understanding the nature of symbols, because the more we interact
and approximate synchronize with the environment, we change the environment that might change us
back. So, you have an open system that is always and everywhere situated and it can be modeled
then with this type of predictive value. So, that's more or less what I had in mind,
and that's how I was trying to think about biosemiotics and possible relationship with
pre-energy principle and the formalisms of active inference. And yeah, I think this is it.
Awesome. Thank you, Lorena. I'll just
organize things a little in my room, but thank you very much for this excellent lecture.
Just as a warm up, how did you come to see it this way? What brought you to this general question
of semantics and how do you see that on your own path and see what other comparable or analogous
approaches have been done in terms of a meta-analysis and proposal related to the naturalization of
semantics? I think it's kind of hard to naturalize semantics, right? I think there's a lot of effort
in doing that, and it might be that if you think differently about how we naturalize those values,
we might have better answers instead of trying to fit the agent into the model.
We're trying to fit the model into the agent, right? I think that's the motivation. I think
there's an interesting part of biosemantics in that sense. It tries to make less assumptions.
When you start from a hardcore model assumption that semantics is only within
the mind, then we have a very hard time trying to explain that. If you assume less about that,
you might bring different types of explanations, of course, but they might be more interesting.
I was trying to see how that looks like when you bring these two things together in the terms
of active inference and free energy principle, if that works, if that is possible. I don't know if
that answers your question. So wondering about that fundamental question and then coming across
active inference or how elsewhere have people brought in the more formal and technical
into this question. What do you mean by more formal and... Can you repeat that, please?
Yeah. How does active inference help us or have continuity or difference with previous ways that
people have connected the technical part from the... Yeah. Yeah, what you described as the formal
semantics embeds the mathematical formalism and then the symbols are grounded in specific action.
So has that been played out in other technical frameworks? Well, we do have technical frameworks
that try to organize the editable of an activism, right? An auto poetic and activism. But then we
just have in these terms, the notion of symbols sometimes get loosely described and I think
these guys are not really interested in that. I think they're trying to describe something else,
for example. Or you can have some specific types of computational... If you really buy into the mind,
the computational brain and computational mind metaphor, then you have a hard time also to
explain how semantics are built into that computation, right? I don't think anyone has a very
strong answer to that. You have to really buy into the idea of information processing. And that's
something that brought me a little bit to that thing. If you buy into the metaphor of information
processing, then you need to have semantics within the brain. If you try to lose a little bit of
this notion, if you try to understand process and information in different terms, what happens?
I think that was more or less the question that I was trying to ask. And effective inference and
bio semantics can, because they have less assumptions in terms of what happens inside the
processing information content in the mind, if that can bring interesting answers.
Or if you can use as a model to organize behavior. And there's another point that also
brought me to this type of thinking was trying to understand how active inference can include
the historicity of the agent. Because I think that something comes across
debated in active inference, how you bring novelty into the state space. Like once you
define that state space, the state space is more or less deterministic. Because everything will
happen within the specific range. So how does novelty comes within this type of modeling?
So how can you explain that? If it does, I don't know, it's more like, it's more like an
it's it's more like an exploratory question that I was trying to make and see how that
pans out. I don't I actually don't have an answer for that. But
if you take seriously some more inactive claims that you need history of interactions
to understand how agents behave, you cannot understand agents without that. So
how does active inference answer this question specifically?
Right, because once yeah, that's just I think there's a few kind of debated. I'm not sure if
there's new developments in this specific topic. But I remember I think two years ago was like this
specific papers from the Apollo, I think the forking laying down a forking path is specifically
focusing on that in the formalisms and etc. So I don't know if these two things can
bring a little bit of more to the conversation. Maybe not.
This is great. I'll just ask some some more general questions. You're adding a lot with
these thoughts. So you said that social interaction in this account is not reduced to prediction.
So how would you unpack that? And how would you relate this?
I don't know exactly what term of art would go here, but this kind of social epistemology
that active inference provides us in contrast to say predictive processing.
So how is it that that we would or wouldn't reduce something to prediction? And then what
is it that active inference brings into that discussion? Well, I think I have two points
in that active inference in that sense has a type of modeling that tries to include all the time
and everywhere the embodied agent. If you take seriously the idea of the model, the
generative model is always accurately modeling that specific agent. And because it cannot be
true or false that the model is your current state is like that. Even if you are not feeling
really well, you just know that you're not feeling well in relation to something else.
And that that story is still very accurate to your state's condition right now, right?
So the prediction against traction in socially at least in that sense, not in the specific detail
of like predictive predictive processing, I think, because I think that's more complicated,
but socially in social cognition, at least, we can talk about this predictive value,
I think is a more interesting way to do that. Because the model, the example that I use in
terms of catching out symbols, we are using something that was meant to make something
intelligible that have very bad consequences that were not even close to be predicted.
So in that sense, and how these consequences happen, the prediction cannot be there everywhere
and all the time. The prediction in this has an orientation as well, right? So that that's
going to unfold only in terms of the orientation, but that's not all encompassing.
So, well, what does that say about the prediction? That's why I was trying to think of it as not
being primitive, but something that comes along with these dynamics. But yeah.
Well, this is a very deep, impressive point that because the causal structure of the world changes,
historicity, agents change, they learn, and they attend, and then the niche changes with
Stigmergy and niche modifications. So because things really do change through time,
then just training a data set at one time point, and then using that same generative model
and carrying it forward, it's like picking a speed in a direction when you're on a winding road,
and just saying, all right, now let's turn on cruise control right now and just keep going
in this direction. It's working right now. So then to connect that to the legibility of the
forests, as the causal model changed and externalities were not taken into account and so on,
all these different features you brought in. So now is active inference and cognitive modeling,
cognitive technologies increasing our legibility of perception, cognition, and action
through surveillance technology and other mechanisms, such that there could be slash,
we expect there to be also hidden dynamics and externalities that we are also failing to see
when we make some aspects of cognitive systems legible in the way that research in the neurosciences
is happening towards. Yeah, I think in the sense like if you're trying to do that, you cannot have
a know, like in a model, it encompasses everything, right, that would be non-informative. In terms of
for you, when you do that, you have one interested thing, you're interested in something, right?
You have one thing in mind when you're trying to flesh out in terms of cognitive modeling.
So how that applies to these more all-encompassing situations, I think that's like, that that
model is how I'm trying to ask this question. So you can model them in this like a sliced
sense and that's what we do as scientists and that's how we learn about things,
but that only way of seeing that that very specific model does not all-encompassing for
all answers. So how can you use that in comparison to other situations? So how can you integrate
this type of thing? I don't know. I don't have a question and an answer for that. I don't know if
we do have an answer for this type of question currently, but I think it's a very valid question
to ask because also in the terms of sometimes applying that socially,
that sort of ratifies in a way and then it becomes an organizing principle that becomes
somewhat ratified. So keep an eye for this kind of metaphorical use, like assuming a little bit
that all this talk can be metaphorical and it can be interesting and useful to catch them out
in these terms because you don't have other ways to talk about them. So how we don't ratify them
and how they are, you know, because I think I'm having a hard time to get there,
but I think I'm making the point of people criticizing the causal primacy. So when you
reduce these complex systems to one single cause, caching out everything that organizes the principle,
these complex systems and one primal cause, then you are losing the complexity. However,
if you don't do that, how can you slice it out to understand the system? So I think that's the
two tensions here that I'm trying to propose as a question in turn instead of an answer.
I don't know if that makes sense, but thank you. Yeah, I hope people continue that discussion.
I'm going to build on that just to maybe circle around that because it's really important. So
in the forestry case, the realist perspective, again, using retro casting, the way we
or contemporary discussions, some of them in the active inference and free energy principle space
are, the realist says that region of land is just economic potential. It is a natural resource.
That becomes a kind of handle. The instrumentalist perspective takes a step back and says it's as
if that piece of land is a natural resource. So yeah, the territory is indescribable and there's
still a space for mystery. But then when the proxies come out, because policies are being selected,
the as if in some ways carries similar consequences to the actual because they and they may totally
agree and the realists and the instrumentalists might be like, yeah, it is economic potential
or represents or it could be treated as such or it could be engaged with as such like that
cognitive diversity can align on the social policy that then connects to these broader
social questions and histories. And so it's kind of interesting like what work does this
instrumentalism do like, Oh, it's just a principle. What work does it do and what doesn't it do?
And the ways that that science and technical engineering
fields are and aren't deployed alone or together with other considerations.
Yeah, that's very interesting. Like, in the sense that either if you're a realist or instrumentalist
about that, like, if you think like models are not either true or false, they're just models,
right? They might have views and it might, they might be capturing real properties. But
the problem is in this conversation, even when you push them, like have realists and have
instrumentalists try to like lose a little bit as assumptions, they still come, they still end up
refining those principles and taking them to be more or less true or false, right? Well, that's
a plot twist. It's like you're appealing to what surprise minimization as unifying
the diversity responses that the realists and instrumentalists do. So then does that make
surprise or cognitive inertia like the principle where the maze just ends and it explains itself?
Or how does that play in a pluralistic scientific setting?
Yeah, that's the, that's the, you might, you can have a third answer to that, like, right? I have two,
I think the answer that I try to give is more eliminativist in the sense that eliminates the
cause or primacy of them, of these two modes of answering. So when you think, I'm thinking I
have in mind now, like actually just to try to make sense of that, when you, when you think about
biological information, you can think about biological information as being reword, as being
metaphorical or an instrumental. Or you have these guys like Susan O'Yama or Richard Leuhernting,
they try to bring some, they are against this cause or primacy, they try to advocate for
systems that do have that, but they have like a lot of more going on. So that cannot be the only
answer because those systems are not everywhere, scientifically cash. They don't have to be everywhere
that. So for example, going back to the forestry, forestry, so we really is going to say
that territory is value property. And in the sense the instrumental is going to say, look as if,
you know, it can be used as if, but it's not necessarily value property. It doesn't matter.
You can say like, well, this terrain is seen from one perspective as value property,
but it also has other uses around them. So you had to be more inclusive of this diversity.
Because the only organization principle around that specific terrain is not
only to generate value or if it does, this value doesn't have one single output.
It can have more than one output in terms of very specific terms. You can cash it out very
materially. This terrain that has to provide monoculture needs to also, has to provide also
value for the diversity of the fauna and the diversity of the flora around it. And that is
not included in the model because that's not what the model is done for. The model has a specific
use and that's fine. However, that does not reduce the terrain to that. And well, when you're talking
about cognition, that might be more complicated, but I think it's easy. It's an easy way to talk
about this causal primacy when you talk about forestry, because we are very much now experiencing
this climate crisis and we see these things happening right now. And how difficult, because
this type of thinking is built over time and so well fixed in the way we see things and we are
understanding how hard it is to change that. It's a paradigm shift that needs to happen
for that to change. It's not necessarily the model that is right or wrong. It's just how you
understand and apply them. So there are pragmatics into that. It's not only an instrumental, but it
has something that the instrumentalist take does not capture and I don't know how to cash it out
in one single word. But that's what Biosematics was offering. Biosematics was offering the idea of
practice and pragmatics. I don't know if it's the whole story, but it's another point into that story.
A lot of great points all connect that note of pragmatism to a little bit of the active
inference formalism. So when it comes to policy selection, behavior selection,
some but not all cognitive entities can act as if they're calculating expected free energy.
So these are the active, the truly active entities, whether they're simple or whether
they're sophisticated and they do planning, expected free energy is how those agents are
being modeled as if they're making decisions. And it consists of the pragmatic and the epistemic
value. That's how these different policies are evaluated. And so I see two angles or windows
that that supports at least from my non social sciences background, a new kind of meeting in
the middle there. So first is the expansion of pragmatic value under the principle that surprise
minimization or bounding is the imperative. Right there in the pragmatic value, it doesn't
have to be just body temperature or financial income. We can expect and prefer
ourselves to be learning new things or meeting new people. And so we can load into the pragmatism
different goals that under a narrower definition of utility or pragma have not traditionally
be included. So I think that first way is it speaks to a more inclusive concept of utility.
You might say I'm also de risking on forest fires alongside the timber and already you've had you
have now plural pragma. So I think that's the kind of crossover. And then the deeper and second,
and not saying there's only two ways that that the conversation continues, we have epistemic
utility in terms of epistemic value. And so the balance in the waiting between pragmatic value
and epistemic or learning oriented activity overall helps control a dynamic balance with just
like how tight is the grip and the preference overall. And maybe we have some preference
for timber to be exported from a region, but we really don't know, we don't have long term
modeling, we don't have deep causal analysis. And so we're going to put 5% on the pragmatic
extraction and other pragmatic features and leave the rest of the policy in an exploratory mode
and come to a blend that's not just on the spectrum from explore to exploit, which is how
this has been approached in like cognitive sciences previously. It's like this is the third thing
where policies that are on the frontier of exploring and exploiting rise to the top through
their contributions to pragmatic and epistemic value. And we made the model. So that isn't
to say that that is what's happening on the ground, or maybe that's just the instrumentalist perspective.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah, but if it's an instrumentalist perspective, it might be a good one, right?
In the sense, the idea of inclusion is kind of the interesting one, right? Because if you
really find a nation of maximization, because you can use that in certain ways to understand
what happens within when you're modeling something, what is the limit of that maximization. So that's
you can model agents as if maximizing utility, for instance. But maximizing utility is something
that needs to be balanced out with the utility of everyone around them, right?
And that's not that's not trivial how that happens, right? And even if it does,
and even if it were a trivial, it's not something that maps out completely
identically with all every single agent, they don't that's not that there's not going to be
there's going to be diversity there. So how do you make that notion more inclusive and less
refined in that sense? Because then if the more you're refined, the more you single it out into
around only one general type of understanding. So when you think them more individually,
then you kind of lose you lose that strength of this one single principle
organized, like the one single way of catching out utility, that's not the principle like sorry.
So I think that's like speaks a lot with like the type of instrumental use and the type of
pragmatism and how the time the types of application of this practices, right?
Remember, in the sense of the scientific forestry, it's also a practice. It's not
something that is true in itself. It's true in terms of practice, right? In terms of applications,
in terms of building communities around them. So without this use, they have no grounding.
Yeah, one really strong and salient point that I got from the lecture was about generalized
synchrony. And it's almost funny that we have to advocate or delineate generalized synchrony
because the alternative the absence of generalized synchrony is just like kind of like an ideal gas.
It's like there wouldn't be regularities in society. We wouldn't be clustered in space or in time.
We wouldn't have information and communication and we wouldn't have what differentiates
a society or a group or civilization or a colony or whatever from literally anything else.
So generalized synchrony is almost like all of the space between nothing and anything
happening. And then it supports all these different scenarios. We could have
this kind of mind in this kind of brain and this kind of environment and this kind of niche.
And so we can talk about the colony foraging algorithms that work in the desert. And there
might be mutual, non-exhausted, open-ended change of algorithms and what works in a different setting.
And with humans, we have the sophistication and the history and the scope and the scale
and all of these metas and weaving with is an odd and our own forward going
direction, which is really the moment where it goes from being a forensic
sociology to the real-time sense-making and action selection based upon
our cognitive models in the broader sense, which includes humans and non-human
agents. But it's like that's when it goes from being more than just an understanding
when that understanding translates to an action policy and they do, then it matters as much as
anything does. Yeah, one of the criticisms of the active inference, I think, is like it's too
general to single out specific constraints that orient action. That's what I saw like
thinking about how symbols are brought about in community of new language users.
Assuming that the symbols are not, they are only meaningful throughout these
histories and practices can help us to apply this type of general story.
Yeah, navigating specific, well, epistemic communities. And I think that's the work that
my whole is going to bring along in terms of epistemic communities. And then you single out in
them. So you have these communities of language users in which specific practices
create specific orientations.
Yeah, one thought on that. Asking like what is active inference or linear aggression or
some other method. Again, this is who knows, is this just deep esoteric instrumentalism?
But asking what does it have to say about this symbol? What does active inference have to say
about the letter E in English? Can it be as simple as to say that that's a category error,
and that you could make a toy example or a pedagogical example where symbol one and symbol two
oscillate in a multi agent simulation? Or you could make a generative model for an
alphabet and leave it abstract, but you're never going to connect to the historicity
and the real enactment of the English letter E. Unless you're confronting
the minute particulars and the actual embodiment of that letter. And then there's
different course grainings, different iterated modeling decisions, different questions about
how do you include and participate in a different stage of the scientific process. But it's like,
you're in the specifics at that point. Active inference doesn't have an opinion on the letter
E because we wouldn't want it to. It would be too opinionated about the wrong things,
it'd be making assumptions and bringing axioms into play that would be extremely constraining.
And so it remains general as a framework and the free energy principle, even more slash
differently so. But when we get into the actual, that's where we're connecting the real systems
of interest. But how can we make claims and advance them socially about systems of interest
when we're not even, it's like comparing bridge building as a concept with this bridge right here.
It's a little bit like a category disconnect.
Yeah. Well, it depends on also how you single out some things, they're not,
they're just, you just don't do that because they're just not interesting enough, right?
There's nothing like that comes out of it in terms of this bridge right here in a single,
how did you put it again? Like your category of bridges in this bridge right here, right?
When you do that, you can learn something about the category in terms of this single one right here.
But it does not, it's not exhaustive. That's the, that's the thing, one point it's not exhaustive
and it's not right or wrong. It might be better than other, I think the idea like you can bring
some, you can make some comparisons in terms of like predictive value, you can have like
better or worse ways of doing it. And then it gains more utility.
Okay. Connecting this to also this non-exhaustive nature and where the power of a generalizable
framework is. Let's talk about the category of Golden Gate bridges in San Francisco. So there's
only one actual bridge there, but we're generalizing it. And so somebody makes a state space and says,
well, I'm exploring if there was more than two end to end. So they're exploring the state space
of topologies of bridge and someone else is exploring the state space of color. And somebody
else is exploring the state space of traffic dynamics and someone else is combining two of them
or combining all three of them. And then that's the conversation is which map of this category of
state spaces category of adjacent possible as we chose to model it. And if you don't include
traffic flow, don't be surprised that it's not going to take that kind of data or make that kind
of prediction. And some variables matter and some matter in combination and some don't. But
when we model, we kind of build these regions or adjacencies to the actual, which is where
the historicity of the past leaves us. And then we have an adjacent possible as modellers and
sense makers, including absurd counterfactuals and state spaces. And then the state spaces are mobilized.
Yeah, in a way, but if you talk about, like, specific type of engineering, yes, and that's
since they are mobilized, and they are not true or false, you can use false models,
that is to function, that's not like, you can you have specific uses of things that you know,
they're not really true, like the thing that tolerate, tolerate, tolerate type of modeling the
social, the solar system is to use that to navigate, you know, in the desert, even though
it's not really accurate, but if you want to go from A to B helps you to do that. That's
a different thing, right? Like, it is not true or false. But when you think about agents in terms of,
like, and if bringing back to the idea of symbols being only cashed out in terms of community of
users that have histories and they are made useful, that they are made meaningful in terms of their
practices, then you don't have ever this disconnect, right? You have a, you can think about this
cognition is always connected to this specific types of practicing, you can even single out some
moments of it and try to see what you learn from this kind of slice of time. But when you think
about the whole story of the cognitive system, you can, if you're going to really think of it in terms
that it's valuable, you cannot disconnect from the state, let's say the state space of practice.
Awesome. Well, do you have any closing thoughts or what are you looking forward to with the
discussion section and the rest of the course, just by way of wrapping up and letting people know
any other thoughts? Yeah, I would be cool to explore this, this idea that we've been actually
bringing along here, right? How we can go with that, like, instrumentally realistic book bay or
how can we understand this general synchronization of the model in terms of specific
instantiations and how informative they are. Is that really interesting or
how can these things be actually reified in terms of modeling and if that happens,
does that have any specific consequences actually or not, right? Maybe not.
Awesome. Well, very ambitious and excellent lexer. So thank you very much, Lorena and talk to you.
Just keep in mind, I was just like trying to ask these questions. I don't also have those answers.
I found very little about active inference and semiotics produced. I found a few papers,
so that's very exploratory actually. So we're also invited to think of these things and explore a
little bit further if it's possible. Yeah. Cool. Epic. All right. Thank you, Lorena. See you in a
couple of weeks. Farewell. See you. Bye.
