Hello, and welcome everyone. It's October 18, 2023. We're in the course active inference
for the social sciences. And today, we're in the lecture by the course co organizer,
and that will kick off the final leg of the course, which is Avel Guenin-Carlu's lecture
social constraints and existential stance, what makes us human. So we'll be looking forward to
a lecture, followed by a discussion. So if you have any questions, please feel free to add them
in the live chat or submit to the course syllabus. And also, at the end, we'll talk about how we're
going to conclude this course. So with that, thank you to you, Avel.
Hello. So do you see the slides correctly? Everything is fine.
I will take silence as a yes. So the role of this session is basically to show you the inspiring
intuition behind the whole course and to show very concretely, well, very abstractly, but in my
mind concretely, why the specific formalism of active inference and social constraints
is relevant to understand the human species and the social evolution of things that we do.
So we'll talk of social constraints of the existential stance and of what makes us human.
So disclaimer, this paper, this presentation is closely aligned with upcoming paper, which
whose name is like the same, I think. It's tentative for now. And whose man on job is a co-author.
So first, let us ask basic questions about the topic at hand. What is culture?
By psychologist Cecila Heis, culture is typically used in one of three ways.
Culture can be information or behavior acquired socially. It's like, if I am an ant and I figure
out that you need to go somewhere because of pheromones, this is culture. It can be socially
acquired behavior that is shared within a group. So for example, if I am a nape and I figure out
how to open nuts with a stone thing and the group just, everyone does it the same way, this is
culture. And it can be the adaptive evolution of socially acquired behavior, which is like,
if I remember well, we have evidence of it in the wild for corvids and humans only.
So the question is, we know that culture is the human specific, like it is the case simply.
But depending on what we mean by culture, it can describe behavior that is very much shared
with other species. So a question that needs to be answered is, how specific are the human
cultural mechanisms? So one core thing to understand is that there is no such thing as
the cultural mechanism. The mechanisms of social learning in humans, they are culturally
transmitted. Whether you will listen to, I don't know, an elder, a rapper,
scientist depends on the cultural norms in which you exist. And the specific way in which
teacher-student interaction are supposed to go is, again, culturally embedded.
And the type of information that people will try to figure out is or transmit
is itself culturally embedded. So we can just write the mechanism for human social learning,
this is like, empirically, there is none. And conceptually, I don't think the
notion is coherent to begin with. So one core element for this is we have basically
explicit linguistic rules about who we should trust, like listen to your parents.
And those are linguistic and language varies from culture to culture. So these
changes from culture to culture pretty straightforward. And in general, the practice
of cultural transmission of intentional teaching, they are varying between cultures.
And I do not want to get into it because I don't think I would say something that is
accurate without notes. And we can, however, take a look at a behavior that is, I think,
nearly universal, which is storytelling. When people tell a story, they use stories
to transmit norms. And like, in the specific culture of the Agda, or Akda, I have mispelled
it at least once, I think it is Agda, like you have a core role of storytelling in telling people
what to do. And you have specific tales that were studied and that were associated to specific
norms. And these are very important because here we have laws that are written somewhere
and that people in blue will come and hit you if you don't follow them. But this is not something
that is universal. So in a context where you do not have states, you typically have no
really other way to transmit norms than talk about it. And so from there, everything is
culturally embedded, like the way we interpret the norms, the kind of norms can be transmitted
given this way, the way specific cues will be understood, given a specific niche, etc.
So yes, all this to say there is no big C culture, there is cultural transmission, there is
cultural evolution, but there is no specific mechanism or, you know, natural type of culture
in humans. But there are categories of behavior that are very obviously human specifics and that
are very obviously cultural as in direct contribution to culture. For example, fire,
it's obviously majorly important to culture because if you have fire, you get a lot of calories. If
you get a lot of calories, you get a big brain, like a California brain. But fire, you know,
it doesn't produce culture, that's not how anything works. Things that do work directly
to produce culture are language and role-taking. So language, I think you are familiar with it,
you are using it now on the receiving side. It is a practice that basically embeds
communicative intents into a specific set of symbols that can be letters, that can be words,
like, or rather it would be phoneme, I guess. I don't know if phoneme or the word is a symbol,
but you have symbols and they embed meaning and people use it. And what is critical is that each
of these symbols has a public meaning, has a public, like, semantics and pragmatics. If I
tell you chair, maybe we don't know precisely, like, what specific thing enters in the chair
category, maybe press a tool, the situation of chair will vary, but like, we are, we agree on
the basics of the chair, we agree on what we can do with chairs, we agree with a lot of things,
implicitly, by the use of this word. And we can use the role of syntax to manipulate this
unit of meaning in a specific way. I see it on a chair, I'm talking in action, that is relative
to a specific object that is a chair. And you understand what I mean. If I was trying to, you
know, mimic it, maybe I would guess it through. Maybe you would think I'm saying I'm crouching
over that. Why not? And so the language and the fact that it has a publicly insensitive meaning
is critical in, you know, keeping a coordination in the specific thing that people do and why they
do it, which is anonymously cultural. And you have another more subtle mechanism process,
I don't know, phenomenon, which is shared intentionality. So by the work of mainly Tomas
Hello, we know that chimps are not very social. And they can learn they are, but as intelligent
as humans, but at least young humans, but they usually are not really interested in what other
chimps are doing. And most importantly, they are not interested in sharing goals, trying to figure
out what is the end result that some other chimp is upholding and trying to mesh in this plan
to help him. While in human, from a very young age, we are very stream motivated.
And we are very motivated to figure out what we, whatever we are collectively doing and figure
out what one's role is in that and do that. And this is likely not, you know, a bona fide cognitive
function that stands on its own, but it's behavior that is a cognitive process that is
enemy in humans, very rare, if existing everywhere else. And that is core to most theory of the
transition of culture. So these two things we know are human specifics up to maybe very small
and important details. And we know are critically embedded in what we call culture.
And so what I will do from the one is to provide a specific theory of culture,
so the active inference of cultural landscapes, that in my opinion,
one basically explains or at least mesh well with why those two specific
phenomenons are so important from the appalling of culture, but it also means that culture is not
information per se. It's something that is more organic and that evolves more like, you know,
biological system themselves evolve than population of genes. And from these accounts,
we will go to figure out what it means about collective organization, figure out why we
have gods and taxes. And from there, we will go to more physical and physical consideration and ask
how basically this theory can be written within physics through the active inference formalism.
So let us go. First, I'm just presenting the theory of the active inference of clear landscape,
and I'm presenting a core concept, the concept of string constraints that they arrive from at least
my treatment of that. So active inference, probably a lot of you know what this is,
but this goes on YouTube, so I will re-explain. Active inference is a theory of cognition where
basically agents enact expectation of the world. They have a world model,
and they make predictions over the world model, and they strive for those predictions
to remain coherent with what they actually observe. And that means that the agent will,
you know, update beliefs that are false. If I hear Mio, and I think there is no cats,
I will then think that it is more likely. And on the other hand, I will try to provoke to
realize prediction that I cannot need. So for example, if I really want to hear Mio,
if I really expect to hear Mio, and I expect this to be like a basic step of my life,
I will maybe figure out how to get a cat. But that works not too well with cats,
but with drinking or eating. I expect to be a thing that has water in it because else I die,
so when I am thirsty, I am thirsty by drinking. And we have this basic duality of
predictive inference, like normal, what we call typically perception, just
trying to figure out what there is outside and the thing or belief when we don't. So I said
perception, but it is more inference. And there is active inference, which is
like the realization of those inference through action. And the core argument of active inference
is that those two are the same process. They are the same process that is entailed by an
information geometry, so basically a space of belief over which the dynamics of an agent unfold.
And the core feature of this approach is the dissolution of agency, as we typically understand
it. We typically understand the agency to be like, hey, I am an agent, I want to do this,
and I will reason about what I want, and I will reason about how to get it, and I will do the
thing that I reasoned about. Reason is importance. It's not the basic cognitive function that
relies on everything we do. I do not think the statement is controversial. And in active inference,
the model we have is that at multiple scale, in a real context, we get produce prediction
over our sensor rotor flow, and then strive to realize those predictions. So what that means
is that our actions are not constrained by will. In the general case, they are constrained by what
looks more like a self-model, a model of oneself, and what oneself would typically do
in contexts such as the one I'm exposed to. Related concepts is the notion of skill and
intentionality. So this skill intentionality thing is a theory that stands at the interface
between active inference and ecological psychology, which I will absolutely not get into.
And the core argument of skill intentionality is that when you are a skilled agent, so agents that
understand how to do things in the world, you do not experience the world as a
represented space in 3D with 3D models in it, and each object is well defined and
has a lot of properties that are embedded in a world model that you would have in a video game.
What you see is a landscape of basic opportunities for action. I will see a computer. I know I can
mash the keys. I think you say keys. And I know I can go to the internet, and I know I can do this
or that. I see a door. I know I can go through it if it's open. I can close it. I can go through it
if it's closed, and I can open it. This is the basic opportunities that the door presents.
And I don't say a logical consequence, but a very coherent
entailment of active inference is that I will see a minimal model of things around me that
are based on the opportunities for action that they present. I will orient my attention minimally
to grasp what I can do with things, and what the field, the perceptive field that I live in,
is a landscape of those affordances. So the picture is an extract from Fallout New Vegas,
which is the greatest RPG. Please play it. This is important. The only thing you need to
keep in mind on this course. And that shows you like a radio in 3DF mode of radio,
and you have an action button that tells you whether you want to activate the radio,
and you have HPs and APs, and I have no idea what AP is. And this looks more like a naive field
than what you get into a really realistic presentation of like a picture, photo picture
of your environment, because you have a perception of the objects, like you have
to the array that presents your vision of an object. But it's embedded in things that tell you
where you're looking at, things that tell you what you can do with things, things that tell you
what are your states, what are your basic states when you're engaging with this object. And this
is, I think, pretty nice illustration.
Okay.
Sorry, Aval, could you repeat the last 30 seconds there? It was just like it hung up.
Okay.
Just repeat the last 30 seconds. Thank you.
So this is a picture from Fallout New Vegas, which is a good game. And I claim that it is a
pretty good illustration of what we talk when we talk about action-related perception,
because you see the objects and with slash through the object, you also see what opportunities
for action in presence, in this case, activate the radio. And you see it in the way it is embedded
with your physiological states, so the HP and AP. And a core feature of that is that when experienced
affordances, I feel directly through the perception whether the affordance is good or bad. If I see,
I don't know, a cliff, and also I can fall off the cliff and die, this will cause fear.
The perception of that possibility of falling and dying will be negatively loaded. If I see,
I don't know, a hot bed in winter, and I know I can no rest after a day of work when I was cold,
I will be happy about it. I will pursue the possibility in a, like, positively balanced way.
And so this is the case for basic physiological thing, but this is also the case for cultural
norms and values. We come to experience the world as a world of affordances, and this is the same
for the social world. I will feel bad or good, depending on what possibility for action I will
experience in a given context. And this is a picture of a forest path near
archaeological sites that is studied by the research group that funds me, XCAPE,
and from a pure direct perception kind of way, there is a very complex statistical
feature that are made in the picture, but if you are a human, a thing that walks,
what you will perceive, like, feel directly, experience directly, is just a possibility to
walk along the path and follow it. And this is something that you feel is a property of the path,
I think. You see the path, you think, I can go through a path, you don't think,
there is a 3D space, and in this 3D space, there is a set of statistical feature, one of which
being a flat thing in the middle, and among the entire space of action that they have,
one of them is to walk through the path, like, just do this and this and this and this,
you just feel like you can go through there. And the way humans learn about each other,
the way humans gravitate and come to expect things about each other, they can develop
basically a sense of what is culturally possible or not possible in a given context.
And this sensation, this perception of cultural possibilities, it is embodied in the way we
pay attention to things. We will pay attention to different things according to, like, you know,
what is culturally relevant in a given context, in a given situation. And this is a core argument of
the thinking through the minds, accounts of cultural evolution, which was spearheaded by
Maxwell Romsted and this year, forgot his first name. And because of everything that we saw before,
because of the dissolved agency that we have under active in France, the patterns, cultural
patterns in the attention, they will not simply be experienced as abstract norms and value that
one could or could not respect. They will effectively constrain the thing you can pay
attention to, the outcome you expect in a way that will drive reaction towards specific outcomes.
And so this cultural landscape of affordances, they embed international activity as in the
patterns that are relevant to explain normativity and intentionality, they are in the landscape,
they are not, like, only at least in your brain cells. And a core argument, I would say, is that
the engagement with a cultural landscape, it is due all to existence of social constraints,
where social constraints are understood as statistical patterns that will, like,
causally act over what you do or cannot do. So when I talk about the cultural landscape
of affordances, I am implicitly talking about a set of constraints that act over behavior.
And this I've demonstrated by talking about many normativity and the like.
You have, how to say? You have a reliance in the notion of constraints, which is that
avil. Sorry, again, avil from your side is just, I'm not hearing any audio.
Now, or Maria, do you hear him?
No, nothing.
You can't write everything over a collective behavior. So there is a scale of one specific
account. Yes. All right. Could you repeat, could you repeat the last 45 seconds?
Can you hear me now?
Yeah. Okay. So what I'm saying is that the engagement with cultural landscape affordances,
it is due all to the existence of social constraints, which act over individual behavior.
Because when I engage individually with the landscape affordances that is a characteristic
of my local material and cultural environments, the like, and by normativity, we will drive
my behavior, my intention, my presentation in a specific way. And instead of looking at how each
individual agent engage with the landscape, I can look at the constraints that emerge from this
collective activity. So is that, do you hear me now?
Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Good.
And so let us get back to the question of what makes us human.
We are told about human-specific mechanism phenomenon that seemed to be involved in culture.
Those were language and role-taking. And those two phenomenons seem to be pretty robust
candidate to explain the coherence of a shared cultural landscape or set of social constraints.
Language provides a space of public presentation, like representation in the classical
cognitive sense, that you can negotiate that are actually out there in the literal sense.
They are sensory signals that are in the environment. And that structure in Asian behavior.
So when you talk to yourself, it will constrain what you pay attention to implicitly what you can
and cannot do. And when you talk with others, this will, you know, influence what you say
and what you want to say and what you perceive to be driven to say. And so it will constrain your
behavior and in a much stronger and more robust way than you could have to implicit
intentionality inference. And role-taking in a more subtle way brings agent to think
existentially to like, not ask the question what I am supposed to do in the situation,
but what an agent that is embedded in the specific cultural context where I embedded
is expected to do. And so this basically forces you to have a synchronization between
what you experience as a possibilities for action and what you expect our cultural expectation
of our behavior. So these two mechanisms, there would be very, very strong mechanisms
to enforce the coherence of cognitive landscape between agents. And it just so happens that
there are things that exist only in the one specie that has full-fledged cumulative
open-ended cultural evolution. So yes, I think this is interesting.
Okay. Aval.
You just unshared your screen.
Sorry?
You unshared your screen or is that done?
No, I did not unshare my screen.
Hmm. Could you just like reshare it?
Yes.
There you go. All right. All right. Looks great. Continue. Thank you.
Nice. So yes, the question is,
as I said, there is a duality between each agent engaging with a landscape for dense
and constraints that exist over the landscape that is shared, that is straightforward.
But in the set of constraints that is characteristic of a given landscape,
basically, to account for an anti-cultural evolution, this must be a set of constraints
that changes to a time that builds new constraints and new demical flow. And it's
something that you cannot get with a landscape in the sense of demical system theory.
That is not, demical system theory does not deal with systems that do open-ended evolution.
So the question is, what relation can we make between the dynamics of enculturation,
according to which agent integrates specific cultural expectation,
and the dynamics of open-ended cultural evolution through which cultural landscape
and the constraints, like, constructs itself through time? And this is where we get to the
more holistic side, where I think we can see why the specific construct of constraints is
that critical as compared to the simple cultural landscape approach. Let us take a look at this.
There is a thing called biological autonomy. It is a quite recent term in its formalization,
the real formalization that describes the ability of a living system for self-construction,
like maintaining one structure and changing it through developmental and evolutionary time.
And the best formalization we have had so far is from Montevil and Mosho,
and its constraint closure, a constraint, is simply a relatively slow physical process
that shapes a faster process, like canalized material or information or energy flow,
without itself being affected at the time scale of the interaction.
And for Montevil and Mosho, you get biological autonomy, where you get a set of constraints
that collectively produce itself. Each constraint is produced by other constraints in a set,
and each constraint produces other constraints in a set. This is a very simple idea. This is a very
informal idea, in the sense that it does not have dynamics, it does not have a physics.
It is just a formal statement of what we mean by autonomy. And this idea, basically, is the best
grounding we have to think about what is living and what is an agent, although in itself it does not
entails agency. And when we look at social systems or early systems as a set of constraints,
what you can see is that systems such as the brain, multi-scale organized system,
they can be read as basically a set of nested constraints, like your DMN, the activity of your
default mode network, which is the basal activity of the brain in the absence of stimulation.
It basically is constituted of chemical constraints over what the composites
tissues do at a given point in time. And this itself is a constraint over what individual cells
do through time, which itself is a constraint over the evolution law of an individual cell,
et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So I can always look at a multi-scale system as a set of nested
constraints at nested scales. And in systems that are autonomous, that are biological,
cognitive agents, not only the smaller scale systems like cell, they can enable, they construct,
and they enact the constraints that are higher-scale agents. But higher-scale agents can also shape back
the behavior of low-scale agents. Like, of course, if I have, you know, if I do something,
which is something that I as an agent do, this will constrain my activity of my neural networks.
This is like heavy learning. This is common to all models of learning. Learning goes through
change in network structure. And so there is an opportunity to model emerging agents from,
like, collective network activity and to look at the interaction between description at nested
scales of behavior. And this is applicable very straightforwardly to the human species. So this
is a certain city-state. And something that you can look at is that it is very dense. It has
very dense buildings that are built in a specific way. It is near a river, which enables the
trade at great distance. It has a bridge, so entry to the city is constrained to a specific point.
And it is essentially surrounded by several fields, very flatlands that are rubble, that are
fertilized, probably by water from the river. And basically, all of these features
are enabled production of state societies, societies with a central institution that does stuff.
And these societies will robustly produce material contexts that favorize there on survival.
For example, dance settlements. They enable you to have everyone together to tell them what to do.
Temples which give a material grounding to the authority of the states.
Bridges that allow you to move things around and to control what gets in and out.
And more cultural, several fields that allow you to take the food and bring it back to the city.
And the production of such settlements and such material environments by states
is somewhat robust intercultural feminine.
Atomore, like ancients, are multi-cultural scale.
You have a set of processes that are critical in the construction and action of norms in humans.
And most likely, common ancestor to those processes is dancing and singing. Dancing and
singing that give you like embodied synchronization. And this is shown to drive development of group
identity. And this gives you basically emotional grounding of the norms that are shared within
society. Because those norms, they are not abstract expectations. They are embedded in your specific
emotions, in your specific embodiments, while you do things that are critical to your ecology.
And ritual activity and storytelling, they allow more complex self-automativity by using,
you know, symbolism. And the system of automatically there may be less embedded
embodied, sorry, so less embedded in the like one's direct experience, but they allow a more
complexity in the nature of the norms that are transmitted and enforced.
And these norms, by the simple fact that they are perceptible through material symbolism and
through storytelling, they become a causal force in the cultural landscape that is shared by a group
member. So they become things that are the power to produce or constrain the framing in which people
will read specific situation and therefore constrain and produce social behavior. And this
this is like I've said this already, so this looks like a petition, but I want to hammer
this because if this is the case, then we can be interested in what complex tales in sorry,
in agency that emerges from the constraints embedded in complex tales.
So we know that people can perceive non-material agents under certain conditions.
This is common in schizophrenia, like you will hear voices that tells you to do things and
that are not embedded in a specific body. This is common in a decisive valentine disorder because
you will have agents that basically share your body while having and existing while not being
tied to a specific body. One specific personality can exist while they are not in control of your
body and so in a way that is not contingent on the direct material and action of what they want
and want not to do. And under a lot of anthropologically described conditions
that are not considered pathological, you can basically have regimes of attention
that produce a non-material agent that you can talk with and that have motivation and that have
many traits which are often called toll paths, which is a term borrowed from a Buddhist literature.
And so this emergence of non-material agents, how to say, if I consider an agent to be something
closed set of constraints and I consider things like tales and rituals as mechanisms that produce
constraints in behavior, there is basically no difficulty whatsoever at concept level. There
is no unexpectedness or no complexity to say that. Specific systems of constraints that
happen to be closed and that are embedded in those tales and rituals, they exist as biological agents.
And so we kind of basically a model of gods of non-material agents, which is a better,
less likely way to put it, that relies on systematic training of your regime of attention.
And of course, when it's collective, it will like those agents will be social agents. They will
be things that have power, that have the ability to frame the debate around specific things.
If you and I think that, so this is, sorry, the painting that is on the right of the screen
is a painting by Willem Blake, that presents basically a late 18th, I think,
a notion of God, which is not really Old Testament, which is a bit more New Testament,
but which is mostly a sensation of the clockmaker gods that was popular at that time.
And what you see on the painting is a resend, so William Blake's version of God,
that is in the sky, like very powerful, very Zeus-like imagery. And that is using,
like this, his hand to draw a compass, that is considered a symbol of
constructing things, of masonry, like the compass is one of the Freemason symbol,
for the same reason it is a symbol of orderly creation in William Blake's paintings.
And so if we share a belief that there is a God somewhere, and he built the world,
as it is intentionally, and this God is benevolent, or at least much too powerful for us to fight with,
but basically your option is a burden to following the order, because if you don't,
God will remove you from the order, and you don't want that, do you? So even if you don't have
the existence of, like, a materialist sensation of this God, even if people don't really,
really believe that there is actually a guy with a bird that does stuff,
the short, ritualized belief in an entity that has this specific motivation and this specific
traits, it will shape heavily the social landscape that is available to everyone.
And this is compatible with, although it does not entail, the existence of actual agency that
is tied to this specific entity through the constraints that this entity concretely is.
And something that I find, again, interesting is that religions that are popular today, so
Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism, if you think of something as a religion, it will likely
fall under this handle, are typically what White House called doctrinal religion,
which are religions that are where basically you sit down and you look at rituals and there is
priesthood that is trained to do the ritual in a specific way that is supposed to mean specific
things. And this is basically optimal to build very robust notions of what gods are, what they
want from you, what they do, what they're motivated by, et cetera, et cetera. So I must insist that
this is with a question mark. But in principle, the Shogun strains model, it can produce a
terrorist theory of gods and non-material agents, sorry, as a socially embedded non-material agent
that are computed collectively through engagement with a specific cultural landscape where ritual
and doctrinal elaboration are important components. And I can say with an exclamation mark that this
model enables a realistic theory of true agency that is not tied specifically to individual bodies.
If I consider a social system, actual organization to be autonomous that is closed,
system of constraints, then agency or maybe non-trivial agency simply reduces to the power to
shape this landscape. And you can have emergent social things do that. You can have states which
follow specific rules, so social constraints, and specific norms, so against real constraints,
that have autonomy and that are able to shape the landscape. But in all of this, like this part,
in my opinion, shows that social constraints specifically are relevant to study these social
worlds, that they correspond to relevant social processes in human order,
agents, later institutions, and maybe, again, question mark, non-material agents,
sorry, intelligent institutions, so gods. The question that needs to be asked is
how we can model the person of constraints, because all of these rely on the idea that somehow
in the landscape that we experience, there is such a thing as constraints,
and they are well-defined things that exist over collective behavior, and that they are
of the property to construct itself. And for reasons we'll very shortly see,
to frame this mathematically in a coherent way is insanely hard. I don't know how to do it,
no one knows how to do it, we have leads, but they are leads, nothing else.
And so we'll turn to the question of whether active inference frames a
gauge theory for incorporation. In incorporation, you should know what this is by now.
Gauge theory, we will see that soon. So, to explain gauge theory, I need to explain
explanation, which is fun, but mostly symmetries in physics. In physics, we frame physical problem
around symmetries. Symmetry, it is algebraic, so something that has composition,
like plus, groups of transformation over the space of possibilities,
which are even from the perspective of the same dynamics. It is very abstract, so let's look at
symmetries. This is the ceiling of the Lotfala Mosque in his farm. What you can see is a symmetry
under the C32 symmetry group. If you shift this picture by one over 32 full turn, it does not
change. This is what we mean by symmetry. This is a transformation, a set of transformation that is
closed, and that does not change, well, not a picture, of course, in the context of physics,
but the dynamics of the relevant system we are studying.
For formal reasons, I will not absolutely not get into here. Explanation in physics,
it usually derives from the statement of symmetry. For example, when I state that energy is conserved,
this is the same formula stating that my system is symmetric in time. When I state that momentum
is conserved, that radius formally to stating that my system is symmetric in space. Most things
in physics can be framed as simply symmetries over system dynamics.
A gauge theory is simply a elaborate instance of this core ID. If your symmetry has two properties,
first it is continuous, so not like the set of small rotation, but like the set of all
possible rotations that you can take around the circle and local. You can apply the symmetry
to summation to every single point in space. Your problem, basically, can be framed with
real degree of freedom. Because the symmetry does not change the system, whether your system
where your system is in the, for example, clockwork rotation, it is not important. It does not
change the dynamics. This real degree of freedom we call a gauge parameter.
The core feature of gauge theory is to take the geometry of that problem and make it into a physical
force. When I say gauge parameter, you should see in the screen, non-trivial z over 2z
possible bundle of a circle, which means basically that if you have a circle, it has two stages.
When you are over it, you can be either on top or down. You can't know where it is. This is
not quite the graph freedom because you have only two choices. To get to the graph freedom,
you have to get a continuous space of choices. But this is basically what we mean by a gauge
parameter. It is a geometric property of your system that you know mathematically exists,
but that cannot possibly be observed or, how to say, corresponds to a choice in
how you observe your system. So this is why we talk of gauge, because this is a choice in
how we understand the system. I will not get into the details of this here.
The thing is that because of its redundancy, the gauge parameter does not have to be the same
in a specific trajectory at any given point in space. From that, you get curvature. Curvature,
if you are anywhere near physics, and you know...
Aval. Okay, last thing we heard was if you're anywhere in physics.
So about relativity theory, you will know that curvature to the naive embedding space.
So if you know vaguely about relativity theory, you know that, yes.
Sorry, just if you're anywhere in physics, I then continue from there.
Yes. So if you are vaguely familiar with relativity theory, you know that the
curvature in a space, it corresponds to forces. So in relativity theory, the curvature of space
time, it corresponds to the gravity force. And generally in physics, the curvature in other
weirder gauge spaces translates in the other mental forces. So weak force, strong force,
and electromagnetism. So, yes, just stating that there is a space which has a gauge parameter in
it, and this space has a curvature. It entails that you have a force that emerges over the,
let us say, natural framing of the problem. And this speaks very closely to active inference.
So active inference can be framed as a consequence of a formal result that is called the Franjie
principle. Let us write a demical system, stochastic, which means that it has noise in it,
and which can be partitioned between an agent A and a boundary, sorry, an environment E and a
boundary B, such that the distribution of the agent and the environment are independent from
each other, given the distribution of the boundary B, which kind of means that an information
in E that is relevant in A and vice versa has to be in B, but doesn't quite mean that.
But it's very close. Then you have an information geometry, which is like
geometrical construct, where each point in the agent corresponds to a distribution of belief
over the space of external states. And because of this information geometry,
each possible internal state of the agent, it entails implicitly a belief over external states.
So this means that given the condition of partitionability, I can write Bayesian belief
over my environment as a simple geometrical property of the space we are working in.
And as I just said, when you have a geometry and it's curved, you get forces. And so
the FEP can straightforwardly be framed as a gauge theory, where the symmetry is in
sensor entropy technically, but let us say the space of belief I am evolving in directly
constrain my action in a specific manner to constrain Bayesian coherence between what I
expect to be the case and what I experience to be the case. And so, straightforwardly,
this grounds active inference because like what I just said is what I said to explain
active inference up to some technical words that were added in. But yes, this result entails
predictive processing and predictive control of behavior of the agent.
And to some extent, it proves the possibility of this existing in bare
dynamical system theory. But I do not think that the FEP can possibly represent enculturation.
So when I talk of a dynamical system, this is a system with dynamics in it, you are.
I think you understand that. I do not think you necessarily understand the formalism that
we imply by it. A dynamical system is a flow function phi, a time parameter t and a state space
x. So what that means is that to find a dynamical system, I have to write a space,
let us say I do not know, just the Euclidean space with three dimension. I have to specify time,
which is naturally in the Euclidean space, what we think of as time. And I have to specify a specific
way in which my system will move in space in a given step of time. So phi gives from any position
in any time slot where the system will be, if it starts from this position after the specific
time duration. This is what the dynamical system is. But if you have noticed this, this entails that
I define preemptively all other space of possibilities of my system. If I have a system that is,
you know, an open-ended system of constraints that can build new stuff, that can build language,
that can build accounting, whatever, new states. This does not go. Maybe you say we could reconstruct
a minimal version of new stuff happening by working... Sorry, I will ask him again.
Avel, again, repeat the last 30 seconds.
But your audio is still not there. It's like a 30 to 40 second period where your audio just
doesn't transmit. None of us can hear it. But the internet is fine.
Working over the dynamics of the system per se, the dynamical system theory. So you can do that,
so fine. Yeah, continue. Yep, continue. Okay.
So the dynamical system can be written as a flow function phi over a state space x and a time
parameter t. When you specify x, you specify the total space of possibility of the system.
So if you have a system that has open-ended evolution in it,
well, you cannot work with a fixed state space. You could maybe circumvent the issue by
implicitly having new things happen from a change in the dynamics of the system.
But in the dynamical system theory, the dynamics are pre-given through the flow function phi.
The dynamical system theory system is a specific deterministic flow. So you can change the flow
through time. So you can't model the construction of new constraints. And you can't model the
emergence of new parameters that affect causality of the system. So the FEP in and of itself cannot
present the creative evolution of either cognitive kinds such as money, shares, or constraints.
And this is where we have to get in weirder spaces formally to get something that looks
like it could model open-ended evolution. Although I cannot say definitively it can
because we didn't yet. By construction, when we work with set theory, which is the basic theory
of mathematics, which is about specific objects that are predefined, we can't have what Kaufmann
calls adjacent possible, which correspond to new evolutionary possibilities that are brought about
by the evolution of an evolutionary system like living systems. Simply set theory forces you to
define all of the possibilities at step one of the modeling process. So you can't have your system
that builds new possibilities through its activity. This is not a coherent concept in set theory.
However, what we can do is to look at rather than set theory at a category theory, which is,
let us say, another approach to mathematics, which looks not at specific objects and their
relationships through functions, but of specific spaces and their relationships to
factors. And this changing approach basically does not entail at least not a theory that when
you write a system, you have to write all of the possibilities that are within the system
preemptively. You can write a space and then look at the relationship between the space and
other adjacent spaces that could correspond to adjacent possible. And one thing that is
related to that, at least in spirit, is I won't get into the detail, but formal approaches that
allow you to build quantum state spaces from the property of quantum observation rather than the
opposite. So simply speaking, we can look at the problem of how cognition brings about new
possible, not as a space of possibilities in which there is a flow, but as a set of spaces
in which specific events such as observations, such as enculturation, such as invention of new
concepts can bring about new spaces. And when we rewrite active inference in the language of
category theory, we get things that are, that do not coincide the same thing as chemical system
theory, like actual active inference, actual friendly principle. But we get things that are
very, very complicated. So the diagram that you see on the bottom left of the screen is a cone
con diagram. I could tell you what a cone con diagram is, but I don't know, so I could not explain.
That is meant to present the alignment in reverse frame or the mutuality inference
between two subsystems. So again, formally, we have no reason to believe this Kant model of an
evolution, but also given the level of effectiveness of the math, we have very, very few grip with
which to understand what we're looking at and how this relates to specific cognitive and cultural
processes. So there is a lot of progress to be made in that direction before we have a self-standing
theory of an endic cultural evolution. And the basic handle of social constraints, I think,
is a good bridge between the very concrete, very simple chemical system theory and the very abstract
problem of many the evolution. So let us wrap this up here and try to take out a few snippets
of actionable information that was included in the talk. First, agents, by nature, they engage
with the world, with their world as a cognitive landscape that is defined by the modalities
by which they perceive the world, that is defined by the intrinsic motivity that the
agent experience, and that is... Again, sorry, just go back 22 seconds.
But still, the audio is not ready yet, but it's okay. We'll breathe before we jump into the conclusion.
Okay.
I still don't hear you.
Okay.
No.
Okay.
We can do the slide game where someone else presents the slide.
Any volunteers? Okay. Yeah, I heard that.
Okay, cool. Can you continue now? Okay, we'll try to go fast because this is not agreeable.
So one, agents engage with the world as a cognitive landscape which is defined by
affordances or minimal representation of the action that are possible in the landscape
and the normativity that's embedded in the possibility of the action.
Two, the fact that humans collectively enact a relatively coherent spiritual landscape,
it entails that we have social constraints over collective behavior and the existence
of those social constraints. They enable or do not necessitate the emergence of high-scale
agencies such as institution, organization, and maybe godlike beings.
And last, the remix of constraints, they entail a duality between the creation of meanings,
so the way we humans create a way to understand the world and the construction of physical
possibilities, possibles, in the sense specific concrete, causally relevant possibilities
that characterize specific social cultural organizations and maybe like physical version
practices, but just don't worry about it. And all of it is embedded in this diagram. The engagement
and the duality with a system of constraints that produce itself in an independent manner.
So a claim that I'm making on the record here is that if we understand
correctly every arrow in this diagram, we understand cultural evolution, we understand
what human are and we understand the evolution in the cultural world.
And here I'll go through the slides in case someone needs a reference and has no time to,
you know, go through a video to find the reference. So thank you and sorry about the audio thing.
Did this go well?
Yes, it gave some much needed silences, so it was all good. Cool. Well,
first Mao or Maria, if you would like to give any comments or reflections, otherwise we can
go to a few topics and then talk about how we want to conclude with a course.
But first Mao or Maria, do you want to say or ask anything?
No, I mean, this was a great summary. I think you covered a lot of grounds.
I think ideally I would have liked to see
how much we can do with gauge theory and how this can potentially link us to
understandings of power, I think. That would be interesting.
Cool. Thank you, Maria. All right. See you, Maria. Okay. Anyone live chat can ask a question or
let's first address the course question while people are writing questions live chat. So
what do you see for the coming weeks as we kind of conclude this first round?
So you're asking me, right? So for reasons I do not understand and Daniela does not understand,
no one came up at the Mao discussion session. So I thought it would be interesting to
like push the presentation for the last session to have everyone sign the things
of feedback and have the current thing to move on from. The question is whether you
feel there is a need for discussion that is specific for the session we have just now
because lots of things were covered, lots of audio problems were existing. And basically
the two options are either next session is everyone presents, we give you feedback,
ciao. Or we have a discussion session. So at the time that was initially planned for the
conclusion. And then we have yet another session that will be the conclusion. You will make a
presentation and you will get the feedback. So we'd like to know which is your preference
because both are very possible in my book. But it doesn't show anything to me. So what you want is
Yeah, Mao also open to your thoughts. And of course, we're sharing it so that people can
write in live chat or let us know in the coming days what they prefer. I'm down for a discussion
of what we covered here. The slides being linked and going into some of these next steps and then
a form based registration for a presentation only session. So that we'll then know exactly
who wants to present what and we'll then we can ask how many minutes they want to do or something
like that. But Mao. Yeah, I think it would be good to get people who are interested in getting more
active to come and make a small presentation, explain what they understood, describe the
highlights for them, and potentially link it to some topic in social sciences we may not have
covered here. But that they now see through a different lens, I think that would be interesting.
Okay. All right, I will look through the live chat while I was getting some water,
then we'll ask any questions that people come up with.
Is there ever symmetric information between or among social entities?
Or maybe from the script perspective, Mao, or from the, or however you see it in relation
with the constraints. I mean, what about asymmetric constraints?
I'm not sure I understand the question. Can the person give a little more
detail in terms of the question? Okay. I have a little back, but there was a question in the chat
about our inf, can information ever be symmetric? You talked about symmetries.
So are those symmetries in the information that to social entities have? Or are they in the
constraints that entities experience? But what are the symmetries and what are the breaks?
I would say that depending which space you model the problem, like as an information, it entails
symmetry because it has to be readable. So you have to be a conservation between context or time
of something that is considered to be the content of the information bearing thing.
But also it is a symmetry breaking because if you take any presentation format, let us say binary,
a random string means nothing, and you have to break the symmetry of the uniform expression
to say something. So it depends very heavily on how specifically you are modeling the problem.
But for fundamental reasons, any mathematical representation, it depends on the implicit
model of the symmetries of the system because you want to present things that do not matter,
but you have to present things that do matter. And then you have a very
uncomfortable amount of freedom over how you want to present any single thing.
Certainly this comes up in learning active inference and in talking about it, like what
you described, how many ways there are to model a given thing, which is related to which symmetries
are preserved, as you mentioned. So how do we reckon with that space and with the different
ways of representing the same social setting? So a reason why I'm not quite comfortable with the
notion of information is that in all possible settings where I define quantum information
theory as not possible, because very few people have already think about it, information will
be a probability distribution. It will be a functional or a probability distribution that is
minus to the logarithm of the probability. That is what self-information is. And this is defined
over probability distribution, where distribution is defined over state space. So implicitly,
information entails differential of state space. So if you want to work over things that are prior
to state spaces, you cannot work with information like any coherent definition. So the
basically the one thing you could do that is vaguely inspired from work in a quantum
information theory, mainly by Christopher first, is to not look at the probability,
but at the, sorry, not to look at the information. I'm using that term in a colloquial way now,
because I have to switch meaning information, not as a property of the distribution, but the
property of a quantum operator that corresponds to observation. And that embeds basically,
we could say again in a very, very colloquial sense, something akin to an exploitation or a
measurement or a synchronization event in the active inference model. And this,
for a specific type of operator, for a specific type of spaces, you can get basically the space
that flows from the operator rather than the other way around. And then information is
like it's not a Kolmogorov complexity, it's not shallow information, it's not a variant of entropy.
It is basically what is hypothesized by these specific operators that you use to interact with
matter and with cultural and material environments. And maybe, maybe, there is a big maybe here,
I should say maybe one more time, maybe this can happen in some way to account for the process
of integration, where the, basically, the process of integration is considered as the
integration of specific reference frames, like expectation colloquially. And this entail the
evolution of a cognitive landscape and our social constraints, either define over the
cognitive landscape or defined as a self-standing mathematical object, I do not know.
But if we have that, and if we have a decent level of understanding of what constraints the
evolution of new inference frames, we are the self-standing theory of the unfolding of
cognitive landscapes and of open-ended cultural evolution. This is a sufficient condition,
I am sure of that. But it is very, very hard to reach. There are so many threads by which
you could take it, and each one is like the level of post-doc in mathematics, and I am not talking
about 19th century mathematics, I am not talking about algebraic topology, I am talking about
weird category thing that people only figured out how to define 30 years ago. So yeah, I am
not confident, I will give you an answer to that within five years, I am not confident.
Wow, very interesting there. All right, some questions from the chat. So first,
Upcycle Club wrote, do you think ritualized storytelling is driven by social constraints?
Everything is driven by social constraints. We just define social constraints as the
constraints that exist over behavior. If we expect that every night we have to go around the fire
and listen to someone tell a story, then yeah, like this will happen. If we expect that we have
to go on YouTube and listen to talks about abstract things such as inference, this will
happen. So in this sense, every single activity you have is embedded in a landscape of expectation,
and this is why it is pretty hard to talk about the basic mechanism of cultural submission,
because whichever cognitive mechanism you are looking at is encultured and could in principle
and likely has been a few times changed by cultural evolution. So, yes.
Cool. And that takes me back to the scripts, discussion and papers, the strong script at
exactly this time. Here's the script that we're all going to read from on through the
spaces of weaker scripts like we tend to meet here or there happens to be a path here.
Okay, so then some comments from M. Lennon, 001. Thank you. I don't know if making a presentation
to explain what one understood is an attractive invitation. Still, two places I did not track
as well as I hope was one, dissolution of agency as we know it, and two, the informational geometry
among agent environment and boundary went over my head. Thank you.
So, dissolution of agency and agent environment boundary. Yes. I will get back to the slides.
Are you seeing the window?
Yeah, I'll bring it in. That's fine. Thank you.
Okay. No, no.
So, the dissolution of agency is basically the idea that when we think about agents, people,
like we think as a system that has a body and that has a brain and that has the ability for
discursion, like the rating for what you do and not do, and we place agency at the level of
discursive beliefs. So, if I say I want to grab the water and I grab the water, I grab the water
out of my agency, if I, you know, eventually, like, I don't know, bump into something and make it fall
or grab without thinking about it, is it agentive? Most people would say yes, but that's actually
not entailed by the most used model of agency. Legally speaking, you are held as not responsible
of less or less responsible of things that you did not have the opportunity to liberate over.
But from a purely cognitive perspective, and if that inference model is correct,
the bulk of the intentionality of the durability to the returon flow that you have does not come
from reasoning and deliberation and central executive system, my cognitive function that
was to say it was reasoning and agency. It is, it comes from the basic expectation you have
yourself and the world, because your expectation over the world constrain heavily implicate
the opportunities for action that you perceive, and your beliefs over yourself constrain just as
heavily as the options that you will end up pursuing. And so the agency, your ability to
decide of stuff, it mostly reduces the predictive process over yourself model and your world model.
And this is why I don't see any problem formally or empirically with that picture.
Like, as I understand, it accounts very well for the neuropsychiatric and psychological
literator and sociological literator. Like, this is good, this works scientifically,
but this is counterintuitive because, again, most people would expect you to have reasoning
and then to decide of stuff and then to execute all the stuff you decide, which, again, I don't
think this happens. So, our question is the information geometry. I kind of glossed over it
because, yeah, so the information geometry is a geometry that is defined within a
political system equipped with the partition, blah, blah, blah. And so by a geometry, I mean
basically a space of curvature that exists over your basal space. This is basically the same thing
that I'm presenting in the bottom left of the screen here. You have a space that is your
normal space where you see stuff happen, which is represented here by the line.
And you have a curvature that is defined by some of the things that are defined over the space.
And by the Frenzy principle, when you have this partition condition that is verified,
then each state in the agent's internal states, like each specific point it can be,
corresponds to a belief distribution over the states of the environment.
And so this is in this sense that we have an information geometry, like we have a geometry,
so curvature over space, where the space is the internal state of the agent and the geometry is
belief over some states. And furthermore, this matters because the agent is actually constrained
by the image. The agent is effectively constrained by the geometry in such a way that its internal
flow optimizes the Bayesian coherence of the belief that exists according to the geometry.
So this is highly, this is math, this is like straightforward, but lots of words,
lots of perfection, no real visual aid put it. So this is more something to create about and
something to hear about, which is why I gloss over it. But I hope going over it again brings a bit
more of clarity. How would you connect what you just said to the differences with written and oral
culture? Like what is hearable? What is seeable? How does writing in the printed or etched or
digitized form relate to how you discussed culture today?
I see you as frozen, Danielle, can you hear me?
I can hear you, Mao.
Okay. So do I answer or do Mao answer?
Mao, if you want to.
Yeah, please.
I can give a little bit of an idea, but effectively we're talking about precision and
temporality, right? So writing and discourse, the discourse has to relate to pragmatics and
the discourse is likely to be interpreted because it has lower precision than, say,
writing has over time. So here you're talking about the ways in which the information geometry
will be bent and shifted through the precision of the embedded normativity that is given rise to
through these markers that you can point to over and over and over with high precision.
I think that's the link.
Yeah, but basically that's, so when I talked about rule taking and language, I
claim that the core reason why this matter is because it disenforces coherence between the
cognitive landscape experienced by agents and writing changes massively the scale at which it
is possible. And it changes massively the level of emotional embodiment of the language. It is
much lower in speech than, sorry, much higher in speech than it is in writing, especially if you
account for like singing as a form of speech. So historically, writing very clearly and very
ambiguously powered the rise of administration, so states, so organization that do a lot of
accounting and bookkeeping, like book is literally in the world, and that's enable the
centralization of resource management. This is explaining detail in the logic of writing by
Goody, G-O-O-D-Y. And yeah, basically this writing is a core cultural innovation that
enables centralized policies, city-states, things like that.
Yeah, that's very interesting. So one topic that we've discussed and maybe you could unpack a little
bit here is thinking of culture and these cognitive ecosystems leads to consideration
of the cognitive security or of different information risk aspects. So
where does that come into play with the formalism or what you discussed here?
So from a cognitive security aspect, one thing you can read in the formalism quite directly is
that if you control the environment, as in the cognitive landscape experienced by agents, you
control what the agent do directly. So there are two things that are very, very, very stereotypically
associated with cognitive security. This is Russian propaganda, not quite propaganda, cognitive
warfare campaigns, pretty much around the world. More generally, the propaganda that is used by
authoritarian regimes to get stuff going. And the cults that historically are
tied to the worry of brain control by evil cults that can control you from afar, like you
you know, telecommands. And so in both cases, actually, let us get back a bit. When you are
a state that does propaganda, and like when you're a state, you can do a lot of material
engineering. So producing the environmental states in which people live in. And for example,
if you look at the city of Brasilia, which is one of the very few specifically built capital
cities that exist in the world, there is like one in there is Brasilia, and there is like,
I think, maybe four others. And those cities are basically very big, glorified administrative
centers. And Brazil in particular, it has neighborhoods for work, neighborhoods for
leisure, neighborhoods for for habitation. It is extremely divided. And because of this
divininess, you basically don't get to do stuff that are not work or hang out with your family.
That is not a possibility. And of course, this change massively the way people experience
their life. And this turns massively the topology of this network that can emerge.
But when you are doing a cognitive warfare, like in the sense that NATO defines, so you are a state
or state organization, and you are trying to fuck with another state or state organization,
you don't get to just build cities that are bad. But it's not a possibility that you have.
So what the Russian do in a systematic way is to try to basically create doubts over what
information is reliable, so that people feel paralyzed. The target I most insist critically
is not the information that is available, it is the trust that people can have, the actionability
that the people can give to the information. And so they tend to propagate a lot of conspiracy
theory nonsense because it occupies a lot of space and it prevents the possibility for
public debates to occur. And another strategy they use is to manipulate the personal identity
that are embedded often in ethnicity or in the case of the US of advanced countries that have
where political life is mostly decoupled for ethnicity. And I understand the irony to say
that this is the case in the US, but you don't have like ethnically specific parties or armed
forces, so this is less the case that elsewhere. So in these countries they will use political
identity, so they will use Republican identity or leftist identity, but mostly Republican identity
to just push complete nonsense and get people to act in a way that overall destabilize the
grip of the US over their own population. And so this is the basic way that we look
into warfare and you can understand this in terms of social constraints, because again the target
is not like information enough itself, it's the possibility that is afforded by the
social context in which we evolve at an instant. The goal is to create
doubts and noise in the public setting, it's right constraints that are not compatible with
efficient collective organization. And a way, like a way where you do it is when you see it
being done in a much more systematic and efficient way is of course with intrastate influence,
where state administrators and state institutions, they try to create grip over a population.
And if you look at the birth of nationalism, like we have the notion today that nations are
somewhat coherent political groups that let us say the French hang out together and take
the Syrian together. This notion, it's not quite recent actually speaking, but the fact that it
is dominant, that it is just a standard expectation is very recent and it derives from the French
that somehow we're a group of administrators, somehow managed to convince everyone that they
shared identity and they shared mutual obligation, responsibility, and the way in which this happens
is they sent insiders in villages and they sent soldiers and the children had to listen to the
insiders explain to them that they were French and they needed to do French things like
going to war for France. And if you did not let the children do that, you went to prison
and no one wants to go to prison. So with, of course, I'm doing a very, very huge caricature
here. There is not a shadowy set of influence that sends. This is an overspecification, but
what happened is that the French state managed to create a social niche
up in a very, very foreign villages where French hood became a basic condition of existence.
Most of your social thing, the fact that you were legally recognized as existing
the activities or activity that you had, a lot of those were embedded in your perception of being
French. And so when this is the case and when you see that the administration tends to be on top
of things, the administration tells you, you have to go to war in virtue of your freshness,
then you go to war. You don't like fight against the administration, you fight against
whoever the mission tells you. The fact that you have agreed implicitly that you are French
with France makes this a lot harder to resist basically than in like the state just sends
soldiers at you and kidnaps you and give you a swerve until you fight. This is not how you
make things efficient. Armiers this way are unorganized, they are mutated, they are not good.
And if you want people to have stakes, you need to give them power or you need to give them the
impression they have power because they are French and here French govern things. And whether you
are in a set of French that actually directs things or not, bad question to ask, just go to the
trenches. And this type of things we would not think as cognitive warfare because we would not
think as like implicitly when we talk about warfare, we talk about between states or between
nation conflict and this is within a nation, within a group. But you can look at cults and how
they create such an influence. You can look at for example one of the most famous cults
that existed which is the Mooneys or the Unification Church. They were widely accused to
make brainwashing. They were widely accused to somehow control people and make them do things
they don't want to do. That is not the possibility you have as a organization. Like you cannot
kidnap people and hope that it will be okay, you will get killed by police if you do that.
Most likely in the US, in this specific space where the Unification Church evolved. What you
can do is to create a context where you have a huge grip over what people can and cannot say,
what they can and cannot think about themselves. You can tell them that your leader is the coming
of Jesus that is going to bring everyone in paradise and you can make people go to work
sessions to talk about it and you can just like physically cling to those people all the time
until you are quite confident that they feel that whatever you are doing is important.
And you can have a very big emotional ritual where you learn like
cries and become extremely embedded in the group membership and you can be extremely
supportive of group members while being extremely like aggressive to anything that
go away from group identity and when you produce these environments and people and go
in this environment for a long time, they tend to develop this group identity.
So when you tell them the big leader tells you to give us 2,000 euros, sorry,
20,000 euros for your ancestors not to go to hell. That seems reasonable. That seems like a
reasonable ask which it would not unless you had a very tight control over the social environment
of someone because then it's not just giving money in exchange for good. This is about upholding
your self-identity as someone who follows and believes the cult teaching. So and yet again
this is something that is formalized directly in terms of through constraints because this is about
what you can and cannot do in a given through context. This is not about like abstract belief,
it's not about brain control, it's not about anything but what you can and cannot do in a given
social context. All right, there was a ton there. Let me let me kind of retrace a few of the pieces
that I heard there. So towards framing cognitive security under this cognitive constraint framework
that you're discussing for which active inference under the free energy principle is the process
theory that gets it done. First you described how modern states have a lot of administrative
capacity and affordances especially through writing and especially again in the last decades
and centuries of information environment changes. And then you pointed to two kind of patterns or
genres or motifs of influence or cognitive warfare, propaganda and cults discussed.
One example of them surely could have gone into more detail or there's other examples and perspectives
and so on. And as Mao alluded to earlier, precision modulation is a key aspect of constraint. I mean
precision modulation of how tightly you're holding the baseball bat is really the movement
its precision in wobble is going to be related to the to the grasp. And so
increasing uncertainty can lead to anxiety and doubt all of that's very wrapped up in a narrative
setting. Then you discussed how there's a ratcheting of thinking and acting like a state,
breaking symmetries like states do and getting grasped over the subject over the citizen.
That's a complex topic, but that's what you went and then there are asymmetries around
control of the environment, the information environment, ability to to read, write, edit
in the information environment. And that leads to these engineered distributions of what is
important or what means what, which justifies or even writes the blank check for requests of funds,
whatever the narrative is around those funds. But more fundamentally, those strategies can
threaten sense making, which is to say the inbound perceptual component of active inference,
and then also decision making and action selection, which is the fundamental
complement that outbounds aspect of active inference.
I'll read another comment from the left. Yeah, do you want anything else on that?
Like I'd like to point out a very, very specific example that is contemporary, which is the
like the campaign by Israel to remove people from the Gaza band. So just, I don't know when
people will watch it. So on the 7th of October, 11 days ago, Hamas, which is a terrorist organization,
Islamist organization that is dominant in the Gaza band, attacked Israeli and slaughtered
Israeli settlers that were nearby and slaughtered tourists that were nearby and attacked military
basis. They made, I think, 2000 deaths. And so the state of Israel as a counter that is currently
led by very far right parties, things that we would not have equivalent in Europe or the U.S.
has decided to ensure by like blaming each individual Palestinian for this and trying to
like deport them elsewhere. And so like this is not itself, what I'm trying to comment about,
what I'm trying to comment about is that every single comment you will see about it on Twitter
makes the confusion between Hamas and Palestinian on one side and IDF slash Netanyahu and the
Israeli on the other side. And so this progressive framing that says basically
people are not, people are trying to decide whether the Hamas action are justified or not.
And implicitly in this debate, they create a context where whoever lose whichever
group lose the HMIC debate gets to be killed to the last. And so you produce very, very,
basically the producer framing that makes the only possibility in the conflict explanation because
each side, like there is no, like this is not a two-side dynamic. There is no Palestinian and
there is the Israeli and there is the, I will not make all the relation. But by this framing,
like the framing that either the Arabs or the Jew must prevail and kill the other,
you give a lot of power for groups to just make this a genocidal war and justify things like
cutting water to one million people because like 200 of them committed massacre. And like,
I do not know if there is a single actor that tried to get this. I do not think this is the case.
But this is a very powerful instance of how propaganda does not need to target what you
believe, but it does need to target how you frame problems.
Yeah, lot to say on that. Any last pieces you want to discuss?
No, it is good. I have talked a lot. I'd like to stop talking.
Okay. Well, thank you. We will send out updates to people about the coming weeks.
So, thank you. All right. Bye.
Ciao. Thanks for your attention. Goodbye.
