Hello and welcome. It's July 29th, 2023, and we're here in session three discussion of
the course, Physicist Information Processing at the Active Inference Institute. We're having
a follow-up discussion on Chris Fields' third lecture on quantum reference frames, and we're
looking forward to your participation. So if you're watching along live and you've been invited
to the calendar event, it's not too late to jump in. If you're watching on YouTube, you can write
any questions or comments in the live chat with Dean and Andrew here. We're gonna be looking at
some of the key points and taking it in a few different directions, sharing our reference
frames, making a shared one. So Andrew, be awesome to have you zoom in a little bit on the slide,
and then feel free to take us through some of the key points so that we can see a little bit
how you're seeing it. Thank you. That looks good. Yep. Okay, so let's start by reviewing the last
lecture from a couple weeks ago, and then we can open up the discussions if there's any questions
that appear in the live chat. We can address those. All right, so lecture two, Chris introduced
this idea of the information processing between system AMB, you know, where they interact via
qubits on a boundary, and they have reference frames that give meaning to this communication.
You want to think of information processing as a communication channel, the way Shannon thought
about it. So that was the lecture two, and lecture three a couple weeks ago,
tried to make this more explicit by emphasizing the idea that this has to be physically embodied
somewhere. Okay, and I think that because we are so used to information being fungible,
you know small part because of the internet and everything. It's a little hard to understand
at first when the claim is made that you have a QRM, that it's non-fungible, or you have a piece
of quantum information that's non-fungible, or things like the no-cloning theorem,
we're so used to information being fungible to it being zeroes and ones, that it's a bit of a
change in mindset at first, but that's exactly what lecture three introduced.
This was all stuff, right? Could you maybe just unpack that a little bit? What would it mean for
information to be fungible, or what's that stance like, and then what does it mean for
information to be non-fungible, and what is that stance like? Yeah, I'm allowed to get there. So
let me scroll down the slides because that's addressed here. So I was maybe I should have
kept this in the beginning, but anyways, session two talked about how information theory makes
this simple and obvious, okay? And in session three, we talk about reference frames and
mechanistically how all of this works. So yeah, let's address that question of the difference between
between, hold on one second, let me use my mouse to scroll down here.
Okay, so that's a little faster, right? Okay, so can you restate your question, Daniel?
Yeah, what would it mean for information to be fungible or non-fungible? People might be familiar
with that in the economic setting with non-fungible tokens and all of that, but what are we talking
about with informational fungibility? I think it basically comes down to
whether you can replicate. I mean, it's basically the difference between classical
and quantum information. As far as I know, fungible information is everything that you can
basically turn into a message of zeros and ones. It's, you know, how you transmit it may be different,
you know, the channel, the physical hardware and so on, but at the end of the day,
it's something that you can write on a boundary and something that you can
transmit as zeros and ones. Whereas quantum information,
you literally have to send the hardware, the piece of hardware, the QRF. At least that's how I
understand it. So a simple answer might be that it's information encoded in a piece of software
versus a piece of hardware, but I don't think that analogy is perfect. Dean, what do you think?
Here's what I'm curious about. And again, you guys can help me with this. As opposed to reference
frames, I oftentimes default to frame of reference. And I know that in one of the live streams,
what I tried to bring out was the idea that there was an ice cream cone looking at an ice cream truck.
And the question was always whether or not, which one of those two entities, one is in the foreground
and one is in the background. And in this slide that Andrew has up, the question is,
is the non-fundability because only A and B can decide whether the A, the VA as seen by B,
the A is deeper into that image based on our frame of reference and the B is closer or is the B,
the one that's actually deeper and the A is the one that's in the foreground. And I was wondering
whether the idea of non-copyability is because of that depth of field aspect that cannot be
determined unless it's literally handed over the way that Chris was describing it.
I think that's basically accurate. I'm not sure that I can answer the question, but I think
I have the feeling that Chris said this in the lecture that, I mean, at the end of the day,
the QRF is somewhere in your nervous system. And here, whether, I mean, you bring up a good
point, right? It looks like this slide is a bit of an optical illusion. Whether you see A or B
deeper, I guess it depends on something going on inside your head. If you, this picture is so
symmetrical that if you focus an app on it, you can change your opinion. Well, just to even
connect that to what we're talking about, the classical fungible information on the holographic
screen on the blanket and then quantum cognitive rotation is those two images are on the screen
identical. And then whether it gets a quantum rotation such that the three points of the axes
are closer to us than the intersection on that kind of tetrahedron or the other way around,
whether the ballerina is rotating one way or the other, that's not on the boundary. So the
information about the depth of field is part of the QRF or part of the enactment of the QRF.
And it's not written on the boundary. And that goes back to the preparation question and not
just the measuring. Yeah, like at the preparation, if your whole enculturation or the last five minutes,
it was entrained or you were holding an object that predisposed you to think that the vertex of
the intersection was further away. That's the preparation that sets your prior so that when
you get this ambiguous artifact, you rotate it into the most natural position cognitively. And
that's the preparation that sets you up for measurement. No measurement can happen without
a preparation. What do you think, Andrew? Sure. Yeah, everything you said makes sense.
So perhaps let me recall what I said around the slides. There was a, in this whole spirit or
philosophy of making, emphasizing that information is physical, you know, income from QV, this whole
thing. One of the glaring omissions in physics was the embodiment of the reference frame,
which was treated as an abstraction, you know, in classical physics, such as by Galileo. But
maybe even Einstein, even if he, my hunch is that he did have more of this instinct of, you know,
particularly in all those thought experiments of trying to chase the library, you are chasing
the library, right? So at the end of the day. But I mean, this is a whole process of making
the observer and the reference frame more and more explicit and more and more physical,
because at the end of the day, it has to, right? If you start with this assumption that
so it is the assumption almost that, you know, all you see and, you know, it's part of the same
material ether that you are, then, you know, then you are part of the universe that you're
observing something that is out there. So you need to make, include a theory of what it means for
you to be observing that, right? And at the end of the day, the observer has to be physical.
That's what was emphasized by Chris at the beginning of this lecture. So this jump from
treating the reference frame as an abstraction to a real physical entity. Yeah, these people have
talked a lot about in these papers that are put in there, but I should also remark
that if folks want to see this, it's coming up in high energy theory also, in recent work of
Saskin and others, where they talk about quantum reference frames, very explicitly. So I don't
have the citations of the but, but it's definitely becoming an important thing in the last 20 years.
This attempt to really explicitly treat the reference frame and the observer as a quantum
entity, as a physical entity. Okay, so this, that's what I just said. Okay, the jump from
treating things, reference frames as abstractions to physical objects. Go. And
and because we cannot make a perfect copy of quantum information, we say that these are
unique and clonable and unfungible. So in order to recreate an experiment perfectly,
this is that this is addressed as the part of fungibility or not, right? Can Alice,
if you have some sort of quantum experiment and Alice and Bob are, you know, it's the usual
EPR thought experiment or whatever Alice and Bob are separated by light years.
Is it enough if they want to recreate the same exact, the same experiment or Alice to send
string of zeros and ones? Well, if you had an experiment where that's enough, then you can
recreate it with fungible information. If not, then you need to somehow send non-fungible
information, which really implies standing a piece of hardware.
Um, can I, can I add another, another piece here? Look on the previous slide. So this looks
really technical and scientific. But let's think about Alice's laboratory is Alice's
brain, mind and Bob's analogously. Alice is thinking about what to say, and then says it.
And that information might be written in a chat form. It might be said verbally,
it might be transmitted through digital or analog signal. But at some point,
it's going through this classical informational interface. And then Bob's laboratory is like
perceiving and unpacking it. And the question of semantic alignment is such that if Alice gives
a shopping list of 10 items, if there's semantic alignment, Bob would be able to go to the store
and then find those 10 items. And it made me think of the, the dictionary definition of left
and right. So this gets back to our discussion of whether the vertex on these axes is coming
towards us or away from us. So I looked up the deck, the dictionary definition of left
on towards or relating to the side of a human body or of a thing that is to the west when the
person or that thing is facing north. So that's, I guess, one attempt to anchor what it means to
be left. The second definition is the left hand part, side or direction. And you could imagine
there's an analogous definition for right. The point is, you can't describe verbally
leftness and rightness or chirality in general, because its reference is an embodied perspective.
And so if Alice said, okay, you're going to go down the street and then turn left at the stop sign,
how would Alice communicate to Bob what leftness meant at that stop sign versus rightness?
And that's this question of flipping. And the way that the quantum formalism accommodates that
is through the WIC rotation and the quantum cognitive events, where the fungible,
transmittable holographic information gets rotated into the imaginary axis
with the formalisms that enable it to be rotated at all. But that means you could
rotate it left quote or rotate it right. Yeah, I think that's, that's a very good explanation.
I don't know if I have much to add, Dean, do you want me to say something?
So, but I can't, I don't know the answer to this, but to take what Daniel just said, to take the
basic concept of being able to take something that for all intents and purposes can appear one way
or another. And then turn that into how Chris closed the last lecture with, we are, we are
seeing ourselves as both being entangled and also being separatable. How did we go literally from
a three dimension vertex to we're both entangled and we're, we're not living in a paradox. That's
just the way it is. We're also removing ourselves or separating ourselves at the same time.
That's what I would like to know because somewhere between three arbitrary lines and
complexity is not a paradox. Something has to be happening and I'm not exactly sure how that
transition plays out. Anybody want to enlighten me? Can you repeat your question please? Well,
how do we, how do we go like from the, at this point of the reference frame description of
saying it can't, you can't copy it. All you can do is pass it because we think things could be flipped
based on internal, internal reference frames, internal meanings and internal models. The thing
we choose for context goes all the way out to the conclusion of Chris's conversation with us in
number three where he said, bottom line is, is that it's not a paradox that as things become more
and more complex, then it wants to be able, it wants to get to a place of entanglement, alignment,
a sense of agreement and at the same time wants to remain separate. So between those two things,
a whole lot has happened but, and I don't think we've skipped over it, but we certainly haven't
opened it up and really looked at it closely and I'm just curious, what's in between those two
scales? I agree. I think we're, we're going to cover that towards the end of the, of the talk,
but I agree. I mean, I don't know how you see this related to QRS or the stuff we just talked about,
but I think it's the big question in this, in this lecture, right? That was like,
where does this tension between increasing complexity and, you know, wanting, wanting to predict
what the environment is doing? One requires entanglement and one requires separability, at
least colloquially speaking. I think this tension is basically what the free energy principle comes
down to, right? Daniel, what do you think? You have the free energy and you have the E minus TS
one is prediction error. I mean, not exactly E minus TS, right? That would be the dynamics, but
you know what I mean? One is prediction error and the other one is, what was it? I can't remember.
I'll definitely look forward to the, the technical unpacking that, that you'll get to soon, but,
but I was reminded of the William Blake quotation, do what you will, this life's a fiction and is made
up of contradiction. So let's modify that, project what you will, rotate what you will,
space times a fiction, not that it's false, but that it's a projected fictionalization,
that it doesn't have the ontological primacy that, that's apology of communication does,
and is made up of contradiction. Yes. And it's made up of this tension between
fitting and not overfitting between aligning and the principle of unitarity and differentiating and
becoming through others, we become ourselves and that type of articulation and recognizing that two
complementary forces like convex and concave come into existence at once, like a zero to two jump
is not an issue or a stumbling block. It's that we wouldn't have it any other way.
Couldn't have it any other way. Yeah. Sure. We'll get that towards the end. You can almost
even call it a duality. It's not far fetch. I mean, it's the sort of thing that I think most
people will be happy to take for granted such supersymmetry, like you have two kinds of particles,
but the same amount of them and dualities that are all over the place. So I think it's fairly,
it's not unreasonable to just accept that there is a tension between increasing complexity, which
you want you want me to be separable for and accuracy prediction. Now, how this is related to
emergent space. And this QRF stuff, you know, I don't want to make very far fetch claims,
we'll talk about emergent space later on the course. But for now, let's, let's, let's say a
few more words out here. And then we'll get to the complexity stuff towards the end.
So, so QRFs are almost building blocks if you want for information processing. Here it's very
useful to recall the definition that I feel. I think we, we have mentioned before
of information as being differences that make a difference. That's probably the best
definition of information I've heard. And I think, I think it does a lot of work. I mean,
it's almost mathematical. But anyways, we need to unpack it a little more and see. So
for a difference to make a difference, what do you want out of QRF, right? And surprisingly,
I mean, not surprisingly, but reassuringly, I think would be the word. You need a QRF to have
sensory action and a default state, right? This is sort of like
where your Bayesian prior distribution is encoded. These three things will give you a building block
for any information processing. And that, you know, ties together with all the work in the
pre-energy literature and perception action loops and whatnot. So before we see mathematically
how a QRF is defined, I think it's more illustrative. And I think Chris, when exactly on the right
order, when he presented this a couple of weeks ago, seen examples from nature. These are actual
pieces of forward are effectively QRFs. And it's remarkable how they map to, well, I'll skip ahead
a little bit. But when you get to them, to the mathematical definition of the QRF as a quantum
system that, you know, you can specify with this category theory diagram, you know, you have
incoming arrows into a node that then expands, right? And this roughly corresponds to measurement
and preparation degrees of, not degrees of freedom, degrees of freedom would be the same,
right, when you attach it to the boundary. But measurement and preparation stages, I guess,
would be the better word. But anyways, let me go back to these examples, right? And Daniel,
your biologist here, so correct me if I say anything wrong here. You have a cartoon picture
of the bacteria, I think. And this is a very simple sort of thing, right? It navigates in the
direction of food. And, and that's it, right? So it is a very simple rudimentary example of a QRF.
You have the sensory
stage here, I guess, the degrees of freedom. I guess the degrees of freedom,
it's not obvious here what the boundary is. That's one thing. But it is a good enough picture to see
the resemblance to here. We have the measurement, which in this, in this case, you're trying to
measure concentration of food. You have your node here, C, which is your prior distribution for
concentration of food. And finally, you have the output, the preparation stage, which is your,
you know, this, the rest of this chemical network that will control and steer this
bacterium, right? So there's here, you want to call it the action degrees of freedom
that will steer this bacterium in the direction of food.
And likewise with cell division, this I understand even less, the network appears more complicated.
But I think it's fair to say that at the end of the day, all these chemical networks
that appear super complicated, somehow have to be mapped to this
category theoretical diagram. That's the tolerance to it. You're going to have the sensory input
and the action output. And you're going to have the default chemical concentration, which
amounts to this, to this node over here.
You remember this from last lecture, right, Daniel? Yeah. And the cone cocoon we explored also in
live stream 17 on the Bayesian semantic information flow. But I'll kind of at a point about these
biological systems in relationship to artificially specified systems and what that helps us understand
about perception cognition action. So the cone cocoon diagram has this bow tie architecture,
or this kind of like two pyramids touching point to point, where there's a preparation
and a measurement, which can be different dimensionalities or different scopes,
like you could be multi input multi output or multi input single output vice versa and so on.
But they come through this eye of the needle with C prime here. Now contrast that kind of
architecture represented here abstractly with what we see in the bacterial process
and in the cell division process. These have that kind of a bow tie perception cognition
action architecture or measurement cognitive integration, preparation architecture.
In contrast, we see, for example, an artificial neural network, where the input and the output layers
are usually lower dimensional, maybe an image coming in with several hundred pixels and a
single output like a classifier coming out the other end, but a dimensional explosion
in those internal cognitive layers. But in biological systems, it's actually exactly the
opposite. For example, many, many, many receptors on the cell surface on the holographic boundary,
the sensorium of the cell. But then there are these common secondary messengers
that many pathways converge upon. So that reflects the kind of radically different
architecture that a QRF embodies, as opposed to the approach taken by disembodied intelligence
frameworks, which use dimensional explosion internally, to try to categorize and classify
and find find edge cases versus this dimensional winnowing that is reflective of these embodied
intelligences. And if I may make a tangential comment here also, I think the good thing about
these two examples is that they also showcase the fact of how, you know, the deep implications of
a scale free biology, if you want to call it this way. We tend to think of these sorts of processes,
right, such as here, only happening at the level of the nervous system in animals.
Or, as you said, neural networks, right, we tend to associate this with neural networks.
And perhaps evolution is theorizing a way that endowd us with nervous systems to make these
things, maybe these are higher up in the layers. But really, that's a bit of an arbitrary distinction
that we make. The processes going on at the cellular level, even if they don't appear to have
anything to do with the nervous system, my understanding is that there are some generic
properties that are the same and everything that has to do with information processing.
It manifests maybe slightly different when it comes to explicit nerves, but at the end of the day,
it's the same generic process going on. Would you say that's right, Daniel?
The ontological claim is that it's the same generic process happening, whereas the more
instrumentalist claim is that we can model it with some shared abstractions.
Yeah, okay, so we can continue, right?
So, from, you know, I don't have a whole lot to say, Daniel said quite a bit about,
at the end of the day, QRF is, you can visualize it as this diagram. And, you know, you can think of
it as, if you are more familiar with the picture of neural network and ways on a neural network
and so on, that's the way to think about it. Now, let's continue with explicit embodiment,
if you wish. So, QRFs in the formalism have to be attached to a boundary,
boundary, degree, supreme. And I should add another remark here, I think,
and personally, to me also, like the hard part about this quantum pre-energy
principle formalism, if you wish, is what you said at the beginning is the fact that it's
topological, right? So, very often it's not clear what the boundary, degree, supreme are,
right? Because we tend to think of boundaries as, you know,
geometrical, and certainly the classical FEP treats them as geometrical, but that's not the case here
in the quantum pre-energy formalism. And where we have merchant space, as we'll be talked about
in later sessions, that's just like one quick remark to make. At the end of the day, though,
even if it's topological, we're going to have real degrees of freedom that this
QRF is attached to, this cone-cocoon diagram. And you're going to have measurement operators that
yield classical outcomes, class of minus one. And then you can think of this QRF,
or more abstractly, this cone-cocoon diagram as a neural network, if you wish, acting on those
boundary qubits. And then backpropagating some sort of action signal preparation.
Okay, then let's not forget that the Landau's principle and so on requires that we are mindful
of energy constraints on computation. And that gives us the following picture.
Number one, we're going to have to
use energy from the environment to fuel our computation, to fuel our observation.
That means that right away, you cannot use the entirety of your boundary to gather information.
It necessitates an allocation of resources. Here, E is the observed environment,
and the blue portion is a thermodynamical sector, where you extract free energy and
heat in order to run this computational process. And then furthermore, you can have
a memory sector where you write things on the boundary. And this takes up energy also,
writing information on the boundary by Landau's principle. We'll take up information.
And Chris called this the minimal interest in observer,
because it has a memory sector. And why minimal here implies that we have at least
minimal interest thing implies that we have more than one layer. Here, the process of
writing things into a memory sector requires us to have a clock so that we can label
those memories in time. So we do have time as part of this formalism, just not space yet.
Okay. And time has to be internal to the observer.
Just one piece on that that Chris mentioned. And as you echoed, time here is an attribute of
some cognitive systems in terms of their internal understanding so that they can sort
memories and understand what came earlier or later. It's not something that's a priori defined
externally, which is the case in the kind of space time first. Now, how do we fit communication
into here? We flip that, we're talking about the topology of communication as ontologically
primal. And now certain kinds of sophisticated agents, that's not like necessarily true of rock
or a metronome or a particle of a gas, but some kinds of cognitive systems are such that they
are able to generate an internal clock concept. And that doesn't have to be the same thing as
what's happening on the wall with chronos. This can reflect a purely internal time,
kairos that enables observers or interactors that have different clock structures. And then
Landauer's principle helps us arbitrage or connect the informational demands to the energetic or
the metabolic demands. Bean? So when I first listened to the lecture, I thought when the
term or phrase trade off was raised, I traditionally have thought of trade off as kind of a binary.
If I'm picking this, I'm trading off against all the other things that I didn't pick,
so one or the other or others plural. But when I saw this, and especially when I heard it in
the context of things like degrees of freedom, I began to wonder whether it is because it could sit
on either side of that boundary. It could be a priori or it could be ad hoc or post hoc, a trade
off, which prior to this conversation, I just assumed that a trade off was one or the other.
But essentially what this implies is it isn't even, it's still a kind of a degree of
of how much weight you put into it. And then it kind of crossed a threshold and then you've made
your pick. You've completed your trade off. Or did I, again, did I misinterpret what I was
hearing? If it's topological, as opposed to the more conventional space time perspective.
Is this, can a trade off be both ad hoc and post hoc, seemingly at the same time?
Very interesting question. Let us just let it float and continue on, enter.
All right. Because again, if it's, I'll just say this, if it can be, that would really move us
out of the classical realm. That would essentially say that anytime we've made a pick,
we really haven't made a pick. There's still a whole bunch of other things that are going to happen
that can change whatever that action is that we thought we carried out or enacted.
If we're talking about an internality state, which is what I think we want,
I think we want to be able to change our minds.
Let me take that one way, Dean. The analytical equations of the action perception loop
don't tell us in implementation, like if we're going to write it in code, whether we should
use action first procedurally to update our observations, or whether we enable our observations
to wag the dog and then select action at the end of the loop. So is it a perception action loop,
or is it an action perception loop? And those enable a kind of seesaw where sometimes we want
what we learn to change what we do, and other times we want what we do to change what we learn,
and having that kind of a fulcrum or a pivot, and then again to connect it to the vertex popping
in and out, the analytical formalisms inscribed on the screen of the FEP, like the textbooks,
they're ambiguous whether we lead with action and have inference follow, or whether we lead
with inference and have action follow, or lead with action and have inference follow, whichever
one of the combinations there are, and then that trade-off or run-off is broken by specific
embodied cognitive agents. That trade-off about the procedural primacy of perception or action
can't be broken generically. Right.
It certainly makes for a lot of waste heat if you're not careful.
It'd be exhausting a lot anyway.
Okay, so I see, I don't know if we can talk about intent much with this formalism,
but we can take a very descriptive approach to it and go down here a little more.
Actually, before I don't want to get ahead of myself, what I mean by that is
whether we can put intent or not in this hierarchy, I don't know if it matters a whole lot,
but at least we can talk about it operationally and descriptively and say just like when you have a
clock, that clock is just there. If you don't have the clock, you don't have the memory,
and that's it. Unlikewise here, if we don't have an attention control compartment, we cannot play
with all these QRFs that are non-commutative at the same time. If there is no attention control
system to begin with, we cannot talk about a system that has non-commutative QRFs,
meaning here one presumably goes to memory sectors, the other one goes to environment
sectors and so on. This is certainly a necessity of the fact that we have different sectors of
the boundary being allocated to different purposes, such as environmental observation
and memory and so on. Within the environment, it's worth remarking that here if you think deeply
about first principles and what it means to observe an entity, well, you still come down
to these differences that make a difference sort of thing, which involves whenever you're looking
at the environment, if you're going to identify a system, you need sort of a background that tells you
that puts the system in context so that you can identify the system as something distinct.
I think this again is something that we have talked about in previous discussions, where
the easiest picture here is something like the speed gauge in your car, where
the P is the gauge itself that tells you the speed, but it's meaningless without the reference
system. Outside of the thing that stays invariant, the context, the background,
that gauge moving means nothing to you. So come back to this idea of if we think of
information as differences that make a difference, in terms of first principles,
this environment sector that we saw earlier has to be further broken down into pointer and
reference states. Again, this is covered in the increases papers. I'm thinking particularly of
free energy for generating quantum systems.
Again, just to reiterate, this attention controls that compartment, which is by the way very reminiscent
to the hierarchy that was earlier with the clock arising higher up in the hierarchy,
deeper into the layer. Likewise, whenever you're writing something into a memory,
you need to have that clock. Whenever you are deploying noncommittative QRFs, you're going to
need an attention control compartment. We just described this operationally. If you didn't have
it, then the agent would not be what it is. It could not deploy those noncommittative QRFs.
So marching on, we'll just end here with the QRF alignment and the free energy principle.
Just a few more words. This is possibly the most interesting picture in this
presentation. We can recall here the possibilities for QRF alignment and how
free energy comes into play in this formalism. We call A the trivial interaction. We call this
a thermal interaction. Then you have a bunch of possibilities. Depending on each possibility,
you're going to see things as notes or as in the paper says, non-local in variables.
The last situation is what we call alignment when we have QRFs of the same size perfectly aligned.
I can't quite recall. I think this
would be the situation where you have noiseless classical computation. You have A and B just
interacting. This is the situation where, correct me if I'm wrong, Daniel. This is
entanglement, asymptotically. Once all the QRFs are aligned, you have entanglement. Now we can tie
back maybe to gains earlier. So these two slides conclude the discussion, basically, and then we
can open it up. So given these possibilities for how QRFs can be aligned, QRFs deployed by A and B
can be aligned, and how in each situation you're going to get noise or whatever,
then what does the free energy principle say in this quantum setting? Well,
minimizing variational free energy leads you to entanglement. So if theorem here,
if you're in the picture of B here, and the QRFs are aligned, A and B are going to be entangled.
Now there is a tension between this tendency towards alignment, as the free energy principle
will carry you, and observe reality, which is that we're not just a blob of entangled particles.
So there is separability, and systems are a tension between maintaining separability,
and at the same time being correlated enough to the environment,
which has to be able to predict the outcome. And now we can maybe go into a more philosophical
discussion on the free energy principle. I should also say, in the last month, just like I talked
earlier about QRFs, Lenny Saskin, whose recent paper that talks about QRF, he led me into a
rabbit hole of looking into his recent work, and he's talked a lot about complexity. I'm being
very speculative here, so if someone can pull me out, that would be good in the comments. But
just to skim it through some of his papers, I saw a monograph in 2018 where he talks about complexity,
and he puts forward the second law for complexity in quantum systems, an increased complexity,
and it is very reminiscent of what's going on here. You have a tension between
systems standing to entanglement, and the other side of the free energy functional
if you wish, where systems increase in complexity, and that necessarily requires
that AMB are separate. So Daniel, do you have any comments at this point?
Yeah, there's a lot to it. I like that you showed the four possibilities
in the image above and said it was one of the most interesting figures. I agree, and
how to connect this to the classical FEP, and also how to see the quantum FEP
not as just a second story built on top of the classical FEP, which would be kind of like a
historical chronological understanding of the theoretical apparatus, but it's almost like
the quantum FEP was like a basement we didn't know about, because it gives a broader context,
and though it appeared conceptually several years later in the timeline we understand,
that doesn't give it a secondary status. So what it really means for the classical FEP
to be kind of like a special case of this actually more generic setting, there's just a lot I'm
very uncertain about. I can wrap it up, and then if Dean or you want to say something,
we can continue with that, but let me conclude, and this is all I have to say for today,
I think I'm sure Chris will explain this more in coming sessions and lectures, but I think the
main key difference is in the emergence of space, how it might emerge from something more fundamental,
maybe a sense of network or who knows, but that's the big difference, and I suppose the
quantum free energy principle generalizes the classical free energy principle, because he
doesn't have this spatial embedding. Now this to me personally and also to folks in the audience
for asking questions is probably the hardest part to wrap your head around, and I foresee
interest in those discussions and lectures that deal with the concept of emergent space,
because every time you try to, and I've done this myself, I've been thinking about how you could
apply this formalism to better known pictures or compare it for instance with thermal equilibrium,
with relaxation with thermal equilibrium, and then you start thinking about okay what is the
boundary and so on, it's far from obvious, because again you have to remind yourself that the
definition is topological, so in that regard I think it might be worth talking about one of the
questions that came up that I thought was good, and then I can call it a day on this end,
so this question, and I think it was the first question asked since the last lecture.
Can you just read the full question and then read the full answer, thank you.
The question on the answer, it's number 28 here, can you guys see it? Should I zoom in a little bit?
It's pretty small, but reading it will be good. Okay, so this question I think, I fast myself this
question too, maybe in a different way, but basically it gets to the point of what I was
saying earlier, that it would be nice to see how we can use this quantum free energy principle
formalism to recover maybe familiar settings, such as relaxation to thermal equilibrium,
the equation, but that's far from obvious how you do it if your definition is topological.
So the question says, what happens when the agent becomes identical to the environment,
when the model has been improved so much that it does not differ from the environment, is this
a stadium impossible, would it be thermo-amical equilibrium maximum entanglement? Okay, so clearly
it's not thermo-amical equilibrium, but I think what the person is asking if I maybe,
if I'm understanding this correctly, they're wondering, okay, so if the free energy principle
drives AMB towards entanglement, then it's referred to say that they have, that any distinction
between them has been solved, right, that they have merged into the same thing.
And that has to do with this whole definition of philosophical debate of thing-ness, that Carl
Christon, you know, is a proponent of, right, what it means for two things to be separate. Okay,
so let's see what Chris said.
Christon has pointed out that the limit of the classical FEP, the limit of perfect
prediction, corresponds to the general synchrony between system and environment,
each sense messages that the other can perfectly predict. Now, however, it's clear,
I'm not reading anymore, I'm making a quick remark here, I'll continue in a second.
In the classical FEP, it's clear that AMB, even if they are, you know,
in the perfect limit of the FEP, they remain different, different entities, right, because
you have that, if you wish, that extra layers of differentiation coming from the spatial embedding,
right, in the classical FEP, that is clear, that they haven't, even if they are getting
synchronized, they have not lost their separate identities, you can always say, well, this is
the one that was to the left, and this is the one that was to the right, pun intended in the earlier
discussion, right. You have that extra resource for separating them, if you wish, by virtue of the
spatial embedding, right, the spatial embedding is giving you this extra information that allows
you to keep track of AMB separately. Okay, so I'll continue, this notion depends on the system
and its environment being separated and has distinguished somehow, in classical formulations,
they are separated in ordinary 3D space, i.e., they occupy different locations, so they are
different because they occupy different locations, right, but if you don't have that geometrical
background, then how do you know that they're different, right? Okay, so I continue, the quantum
formulation is background free, meaning it assumes no spatial embedding, system and environment do
not have different locations, even though they have different sets of degrees of freedom in
the overall Hilbert space. Here, the FEP, the limit of the FEP is maximum entanglement,
this does not mean that the system and its environment are identical, they are, and since
they have different degrees of freedom, okay, so this is just addressed as the question I just
posed, it means that the joint state is not separable, okay, into a system S and environment T,
their states are no longer conditionally independent, this is distinct from thermal
equilibrium, which means that they have the same temperature while remaining separable,
and that their interaction can be characterized as the change of thermal fluctuations,
you know, so I guess this is a nice format for things that are to come, but I do think that this
whole idea of emergent space is going to be possibly, you know, one of the most important in
the course, and it's going to help stick out between the class and quantum formulations for sure.
Dean, what's your take on this? What I saw was that when you have that kind of alignment,
that perfect alignment, that is one, that was one, that was D in that diagram, right, that was one
state of a complex state that included an A and a B and a C, and probably a whole bunch of other
ways that, yeah, right, so that one state where you've got this kind of entanglement
isn't into perpetuity, like you don't get there and then stay there, and that's where I think
the question of separability and complexity, it still works, because just because you've momentarily
gotten to a place that we define here as D, doesn't mean you stay there indefinitely.
You could be swapping around to B and C and A in the next instant, so that's, at least that
holds the complexity piece up, that moment for however long that moment is, where XA and XB
are aligned isn't permanent, so it's not predictable in that sense, therefore it is complex.
I still don't know how we get, though, that the closer we get to agreement, the more complex
things are, unless we're just talking about D in this array of A, B, C, and D.
That goes back to that quantum reference frame. I think, like I said, again,
maybe I'm interpreting this wrong, but when I message pass, the reason why I have to, like,
literally give it over to the other person and let them have it, I can't give them, have them copy
what I'm doing, is because there has to be, I guess that reinforces the separability piece of
this as well, the fact that I can't give them a copy that I can only give them the information,
and then they've got to sort of unpack it in their own, in their own way of taking it off the
boundary. But again, I struggle with this, I'm guilty as charged, but I am, what I'm trying to do
is trying to come up with my own narrative so that what Chris is saying makes sense to me,
as opposed to make sense to the world, which is what Chris is trying to do.
I'll try with another speculative fiction. So there's a screen between, let's just say, the
stage in the audience or whatever, it's a holographic screen. And on each side of the screen,
there's some embodied object. So that means that it must have, it's a volume-enclosing
object, because points and lines and planes are only abstractions, every real physical object
encloses volume. And now a light is going to be coming from behind each object facing the screen.
And that's this kind of cone that we're seeing from each side, it's like the shadow cast by the
object. So if the object was a sphere, then it would be projecting down to a circle onto the screen.
If the shape were a cube, it could be projecting down. And so where the light is positioned
is the perspective that that cognitive entity is taking on its QRF. Those lights could move. So
now we have this situation where the two spotlights are moving, maybe the shapes are staying the same,
maybe they're changing too. And it's like two searchlights scanning across this
B oval. And sometimes they are perfectly locked. I mean, there could be a situation where they're
perfectly aligned. Or there could be situations where they're totally disjoint. And each of those
situations have different implications for what one entity sees when it looks at the screen.
Maybe like the shadow is the only part where you can see, because the rest of it is too blinding
or something like that. And so then if we're in case A here, where maybe B doesn't have a projection
or maybe B's projections totally somewhere else, then A is in this solipsistic, I'm the active
agent interacting within an inert world setting. And D is like potentially the computer engineer's
classical dream or asymptote, which is like all the data going through the USB cable is just
being perfectly noiselessly received. And then we also get these B and C cases.
But A is kind of like the inert world. D is like the perfect communication channel and then to
connect it just to Friston's concept of generalized synchrony. As we've talked about many times,
generalized synchrony doesn't mean lockstep. Two agents could reduce their uncertainty about
each other, not by doing the same thing at every time step, but for example, by turn taking.
And I think that points the way to how we get reduction of variational free energy, reduction
of prediction error, surprise and so on, without especially spatial temporal enmeshment, but not
necessarily even informational identity enmeshment, because you could have two things that through
their alignment become actually differentiated. And that could increase the mutual information
between two metronomes, not just to have them going in the same direction, but to have them
going in opposite directions, the mutual information those two settings is going to be high.
So it's not the case that generalized synchrony means that things are becoming
blurred. We could actually also have integrated information through increased
articulation, not just decreased. And then life finds a way or cognition finds a way
on this trade off frontier of in our pursuit of unitarity, will we blur to unify or will we
differentiate to unify? But those are the paths we have, we don't have the backwards ratchet.
Yeah, yeah, makes sense.
Any other ladder slides, Ender? No, that's it. So Chris made a few more remarks at the end of
language here. But he mentioned that he's going to talk more about this in the coming lecture,
so we'll just leave it up to him.
Yeah, there could be some very powerful and interesting linguistic opportunities
for updating our speaking to reflect what we are learning here. I don't know what those necessarily
are. Whether it's a syntactic or semantic thing or whether it's a narrative thing,
but how to actually re enter some of these formalisms into our focus understanding
could just be immensely powerful. And we could have a lot of integrity between the natural
language way that potentially we're already showing up for engagement and some of these
formalisms that get to first principles about interacting entities and boundary conditions
and all of that. Dean, any penultimate thoughts? Not really. I'm going to go back and listen to
the I'm going to listen to Chris's comments again about this common cause and the fine
tuning assumption and whether that's sort of a metaphorically a dialing in or what it what he
what he means exactly by the fine tuning in the in the context of this conversation today.
What you just kind of said about are we dulling something here or are we sculpting something
to make it more fitable? Like, I'm going to go on now and go back and listen to what he
talks about in terms of fine tuning and maybe update my priors around that. So
And are any last thoughts or maybe scroll over to the schedule of the course again just so we
can close on that. Yeah, we're halfway through. We just completed the third discussion section now.
So we've had three lectures and three discussions. It's all downhill from here.
By the way, this was the first midterm. You guys both did well.
Um, we're going to head into four, or like session four, with these last three, how agents use
multiple communication channels and that's going to get connected to the quantum FEP.
How space time emerges from communication, which is something that we've brought up a
bunch. It's been in the background, but but making that explicit is going to be exciting.
And then section six, I think is just going to be such a jumping off point because the scope
and the intensity of what is transpiring is extreme. So connecting it to biology,
which is to say life more fully and where we go in, in 23 and beyond,
that's going to be awesome. So any last words, Andrew?
Uh, no, I was just going to go with what you said.
Very, I would, I would say it's going to be uphill in, in terms of how interesting it's going to get.
Up hill in the good sense, meaning that we're planning.
Cool. Well, I encourage people to check out the course website and submit questions that they'd
like to see addressed by Chris also to register and join these participatory discussions. There'll
be three more of them. So if you want to join, share your QRF, be part of the publication of
all of these works that we'll compile at the end and just get your exoskeleton in the game
with what is happening here. It'd be really awesome to hear more voices and to have more on board.
Okay. Thank you, Dean and Andrew. Till next time.
Thank you.
