Lecture 17 Emotions and Responsibility
The idea that emotions are strategies, which I've been pushing since the first lecture,
raises some very interesting questions, because the idea of strategy is very much opposed
to the traditional idea of emotions as passions.
In fact, when Aristotle gave a name to this whole group of phenomena,
he called them pothé, plural, meaning sufferings.
And the idea ever since Aristotle has been that emotions are a form of suffering,
or to put it a different way, emotions happen to you.
They are not, as I'm suggesting now, a form of doing something.
But to say that an emotion is strategy is all ready to suggest that it has an end in view,
that it has a goal, and consequently that it is something that we actually do.
Now, this suggestion, which I've made now for quite a few years,
has generally been greeted with a kind of disbelief.
The other suggestions that emotions are judgments, that emotions are intelligent,
well, over the last 20 years I've gotten pretty widespread agreement on all that.
But by second major thesis, this one that emotions are a form of doing something
still gets greeted with a kind of severe skepticism.
Now, part of the reason is just the way we talk about emotions.
We talk about emotions as things that happen to us.
We discussed, for example, the fact that anger is loaded with metaphors about being filled up with something.
And the not metaphorical, but very concrete physiological observation
that emotions like anger consist among other things of the sort of firing the autonomic nervous system,
which is something utterly beyond our control.
It's not something we do.
And of course, this is true of emotions like fear.
Where fear involves all sorts of autonomic responses, which again,
it makes no sense at all to talk about doing them, choosing them, even controlling them.
So what we have to look at are, first of all, the nature of these metaphors,
many of which have to do with the idea of being struck by, say, jealousy,
or paralyzed, say, by fear.
And understand where these metaphors come from
and why they are really not a way of understanding what emotions are.
We talked at one point, several lectures ago,
about a metaphor I really sort of pointed to Freud,
not as responsible for, because it goes way back before that,
but for sort of bringing into contemporary science.
And that was what I called the hydraulic metaphor,
the idea that we are something like a boiler system with sort of hot gases
or something that is pressuring to get out.
And this, of course, is a kind of key metaphor to this idea of passions happening to us.
But what I'd like to suggest instead is that there's a very different way of looking at this.
For instance, if you look at an emotion as a form of self-control,
if you look at an emotion as a form of expression,
if you look at the relationship between emotions and, say, reason or emotions and reflection,
as not something like master and slave, but rather something more like a boss and his employee,
then you get a very different kind of image of what's involved here.
Now, to be sure, if emotions are strategies, as I pointed out in the last lecture,
they're not always very good strategies.
Sometimes they just get it all wrong.
You get the facts wrong, they are unfair,
or they're wrong in terms of the overall enhancement of life.
In other words, they tend to be strategies that are quite short-sighted.
Anger is often like this, but as I also pointed out, anger can be really key to the enhancement of life.
If, for example, you realize that you've been oppressed or screwed in life
and that getting angry is a way of improving or changing the situation,
then it's a very successful long-term strategy.
And I would want to say, without any hesitation, this is something we learn to do, not something we suffer.
Now, I still want to leave room for the word passion, perhaps not in this traditional meaning,
but it seems to me there are two very different ways of understanding it.
The first, we use the word passion when we talk about an emotion that gets out of hand.
It is, for example, the idea of being swept away by love, which I talked about in the last lecture,
or the idea of being in a rage, wholly out of control.
But there's another sense of passion which I think is perfectly legitimate, and I certainly want to praise.
And that is, we talk about a person having a passion when they're wholly devoted to something.
And this isn't something like being swept away, it's not something that happens to you,
but it's a matter of continuously renewed, passionate commitment.
So if someone is very religious, I would be perfectly happy to say they are passionate or in a passion about their religion.
But it doesn't suggest that something's happened to them.
What it suggests, rather, is that they're deeply committed,
something that the Danish philosopher Kirchgaard talked about at some length.
Or if someone has a passion for art, or a passion for a certain kind of scholarship,
or a passion for baseball or video games, I want to say this isn't something that's happened to them.
What it is, is rather a kind of devotion, something that involves a sort of constant renewal
of getting excited about, being involved with,
willing to overcome all sorts of frustrations and difficulties.
And this, again, is something that we do, and not something that we suffer.
Now psychologists for the last ten years or so have talked about something they call emotional regulation.
It's an interesting phrase.
And what they have in mind, of course, is the fact that there's a sense in which emotions don't just happen,
but we control them.
But now, this is very ambiguous, because the control of emotions can itself be something purely physiological.
For instance, when I have a strong emotion, say, anger,
there is immediately a kind of counter-reaction, and this is just within the neurology itself,
so that the emotion is always, to a certain extent, in balance.
When I find myself very attracted to someone, and we all have had something like this experience,
there's a kind of secondary response, and this is on one level purely neurological,
but it also has its manifestation, for example, in a little voice ringing in your head,
and it says, whoa, slow down a minute, wait until you see what's really happening.
So there's a sense in which every emotion has its own kind of control,
and this, of course, is one kind of emotion regulation.
It's sort of like a thermostat.
When it gets too hot, then it sort of kicks in and sort of turns on the air conditioner,
or if it gets too cold, there's a point where it kicks in and turns on the heat.
That's regulation.
And what bothers me about it, as I suggested in earlier lectures, is that it's just too mechanical.
The alternative is something like choosing or controlling your emotions.
But these are problematic, too.
First of all, the idea of choosing your emotion makes it sound too much as if what you're doing is
planning, deliberating, forming an idea about what you'd like to feel,
looking at a menu, well, I could get angry now, or I could just let it go,
or I could get jealous, or I could be resentful,
and you sort of think it through, perhaps even weigh the consequences, and pick your emotion.
Well, this doesn't happen.
There may be occasions in which something like it happens, and I'll talk about that towards the end of the lecture.
But basically, when we talk about choice and emotion, which I did talk about a great deal 20 years ago,
I think this is an overstatement that is pretty rare that we simply choose our emotion,
and I think it's also rare that we deliberate about our emotions.
We reflect on them.
We consider, once we already have them, what we want to do with them,
or whether this is a good thing or a bad thing.
But choice and deliberation are too strong for talking about what we want to talk about.
On the other hand, there's control.
Well, what does control mean?
Again, it's ambiguous, because what people mean generally by controlling your emotion is controlling the expression of your emotion.
And while the relationship between the emotion and an expression is rather intimate and intricate,
nevertheless, there's an obvious difference.
So I find myself getting very angry.
For example, I find myself getting angry at, let's say my wife, because she's been doing something to frustrate me.
But I love my wife.
I want this marriage to be a good one.
I want our data together to be happy.
And so I control what I say.
I even control my looks.
I control my behavior.
But the fact is, I'm still angry.
And so to talk about control here, if all we mean is control of the expression of emotion,
that's really not enough.
Because what I want to talk about, if emotions are a kind of doing that involves strategy,
I want to talk about controlling the emotion itself.
And the question is, how do we do that?
And again, simply talking about choice and deliberation is much too strong.
People also talk about constraint.
This too, I think, is overly involved with the expression.
I strain myself, for example.
I'm in love with a woman.
And I know that, you know, just sort of coming out and saying, gee, I love you madly.
I haven't even met her yet.
It's an insane strategy.
So what I do is I show cool.
I show great constraint.
I have a conversation which is very much on the sort of legitimate plane and doesn't involve romance at all.
But again, it doesn't involve my feelings.
It just involves the expression.
Now, religious traditions often talk about this.
And interestingly enough, they have a very deep interpretation here, which is very much like mine.
Christianity, for example, traditionally talks about, it's not just a question of what you do.
But I remember Jimmy Carter saying 30 years ago now, playboy interview.
And he says, well, he often finds he has, I think, it's lust in his heart.
And he's very clear that he doesn't act on it, doesn't do anything.
But nevertheless, as a devout Christian, he realized that this in itself is a kind of sin.
And when you read many of the sort of traditional Christian spokespeople, Augustine, Aquinas, and so on,
they often talk about not just controlling the expression of emotion.
That's easy enough to do most of the time.
But they talk about controlling the emotion itself.
So there's an insight here that there's a sense in which you are responsible for your emotions, responsible for your feelings,
and that's something deeper than simply having control or constraint over their expression.
You find the same thing in Buddhism.
Buddhism talks a lot, not just about not expressing certain emotions, but about getting rid of them.
In fact, there's a sort of opposition here, Nietzsche against Christianity and also against Buddhism to a certain extent.
And normally, as many of you know, I would tend to side with Nietzsche, who's one of my favorite philosophers.
But Nietzsche thinks that it doesn't make any sense to talk about controlling your emotions.
But I think he's wrong, that Christianity here is right on the button, that there's a sense in which you are responsible for what you feel.
It's not just a question of controlling the expression.
Now, I want you to think for a moment about the very idea of what it means to have something in control
or to put it a very different way, to take responsibility, or now we talk about taking ownership of it.
Because often emotions are contrasted with thoughts.
And the idea, generally put, is that thoughts are one's own, one's responsible for one's thoughts,
but one is not responsible because one doesn't do one's emotions.
I think this is a little too quick.
Think about thoughts.
There are thoughts that we have, for example, in the process of thinking, where there's no question about it, but these are our thoughts.
Now, if you do the phenomenology and you think, now where do these thoughts come from?
For example, I've got lots of thoughts and they're coming out of my mouth right now.
Is it the fact that I'm talking?
Does that mean that I'm somehow prescripting or pre-planning or deliberating what I'm going to say or what I'm thinking?
Well, the honest answer is, and this is very mysterious, I'm not sure where these things are coming from.
I mean, I obviously prepared the lecture.
I've been thinking about these things for years.
But when it comes to this particular sentence, this particular thought, it just kind of comes out in a stream of thoughts which I hope are more or less closely connected.
So when we're talking about thinking, there's no question, but one takes responsibility for one's thoughts.
But there's another kind of thought, and it's a thought that pops into one's head.
Now, there are at least two different kinds of such thoughts.
And the first one is, imagine that you've been working on a problem.
I'm thinking, for example, of the fellow who won a Nobel Prize for discovering the structure of benzene, which is ring-shaped.
And he had been working on this for some time.
And one night, so the story goes, he went to sleep, and at some magic hour in the morning, usually about three o'clock for me,
he wakes up and he's had a dream of a snake with its tail in its mouth.
And it was an aha experience, one of those great moments in the history of science, where he said, that's what I've been missing.
Benzene is a ring.
Now, the point I want to make is that he wouldn't have had this thought, which simply popped into his head more or less out of nowhere in the middle of a dream.
He wouldn't have had that thought if he hadn't been working on the problem for a long time.
I often wake up in the middle of the night with a solution to a problem that I've been working on during the day,
and needless to say, I wouldn't have had the solution. I wouldn't have had the thought if I wasn't working with the problem.
So you might say, this is a thought that pops into your head, but it's an invited thought.
So we're perfectly happy, especially if it's a good idea, to take responsibility for it.
But then there's another kind of thought that pops into your head.
And I think we've all had this one, too.
Especially if you've just that evening watched a violent movie,
or if you've seen, probably inadvertently, some piece of quasi-pornography or whatever,
you might have a sudden thought which is very awkward and embarrassing,
and you will almost decidedly not take responsibility for it.
Say, this is not my thought. I don't know where it came from.
St. Augustine, when he was in the midst of sort of wrestling with his demons,
would sometimes talk about such thoughts popping into his head.
And as many of you know, Augustine is a young man, had quite a wild life.
So we understand he had the experiential base for this.
But nevertheless, he didn't want to take responsibility or ownership of these particular thoughts.
So it's a thought that pops into your head, but it's not something we take responsibility for.
Now, of course, if the same sort of obscene or violent thought continues to pop into your head,
at that point, Dr. Freud's got something to say about it, and maybe you should talk to somebody about it.
But the idea here is that thoughts, which we normally take to be within our control,
something we do take responsibility for, something we're usually happy to take ownership of,
is in fact much more complicated.
In fact, let me make a generalization.
Philosophers often talk as if things fall on one of two sides, which are radically opposed.
On the one hand, there is intentional, deliberate, rational action.
Things that you actually think out, think about, plan options, and articulate before you actually choose.
On the other hand, there are things that happen to you.
You have a heart attack or a stroke, or you get hit by a brick.
There are things in which you are surely passive.
And what I want to suggest is that that vast space in between where actions are not deliberate, not reflective,
but at the same time, there's still actions and not simply passive sufferings.
That is an area which has to be hugely explored.
And happily, there are a few great philosophers who have done just that.
One is Jean-Paul Sartre.
Again, a philosopher I often mention because he's so close to my interest and my heart.
But Sartre has a theory of emotions which we've just started to talk about,
and he calls them magical transformations of the world.
And the idea is that an emotion is something we do,
and it's a way, Sartre says, of exercising certain kinds of strategies.
And when he talks about this, first of all, I think it's a fairly limited set of strategies.
It's a way of escaping from difficulties.
But the idea is that we form a way of perceiving the world,
or we form a way of constituting, understanding the world,
such that what might be a loss of face or might be sheer frustration turns into something else.
A classic example,
a fox who goes after the grapes in Esop's fables finds he can't get them
and sort of revises his view of the grapes,
so that they're now no longer something unattainable, but something undesirable.
Well, this fast illustration, which I've used before,
suggests that something very profound,
that when you have an emotion, it's something you do, and it's something you do for a purpose.
And that's why I want to be so adamant about saying that they are strategies.
Now, one of the things that Sartre says here, though,
is that an emotion is necessarily what he calls pre-reflective.
In other words, it's not deliberate, not even articulate.
It's something that if asked at the time, you might well deny that you have,
or if you admit that you have it, you would certainly deny the purpose it's for.
I mean, the fox can't really say, well, I'm just trying to save face here.
The fox really thinks that what he is doing is simply recognizing the way the world is.
So Sartre's very important here, because Sartre seems to me as one of the philosophers
who makes a very clear stance that emotions are on the side of activity,
not on the side of passivity.
And nevertheless, he's trying to chart out this intermediary range
between the passive and the active that I said is still largely unexplored.
Other philosopher worth mentioning here is William James.
Now, James, of course, I've talked about in other contexts,
and very often he's sort of the target of some of my arguments.
But what I find interesting about James here is that he does talk about emotions
as if there's something that we can change.
So I mentioned in a previous lecture that James says, bit cornally,
sort of like a hallmark card, but you know, smile and you'll feel better.
And of course, that's true. It's a way of changing your emotions.
In fact, it's a general way of talking about emotions that James, in the emphasis on physiology,
often neglects, which is our behavior, or what you might call acting as if,
is often a way of changing our emotions.
Ultimately, though, it seems to me that talking about changing our emotions in the sense of,
they've got an emotion, let's do something about it, or let's produce an emotion now for this context,
is in a way kind of artificial and really not the main point.
The main point, as so often in these lectures, goes back to Aristotle.
Because Aristotle is talking not about changing your emotion,
but Aristotle is talking about cultivating a character.
So Aristotle famously says, can't blame a person for being drunk, or what he does when he's drunk.
But what you can do is you can blame for getting drunk, and more importantly,
you can blame him for cultivating the character that would get drunk.
Think of the idea, for example, cultivating emotional habits.
You drive, and every time you drive, you get in the car, grip the handle, the steering wheel,
and prepare yourself for a day of antagonism.
As opposed to getting in the car and saying to yourself something like,
okay, remember what your Zen class taught you, just keep cool, accept what happens,
you'll get there eventually, and no road rage.
Well, the idea is that what we do is we set ourselves up, we cultivate our character.
Now, sometimes the setup can be pretty straightforward.
If I decide to go to a meeting in which I know a very upsetting situation is going to come up,
something in which I'm already embroiled in controversy,
deciding to go to the meeting is at the same time deciding that I'm probably going to get very upset.
And so one of my options is I can decide not to go to the meeting.
So something obvious about that, that there's a setup in which one can say in advance
whether or not one will put oneself in the situation in which one is likely to feel certain kinds of emotions.
But of course, Aristotle is talking about something more than that.
The example I gave quite some time ago of a fellow who had a whole lifelong habit
of getting angry in order to manipulate people, and by the way also in order to manipulate himself.
This is an example of cultivating a character, not particularly nice one,
but cultivating a character such that what you do is you establish habits and practices,
and emotional habits and practices are like anything else.
They gain plausibility, they gain comfort with the practice.
On the other hand, there's someone like, say, the Dalai Lama,
who of course has all sorts of techniques which he's been practicing for years,
but what they add up to is establishing a kind of personality in which anger, resentment, hatred, envy
are kind of bred out of him, and not bred in the sense of being raised in a certain way necessarily,
but he himself takes control through meditation, through prayer, through the way he behaves on an everyday basis,
that very much determines the kind of emotional character, the kinds of emotions he's going to have.
Habits is really the key to this, because emotions to a large extent are habits.
And when I talk about controlling or choosing or doing your emotions,
much of what I have in mind is thinking in terms of what can I do to make myself a different kind of person,
what kind of habits can I establish.
Now, here's some sad news.
If you think about it, it's much easier to get rid of a set of good emotions, emotions you like.
For example, if you wake up in the morning and you're feeling very cheerful and joyful about life,
it doesn't take too much to bring it down.
On the other hand, if you're in a bad mood, maybe this is just a statement about me,
it takes a lot of work to get yourself in a good mood to improve your outlook on life,
because something about bad habits, they're just harder to break.
Something about good habits, which unfortunately make them much more vulnerable to the slings and arrows of daily fortune.
But again, the basic idea is that what we're doing is we're not just controlling our emotions,
much less choosing our emotions at any given time.
What we're doing is we're developing characters that have certain kinds of emotional repertoires and behave in a certain kind of way.
Now, I said a little while ago that we don't choose or deliberate our way into an emotion,
but now I want to sort of back up on that and say sometimes we do, and I have two examples.
The first, again, is anger, because we think of anger as something often that just hits us or explodes within us,
but I find in myself that very often I get angry and get here is an active verb,
because what I'm doing is somebody will slight me or say something slightly offensive or maybe insulting,
and I'll hear it and it doesn't really register at first,
but if I force myself, and it is forcing myself to think back and think, what did that person say?
What did he mean by that?
Then I start a process of interpretation, and I might bring in all sorts of other thoughts.
Have people talked to me that way before?
Has this person been offensive in the past?
Is this a situation which I should be concerned about?
And as I think these things, what I do is I work myself into a state of anger.
It doesn't happen to me, but rather I choose it, and I choose it methodically step after step.
Or here's a better example.
There's love, and I talked about this in the love lecture, but let me bring out some key features here.
When I fall in love, there might be such a thing as chemistry, I have no reason to deny it.
There are some people who just strike me as charming and lovable, perhaps beautiful,
but that's not falling in love, no matter how we like to talk in a romantic fashion.
It's just being turned on or being charmed.
What happens next?
How I approach the person.
What I say.
What I do.
That's making a whole bunch of decisions.
And as a relationship continues, what I'm doing is I'm continuously deciding
whether to nurture the conditions of love or not to.
And it's not just a question of tilling the field or spreading the fertilizer
or any other agricultural metaphor you want to use, such that I'm just sort of setting up the conditions of love.
But what I'm doing is quite literally deciding to love.
Love is a decision.
And it's a decision that may begin with a certain kind of stroke of attraction or whatever,
but that's not love.
I just love somebody for 10 minutes.
Love is a process, and it's a process that involves lots of decisions along the way,
including, of course, all sorts of negative decisions, too.
So the upshot of all this is to say, emotions are, in a sense, our doing.
It is something which is not just a product of regulation, but a product of cultivation.
And sometimes, as in these last examples, a product of practice, a product of decision-making.
But finally, what's the difference whether you believe this or not?
Well, I wouldn't say it's all the difference.
There are some people, as I said, who think that emotions are generally out of our control.
I think they're wrong.
I used to say no emotions are in our control, and I now think that's wrong, too.
But how we look at the emotions or what you might call the optic of responsibility makes all the difference.
If you believe that emotions are out of your control, that they're things that happen to you.
It's a natural follow-up to say, well, I can't do anything about it, and you don't.
And they are out of your control.
On the other hand, if you look at your emotions and say, I want to take responsibility for this because this is my doing.
Sometimes you'll be wrong.
Sometimes there's not much you can do about it.
But in general, you will suddenly find that you've taken ownership of your life in a way that you hadn't before.
And it seems to me that's a very important philosophical lesson.
