Lecture 16 Emotions Are Rational
There's a well-known crack against economists that goes, if you're so smart, why aren't
you rich? Well, talking about emotions as intelligent, I think one can quite properly
ask, if emotions have intelligence, why are they so often so dumb? Emotions can be very
self-destructive. Emotions can be completely beside the point. Emotions can be, to put
it mildly, unintelligent. Anger, for example. Anger often wrecks lives, or if it doesn't
wreck lives, it interferes with relationships. It makes people lose their jobs. It makes
people lose their friends. All because the anger is foolish, or the anger is out of place,
or it's inappropriate. The worst, of course, is perhaps the emotion of hatred. If you think
about the kind of ethnic and religious strife that's torn the world apart for centuries,
this is a real testimony to human irrationality, and to irrationality of emotions. One might
argue, for example, that hatred is always an irrational emotion. It's always destructive.
We'll talk about that in a moment. Love, presumably the most positive emotions, the
ones that we think is the most valuable of human feelings. Well, love can be very foolish.
Love can be aimed at the wrong person. Love can involve all sorts of destruction, not
just of the person, him or herself, but of the beloved, and the beloved's family and
friends. So love can be dumb. Love can be foolish. It's not as if love in itself is
intelligent. And finally, fears. We talked at some length in one of the first lectures
about how fears can go awry in phobias, or in irrational fears more generally. One is
afraid of things that aren't really dangerous, or afraid of things that might be a little
dangerous, but certainly not that dangerous. So there's a sense in which we might want
to say, emotions are irrational. But how many emotions? Under what circumstances? Now there's
some people who would say, all emotions are irrational. That the very fact that they're
emotions means they're irrational. When people say, for example, don't be emotional, be
reasonable, they're implying that, that reason and rationality are free of emotion. Or some
people would say, emotions aren't so much irrational as they're non-rational. For example,
all those folks who today, and many years ago, would defend emotions as sort of vestiges
of our bestial past, or emotions as just physiological responses, might well say that they don't
even rise to the level of rationality. Because to be irrational is to say that somehow they
go wrong. But if an emotion is just like digestion, or an emotion is just like a headache, then
it's not clear what we would mean when we say that it's irrational. It's just non-rational.
The way any other physiological response that doesn't have anything to do with emotions would
be. On the other hand, we can say that an emotion is rational if it's on target. And
I want to spend a few minutes trying to explain what I mean by that. And if an emotion is
rational because it's on target, we can conclude that an emotion is irrational if it's somehow
off target. And to spell this out just a little bit to start with, if I'm right when
I say emotions are judgments, or emotions are structured by judgments, or emotions at
least involve judgments, judgments, unlike physiological responses, can be clearly wise
or foolish. They can be warranted or unwarranted. They can be appropriate or they can be inappropriate.
And going back to some things that we've been saying, they can be strategically wise or strategically
foolish. So what I want to talk about is the rationality and the irrationality of emotions.
How do emotions go wrong? And what is it for them to be right? Okay, I said an emotion
can be on target. And that means basically getting it right. To figure this out, of course,
we can't generalize. We have to ask, which emotions are we talking about? And what's
at stake? Let's start with perhaps the emotion that is most often in evidence here. And
that's the idea of getting angry. Well, first of all, for anger to get it right, it's got
to be anger directed at the right kind of person, somebody who has actually done something
offensive, someone who is to a certain extent to blame. If, for example, you get angry at
your boss and come home and scream at your cat or at your children, this is clearly irrational
anger. Not that its cause isn't in some sense warranted, but its object is unwarranted. You
just don't get angry at your kid when in fact you're angry at your boss. Second, there's
a question about its warrant. Somebody can do something annoying or just plain irritating
and you get very angry. And it's not that they haven't, in fact, been the culprit. It's
not that they didn't, in fact, do something wrong or annoying anyway. But it's rather
annoyance, irritation just doesn't warrant anger. So when you get angry at someone on
the street, not in a car, who just sort of walks in front of you, well, that's a little
bit annoying. But to get angry, I have to say is irrational. On the other hand, one
has to be very careful not to take rationality here to be, well, equivalent to the word true.
So we can get angry at someone and they haven't done, in fact, what we think they've done.
But nevertheless, all the evidence points to the fact that they have done it. And what's
more, all of our sense of justice and fairness would indicate this is an occasion that warrants
anger. And yet it turns out they didn't really do it. Just all the evidence and all the sort
of suggestions that surrounded the situation gives us good reason to think that we ought
to be angry. So we might say that the anger is here reasonable, but not irrational. Now,
this is often the subject of many discussions in epistemology, in science, in law, and ethics
as well. To say that we were reasonable in doing something is not necessarily to say
it necessarily is true. But from our point of view, it's very often the case that there's
very good reason for getting angry. Nevertheless, it turns out, we find out later, that it turned
out not to be the case. But there's a larger picture here which I keep stressing. And that
is that emotions aren't just reactions. Emotions don't just respond to situations. Emotions
enhance our lives. And this is when I said emotions are strategies and I want to come
back to that. But they play a larger role than just being reactive. And so ultimately
you want to say, an emotion is rational insofar as it doesn't just get the target right. And
it doesn't just get the warrant right. But it's got to be serving a larger purpose.
So for example, if you get angry with your boss, he may well have done something extremely
offensive. But nevertheless, it's probably irrational to get angry at your boss. There's
a good chance of getting fired. Or you can get angry at a small child, someone who's
too young to understand what he's done. Someone who's really too young to even understand
that what he's done is offensive. And I would say that's irrational too. And it's irrational
in part not just because it's unwarranted, but it's irrational because it subtracts
from the overall quality of life. Now you consider particular emotions. Love often is
said to enhance our lives. But the point I made much earlier is, it doesn't always.
That love sometimes can be completely miscast, misaimed, foolish. And when that's the case,
love doesn't enhance our lives, it's irrational. Or anger, typically people would say, anger
is always detrimental, that it always somehow subtracts from the quality of our lives. Well,
I'd want to question that. And again, I'd want to come back with the thesis I raised
several lectures ago, when I pointed out that feminist movements, for example, often thrive
by recognizing the legitimacy of certain kinds of anger. That enhanced a great many people's
lives when people took a certain of training courses years ago. Most people would say,
that really enhanced their lives. So there's a very important conception here that it's
not just a question of whether the emotion is rational in the sense of being on target
and warranted, but also an emotion is rational insofar as it has to do with the improvement,
the maximization of well-being. Now, of course, when we talk this way, we're
not just talking in Darwinian terms. There's a strong evolutionary thesis, which we briefly
considered in the past. And that is that if we have certain kinds of emotions, and they
have survived natural selection and all that, then they must serve some purpose. And I cast
some doubt on this. On the one hand, it might be that they're just a byproduct of something
else. And on the other hand, it might be that they have served our survival. But surviving
is in everything. So what I'm talking about here, when I talk about enhancing one's life,
when I talk about maximizing well-being, what I'm talking about is also a kind of flourishing.
And this brings us back to Aristotle, who's going to play a major role in this lecture,
because Aristotle makes the point that life is about not just survival, but life is about
living well, about flourishing, about what he calls eudaimonia, or another philosopher
I refer to frequently, Nietzsche, who of course often wavers between the idea that emotions
are rational, emotions are systematically irrational, emotions are non-rational. But
nevertheless, he also has a suggestion, which I think is very strong and prevalent in his
philosophy, that emotions maximize our lives. And the way they do this, particularly the
creative emotions, is they bring out parts of us which otherwise lay fallow. And the idea
is that emotions are rational insofar as they make us better people. Now, this question
about the rationality of emotions and the irrationality of emotions, as I said, sometimes
lends to a kind of over-generalization. People say, all emotions are irrational, and I think
that's just plain wrong. But there is a sense in which one can ask the question, when are
certain emotions irrational? And the idea is that it's not particular instances of the
emotion, so much as it's the emotion type. Now, I've thought about this a lot, and when
I come right down to it, I realize that most emotions, I just mentioned love and anger
a minute ago, most emotions can enhance our lives and be perfectly warranted at least
some of the time. But here's one suggestion for an emotion that I would say is a good
candidate for being irrational across the board. And that's the emotion of envy. Now,
I think it's not an accident that envy is listed as one of the seven deadly sins. It's
not usually listed as the top one because no one, Pope Gregory or anyone else, has thought
that envy by itself is enough to sort of spur all the other sins as well. But I think envy
is a sin, or at least it's a very bad strategy for a number of reasons. And when we talked
about this several lectures ago, among them is the idea that in envy, the sort of central
ingredient is not being satisfied with what one has. Now, it's very interesting that most
of the wisdom of both the West and the East comes out in the Talmud, comes out in Buddhism,
and much of Chinese philosophy, but it comes out that the wise man or the wise woman is
he or she who is satisfied with what he or she has. It's a very good philosophy. But
sin isn't satisfied. And what's more, sin always looks at someone else. And whether
or not they're to blame, they are certainly the object of envy, which means the object
of a certain kind of hostility. And envy at the best doesn't do anything about it, but
it sort of sits there and fumes, sits there and simmers, sits there and makes itself miserable.
And I want to suggest that this is a terrible way of getting through life. Now, American
advertising sometimes plays on envy, I think, to an embarrassing degree. And to that extent,
I think making people dissatisfied with their lives is something which itself is, I won't
say sinful, but something which is certainly detrimental to human happiness. And so I want
to say envy is a good candidate of an emotion that's irrational pretty much across the
board. I can't really think of a case where envy is an admirable emotion or a rational
emotion. Here's a different kind of case. Although this time, let's pick one that looks
like it's always rational. And that is joy. Now joy is, as such, a pretty non-committal
and open-ended emotion. You don't have to be joyful about something in particular. In
fact, joy looks an awful lot like a mood and it's sort of very general. Nevertheless, we
want to say something like joy can be inappropriate. If you go to a funeral and you're feeling
really good, just kind of chuckling yourself and expressing, even if subtly, you're sort
of being pleased with the way the world is, is highly inappropriate and will probably
bring down some serious criticism on you. If you're going into a meeting and let's just
make it something very serious like a meeting on world peace and you're full of joy and
optimism, there's something inappropriate about that. Now there's a kind of joy, and
I think this is an American specialty, a kind of joy which I don't know if I really call
it joy as much as I call it cheerfulness. And I think it's important to sort of put
it in its place and that means sort of its anthropological place. Americans in general
tend to think of cheerfulness as the proper kind of outlook on the world. And personally,
I find Americans kind of delightful just because of the optimism that they generally bring
to things. But many of my European friends, for example those who have actually lived
through the Second World War and the Holocaust, see life as a fairly serious and even grim
business. And they see the American emphasis on cheerfulness, this idea that you're all
supposed to be sort of laughing and smiling and enjoying yourself all the time as at best
inappropriate and in the words of one of my friends, obscene. But I think it's a matter
of, again, putting it in perspective. What we see as a very healthy, rational way of
going about life, many Europeans and other people in the world who have seen much rougher
times than many of us have find that this is inappropriate. So again, I would not be
willing to say that joy is a rational emotion in all occasions, but again, it's a matter
of context. Depression is an example. And once again, when I talk about depression here,
I'm not talking about the kind of clinical depression that requires certain kinds of
serious therapies and so on. I'm talking about the kind of normal depression when you sort
of wake up in the morning and just don't feel very good about things and there may be, oh,
some physiological cause like low barometric pressure, or it may be that something has
happened to you that sort of bums you out. But that's the kind of depression I'm talking
about. And there's a question here too, because people who are depressed tend to see things
not just in a gloomier way, but they tend to see things in a more realistic way. A psychologist
named Marty Salogman many years ago did some experiments with this, interviewed people
who were depressed and so on, and came up with a rather depressing thesis that depressed
people tend to see the world in more realistic terms than people who are joyful or just kind
of just generally sort of contended with themselves. Now that should make us think too. Is it good?
Is it rational to be realistic? Well, from what I said about an emotion being on target,
it looks like it. At the same time, you want to say, yeah, but in terms of life enhancement,
depression is surely not a desirable emotion. So there's a real question here. Is it better
to see life through rose-colored glasses a little bit less realistically, or is it better
to see love, to see life more realistically, but from a kind of gloomy point of view? And
let me bring this to a head by bringing up a really major consideration, certainly for
me and for a great many people. It's very well known, and of course there's a great
deal of research on this, particularly in the United States, that people who are religious,
and I'm not going to get into a definition of what it means to be religious, but just
in general, people who go to church, who belong to some more or less organized religion, who
believe in something like God or the divine, are happier and better adjusted, tend to live
longer, have better immune systems and so on, than people who don't believe in any such
thing. And that raises a serious philosophical question for people who believe, and that
is, would that be a good reason for becoming religious? So if you found out you could be
healthier and happier by believing in Buddhism, or believing in Christianity, or being Jewish,
would that by itself be a good reason for doing these things? And I just want to leave
this as a huge question mark, because it might be, as in Seligman's discoveries about depression,
it might be, certainly from one point of view, that religion is a distorted way of seeing
the universe, or at least it involves an awful lot of make-believe and self-fulfilling prophecies.
But at the same time, it might be perfectly rational in the sense of enhancing one's life,
making one live happier and healthier. So what do we say about this? And again, I'm
not going to answer this question here, but I want to raise it and leave it sitting there.
But of course, most of the discussions about rationality and irrationality, no, of emotion,
I'm arguing is, there are questions about particular emotions and particular occasions.
So with anger, once again, it's the particular judgments that are at stake. I said, for example,
that anger is irrational if it's trivial, because anger is supposed to be about something
that's relatively important. Otherwise, it's just irritation or annoyance. Anger needs
an appropriate object. Dogs, cats, young children are not appropriate objects.
Mere frustration, in this sense, is not usually rational anger. Well, it can be. I mean, we're
all frustrated if we're trying to do a task and we can't succeed in it. But the idea of
being angry at what frustrates you, for example, today is a rather gloomy rainy day. And I've
been hoping for a picnic or I've been hoping to go outside and play softball. And so I'm
frustrated. No problem with that. But when I start getting angry at the weather or angry
at the world, then I think I've sort of slipped into a kind of irrationality. And of course,
very often we're in situations where we're frustrated in traffic and we get angry at
other drivers who are just, you know, moving ahead as they can because they're stuck in
traffic too. That's moving from frustration into an irrational form of anger.
There's a distinction here that I've made before. And that's between the emotion itself
and its expression. So sometimes we might want to say the emotion itself might be perfectly
rational. It's reasonable to have under the circumstances. Its object target is right.
It is warranted. And it even enhances our life in some sense. But nevertheless, expressing
it is irrational. And here we come back to the example of getting angry at your boss.
Not a good idea to get angry at your boss. Or getting angry at your professor as he's
grading your paper. Not a good idea. And it's not that the anger itself is unwarranted or
irrational, but the expression here is. But the upshot of all this, coming back to Aristotle,
is that what anger in particular, but all emotions really, involve as something that
Aristotle referred to as phronesis, which I'll simply translate as good judgment. And
it's a kind of judgment that sort of looks at the situation, looks at the occasion, the
people involved and so on. And it makes the right kind of judgment on several different
dimensions. So I've talked about being angry at the right person, but also we should talk
about for the right reason, in the right way, and expressed in the right way, and to the
right amount. Because all these things might be true. Somebody did cut me off in traffic
and the little gesture they made as they did so indicates that they did so intentionally.
I take this as an offense, and it's a sort of serious offense. But if I just sort of
yell back at them or hit the horn, I suppose this culture being what it is, that would
be a considerable rational response. On the other hand, if I sort of ram them from behind,
that would be clearly an irrational response. So doing it in the right way to the right
degree is an essential piece of the phronesis, the good judgment that goes into anger. And
Aristotle also says here that if you have good reason to get angry, and you don't, it's
not that you're a saint, or that you're a superior human being, but rather you're kind
of a fool. Because Aristotle thinks that anger is not just one way of expressing yourself,
but Aristotle sees very clearly that it is sometimes required and obligatory in the situation.
And finally, let me get back to love. Now there are Romanics who think that love is
always rational. And the rationale here is that love is just a wonderful emotion. And
such little phrases as better to have loved and lost would suggest that love is always
a good thing. And love is never as such misdirected, that love is always appropriate and therefore
irrational. There are other Romanics who would say love is always irrational. And they use
metaphors like being swept away. But of course, this isn't a negative statement about love.
It's rather part of its charm, that it's something we should strive for, we should hope for,
this idea of love sweeping us away and sort of bringing us into some other zone or some
other place. Well, I think both of these positions are wacko. And it's not because I'm not a
Romanic, I think I am. But it's rather the idea that love is always rational, or the idea
that love is always irrational. Plus, of course, the idea that love is something that sweeps
us away, which I'll talk about in the next lecture, I think all this is the wrong way
of talking about love. Now sometimes people say, love is irrational because it's a matter
of chance, or a matter of serendipity, a kind of luck, that you meet somebody just at a party,
on a train, or even in a little traffic altercation, and things happen, you fall in love, and you
spend the rest of your life together happily ever after and all that. Well, that doesn't
make love irrational. Like so many things in life, it just says that love can't be thoroughly
planned out, that love often just happens. But to say that it just happens again is something
I want to raise as a serious question in the next lecture. Or it said that love is irrational
because it's subjective, it's distorting. And we talked about this in the love lecture,
and I said, when you see your beloved as beautiful, whereas everybody else sees her as just another
woman or just another guy, is this distorting on your part? Is it just subjective? And I want to
say, no, no, that's what all emotions are about. That emotions, in fact, do see things in a certain
kind of way. And I use the phrase that love bestows virtues. And of course, other emotions do this
too. But it's to say that the talk about distortion and talk about mere subjectivity here doesn't
work. They were talking about something much more profound and consequently much more rational
than that. There are ways in which love can be clearly irrational. Well, let's just name
a few of the obvious ones. Love can be foolish if you fall in love with someone who is utterly
inappropriate to love. People who fall in love, for example, with very young nieces or nephews.
That's inappropriate. And it's irrational. And people say, well, I can't help it. Well,
the truth is, of course, you can help it. That when you fall in love, and I'm talking
here obviously about erotic love, there are all sorts of breaks and controls you can put
on this. And again, this will be fodder for the next lecture. It's also possible to love
someone who is impossible. Women who fall in love with married men or unmarried men who
fall in love only with married women. There's a sense in which they're doing is they're
setting themselves up. This is a love that can't possibly come to fruition. Now, that
may in fact be part of the strategy. But the important point is that it's irrational in
the sense that insofar as love is an attempt to form some sort of enduring bond, to choose
someone for whom that bond is impossible is already irrational. And finally, people love
too much. It's one thing to love a person. It's another thing to love them to death.
Or in effect, to suffocate them. Or to become so obsessed that you act irrationally. So
these are all ways in which love can be irrational. And there are probably many more too. But
to balance that last one, let me also point out that one of the charms of love is that
love is tenacious. It holds on. It has a way of seeing its way through all sorts of obstacles
and frustrations. And that I have to say is certainly one of love's most obvious virtues.
So on all these, the question of whether it's appropriate, inappropriate, possible, impossible,
rational, or not rational is going to be a matter of very particular attention to the
particular circumstances, the particular people, and so with emotions in general. We don't want
to talk about emotions being generally rational, generally irrational. But what we're always
going to be talking about is, is this emotion on this occasion rational or irrational? Is
it wise or foolish? Does it enhance or subtract from the quality of our lives?
