Lecture 15 Beyond Boohoo and Hooray
Among the many judgments that go into an emotion, there are judgments of what you might think
of as approval, disapproval, evaluations of good and bad, and when I talked about the
various dimensions of judgment that went into an emotion, I really skimmed over this
very quickly because it's so obvious that I didn't think it needed much mention.
But even so, it's rather ambiguous because on the one hand, there are evaluations in
an emotion. Emotions take things to be positive or negative, good or bad. But at the same
time, there are also evaluations of the emotion. So we see certain emotions, and we're generally
certain emotion types as being good or bad. Anger, for example, is inappropriate and destructive
sometimes, and so we disapprove of it. Envy, I would say, is almost always an unfortunate
emotion. But there's a difference here between talking about the judgments that constitute
or are in emotion and the sorts of judgments we make about emotions. Now, there is a very
longstanding tradition in talking about emotions to talk about them in terms of positive emotions
and negative emotions, or what philosophers and psychologists borrow in a term from chemistry
sometimes call valence, plus or minus. Sometimes, this is reduced to the simple dichotomy of
pleasure and pain, or pleasure and unpleasure, and this in turn is reduced to some very basic
physiological response. So once again, what we find is that what in fact is something
very complicated and sophisticated and cultivated about emotions is reduced to something which
is very basic, crude, and unintelligent. And what I'd like to do in this lecture is to
characterize what I see as the complexity of valence, or the complexity of the opposition
of so-called plus and minus, and see exactly what goes on when we talk this way. In your
booklet, we've included a chart showing the variety and complexity of these different
dimensions of evaluation. Some of them have to do with health, some of them have to do
with ethics, some of them have to do with the goodness and badness of the emotion itself,
some of them have to do with the attitude towards the object, some have to do with the
attitude towards the subject, and so on. And I urge you to sort of check this out as you
hear the complexity of the lecture that follows. I entitled the lecture, Boo and Hooray, because
the idea is often that an emotion is essentially something for or something against. And what
I'd like to argue is that it is very rarely as simple as that. And as for pleasure and
pain, these to me strike as a kind of a problem. I will say in this lecture, somewhat of an
overstatement, that there is no such thing as pleasure. And it's not because I'm at
killjoy, it's just I think pleasure is by itself something so complicated that can't
be reduced to a single kind of experience or feeling. And pain is something I'd like
to say is not just the other side of pleasure. They're not two sides of a coin. Pain and
suffering to start with are two very different kinds of experience. And I think we have to
appreciate how complex all this is. But let's start by just talking about a few emotions
again. Love is an emotion which is often considered the most positive emotions. But except in
philosophy and psychology and the idealization of love that goes along with that. The truth
as we all know is that love involves a lot of pain. Love is not just positive. Love also
involves jealousy and anger. So anyone who says that love is the most positive emotion
and leaves it at that, I'd say is naive. Or anger. Anger is often top of the list of
the negative emotions. And to be sure anger involves a lot of hostility and negative feelings
towards its object, the person who has been so offensive. But as I pointed out in talking
about Aristotle, anger can also be right on the mark. It can be righteous. It can be importantly
instrumental, for example, in fighting oppression or in motivating one to sort of change an
unpleasant or impossible situation. What's more, one can even enjoy anger. And this is
no insignificant point. That how can one enjoy a negative emotion? Fear, another negative
emotion. But as I pointed out in that lecture, fear is perhaps the most important, most valuable
of all of our emotions. Without fear, we would perish. And so fear all the way down the line
down to the lowest animals serves a very essential instrumental version. But as I also
pointed out, we can enjoy fear. People who go bungee jumping, people who go in for all
sorts of extreme sports, or people who go to horror pictures or tragedies are enjoying
their fear. So it's not so simple as saying love is a positive emotion, anger and fear
are negative emotions, but they're all sorts of evaluations that are going on here. Now
there's another sense in which we evaluate emotions on the basis of their healthiness.
So we're told that anger, at least anger bottled up, is bad for us. And there was a very popular
movement about 30 years ago when people started talking about type A personalities and so
on and how these were more conducive to certain dreadful diseases. And they all had to do
with having certain sorts of emotional temperaments. As opposed to the sorts of things we read
when we're told that love is good for you, or that compassion makes you live longer.
Now I don't know whether any of this is true, but it seems to me what's important is that
again it's kind of simple minded and confuses the issue. Because what might be healthy for
you might nevertheless, in other respects, be a quite negative emotion. Maybe it turns
out that anger and hatred prolong your life because you're so furious that you just want
to stay around to cause the other person grief. I don't know. But the idea that health is
one thing and the positivity, negativity of the emotion is something else is a very important
insight. So in general, my claim is going to be this. That when we're talking about valence,
when we're talking about the positive and negative aspects of emotion, we're talking
not just about a simple distinction between, say, pleasure and pain, but rather what we're
talking about is a very complicated network of different kinds of evaluations or different
kinds of appraisals, some of which are constitutive of the emotion. They're actually in the emotion
itself and others of which are about the emotion and about its consequences and so on.
Now, this way of talking in terms of valence, positive and negative leads to another distinction
I'd like to throw into question. And that is the popular idea that emotions are opposites
or have opposites. The most obvious example is love and hatred, which we've talked about
several times. And the important point here is that love and hatred may be in one sense
in one dimension opposites, the most obvious one that love is positive, hatred is negative
towards its object. But obviously, there's a lot more going on. And what I'd like to
talk about is all these different kinds of goings on.
Start with the idea that's been central to the course, that the psychology of emotions
really has a lot to do with ethics and the concept of the good life. And so you might
think the approval, lack of approval, that goes into our estimation of emotions has to
do with whether they are conducive to or counter to good ethics, good living. But right away
we hit another ambiguity. And that is there are different conceptions of ethics. And some
of these are distinct in different cultures, but also say within our own culture. They
are sort of playing against one another as sort of rival conceptions, or in philosophy
as rival theories about emotions. So for instance, there's a distinction between
right and wrong, fairly elementary, but whether something is right or wrong has a lot to do
with certain kinds of rules or principles. Philosophically you might think of this as
especially championed by the great philosopher Immanuel Kant, who talked about ethics in
precisely this way, that there are certain kinds of rules of rationality and these determine
whether an action is right or wrong. But there's also sort of counter movement in philosophy
and ethics. It's called utilitarianism, many of you know about it. Such figures as Jeremy
Bentham, John Stuart Mill, and what they argued was that what makes an action good or bad is
consequences. And in particular whether it adds to the sort of pleasure and happiness
of people or subtracts and gives them pain or causes harm. These are very different philosophies,
very different theories, very different conceptions. And of course we have as part of our sort
of ethical apparatus, both notions and sometimes, for example when somebody breaks the rules
but with very good consequences, we're sort of torn about which conception of ethics should
be given priority. And finally there's another conception of ethics which I've worked on
quite extensively and that is something you might call virtue ethics. It is intrinsic
to Aristotle. It is also the heart of what I'd say is often misunderstood as Nietzsche's
ethics. But to talk about virtue ethics is to talk about virtues and vices. And obviously
what counts as a virtue, what counts as a vice is going to have a lot to do with the
particular culture. Now the reason I introduce this little mini lecture in ethics is because
whether an emotion is positive or negative is going to depend in part on which of these
conceptions of ethics goes into the judgment of an emotion. So if it's emphasizing obedience
to certain sorts of rules, it might be positive in one sense. But then if you look at the
consequences and whether it causes harm or pleasure, it might have a very different kind
of consequence and a very different kind of evaluation. Or something might be virtuous
but nevertheless cause disastrous consequences all around. Dostoevsky has a wonderful, very
long novel called The Idiot in which a perfectly good, in fact saintly man causes havoc with
everything he does. He makes all the right decisions in terms of being virtuous and they
always have disastrous consequences. Well how do we evaluate that? And in terms of emotions,
what kind of ethics is really critical? Now all this depends on a certain kind of view
which is as I say particularly simple minded that emotions are about something and what
they're about has to do with a simple sort of pro or con kind of evaluation. But let's
go back to anger for example. Because one notes that in anger one has to be sure a very
negative evaluation of the other person. But as I argued in the lecture on anger, what
we also find in anger is a very positive evaluation even if it's a defensive evaluation
of oneself. So on the one hand it's negative, negative about the object. On the other hand
it is positive, positive about the subject. And what is the relationship? Well obviously
the relationship is one of antagonism. But if it's righteous anger one might very well
say and well it should be because the evaluation here is going to be very mixed as well. In
love it's pretty obvious that we do have a positive evaluation of the other person. But
what's also maybe not so obvious is that when we're in love one tends to have a positive
evaluation of oneself or more properly speaking one has a very positive evaluation of the
relationship itself. In hatred it's even more intriguing because obviously again there's
a kind of equality here. It's an emphasis on the relationship rather than the subject
or the object. But what it amounts to is a kind of on the one hand respect mixed with
a kind of hostility. And so plus and minus valence really is of limited value here because
we look as if we're talking about a single evaluation. In fact we're talking about multiple
evaluations. Now when we talk about pleasure and pain it seems to me that we're also cheating
in a very simplistic sort of way. Spinoza one of the great philosophers writing about
emotions actually lists pleasure and pain as emotions themselves in fact as the basic
emotions. A sort of neo-spinozian Dutchman Niko Freide who is one of the great philosophers,
psychologists, phenomenologists of today follows Spinoza here and talking about pleasure
and pain as utterly basic but disagrees with him that they're emotions themselves. Nevertheless
he wants to say pleasure and pain are essential components of every emotion. But again let
me pull back here and ask what we mean by pleasure and pain. Are pleasure and pain opposites?
Are they as so often depicted? Simply like points on a thermometer where you go above
zero and we're in the realm of pleasure and you finally get to the highest pleasures something
like ecstasy and then you go down below zero and it starts to be painful and you get to
the bottom of the scale and I guess it's what we would call agony. Is it really like that?
Are pleasure and pain on the same scale? Are pleasure and pain commensurate? Are pleasure
and pain even measurable? Now of course on the one hand the answer is well yeah I mean
we talk about whether you enjoy this more than that and particularly easy if you're
talking about things of the same sort like do you enjoy hot cocoa more than you enjoy
weak tea? Well yeah so there's a kind of measure but it's crude and as soon as you start mixing
genres you hit an important problem of incommensurability. Do you like hot cocoa as much as you like a
good massage? Do you like hot cocoa as well as you like reading a wonderful poem? And suddenly
we're not quite sure what to say but with a couple balancing pleasure and pain then
we're really in trouble. Suppose you can have the great pleasure of having dinner with
your favorite philosopher but the cost will be you have to spend three hours at the dentist.
Now the truth is we make such practical decisions all the time but are we really measuring the
pleasure against the pain? Well there are some philosophers who think that's exactly what
we're doing. The most important name here is Jeremy Bentham, an 18th century philosopher
who talked rather extensively in terms that I just labeled utilitarian which have to do
with the idea that ethics is wrapped up in the comparison and the measurement of pleasure
and pain. So you have a course of action that you're intending and you sort of add up the
pleasures that will give to everyone involved and you add up the pain or the harms that
will be involved with everyone involved and you look at the number and if a course of
action gives more pleasure than pain it's good and recommended and if something causes
more pain than pleasure it is not recommended. Well Bentham had a rather intricate calculus
for talking about this but it all got sort of thrown to the wind by one of his brilliant
young disciples, a fellow named John Stuart Mill because John Stuart Mill who was also
a utilitarian in fact emerged as the most famous of the utilitarians, he had a question
here and what Bentham had assumed was as he put it in a rather crude analogy he said
pushpin a sort of mindless game of the 18th century, pushpin is as good as poetry and
the idea is that if pushpin or you might think of balling or solitaire as a game that gives
you pleasure then it is just as valuable, just as important as reading poetry if that's
what gives you pleasure. There's no qualitative difference, only quantitative difference.
What Mill responds is that there are important differences in quality as well as in quantity
and what this does of course is it throws that neat little calculus all to bits because
the truth is that as soon as you're measuring different kinds of qualities the question
comes in, okay in that case how do you weigh them against one another. Now what Mill is
doing here is really throwing up a question not just about the nature of utilitarianism
but the whole question about pleasure and pain and whether they can be measured whether
they can be compared. So the idea is that if we really value philosophy which Mill valued
or poetry which he also valued and we think that these are superior activities to balling
or solitaire or simply playing in the mud then what we have to ask is what are the natures
of pleasure and pain such that we can talk about these things at all. Now to make it
more complicated I said in the beginning of the lecture that I really don't think there
is such a thing as pleasure. What do I mean by that? Well it's a point made by Aristotle
many years ago because Aristotle worried about what is pleasure and thought about the different
kinds of pleasure and came up with a conclusion that there really isn't any such experience
as pleasure although he didn't use that language but rather to talk about pleasure is to talk
about things that we enjoy. Now we enjoy tastes, we enjoy sensations, we enjoy different kinds
of experiences but we also enjoy doing things, activities and in particular we enjoy doing
things well. In fact as Aristotle talks our primary source of enjoyment is doing things
very well. Excellence is the sort of hallmark of his whole philosophy. Now interesting sort
of psychological gloss on this that if we do something well but we also learn to do it
routinely the amount of pleasure it gives us diminishes so it may well be if you wear
laced up shoes and you tie your shoes pretty much competently automatically every morning
even if you do so excellently. I doubt if it's going to give you much pleasure but if you
imagine a child who's just learning to tie his shoes it gives great pleasure indeed to
do this well and so too for any difficult task. If you're learning to play the violin
or you're learning to play a sport at first it's a lot of work, it's a lot of effort and
then when you master it it gives a lot of pleasure but as you then routinely practice
it the pleasure diminishes. And Aristotle's thesis which is reinforced here by contemporary
psychological research is that enjoyment is what pleasure is really all about and enjoyment
has to do with among other things mastering what you do but it's not an experience in
itself it is not a separate item as Aristotle puts it pleasure completes the activity it's
not something that's simply added on but rather it is part of the activity itself so to talk
about pleasure as such is really a kind of empty way of talking. Now by contrast one
can really talk about pain. Pain is real there is no question about it but even pain has
certain kinds of puzzles attached to it. For example take something that is we think
intrinsically painful and ask yourself what makes it so? Well it all depends on the context
for example as a male over the age of 40 if I have chest pains they're much worse because
of the fact that I have sort of sneaking suspicions of various terrible things that it might represent
the pain itself might be pretty negligible but the pain plus the interpretation the pain
plus the meaning is profound. One might say what I've pointed to here is the difference
between pain on the one hand that is the sensation itself and suffering and you might say well
there's a sense in which only people really suffer at least in this way that they interpret
their feelings their pains as signifying certain sorts of meanings. Well that means it's not
just the sensation but it's the context in which they're experienced. For an example
I like to use that has to do with enjoyment as well. Imagine someone biting you fairly
hard on the back of the neck now if you imagine if you're slightly rough lover and you turn
around and you're being bitten by your sweetie. What might be construed as a painful experience
is in fact enjoyed as a rather pleasurable one and we're all aware of the various ways
in which pleasure and pain can mix in a great many erotic and exciting experiences. But
if you turn around and it's Dracula that same sensations same pain suddenly it's not enjoyable
at all unless you're very strange but what you're getting out of this is an interpretation
of the bite which is very painful but it's painful not just because of the nature of the
sensations it's painful because of the context and the meaning. Now what all this means
is that talk about pleasure and pain is much more complicated than it originally seems.
Pleasure is not as such an experience although to be sure we have lots of pleasurable experiences
of doing things we enjoy experiences of being with good friends but it's not as if pleasure
is a feeling in itself. Pain by contrast does look a lot like a pain like an experience
in itself but especially when it becomes suffering it's not a simple set of sensations painful
sensations but it rather has to do with the interpretation the context in which we experience
these things. Now put all this together and what it turns out to look like is that pleasure
and pain are just a short hand way of talking about a bewildering range of different kinds
of experiences and so too I want to talk about valence or positive and negative emotions.
To be sure we all understand what's being said when somebody says you're angry again
and it's really a negative way to be in the world. Okay sensible enough but what that
does is it collapses a great many different kinds of considerations some of them talking
about the construction of the emotion itself the fact that anger involves a kind of hostile
interpretation of its object but some of it is a kind of evaluation of the status of the
emotion itself. It's not good for you it's unhealthy or it's not appropriate for the
occasion it's embarrassing or humiliating. It can also be something like well it's self
indulgent so it isn't a virtuous emotion at all but at least in this context it's rather
a vicious one. So the idea is that all this is much more complicated and that's part of
my overall campaign in these middle lectures and that is that emotions are much more complicated
much more sophisticated much more detailed and perplexing than we normally expect them
to be. And when we reduce the complexity of emotion to something as simple as positive
and negative or something as crude as pleasure and pain I think what we're doing is again
not understanding the importance that emotions play in our lives and the rather subtle distinctions
that we find both within and about emotions because again it seems to me that sort of
basic ambiguity about valence in an emotion and valence about emotions that is appraisal
approval of emotions as opposed to in emotions is really essential here and also I don't
want to sort of pry these too far apart because what we think of an emotion is often going
to be an important component of the emotion itself. It's the nature of human existence
that we are aware of what we feel and our awareness of our feelings in turn affects
the feelings themselves. So when for example you've been raised to think of pride as sinful
not surprisingly one of the components of pride for you is going to be a certain sense
of awkwardness and having done something wrong even as you're feeling very good about what
it is you're proud about or if you've been raised to think of love as one of the grand
virtues of life. It's going to be quite natural that you're going to experience lack of love
or loss of love with a kind of real sadness a kind of humiliation even if it's a matter
of having just gotten out of a terrible relationship. Now this idea of reflection and the emotion
it's reflecting is self-central again to the idea of emotional intelligence. What I want
to say about valence here is that the kinds of evaluations we have over emotions positive
or negative or much more refined and convoluted the kinds of evaluations we make over emotions
are going to itself be an important part of our emotional lives. Just end with an obvious
example I get angry at a colleague and not just the expression of anger but the anger
itself I find humiliating and so there's another emotion embarrassment or humiliation
that goes on top of the anger and at the same time I might realize that no but in this case
I'm right and so I get mad at myself for being embarrassed and of course this kind of layering
of emotion on top of emotion by way of different kinds of appraisals is something we all find
quite familiar but what I want to suggest is that this is characteristic of the emotions
itself that it's not just a matter of positive and negative but it's a matter of an emotional
world which like the world itself is very detailed and complicated and has to be understood
in its own terms.
