Lecture 24 Happiness and Spirituality
In this last lecture, I'd like to bring emotional intelligence to a kind of culmination, because
after all, it may be true, as I've been saying, that emotions give us insight, that emotions
are intelligent, that emotions are ways of engaging with the world, but what good is
that, one might ask, if it doesn't help you lead a better life, if it doesn't result
in happiness?
Well, I'd like to try and answer that question in a number of different ways, but let me
start by going back to something we've already established, I hope, and that is that emotions
can be rational, and I take this in a very serious way.
It's been shown in many different ways that emotions are necessary for rationality, necessary
for rational decision-making, and so the two work in tandem, and so to lead a good life
as many philosophers have argued, is to lead a rational life, but I would say it also follows
that to lead a good life is to lead a passionate life, and that's what this is going to be
about.
One might say that rationality is not just the capacity to figure things out, it's not
just something you learn from books, theories, and the like, but rationality ultimately comes
down to caring about the right sorts of things.
Now, what counts as the right sorts of things?
Of course, it's going to be a matter of considerable debate, and in fact, I would say much of contemporary
politics rests just on that question, whether caring about the right things is something
that's up to each individual or up to communities, or rather, whether it is something absolute.
I'm not going to answer that question, but I would like to talk about what the passionate
life entails, because the whole history of philosophy has been dominated by various philosophers
who have said something like, what is ultimately desirable is peace of mind, or what the Greeks
called a toroxia, or it's freeing yourself from disturbing emotions, or what the Greeks
again called apateia, what we call apathy.
I would want to hold a very different view of what the good life consists of.
It's a view that I get from Nietzsche and other philosophers, but it's a view that says,
no, what's important in life is being devoted, being passionate, being involved, being engaged,
and that's a very different vision of life.
When Nietzsche talks about these things, he uses the metaphor of the Dionysian, where
the Dionysian is, going back to the old Greek god of wine and frivolity, the Dionysian
is a life that's wild, but it's also a life that's heavily devoted, or one of my other
favorite philosophers, Hegel in the 18th century.
I mean, Hegel essentially argued that life should be a Bacchanalian revel.
Again, Bacchus and Dionysian are pretty much the same character, and the image is pretty
much the same.
But the idea here is that life is not just to be striven for in a kind of homeostatic
peaceable way, but rather life is to be lived through the fullest.
So what I'd like to talk about in this lecture is primarily this question about happiness
and the good life, and what that amounts to.
Now to talk about happiness, one has to start, I think, with the ancient philosopher Aristotle,
who's made many appearances in these courses.
For Aristotle, happiness, or what he called eudaimonia, was something like flourishing.
It didn't have to do with just a momentary state, but it had to do with living a whole
good life.
In fact, the wholeness of life was such that Aristotle even made the seemingly outrageous
comment that even when a person is dead, you can no longer say for sure whether he's happy
or not.
Why?
Because happiness is not a feeling for him, but rather it has to do with the fulfillment
of your life's dreams and expectations.
So if your children, for example, are after you're dead, arrested for a scandal, or otherwise
but smirks the family name, Aristotle would say, well, in that case, you weren't happy
after all, even though you might have had an otherwise happy life.
So the idea of eudaimonia as flourishing as a full and happy and well-lived life is something
I want to take very seriously, and I want to juxtapose it with some of our contemporary
notions of happiness, which I think are, by comparison, rather trivial.
The first, of course, is the idea that happiness is a feeling.
It's a feeling which can be induced by various drugs.
It's a feeling that can be induced by just going to the right kind of setting, say a
comedy club again.
It's something which is transient.
It's something which may have no substance or foundation at all.
It certainly doesn't have anything to do with living well.
It doesn't have anything to do with accomplishment, achievement, doesn't have anything to do
with respect.
But we often talk about feeling happy as if that's our ultimate aim.
And I think even for us, it's not.
There's also a concept of joy.
Now joy is a wonderful emotion.
I occasionally experience it myself.
Joy is a high.
It's a kind of ecstasy, but it's not completely unrelated to what's going on in the rest of
your life.
If you take joy in something, if you find something that causes you joy, that sort of
ties the emotion into the world in already a significant way.
Now related to joy, however, is peculiarly American mentality.
And it's what I called in an earlier lecture cheerfulness.
Now I'm suspicious of cheerfulness, partly because, as you can probably tell, I'm not
a particularly cheerful person.
But also it seems to me that it's been pointed out by many people in the world, Europeans,
Asians, Africans, and so on, that there's an American façade.
And the façade is one of being happy all the time, a very good novel, by the way, by
Laurie Collwin some years ago.
But the idea of cheerfulness, again, is perfectly superficial.
And it has an interesting history.
Two centuries ago, we were very much like our European heritage.
And the proper temperament for a good American was one of seriousness and piety and a certain
amount of concern.
Because everyone knew that life was tough, that it ended badly, that there were serious
issues in the world.
And so it was considered simply inappropriate to be too cheerful.
That changed interestingly enough in the 19th century when, for example, employers found
that they were having trouble with their workers because they didn't really like their jobs.
And so job satisfaction and cheerfulness were encouraged as necessary parts of employment.
And in the home, women were getting a bit unruly and were often embittered by their
situation.
And so cheerfulness became a kind of façade, which they were expected to put on, as a way
of confronting what was otherwise perhaps an intolerable situation, but in any case
it caused their husbands much less trouble.
Now, these are not very pretty pictures.
But the idea is that cheerfulness is something that Americans have learned fairly recently
as a façade to the world, which, needless to say, most of the world does not find very
amusing.
Most Europeans look at Americans with their constant cheerfulness as kind of, well, sort
of idiots because life isn't to be that cheerful about.
So I want to be very careful here talking about joy and cheerfulness and not confusing
it with happiness, which is having a much more realistic conception of what life is
all about.
It's also supposed that laughter is a good indication of happiness.
And sometimes it is.
But as we saw in the last lecture, laughter can express lots of things besides happiness.
Laughter can sometimes be a function of gallows humor.
Laughter can sometimes be a matter of ridicule.
Laughter can sometimes be a matter of repressed sexuality.
And I wouldn't say that any of these things are tantamount to happiness.
Perhaps the most fascinating, there was a theory about 20 years ago by a fellow named
Chicks and Mihai, which is simply summarized in the word, word, flow.
And the idea is that there's a special kind of high, special kind of feeling, which comes
with usually intense activity.
For example, long distance runners are perhaps the best example of people who experience
flow.
As a writer, I can say that on my good days, I feel something very much like it, although
it's not a physical activity.
But nevertheless, it's getting into my work in such a way that I'm almost on another level
above my life.
And it's a beautiful feeling.
But what's important here is that it is directly attached to what I'm doing.
It is not just a feeling which could be, say, artificially induced.
But when Aristotle talks about happiness, or Eudaimonia, what he most often emphasizes
is the fact that it is, in fact, part of an activity.
In fact, Aristotle, when he discusses pleasure, rejects the idea that pleasure is a feeling
or a sensation, and rather he says that pleasure is something you find when you enjoy doing
what you're doing, and you enjoy doing what you're doing when you do it very well.
So he says that happiness consists of enjoying what you do, doing it very well, and the pleasure
of it comes along as he says it's like the bloom of youth, which I've never understood.
But the idea, I think, I get pretty well.
And that is, pleasure is sort of a bonus you get when you're doing good things.
And happiness, overall, happiness has to do with living the kind of life that you want
to live, that you ought to live according to the best standards that you can find.
So happiness is not just a matter of feeling, it's not just a matter of facade, it's not
even just a matter of enjoying what you're doing at the time, but it's looking at a whole
life.
And emotional intelligence, I want to say, is the emotional sensitivity to care about
the right things, to vote yourself to the right things, get involved in the right things,
and that's going to be what the good life is all about.
But there's a problem here.
And it's a problem that I get, again, from some of my favorite philosophers, but also
some of my favorite musicians and artists, and my own upbringing, which is, among other
things, Eastern European, not a set of societies which are best known for their constant laughter
and good humor.
And it has to do with what you might call the romantic sensibility.
I was listening to a new study the other day of the great composer Beethoven, who suffered,
it now seems, from lead poisoning all of his adult life.
And the doctors who sort of diagnosed this said that from the late 20s onward, Beethoven
probably never had a pain-free, satisfied day in his life.
And then you listen to the music.
And what you get expressed in the music is unmistakably a kind of joy, a kind of spirituality,
a kind of elevation, that it's hard to imagine coming from someone who was just playing miserable
so much of the time, or reading Nietzsche.
I read Nietzsche, and I'm just always buoyed up by just the lyricism and the excitement
and the enthusiasm of his expression.
And yet I know Nietzsche pretty well.
He spent his entire life with great many ailments.
He didn't sleep well.
He was taking various medications.
He watched his diet very carefully.
He was in pain, serious pain, much of the time.
And yet here's this life.
Now, were Beethoven and Nietzsche happy?
Well, in one sense, certainly in the American sense, the answer is obviously not.
But it seems to me there's something missing here.
And what's missing is the whole idea of a passionate life, which isn't just a matter
of enjoying what you're doing, which isn't just a matter of devotion, but it's a matter
of being so obsessed with something that you really believe in, something beautiful,
something creative, that nevertheless we want to say, these are admirable lives.
And so the question is, should we call them happy?
And I think there's good reason to think so.
But what makes a happy life?
Here's an image.
If you watch a puppy at play, it's easy to get the thought, and this is why we have puppies,
it's easy to have the thought, that's happiness.
This sort of unbridled, unrestrained play with the world, and just you watch a puppy
sort of jumping in joy and so on and you think, that's happiness.
Well, maybe, but it's not a human happiness.
The question is, what makes a happy life?
That's required.
It can't just be good health and enjoyment and all those other good things.
There's something missing.
To get to what I think is missing, I want to make a very perverse turn.
This is a novel by Jean-Paul Sartre with the unappealing name, Nozzea.
The title was supplied by his publisher, interested in the enough.
But Nozzea is the story of a truly miserable young man.
He's quite unpleasant.
He is very cynical and even cruel to the people around him.
He's utterly in despair about his life and what he does.
And I want to use this as an example.
As a way of setting up the question, what is it to be really happy?
One might contrast the character in Nozzea, whose name is Roketan, with the character
I talked about in a much earlier lecture in Camus' famous novel, The Stranger.
Because the character in Camus' novel is very much like a puppy.
He goes through life.
He sort of enjoys things.
He's not very sensitive to the responses of people around him.
He has no clear moral sense.
And this is a very appealing picture of a different sort of perverse sense.
But the character in Nozzea, to the contrary, is reflective all the time.
He thinks about his life.
And what I want to argue is it's the reflection that makes him so miserable.
It's not that he has a bad time of it, but rather he keeps thinking about what he ought
to be doing, what he ought to be.
He keeps thinking about what the people are that he meets and what they represent.
And it's the reflection itself that brings him down.
So here's what I want to say about Nozzea.
This is a character who is so unpleasant and so unhappy because of the way he reflects
on his life.
Now in earlier lectures, I've touched on this notion of reflection.
And one of the points that I keep making is the reflection isn't something over and
above emotion.
It's not as if there's a kind of emotion going on down here.
And then from some distant point, you're looking down at it and sort of producing a commentary.
Quite the contrary.
Reflection and emotion, at least in adult human beings, are part of the same process.
Sometimes the reflection can get more detached, such as when we step back and ask ourselves,
what are you doing right now?
Do you really want to get this angry at this person right now?
Or is this a person you really want to fall in love with?
But for the most part, reflection and emotion are intertwined.
They're part of the same process.
Now let me turn to happiness because what we want is a happy life.
And if you think of a happy life in terms of living like a puppy, unconcerned, playful,
and so on, I'm sorry if you're over the age of three, you're not going to have that.
But what we do have is a reflective life.
And so I want to make the seemingly outrageous comment that thinking you're happy is a huge
part of being happy.
The experiences that most Americans have most of the time are, as far as the general run
of humanity goes, pretty privileged and pretty enjoyable.
Most of us do not suffer the kinds of anxieties, the kinds of pains that too many people in
the world suffer daily.
And yet how we think about ourselves, whether our emotions on a reflective level turn out
to be things like envy and resentment, have a lot to do with how happy we are.
So here's my thesis, and it comes straight out of sight.
The thesis is that what our lives are is not just a matter of what we devote ourselves
to, what we engage in, but it's how we think about these engagements and how we think about
these sorts of devotions.
One might think of love in this context.
To be in love, I suggested many lectures ago, is not just a question of feeling very attracted
to or very close to another human being.
Our Western conception of love is very much captured in that little saying of LaRouche
Foucault that I love to quote.
How many people would be in love if they didn't know the word?
And I think that's very profound in part because love is a reflective emotion.
It's something that one might discover after having found oneself attractive for some amount
of time.
But most important, it's thinking that one is in love, that makes one in love.
Now again, that's not wholly the case.
If you viscerally find the person ugly, it's going to be very hard no matter how many times
you say it to sort of convince yourself that you love them.
But nevertheless, an essential part of love mixed in with whatever emotion is there to
start with is the idea that I love you.
It's a very important part of loving.
Now what all this has to do with is a term that I've introduced recently, which I find
very important in this context, and it's the idea of emotional integrity.
Emotional integrity and emotional intelligence, I think, kind of go hand in hand because emotional
intelligence is the insight we have through our emotions.
The emotional integrity we have is a more explicitly ethical notion, and it has to do
with living a good life.
But here I want to go back to some of the same considerations that I've just reviewed.
Having a happy life can't just be feeling good, certainly not transiently feeling good
at the moment.
It can't just be cheerfulness or even joy.
It can't be laughing all the time.
It can't just be that kind of special high that runners and writers occasionally get.
And even enjoying one's activities, as Aristotle argues, by itself isn't enough because these
good feelings or these good emotions also need something else, and that something else
is value.
And here's where reflection comes back in.
Emotional integrity to me is not just consistency in one's emotions.
It's easy to be consistent in your emotions.
All you have to do is be fanatically devoted to one thing, and you're consistent.
That's not emotional integrity.
I would say it's the exact opposite of emotional integrity.
Emotional integrity, for one thing, involves conflicting emotions.
I would say anyone who is at all aware at this point of the 21st century always has conflicting
emotions because there's always enough terrible things going on in the world.
There's enough to worry about just in terms of our own society.
There's enough conflict in our lives that the idea of a single focus on a single emotion
doesn't make any sense.
It's always going to be conflicts of all sorts, and it's managing the conflicts that's going
to be good life.
And I said values here, too, because managing conflicts is still sort of intra-psychic, it's
sort of saying, okay, here's my emotion repertoire, and here's how I put it together.
But put it together with what?
And here's where values come in.
I would suggest that emotional integrity, or what some of the existentialists would call
authenticity, has to do with not just feeling in a certain sort of way, but it's having
one's whole life tied up with the deeper values that one really believes in.
And that, of course, itself is a matter of emotional devotion.
To bring this to a head, let me talk about one sort of passionate life, which I find
particularly impressive, and as I get older, it becomes more and more important to me.
And that's the life of spirituality.
Now, let me make a couple preliminary points, because this is easily misunderstood.
First of all, spirituality, as I understand it, is not the same as religion.
Of course, people who are religious, often, perhaps even typically, also are spiritual
people, but not always.
Just one thing, religion tends too often to be dominated by sectarianism, a sense of
us versus them, we've got the true religion, they don't.
And that is emphatically not spirituality.
Spirituality is non-sectarian.
It's a kind of attachment to humanity and the universe as a whole.
So sectarianism is quite out of fashion.
Also, spirituality is not faith.
Now, faith might be a symptom of spirituality in certain religions, namely Christianity and
to a certain extent Judaism and Islam.
But faith is a very Western concept.
If you think, for example, about Buddhism and Taoism and other religions which don't
have, for example, a dominant single God, then the notion of faith makes much less sense.
Or at least it's much less central.
But spirituality, I want to argue, is a matter of passion.
It's not just a matter of philosophy, it's not just a matter of rationality.
It has to do with feeling the world in a certain kind of way.
Philosophers have talked about this in the past by talking about a sense of the sublime.
And sense of the sublime is actually a fascinating experience.
We've all had it.
Sometimes it comes with standing on a beach, watching a beautiful sunset, and of course
all this is a bit compromised by the fact that the same sunset has been the object
of so many postcards and so on.
But it's that idea, looking into the Grand Canyon, looking up at the stars at night,
and having that sense that I'm really not so significant, that my personal self is not
all there is to the universe.
That's what spirituality is.
Now as I said, spirituality is not necessarily tied to any religion, certainly not necessarily
tied to any organized religion.
But it's something that plays a very curious role in contemporary thought.
Because spirituality is sort of in between the doctrines of religion on the one hand,
and what is often called secular life on the other.
And for many years I've rebelled against that distinction between the secular and the
sacred, but I wasn't quite clear why.
And now I'm starting to see it.
And once again, I want to go back to two of my favorite philosophers to sort of give
them credit for giving me these ideas.
The first is Hegel, whom I mentioned just a little while ago, who had a conception of
the entire universe as a kind of grand spirit.
Now this was a radical idea insofar as it didn't take God to be something other than
the universe, but as a good Protestant, Lutheran in fact, what he thought was that God infiltrates
everything and everybody.
And so to make the distinction between God and humanity, or God and us personally, is
already to get our conception of the universe very wrong.
So spirituality for him, was it secular?
Well not really, but it didn't believe in other life or other world, but neither was
it sacred and religious in the usual sense.
And the second philosopher who made surprise you here is Nietzsche, because Nietzsche is
so well known for attacking religion, it's hard to imagine him as a champion of spirituality.
But he did, and he often sort of complained that what religion, Christianity in particular
had done, was it had turned what is essentially human and natural and magnificent in itself
into something which is simply otherworldly, something which we could never directly grasp.
Well, it seems to me that they were both right, that there is something about the sublime,
something about seeing the universe as much larger than oneself and consequently having
a certain sort of humility and a sense of insignificance with response to it, which
is not a debilitating or even a humiliating feeling, but rather it's something very elevating,
and it's something that I think we should take very seriously as a kind of culmination
of our passionate life.
One more point here.
It seems to me that all too often spirituality is taken as opposed to science.
Some very best-selling authors and some very good authors these days, I'll mention just
one, Thomas Moore, often talks about science as the sort of de-enchantment of the world.
Well, it seems to me that this is wrong and dangerous, that what science does is it sort
of increases our sense of spirituality by discovering more and more and more about the
world and how it works.
This isn't a new idea, Thomas Aquinas defended it back in the 13th century, that if you want
to really show devotion to God, then spend your time figuring out how he's made the
world work, and I think that's what spirituality is about, too.
Spinoza a few centuries ago also believed in something very much like Hegel's theory
that God and the universe are essentially one.
And consequently, he argued that once you accept and understand this proposition, then
what you're going to find is a singular emotion, one that he called bliss.
So too, one finds in many Buddhists who have a very different way of putting the same point,
namely that the universe and all of us are one, but it's sort of a non-being rather than
a being.
But nevertheless, they too would talk about a certain kind of bliss, nirvana that comes
out of all this.
So what all this amounts to is that emotions don't have to be specific and petty.
There is a lot to say about human emotionality that goes beyond envy, resentment, and other
such petty emotions.
And one of the most glorious things to say is that humans are capable of emotions that
take in the entire universe.
And that's really where I think we should end these lectures.
We genuinely hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our great courses series.
Our courses are available to order online.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12.
That's 1-800-TEACH-12.
Thank you very much.
