Anyone who's ever listened to Paul Simon's remarkable 1986 album, Graceland, knows that
something commercially and sonically big is happening.
Simon mixed South African rhythms and local choral melodies, his own catchy pop hooks,
and the sounds of African performers into a strange, seamless novelty.
What Simon accomplished on this album was a total revelation for many people.
The album is suffused with the sounds of the ghetto and black townships of South Africa,
like Soweto, and it was recorded during the zenith of the apartheid regime there.
For those of you who are too young to have ever heard this album, go out and download a copy.
In some ways, it heralded the dawn of a totally new kind of music, world music.
And world music, like Graceland, would come to be thought of by a lot of people as an
innovation that typified the optimistic promises of globalization.
Here, the voices and traditional sounds of people from two very different parts of the
world, South Africa and Manhattan, played with one another back and forth in a kind
of fusion.
And in the process, people in far-flung places would come to appreciate South African music,
albeit in a kind of watered-down way.
And in the process, they might get a glimpse of the problems of apartheid and become more
globally aware and sympathetic citizens, plus it was just a wicked, catchy record.
Now, some critics were less kind.
Beyond the controversy of Simon's traveling to apartheid South Africa during a time when
most musicians had embargoed boycott of the country, many saw this effort to use local
musicians as exploitative and not in the interest of South African musical culture.
As the late South African trombonist, Jonas Gwangwa, was said to have asked, quote,
so it's taken another white man to discover my people, unquote.
Many American and British musicians actually protested Simon in anger.
It was really quite a dust-up.
Many of the same charges made against Simon and Graceland would be lobbed at world music
more generally in the next few years.
Some saw it as a global mishmash of what should have been strong cultural traditions that
should be respected on their own.
Others viewed it as an exploitation of native and local musicians.
But these folks deserve their own stage, after all, not under the wing of a major international
record label or superstar like Paul Simon.
Why should sanitized global music be sold back to Africans when they already had their
own musical traditions?
Now, in these debates, we can hear many of the interests of geographers.
How does the local fit with the global?
How does world culture merge or dilute strong or even dying cultural traditions?
What's the relationship of places and people to one another in a global economy?
Geographic questions.
So what might a geographer actually make of all this?
Unsurprisingly, I'm going to tell you.
Professor John Connell at the University of Sydney and Professor Chris Gibson at the
University of New South Wales took a long, hard look at world music, its global economic
structure, its social organization, and its cultural power, and here's what they concluded.
It's complicated.
So on the one hand, they argued world music was merely, quote, a marketing category with
commerce and culture entangled and inseparable in a form of appropriation for western cosmopolitan
audiences, end quote, pretty harsh.
It was, in a sense, the global system fusing sounds into a palatable porridge for an elite
audience, burying the distinctiveness of local musical cultures and often burying the talent
of local artists and underpaying them in the process.
On the other hand, they concluded that for musicians, quoting here again, quote, world
music was an expressive project, which created identities that fused the local and global
traditional and modern, unquote.
So for some artists, they observed international success required some artistic compromise,
but it got them the resources of transnational companies.
So for Connell and Gibson, globalization is basically a double-edged sword.
That's the fascinating tension I'll discuss in the next half hour.
So to begin with, let's think about the worst case scenario.
As with places, it is possible to predict that economic globalization may heavily influence local
cultures, erasing the differences we see around us.
Just like the disappearing languages of Native Americans we described previously or the vanishing
neighborhoods of Beijing, we might make the bold pronouncement that the global economy
tends to remove the distinctiveness of cultures and cause distinct cultural practices to disappear
altogether.
Now, superficial evidence for this is actually mixed.
While many cultures in the world are coming to look the same as a result of globalization,
it's frequently the case that localities have become, in a way, more culturally diverse in themselves.
It's true, for example, that I can now order pizza in New Delhi very easily,
something that would have been much harder when I first set foot there in 1989.
In a sense, this makes Delhi less unique or less special in a way since you can pretty much get pizza anywhere.
On the other hand, looking back at food choices growing up in Denver, Colorado in the 1970s,
it was really difficult to find Indian food, which is now pretty common, pretty much ubiquitous,
and doesn't end there.
That city hosts Thai, Ethiopian, Indonesian, countless other cuisines.
That's even more startling, really, when thinking about the city in my parent's time,
when Italian food would have been considered, like, really exotic.
In this sort of simple way, globalization need not lead to cultural flattening and may encourage a kind of
inflorescence of differences within local places.
A second point is that local and regional cultures are pretty tenacious.
It's typically the case, in fact, that global commercial forces actually are forced to adapt
to local cultural conditions rather than mow them down.
Agander at the international menus of McDonald's drives home this point.
Though the franchise has a universal, generic, well-worn, antiseptic look and feel,
McDonald's actually bends its menu in startling ways, in deference to local tastes and culture.
Some examples.
The McArabia, served across Southwest Asia and North Africa, takes the form of a traditional pita sandwich,
but with chicken and beef patties served with tahini.
McDonald's in Japan offers the ebi filet au, that's a shrimp burger of sorts.
Indian vegetarians have a number of options, including a rice and vegetable burger called the McVeggie,
or a potato vegetable patty called McAlloo Tikki.
And in Australia, your English muffin can be ordered with Vegemite,
that uniquely Australian vegetable food paste.
Yeah, it's an acquired taste.
In Malaysia, the Baburayim McD, it's served as a thick rice porridge with chicken and chili.
So, even the most global and generic of commercial forces can't fully iron flat the regional and local cultures to which it connects.
And this appears to be good news, in a sense, for those of us who treasure difference, as most geographers do.
But a more careful look at the economy and culture gives us a number of other more troubling things to consider.
Specifically, cultural geographers often spend a lot of time researching what happens
when things that we think about as cultural, that is, local ways of doing things, local traditions, local practices,
when these come to be marketed as things you can buy.
This process is one geographers refer to as cultural commodification.
That's a term that simply describes the process where something culturally organic and local,
which emerges freely out of local tradition, is packaged to become a source of revenue.
Examples of this are countless, but they certainly include all the culture industries like music or tourism,
and they also include all the forms of unique cultural differences from dress to language to art,
which might be marketed for people to be consumed then as a good.
A process like that raises questions both about what happens to the consumer of cultural commodities,
as well as the producers of cultural commodities.
The consumer in this case is anyone who buys a cultural experience or a cultural object,
seeking to have a meaningful experience.
By definition, culture is a system of meaning.
What happens when you buy a meaningful experience?
The producer is the person, on the other hand, who actually makes the cultural experience
by either performing music or designing a dress or cooking a meal,
and in commodification what might have been an intimate relationship between the two parties becomes more complicated
as it gets entangled in global commerce.
When people go from making their own music to buying it,
what sort of relationship has been created between the artist and the listener,
especially if a record label sits in between?
While people living in rural Italian farming villages, for example, have their own local culture,
what happens to it when tourists from other countries or urban centers around Italy
come into town demanding to experience quaint village life?
Now, there might be some reasonable predictions that we can make.
First, from the producer's point of view, we might imagine a kind of decline in the richness of experience of their own culture,
a sort of drift away from authentic cultural expression in favor of marketed products
to the impoverishment of that culture and the loss of that unique cultural tradition.
This grim outcome might be coupled with the problem that much of the value from their work
might disappear into the hands of middlemen rather than be captured at the source.
This, in a sense, was the threat that Paul Simon's Graceland presented,
the possible exploitation of South African musicians and musical traditions
in the hands of global translators who might not understand or pay these performers
for their deep cultural traditions.
From the consumer's point of view, one might predict not only homogenization,
that is, the emergence of a kind of bland sameness to people's experience around the world
that we've already sort of discussed, but also a kind of alienation
where immediate and authentic cultural experience is replaced merely by the experience of purchasing something,
where buying culture, in other words, replaces living it.
This somewhat glum vision of the global cultural economy is made even more pessimistic
by considering just how rapidly local cultural traditions and local cultural artifacts
can be swept up in the global market.
The cycle that moves a musical experiment out of your garage
into the glaring lights of mass production and into the dustbin is frightening.
Stuff happens fast in the global economy, and given this reckless pace,
we might be concerned that local things that we feel are meaningful to us
might vanish in an instant, drawn into a global economic machine.
These might then suddenly appear again, but as product sold back to us from far away,
many cultural geographers have viewed culture in just this way.
Others have drawn this kind of pessimistic outcome into question.
The geographer Peter Jackson, who's a professor of social and cultural geography at the University of Sheffield,
is far more skeptical about whether the economy and commodification
can really alienate people from their own cultural experience through commodification.
First, he argues that this pessimistic view really overstates the degree to which any culture
is pristine or authentic in the first place.
I mean, what culture, from ancient times to the present,
isn't already a result of other economic interactions and global translations.
The Romans imitated the Greeks directly as a product of their brisk tourist trade in Greek ruins.
Ancient Olmec cultures intertwined with those of other Mesoamerican cultures through trade and so on.
All cultures, he asserts, quote, are commodity cultures to some degree, unquote.
And just because a cultural object enters an economy of trade doesn't mean it loses its meaning for people.
Second, Jackson wonders if searching for authentic cultural products,
those products untainted by modern economies, is just a little bit paternalistic and colonial.
I mean, why should Aboriginal people maintain their authentic culture
and not be tainted by the global circulating economics that the rest of us experience in a cosmopolitan world?
So we have a debate in cultural geography.
What's the impact of commodification on culture?
And in good geographic fashion, we'll answer that debate by looking at some examples from around the world.
Indigenous and traditional ethnic music is a good place to start,
since it tells us a lot about cultural difference and commodification,
especially as it's experienced by musicians, that is the producers of musical culture.
The Lunga and Munganiar castes of the deserts of Marwar in India are musicians, and they are a great example.
Their distinctive music was traditionally played at the royal courts of lords and rajas during the feudal period in Indian history.
And in the state of Rajasthan, that period actually lasted all the way up to Indian independence in 1947.
To hear their mix of percussion, harmonium, singing, and clacking rhythms is a totally unique and musical experience.
So go ahead and listen to a bit of this field recording from the 1960s.
Music
Awesome stuff.
But in the decades following independence, this music began to swiftly disappear.
Without court sponsors, there wasn't much money to be made in music.
Children in musical families began to want a different way to make a living.
This distinctive cultural tradition was therefore on the brink of extinction.
But this was all changed as tourism began to boom in the region.
People from around India, Europe, and the United States began to flock to this area to see forts and romantic desert vistas.
And they began to hear the music of the Lungas and Munganiars.
And it didn't take too long to revive the tradition, in part with the help from very hardworking cultural researchers and archivists,
but also with a shot in the arm from the hotel industry, from tour guides and international travel packages.
The musicians actually began to tour the world.
A sudden interest in learning traditional music swept through these communities.
Young people started clamoring to learn the kamaicha.
That's a 17-string bowed instrument made of mango wood and goat skin.
Cultural globalization in this way kind of meant cultural revival.
The price of this change was dramatic, on the other hand.
The late cultural researcher Sri Komal Kotari helped rescue this musical culture.
But he lamented towards the end of his life that though the tradition had been revived, it had also been impoverished.
Where these groups used to play a repertoire of like hundreds or even thousands of songs, all for special occasions,
all with really complex meanings.
Now, a single night's repertoire, whether it's performed in a village in India or a concert hall in New York or Paris,
it consisted of maybe a dozen songs, tops, constantly repeated musical themes.
In other words, the langas and mangas were returning, but their music was now a global commodity.
So is this a bad thing?
Want to consider this?
We might want to consider a parallel case, a comparative case.
But nashi are an indigenous people who live in the more remote parts of southwestern Yunnan province in China.
This puts the community in the mountainous boundary zone, not far from the country of Myanmar,
and very distant from the heart of the majority Han Chinese culture in the north and east.
So it shouldn't be surprising to you at this point in the course that the nashi have an extremely distinctive language
and local cultural traditions.
They have their own forms of dress and other regionally specific cultural practices.
And amongst these, nashi music is emblematic, but it's also kind of puzzling.
Called Deng Jing, the musical tradition calls on many tropes and metaphors of dominant Han culture,
but mixes these with the sounds from nearby Tibet.
And this builds a sort of cultural bridge between the nashi and the dominant Han Chinese culture.
The music has a distinctive style and is traditional, but only in the sense that it's maybe 500 years old.
That's not all that old by Chinese standards, but it's pretty old.
Now, the music was banned during the Cultural Revolution, and it's only begun to reemerge in the last few years,
especially again as tourism has begun to boom in the region.
In fact, local and regional authorities, party officials have begun to carefully position and package and market
nashi music to lure tourists into this unique cultural space.
Regional leaders, party leaders explicitly describe nashi music as an important part of local brand.
In a sense, nashi music has become a Chinese niche product, a commodity,
to earn export revenues by selling this part of Yunnan as a tourist destination.
So, does this mean cultural impoverishment?
Xiaobo Su, a professor of geography at the University of Oregon, has worked amongst nashi musicians for years,
and he's come to, rather, a more ambivalent conclusion.
For starters, nashi musicians who talk to Su all agree that without the tourist trade, there would be no nashi music.
Now, while they would prefer to be able to maintain the historic musical sounds and practices without the tourist trade
and all the compromises and headaches that tourism brings with it,
they all also admit that the market has been a boon for the music.
Just like with the langas and the mangas of India, this has encouraged many new people,
especially young people, to learn nashi music.
In this sense, the opportunity to sell their culture allows musicians to retain it and pass it along to others.
On the other hand, Su notes, the presentations and performances that nashi musicians present are actually carefully crafted performances,
not at all traditional, with inventive touches of political storytelling and very carefully staged modern elements,
set up especially for audiences from New York, but especially from Beijing.
Nashi music as a marketed brand depends on the image of authenticity, that people are getting, you know, the real deal,
even though what's being presented could not be interpreted as authentic in the historical sense,
in the sense that it actually resembles historical musical performances.
Arguably, the changes to the music and the performance make it seem more authentic
and make it a better product in the process.
The cultural losses that occur in this process are kind of hard to calculate.
It's odd and has a weird kind of alienating feeling to invent and perform back what the audience thinks is authentic,
even as the format is drifting away from what you understand to be local culture.
Now, this trick of simulating traditional things is as old as Buffalo Bill Cody's Wild West show,
where Indians performed as savages for applauding audiences, but here Su suggests it has an added poignancy.
In this case, it also allows a nashi minority community to claim an important economic and political position in China.
It's actually pretty unusual.
One government official explicitly, flatly stated to Su, for example, that, quote,
this brand, the Nashi Yunnan musical tourism brand, sings the high value of ethnic culture in an era of globalization
and shows the revival of Nashi ethnic culture in socialist China, unquote.
Those are the words of a party official.
Nashi musicians, as they innovate new kinds of authenticity, are gaining both money and power.
So what we see in both the cases of Marwar and Yunnan is a complicated dialectic between the culture and the economy.
As these local geographic musical traditions are impacted by globalization,
they submit to some of that universal flattening that globalization brings.
This applies traditional elements for market demands.
But at the same time, these traditions are allowed in the process to not only survive,
but also to emerge as something new and kind of different.
And this tells us a lot about the people who produce commodified cultures.
I mean, clearly for them, it's a bit of a mixed bag.
What does it mean to consume globalized culture?
Globalized cultural commodities, are we slowly slipping into a kind of bland global commodity culture?
Consider movies, one of the greatest consumer products of the last century
and one that represents a bellwether for globalization.
Given the overwhelming power of the American movie industry, after all,
its global reach and its marketing strategy,
one could predict the total elimination of consumer preferences for local and regional film.
The view from Hollywood would totally seem to support this global cultural trend.
As many of us who've been to the movies in the last few years can attest,
the giant action-based blockbuster movie dominates screens across the United States.
Despite the massive cost of making these movies and their frequent box office failure,
they remain the largest area of industry emphasis.
Now, why is that?
In part, this cultural trend is actually a product of globalization.
To make a significant profit on films at this scale,
it's essential that they're successful in international markets, especially China,
but also across Asia and even parts of Africa.
Now, as it turns out, movies like comedies translate really poorly between cultures
since every culture has a really different sense of what's funny.
And even more universal themes like romances are often too filled with talk, too much dialogue,
which this detracts international viewers because they're subtitles and they're dubbing.
But everybody appreciates a good exploding building.
It's the international language, in a sense.
So it's no surprise that we're deluged with very similar blockbuster films on our screens every summer in the United States.
Americans are only one fraction of the intended audience for these films,
and certain sameness becomes the inevitable result.
From this, we might tentatively conclude that consumers are faced with a homogenizing,
bland, global, cultural landscape, untreated by occasional building explosions.
Surprisingly, however, the global cinema landscape remains amazingly diverse.
Though American blockbuster films are the most conspicuous ones at movie houses around the world,
major industry centers for film actually exist all over the world.
The first and most vibrant of these, probably the most famous, is Bollywood.
Named for being an Indian Hollywood in the city of Bombay,
the studios there churn out no less than 1,000 films a year, mostly in Hindi.
The viewers for Bollywood films probably number more than two or three billion people every year
since they include people across India, but also Indians living abroad, around the world,
and other populations worldwide.
This is likely as large or larger an audience than the one for Hollywood cinema.
It's huge, and though Bollywood surely draws from tricks and imagery and themes that were invented in Hollywood,
sitting through a Bollywood movie tells you you're really watching something pretty culturally different.
It mixes action and dancing and comedy and shootouts and singing and love scenes and car crashes
and then more dancing.
I mean, these films are fabulously all their own.
And the plots of the films are borrowed from a whole jumble of sources including Hindu mythology,
but also Shakespeare, American westerns, modern Indian politics.
Their color and style are totally emblematic.
And Bollywood stars have fan bases that would make their western counterparts really jealous.
Websites dedicated to Bollywood stars get millions of hits
and sell an enormous amount of ad revenue.
Yet for all its global economic clout and commercial success,
one has to conclude that Bollywood is a uniquely regional cultural artifact.
A commodity, yes, merely commodified?
Definitely not.
And this isn't the only side of unique regional film.
How about Nollywood?
Along with the United States and India,
this is among the three largest film producing sites in the world.
Nollywood cranks out movies.
These movies aren't meant for theatrical release,
but are made straight for video in the hundreds every month.
And where is this film capital located?
Remarkably, the answer is Nigeria.
In a country stricken by development challenges and poverty,
Nollywood is a major commercial success.
The industry grosses in the hundreds of millions of dollars annually,
even though the production system could not differ more
from the major studios of either India or the United States.
Nollywood movies are typically shot on location,
in people's homes and in vacant lots,
by people using easily available digital cameras.
Though they're important regional stars,
many of the actors are amateurs, they're first timers.
The films have a gritty feel to them, a kind of super realism
that's powerful and, again, regionally and culturally unique.
Nollywood themes are wide-ranging.
They include things like ethnic struggles,
religious differences, romance,
witchcraft, and corruption.
And all of these themes are clearly born from the Nigerian experience.
There's no sense that Hollywood sensibilities
have any significant influence on Nollywood movies.
The market for these films is difficult to determine.
It's unquestionably global.
Nollywood DVDs appear in market stalls across all of Africa,
as well as everywhere that African people have settled,
including the Caribbean and South America,
and in most cities in the U.S.
So the globalization of movies allows us to, again,
draw some mixed conclusions about cultural commodity consumption.
It's pretty clear that major economic wheels
are turning in the international movie industry
billions of dollars of revenue on the line
and vast production systems churning out cinema.
But for consumers worldwide, it's pretty clear
that a single, homogenous, fast-food-style film product
is not necessarily the only thing on offer.
Whole regional film traditions are actually ascendant,
impartowing, strangely,
to the same globalizing forces of the economy
that seem to have such homogenizing impacts.
I haven't said anything here about the countless film industries
thriving in traditional languages worldwide.
These include cinema industries in major languages like Turkish
and French, of course.
The bizarre blockbuster Night Watch trilogy, if you've seen it,
all in Russian, that was an international smash.
But there are also far smaller regional language cinema traditions.
You can turn on your DVD or download a copy of Eldra,
a film all in Welsh about gypsy families,
or download Ava, a Catalan science fiction movie about a robot child.
Now, these movies aren't just in another language.
It's important to add that they're really like a whole other cultural world.
So what we've learned here is that there are reasons
to be concerned about the rate at which the global economy
embraces and markets culture,
because cultural difference can be turned into a commodity
by marketing it in art, tourism, fashion, and other industries.
Because of this, we might think that global cultural homogenization
and alienation might be the likely outcome.
But reviewing some of the case examples around the world,
we've been led to conclude that this situation is somewhat more complicated
than we might have predicted.
For producers of traditional culture, like traditional musicians,
the rise of cultural globalization has forced many changes
and modifications for new audiences.
At the same time, the opportunities in global markets
have allowed many traditional arts to survive or be revived,
even affording some musicians and regions new economic and political opportunities.
For worldwide consumers, we've also concluded that
cultural globalization is a mixed blessing.
The power of major economic players to dominate
and homogenize cultural products like movies, that's unquestionable.
At the same time, though, we've seen that the explosion
in the global circulation of culture has allowed
wholly new and unique cultural traditions to emerge.
Paul Simon's Graceland, the smash international music kit we can conclude,
was both a radically inventive effort with huge benefits for the artists
and for the listeners, but it's also a troubled global fusion
that risks the erasure of local sounds and the erasure of musicians themselves.
Of course, none of this addresses a more fundamental
or underlying question concerning the politics of all this cultural exchange.
In a world of fast-paced cultural change like the one I've described here,
who controls how we understand and interpret the world
and how do new meanings and cultural forms impact our political relationships?
Put simply, some cultural changes are desirable for certain groups of people,
while for others, not.
And the benefits and harm that come from shifting ways of understanding
the world through culture may differ from place to place.
Consider that many new cultural views and practices may collide with traditional ones,
or that imposing one form of culture over another can represent a somewhat violent encounter.
There is, in other words, not only an economics,
but also a politics to cultural geography,
one with its own complexities in a very quickly changing world.
And we'll turn to that fact in our next lecture.
Thank you.
