You
Your lecture is Dr. Paul Robbins
Dr. Robbins is the director of the Nelson Institute for Environmental Studies at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison, which serves as a world leader in addressing rapid global
environmental change. He previously led the School of Geography and Development at the
University of Arizona, and has taught at the Ohio State University. He holds a master's
degree and a doctorate in geography, both from Clark University.
Dr. Robbins has years of experience as a geographic researcher and educator,
specializing in human interactions with nature and the politics of natural resource management.
He is also the author of the foundational textbook, Political Ecology,
A Critical Introduction, and the award-winning Lawn People, How Grasses, Weeds, and Chemicals Make
Us Who We Are.
Maps. When you think about geography, you probably think about maps. The word geography itself comes
from the Greek, geography, literally meaning world writing or earth writing. Clearly,
maps are a fundamental part of world writing, since maps graphically describe the earth's
surface, its contents, and its patterns. Geographers use maps to analyze the relationship between
places and people. Maps can be used to show how things change over time. As we'll see in this
course, maps can be used to describe current and future patterns of culture, language, population,
climate, food, or health. Maps are a geographer's best friend. But as I'm going to argue here,
maps, no matter how important or essential a tool, are never fully true, and they always reflect the
culture and the society and the politics of the map maker. And since we'll be seeing a lot of
maps in this course, for the next half hour, I'm going to introduce you to how we make necessary
simplifications and we make choices to create maps, and how those choices inevitably reflect
cultural and political biases and sometimes reflect deliberate distortions. I'll also show
how maps can creatively be used to explore different cultures and why it's essential that we always
read maps critically. Consider one of the most basic geographic problems, mapping the earth.
The globe spinning in space after all is a sphere. So we're immediately confronted by a
difficult question that geographers and cartographers have worked to answer in a number of ways.
How do we represent a three-dimensional object on a two-dimensional map? This actually represents
a very real practical problem. Try this experiment. Take an orange, write your name on it with a
magic marker, and then unpeel it whole, trying to keep the rind in one single piece. Now lay that
flat on the table in front of you. What does it look like? Does it appear as a coherent single
sphere? Can you read your name? No, no indeed. Flattened this way, the orange appears in breaks
and fragments or as a long, strange spiral. This is a natural and inevitable outcome of the fact
that a spherical body, generally described using spherical trigonometry, has been rendered as a
flat two-dimensional object, distorting and changing the images on its surface. Trying to square this
circle is a mathematical problem, one that geographers solve using mathematical projections.
A projection is simply a mathematical way of taking the spherical coordinates of latitude and
longitude, and bending and stretching them into a two-dimensional representation to be seen on a
map. Now the mathematics of this enforces some interesting problems. That is, once a spherical
globe is represented in two-dimensional map form, it can never be fully accurate. Either the angles
and shapes on the surface of it have to be distorted, or the proportions and sizes have to be
distorted. You can keep the shape, the shape of continents and oceans perfectly correct,
but their sizes will be vastly distorted, or you can keep their proportion and sizes correct,
but their shapes will be changed. So to describe graphically, the surface of the earth means you
have to sacrifice one to get the other, or you can sacrifice a little of both. And there are many
examples of projections, all of which seek to solve this conundrum in different ways,
but there are always trade-offs or compromises. And the first kind of projection we'll look at
is called a conformal projection. Conformal projections are those which maintain angles
and shapes perfectly, but at the expense of accurate proportions or size. And most famous of these
is the Mercator projection. The Mercator projection is named for the cartographer and navigator,
Gerard Mercator, and it dates to around 1570. Mercator was interested in sailing,
and he wanted to help facilitate transit from Europe to the New World and to Asia.
And as a result, he was focused on producing a map that sailors could use with nice right angles
and proper shapes to get from one place to another. As such, a straight line on a Mercator map
between, say, Lisbon and Cuba describes the exact angles that a navigator would need
to successfully make the voyage. Now, this is incredibly useful if you're a sailor in the
16th century. Indeed, I would argue that it is a technological innovation that ranks high
in the history of the species. Go Mercator! A problem with the Mercator projection is that
in seeking to maintain the angles and shapes for sailing, vast distortions in the size of
continents and other features are introduced. To be more specific, the further you move away from
the equator in a Mercator projection, the greater the distortion is in sizes and the larger and
larger the continents become. Relative to their actual size, those things closest to the equator
maintain their proper proportions, while those closer to the poles are grossly exaggerated.
So the map that I grew up with in school during the early 1970s, which hung on the wall of our
classroom and was commonly used to teach children about geography of the world, was incredibly
distorted. It was a Mercator projection, which showed in particular Russia, Asia, Europe, Canada
and the United States as far larger than their actual size. The most notable distortion in this
regard was that Greenland on a Mercator projection appears to be as large or even larger than Africa,
which is really far from the truth. In fact, Africa is many, many times larger than Greenland.
So the Mercator map is perfectly useful and powerful map, but it was designed for sailing.
Used to teach American grade school children about geography, it's likely to cause some pretty weird
ideas about how the world looks. Of course, these distortions were politically useful at
certain periods. During the colonial era, they tended to show colonial powers like Britain as
terrifically large relative to their actual size. During the Cold War, as I'll discuss later,
distortions in the sizes of America and Russia were also used as propaganda, you know, with a
huge Soviet Union. As a result, many people sought an alternative projection that would more
accurately represent the sizes of the continents relative to one another. And this is exactly
what our second kind of projection does. And these types of projections are called equal
area projections. Equal area projections are projections in which the proportional size of
the Earth features is maintained so that a continent that is actually twice as large as another
appears twice as large on the map and so on. Now there's a large number of these to choose from,
and there are a wide variety of solutions to the problem. But the most famous example
is probably the Gall-Peters Equal Area Projection. The Gall-Peters Projection was named after James
Gall, a cartographer who first solved this problem in 1855, and Arno Peters, who politicized the
results in the 1970s. And what the Gall-Peters Projection does is to try to make up for distortions
in the Mercator Projection by enlarging and stretching the sizes of the continents so they're
in proper proportion. In other words, Peters makes Africa look as large as it ought to be
relative to say North America or Greenland. The results, however, are extremely distorted
and present a kind of drippy looking projection where the continents appear elongated, stretching
from North to South in a really unappealing way. It certainly isn't the way the continents actually
look. Still, the Peters Projection had several strong political allies and was very popular for
a time. It was adopted by many international agencies to make a political point that the
countries of the so-called Global South, that's tropical and formerly colonized countries near
to the equator, are actually much larger than you think they are. And contrary to traditional
Eurocentric or America-centric conformal projections, this map was seen as more fair
from a certain point of view. The larger point here is that no map can be fully accurate. And in
the case of a world map, there must either be some distortion of shapes or sizes. As such,
every world map represents a choice, a decision. It represents a choice to represent the world
one way or another. Maps, in short, are choices. They represent a combination of decisions
that the map maker makes. And some of those decisions are conscious decisions. If you're a
cartographer, if you're trying to support sailing to North America, a Mercator projection is a
deliberate decision to try to make a map that people can use. If you want to remind people
that the underdeveloped world is large relative to the Global North, then the Gall Peter's
projection is a deliberate tool for politics, no matter how ugly. On the other hand, many of these
decisions are not conscious decisions. That is, they reflect certain kinds of assumptions or the
knowledge of the people who make them. In either case, to make a map is to make a set of decisions.
And there's all kinds of decisions that go into the map. The first of these is scale. That is,
the proportion of area on a map relative to area in the real world. A map at one-to-one
proportion, where one inch in the real world is represented by one inch on the map, might be
highly accurate, but it wouldn't be very useful. Map of this room at that scale, for example,
would be the size of this room. As the scale of a map becomes smaller and smaller, the extent of
area in the real world is represented by decreasing increments on the map. That allows you to map
larger and larger areas. A map of Boston at one million would include the city and its outer
suburbs and maybe parts of Massachusetts Bay. A map of the same region at one-to-one hundred
thousand would probably focus mostly on downtown Boston and Cambridge. And a map at one-to-twenty-five
thousand would show the commercial district and the old North Church and areas around the Charles
River. All three of these maps are accurate, but each of them shows very, very different physical
features and political features and so on. So selecting scale makes some things appear and
other things vanish. And this is a classic example of the decisions or choices that
undergird maps. Another decision we make when mapping is the orientation and organization of
space. Most notably, we're all used to maps with north at the top. This was a tradition that likely
began with the Egyptian astronomer Ptolemy in the second century of the common era,
likely as a convenience, since what it does is it crams the most populous known land masses at the
time up top. But there's no natural, there's no geophysical reason that north has to be up and
south on the bottom. In fact, maps of the world with south on the top and north on the bottom
introduce some really interesting and dramatic changes in your perspective.
The organization of map features can also influence how the map reader sees and interprets
the world. So choosing the system that organizes the space also has consequences. For example,
organization by lines of latitude and longitude most notably affect how we understand or see the
world. Longitude lines, those lines that run north and south on the map and show you how far east
or west you are, are numbered eastward from the prime meridian. That's the zero line against which
the rest of the world is measured. The prime meridian, as it so happens,
runs straight through the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, England. A visit to the observatory is
a necessity because you can go stand on the prime meridian. It's a lot of good fun for geographers.
The observatory was founded by Charles II in 1675 as a place to control all measures and standards
for all time and space. Now there's no reason, no natural reason, that the zero or prime meridian
should run through England. It's simply a historic accident resulting from the fact that
when the system was developed the most powerful colonial force in the world was
the British Empire. As a result, the British literally wrote themselves into the center of the
world. Now there's actually an alternative second prime meridian developed by the French
and needless to say, it runs through Paris. Though it was outvoted as the official prime
meridian for global standards in an international congress during the 1800s, the French clung to
this for many maps well into the 20th century. Choosing which direction the map faces up,
choosing where the map is centered, and choosing the mathematical orientation, these also are the
kinds of decisions which introduce a narrative into a map, influencing the viewer in subtle but
important ways. Numerous other choices of course influence how maps are read by viewers,
something can be included or excluded, the size of certain things, the proportions, what colors
are used, what images, which symbols, what language the map is drawn in, all of these things
have enormous influence on what the map looks like and what subtle messages the map conveys.
So maps are never true, but instead are a form of creative text, a text that describes a certain
view of the world. Consider the Marshall Islanders. Now, the Marshall Islands are in the Pacific
Ocean off the coast of Papua New Guinea, an area dotted with tiny land masses awash in a vast
ocean setting. When Western explorers first came across the people of the Marshall Islands,
they were enormously and justifiably impressed with the sailing powers and abilities of this
maritime culture. Marshall Islanders sail all throughout the South Pacific. They have knowledge
of the ocean's geography, the location of distant islands, and the currents and winds that can carry
them here and there. When the extent of their geographic knowledge in fact is vast, Westerners
were however mystified by how this knowledge, how was it recorded and passed along to young people?
Where was the text, the atlas or the map that could describe where things are and mark out ocean
space so that Marshall Islanders could communicate what they knew with one another? The answer as it
turns out was right underneath the explorer's noses lying on the beach. Marshall Islanders employ
stick maps, bundles of curved palm ribs tied together with coconut fiber made into a kind of
lattice. In these complicated stick maps, the nodes where palm ribs cross one another, they
represent sites and locations like maybe islands. While the ribs themselves map out connections
between islands, winds, and current in the vast ocean space. In other words, Marshall Islanders'
knowledge was structured in a cartographic form. It was simply a form totally unrecognizable to
Westerners who were used to a very different form of map. By looking at these maps,
we learn a lot, but specifically about the culture of the people who made them.
If we look back at the history of cartography, we can gain fascinating insights into some very
different cultures by looking at the maps they've left behind. Early Christian maps were very notable
in this regard. The first thing you notice about them is the way they describe the continental
space at the center surrounded by a circular ocean which stretches to the edges of the disc
of the earth. And this perspective was congruent with the Christian belief during the Middle Ages
that the earth was flat. And it was created prior to their knowledge of the Americas. So here,
Africa, Asia, and Europe make up the extent of the world as imagined by these early cartographers.
These maps were also oriented eastward. East was up. And this reflected early Christian
orientation and world belief in Europe focused on Jerusalem. The word we use today for finding our
way, getting oriented, means finding east, as derived from this view of the world. On these maps,
the continents were further separated by water. The Dawn River was seen as separating Asia from
Europe, and the Nile River separating Africa from Asia, and the Mediterranean Sea separating Europe
from Africa. And these together take the form of a kind of cross, or T. The continents forming
a cross within the circle of ocean space lend the name we now use for these, T and O maps.
But the more fundamental point is that they reflect a worldview of the cartographers who made them.
This is a Christian worldview oriented eastward in which the shape of the earth and the relationship
of the continents reflected God's plan. Medieval maps, or Mapa Mundi, were developed later,
and these include the very famous Tabula Rogeriana map of the world by the great cartographer,
Muhammad al-Adresi. Notably, the finest cartographers of the Middle Ages were North African and Iberian
Muslim scholars, owing to the vast ocean trade linkages forged by Arab traders around the world.
The Tabula Rogeriana map was drawn around 1150 CE and shows a very sophisticated view of the world,
including the coast of Africa, major Asian trading ports, inland seas, all of Europe,
and the river systems in Europe, Africa, and Asia. The sophistication of this cartography
reflects the increasing contact between Asia, Europe, and Africa, especially through the perspective
of Arab traders. Arab traders had, by this point in history, reached the farthest parts of Asia
and Southeast Asia and returned home with very detailed descriptions of coastlines and people
and places around the world. These were combined by cartographers like Adresi into comprehensive
pictures of an increasingly integrated global economy. By the time the New World was discovered
in the late 1400s, knowledge of the world had advanced greatly. A new colonial world view
emerged during this period and we can see this reflected in the Vallard Atlas. The Vallard
Atlas rates among the most famous of the cartographic products of this time. It was created no later
than 1547 for patron merchant Nicholas Vallard and the Atlas was likely made by a Portuguese
cartographer in what's known as the Dieppe School. The Dieppe School was famous in the 16th century
for producing handmade maps for wealthy and royal patrons like Henry II of France
and Henry VIII of England. In these maps, South is up, but what's most notable about them is the
proliferation of place names, the product of very recent geographic discoveries at that time,
all along the coasts of newly found territories. The mouths of rivers, trading settlements and
land features that can be recognized from the sea are all treated in enormous detail. The interior
spaces on these maps, however, remain sites with little cartographic detail and instead provide
a space for depictions of things like native life through pictures. In the interior of Africa,
we see African kings. In the Americas, we see strange beasts and early settlements and colonists
and stuff like that. But the real and the vividly imagined are sometimes combined. For example,
in one section of the Vallard Atlas showing East Africa, the mythical Christian king,
Prestor John, is depicted sitting atop a throne. So the Vallard Atlas and its maps give a glimpse
into the imagination of the people who were sailing around the world at that time.
And the more general point here is that maps reflect choices, choices made by cartographers.
These choices reflect both conscious strategies as well as unconscious beliefs and cultural
perspectives. Now this is not unique to old and historical maps. Even maps made today are geocentric
that they tend to place the cartographer in the center of the world and ethnocentric,
tending to privilege the culture of the map maker. Consider the classic Saul Steinberg 1976 map
from the cover of the New Yorker magazine. That is a very famous map and it looks westward from
North Avenue in New York showing the density of people and buildings out to the Hudson River.
And beyond these, the vague outlines of the world beyond Jersey and other things stretch sort of
to the horizon, Nebraska, the Pacific Ocean, and then Japan. And Steinberg's joke which shows the
narrow vision of the New Yorker and its focus on the island of Manhattan is not coincidentally
a map. Human imaginations are spatial and spatial imaginations are represented through maps.
Saul Steinberg's New Yorker magazine map, though intended for humorous effect,
very closely mimics the way people around the world map themselves
into their surroundings. This phenomenon has been studied far more seriously by the geographer
Tom Serenin who helped develop a technique called mental mapping. He traveled around the world
and he asked people to draw sketch maps of their communities and their neighborhoods
and of the world. And the resulting maps show not only how people think the world is shaped,
but more profoundly what their place in the world is. So several specific findings came out of this
research that are worth describing here. First, students from the United States and Europe,
as it turns out, have far more limited world views than those from other parts of the world.
Students from Thailand, for example, were capable of sketching where the United States and the
Soviet Union at that time and Europe were, whereas North American students had only the faintest
dimmest notion of the shape and location of Southeast Asian countries. And more generally,
Serenin concluded, only to the hangover of the colonial era education and the asymmetrical
power of Europe and America, all these mental maps, even those of people living far from Europe,
tended to be somewhat Eurocentric. In a sense, Europe had imposed its spatial imagination on the
world. All of these maps were centered on Europe. Now such biases are not always innocent. In many
cases, the ability that rests in the hands of the cartographer to control our perception of the world
can be put to pernicious abuse. In his classic book, How to Lie with Maps,
geographer Mark Monmonier, who's a professor at Syracuse University,
shows the numerous ways in which choices can be used in map making to deliberately shape opinion
and manipulate political outcomes. Returning to the Cold War era textbooks that I mentioned very
quickly earlier in the lecture, cartographers in education in the 1950s and the 1960s made very
strategic choices about how to represent the world. The favored map for such a textbook was
the Mercator Projection. Remember that Mercator map I described earlier that hung on the wall in
my classroom in the 1970s? Well, this is why that specific map was hanging there. This is in part
because it tended to exaggerate the size of the two great superpowers. Color choices in these maps
also represented the politics of the era. The Soviet Union and China are often represented
as large black or dark red blocks on the map relative to the smaller pastel blue shaded NATO
nations. The maps are often centered as well in a way that suggests the size and the threat of
Soviet power. The resulting images for a young textbook reader can only lead them to conclude
that a giant geopolitical threat straddles the center of the world in the form of communist power.
The utility of that for training a generation of students is undeniable,
but so is the deliberate political distortion embedded in the cartographic choices that the
map maker has made. More recent maps from the early 21st century reflect the same kind of biases.
Consider competing maps made of the border wall, as it's called by the Palestinians,
or security separation fence or barrier, as it's called by the Israelis, built by Israel
along and near its border with the West Bank region of Palestine, a location that may represent
the location of a future Palestinian state. Now what's most revealing about these competing
maps of the fence or border made by Israeli and Palestinian authorities is how the wall is depicted.
Israeli maps of the fence tend to show the congruence of the wall with the so-called
political green line, which separates the two states pointing to the western length of the wall.
Palestinian maps, conversely, show the western portions of the wall along with the proposed
eastern portions of the wall, and the resulting map stresses the physical encirclement of the
Palestinian state and the loss of territory that that might entail. The Israeli map, by contrast,
reflects the Israeli vision of a defensive boundary on its eastern flank.
Comparison of maps of Kashmir in South Asia reveal a very similar pattern.
Kashmir is the contested region in the north of India that, at the time of partition when British
colonial powers left the region, was occupied by competing forces. Pakistan controls portions of
the region in the north, India controls parts of the region in the south, and China controls a
little bit of Kashmir in the east. Pakistani maps, however, show the entirety of the region within
the sovereign territory of Pakistan. Needless to say, Indian maps do the reverse. Neither acknowledges
the military line of control that straddles the region and actually cuts it in two.
So rather than fight a war on the ground, the struggle over Kashmir has become a struggle over
competing cartographies. Each side is seeking to represent its claims as legitimate, and each draws
and proliferates maps of the world as they would like to see it. And these kinds of cartographic
effects can be seen in maps of recent elections as well in the United States.
In the hotly contested US 2012 election, voting maps were made to reflect competing images of the
country. If mapped state by state, the results of the election show a sharply divided blue and red
country, with western and northeastern states all firmly blue, and midwestern and southeastern
states all firmly red. When mapped by counties, the picture is made more complex, with a seemingly
vast number of red counties surrounded by small islands of blue. But when the data are mapped to
show areas on the map in sizes proportional to population, and a kind of map like that is called
a cartogram, the image becomes more complex, with red and blue areas interlacing with one another.
And finally, when mapping the data proportional to population and coloring counties, shades of
blue and red relative to the way they voted, the image is more complex still. It shows a vast
muddled purple nation. The key point here is that in each case, these maps use the exact same voting
data. But cartographic decisions about how to scale the data and aggregate the data and color it
produce wildly different images of the political condition of the United States.
Maps like this can be used to deliberately tell political stories and convince people of different
facts on the ground, or they can simply be the incidental, accidental result of assumptions
and biases of the map maker. So what I've tried to demonstrate here is that maps can't ever be
fully true. They're texts, they're stories, and accounts of the world. And this need not be a
hindrance for us. Instead, it can be a tool. Maps are windows into the culture and politics of the
people who made them. By reading maps critically, we can understand how people think geographically
and how their geographic view of the world is realized in depictions of space. But making
and interpreting maps is only one tiny fraction of what geographers do. Geographers study the world.
Throughout the rest of the course, we'll review the key lessons of human and cultural geography,
and we'll take a look at the research that geographers do around the world answering basic
questions about the food we eat, the landscapes we sculpt, sculpt the global economy we foster,
and the culture and politics of the world that we create.
