One day, several years ago, while I was riding my motorcycle through the desert in Rajasthan,
India, my bike rolled over a branch lying in the highway.
That branch, with its very tough and lengthy thorns, managed to puncture my tire, and shortly
after that I wound up sliding off the side of the road into a big sand dune.
I would only learn, many days later, that the thorny branch in question came from a common
nuisance tree known as prosopis juleflora in the Latin, but its local name is angresibabul,
which basically translates to English tree.
This exotic species had been imported by the British in the 1870s during the colonial
era.
It was first brought to Sindh province in what is now Pakistan, and the British introduced
angresibabul to improve the landscape by greening the environment and making the desert bloom.
In point of fact, the tree has become a runaway success in the sense that the species forms
very dense forests everywhere it grows, but it also drives out indigenous species.
It destroys native grasslands and has successfully colonized distant parts of North India.
The tree has long been favored by the Indian state for the same reason that it was favored
by the British, which is its ability to successfully thrive in really difficult environments.
The tree is so closely associated with government activity that local people also call it sarcaribabul,
which means government tree.
I learned a great deal about this tree later on, and as it turns out, the tree originates
in the southwestern part of North America, in the deserts of Arizona and northern Sonora,
Mexico, and it was brought to Africa first by British foresters in the 1800s because
of its tenacity.
And it was only later then introduced to India in the late 1800s and has since become a successful
part of forestry in other parts of tropical Asia.
Where it goes, it proves to be a mixed blessing.
It has a lot of advantages, including its value for fuel wood, but it also has pernicious
effects, competing with native species, prohibiting the development of productive grasslands and
it has that nasty thorn that can puncture motorcycle tires.
The runaway success of an alien invasive exotic tree like Prisopa's Julie Flora is just one
example of the kinds of impacts humans have on ecosystems around the world.
Along with the transformation of the Earth's surface, which we'll discuss in detail in
a later lecture, and the fundamental transformation of the world's climate, a topic to which
we'll also later return, invasive species are part of a changing global condition produced
by humanity.
This era of human impacts has represented such a radical geological and ecological change
that many observers have considered giving our geological epoch an entirely new name,
the Anthropocene.
And in the next 30 minutes, I'll discuss some of the transformations that cause people
to think about our era as one of runaway human influences.
Is humanity a cancer on the Earth or merely a species who's a skilled architect of its
home?
Is nature fundamentally separate from humanity?
Or are environments and people produced together as the Earth undergoes ongoing change?
We'll also look at examples of how important environments have been both created and destroyed
by human activity.
And finally, I'll conclude by reviewing these ideas and the evidence that goes with
them to argue that the Anthropocene is not a cause for mourning, but instead an opportunity
to reevaluate our role in Earth history.
To the degree that the Anthropocene has created any positive opportunities, we need to think
creatively about how we live in nature.
And to the degree that the era does represent the destruction of nature by humanity, on
the other hand, it's a charge to us to accept our responsibility on the Earth.
You broke it, you own it.
So what is the Anthropocene?
Anthropocene is a term introduced by chemist Paul Joseph Crutzen in 2002.
He proposed to assign this name to our current geological epoch, relative to previous periods
like the Pliocene, Myocene, or Pleistocene, because human activities have come to have
such a significant global impact.
Indeed, stratigraphers, and those of the geoscientists who examine rocks and soils that make up the
Earth's strata, have argued that future geologists digging through the strata of our time
will notice a notable shift in the rock chemistry and layers that they find there.
Now, there's a debate over whether the Anthropocene may, you know, when it started.
Crutzen suggests that it started maybe 200 years ago, when James Watt designed his steam
engine in 1784.
But others have argued that the Anthropocene goes way, way, way back, all the way to the
dawn of agriculture.
In either case, the term is a clever use of language, which merges the anthropo, the
human, with the geologic passage of time.
And one of the most notable things about the Anthropocene is the way it inverts a question
that has historically been the most important question geographers have tried to answer,
and that was, what influence does the Earth have on humanity?
Well, faced with a rapidly changing world, geographers have to ask the reverse question.
What impact does humanity have on the Earth?
The latter question, in a sense, renders the former question irrelevant.
Added to this complication is the fact that many changes are unidirectional.
That is, some human behaviors modify the environment, but halting those behaviors doesn't always
automatically mean that the environment will go back or return to its previous condition.
Many ecological changes follow this pattern.
In the grasslands of eastern Cape, province of South Africa, for example, periodic burning
of the land by local people has turned the land into a highly productive grazing area,
not unlike the one we discussed previously in Madagascar.
Now, if burning is halted, as sometimes happens at the insistence of local authorities, stop
the burning, the land doesn't always recover to its original mix of species.
Often it regrows into a low value tree scrub rather than an indigenous grassland.
Now, this may have to do with the amount of time required to recover the original species,
or it may have to do with the introduction of new species over many years of history,
as well as to the complex relationships between species in this grassland.
But for whatever reason, the transformation is sometimes a one-way trip.
In the Anthropocene, many landscapes and systems behave this way, meaning that sometimes there
is simply no going back.
Now, it's important to remember that human beings are not the only lifeforms that have
changed the geochemistry of the Earth over its history.
During the Pre-Cambrian period, some two billion years ago, prokaryotes, anaerobic microbiota
thrived around the planet, and they took advantage of the atmosphere, which at that time had
very little oxygen and a whole lot of carbon dioxide.
These simple lifeforms were diverse, but they basically lived anaerobically, meaning they
were good at using water, sunlight, and CO2 to thrive and produce energy.
The waste product of their activity was oxygen, and over time, the success of these species
led to a fundamental transformation of the atmosphere from one that was rich in CO2 to
one that was rich in oxygen.
These little critters essentially created a world in which they could no longer thrive,
but one that would make way for aerobic organisms who thrive on oxygen, like plants and dinosaurs
and people.
Anaerobic microbes live on today, but they live in swamps, and they live in your stomach,
where they're actually critical to your biological functioning, as it happily turns out, but
the world they made, the world they made way for, is one, better suited to species other
than themselves.
The Anthropocene might be the first time humanity has changed the Earth in a fundamental way,
but certainly not the first time living beings have changed the geology and the atmosphere
of the Earth.
The question is, whether we'll go the way of the prokaryotes and create a world in which
we ourselves can no longer live.
As we'll review here, and in later lectures, the mark of humanity on the globe is enormous
and highly varied.
Human beings have changed the climate, they've changed the landscape, and the diversity of
life on Earth we can consider the climate to begin with.
Least since the dawn of the Industrial Revolution, human activities have released high quantities
of gases into the atmosphere, and these gases have the potential to trap energy in the form
of heat around the planet.
Most notably, carbon dioxide, but also methane and other gases, are now found in far greater
abundance owing to our combustion of carbon-based energy, starting with wood, shifting to coal,
and petroleum, and now increasingly natural gas.
As we'll discuss in the next lecture, when these fuels are burned, they release carbon
dioxide.
That had been trapped either in geologic strata or in plants.
Now once this stuff's in the atmosphere, CO2 can reside for a century or more, as we'll
discuss in a later lecture.
This all has the capacity to warm the planet.
Current estimates suggest planetary warming on the order of two to three degrees centigrade
in the next century.
This is a significant human impact on the environment.
Another way that humans are impacting the environment is by changing land cover.
Land cover simply refers to the physical, material covers that cover the surface of
the Earth.
Of course, it includes things like trees and grass, but it also includes things like agriculture
and buildings and asphalt.
Human activities, especially agriculture and industry, have resulted in, for example,
the decimation of forests around the world and the dramatic expansion of cropland.
But 36% of the Earth's surface that is considered bioproductive is dominated by humans.
And as I'll demonstrate in a later lecture, somewhere near 20% of the total productive
capacity of the Earth's life system, the whole shooting match, is harnessed by human beings.
Clearly, people are a strong influence on the Earth.
And finally, human beings have greatly influenced the distribution of species around the world.
Plants and animals are intentionally introduced to new regions with both good and bad effects.
You can think of the case of Prisropus Julia Flora earlier.
Other times, species are introduced to new regions incidentally as a result of some other
human activity.
They might hitch a ride on an airplane, or they might be packed into packing crates and
shipped across the ocean to new continents and ecosystems, or they might just escape
or be released from aquariums or gardens or people's homes.
You can find one really terrifying example with Burmese pythons.
Burmese pythons, raised in captivity in southern Florida, have been released by irresponsible
pet owners into the Everglades, and they've become a significant part of that ecosystem.
Over 1,800 pythons have been removed from the Everglades National Park since 2002.
And just to make the point here, they are not indigenous.
Other invasions are the product of bad decision-making.
Consider the cane toad.
Originally introduced to Australia from Hawaii, the toad was intended to devour insects that
prey on valuable sugarcane, so it was brought in to improve agriculture.
Once it was introduced in the Australian environment, the toad ran amuck.
Not only did it not eat the insect it was intended to, the toad began to expand at an
alarming rate.
Once it was armed with poisoned sacks on its body, Australian predators weren't able
to kill it.
This doesn't stop predators from trying.
Wild dogs and other animals that try to snack on the toad, they die, causing a serious impact
on the predator population of Australia.
It also successfully reproduced at an amazing rate.
So the cane toad has now colonized many parts of Australia.
It already occupies a huge part of the tropical eastern and northern parts of Australia.
A map showing its current range would show it stretching from Darwin to Brisbane.
And this is already well beyond the climatic range of its natural habitat, and it shows
no sign of stopping.
If it can jump the central part of the desertous continent, which isn't a sure thing, that's
possible, there's no reason to think it won't dominate the southern shores of the continent,
totally overturning the indigenous ecology of Australia in the process.
And this is merely one example of an exotic species that has become invasive and indeed
so successful as to outcompete native species, even to the point of driving some to extinction.
In Hawaii, and a counter example, a common house cat was introduced in the last century
and its feral descendants are putting pressure on dozens of critically threatened native
bird species.
And it's impossible to know how many invasive species there are like that around the world.
But one figure gives us a sense.
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service says that of the 50,000 species in North America that
are not native to this continent, so there's 50,000 species not native, present in North
America, more than 4,000 of them display invasive tendencies.
That is, they possess this aggressive quality.
Taken together, all that evidence definitely demonstrates that earth systems have been
transformed fully enough by humanity to justify a possible renaming of our era.
But this really tells us very little.
Is the Anthropocene a bad thing?
Are human influences inherently bad for nature?
Is it unnatural to be human?
Should we retreat from our entanglements from nature and try to turn back the clock?
Many observers of our current global environmental predicament would look at the evidence I just
reviewed and conclude that it's time for despair.
Humanity has so fully transformed the earth that our only hope is to disengage from environmental
impacts and retreat to a simpler ecology and economy.
We must go back, they seem to say.
At the same time, it's not difficult to conclude that much of the transformation we've seen
has come from the influence of a very small proportion of humanity, maybe the wealthiest
fifth, who've long enjoyed a high quality of life, often at the expense of the environmental
systems on which life depends.
The remaining five or six billion people on earth have had little individual impact on
the earth's systems and perhaps merely aspire to a quality of life somewhere approximate
to that of the wealthy few.
So given that some population growth is likely to continue for the next 30 years before it
stops altogether, how can we make way for the aspirations of our neighbors around the
world and still maintain the planet?
Rather than insist on fewer entanglements with the natural world, as some observers might
conclude, many geographers and other thinkers have searched for better metaphors to encourage
sustainability on a changing planet.
The first of these metaphors was coined by geographer Neil Smith, whose research was
concerned with social equality and environmental sustainability around the world.
Smith insisted that people and the environment are always bound up together, that they always
transform one another and that, given the industrious nature of people, we have to think
of nature as produced.
Now here, Smith doesn't mean that people can simply invent whatever kind of nature they
choose or that mastering nature is possible.
Instead, it means that whatever people did in their work and labor always entangled them
with nature, whether it was farming or crafting tools or making art or anything else, people
are always producing nature.
So the question for Smith then isn't to choose whether or not to produce nature, but instead
to debate what kinds of nature we want to produce and what kinds of people we want to
become in the process.
This he insists allows us to accept, in his words, quoting, the inevitability and creativity
of the social relationship with nature, end quote.
Now, having said this, Smith also warns that just because we're in the driver's seat doesn't
mean accepting that our driving is especially good.
We've got to avoid what he describes as triumphalist stories about our relationship to nature.
We have to admit that we're never fully in control.
Instead, Smith insists, we're in a struggle with one another about which direction to
go.
To expand on my previous driving metaphor, there are a lot of hands on the steering wheel
pulling us in different directions.
Many things influence our impact on the earth, Smith suggests, and the kinds of natures we
produce.
Among these he pointed to the global economy, which presents very strong incentives and
they're not always good ones.
Smith warns that those influences may lead us to make bad choices.
In another effort to design a new or better metaphor, journalist Emma Maris follows a very
similar line of thinking, and this is in her wonderful book, Rambunctious Garden, saving
nature in a post-wild world.
I really recommend it.
It's super readable.
In this book, she surveys the many intentionally and accidentally created environments that
we see all around the world.
In surveying these, she concludes that people and non-humans like birds and plants are always
together creating the environment.
On one occasion, she describes the sand hill cranes gathering the Platte River of Nebraska,
and she notes that the landscape into which the birds are descending and where they'll
glean resources, along their long migration from north to south and back, it's actually
an artificial product of modern agriculture, irrigation.
These cranes are known to migrate up to 10,000 miles on a round trip, and every February
and April, when a half million stop in Nebraska and feast on the remains of man-made cornfields.
Does this make it a counterfeit, she asks herself, and in response she says, and I'm
quoting her, nope, not in my opinion.
Humans and birds have collaborated to create this beauty.
This conscious and responsible and joyful cohabitation is the future of our planet, our
vibrant, thriving, rambunctious garden.
Needless to say, the writing there is superior to what most geographers write, that's why
you read journalists instead of geographers, I suppose.
But like Smith, she refuses to accept that the Anthropocene is a sign of decay or defeat,
and she insists instead that we have to think about crafting new futures, living with other
species on the planet.
Consider the case of the Pacific Flyway.
This is a stretch of wetlands following the coast of California that connects Baja, Mexico
to the far reaches of Canada.
Along this flyway, flocks of ducks and geese and millions of waterfowl make their way every
year north to south in ongoing cycles of migration.
Many of the wetlands that are crucial to the Pacific Flyway have been dramatically altered
by agriculture, of course, which draws on these landscapes for irrigation.
In an effort to conserve the flyway in the face of human impacts, conservationists went
to great lengths to create refuges.
These are areas where the birds could land and rest and replenish and then fly onwards.
But as geographer Robert Wilson demonstrates in his compelling book Seeking Refuge, the
migratory birds who were supposed to be taking advantage of these refuges refused to fully
cooperate.
The blurry lines between private land and suburban land and farmland and refuges, they
weren't fully respected by these gregarious and really unruly animals.
They weren't played by the rules.
This led to a century of conflicts.
Birds sought to herd the birds into their proper natural place, and farmers and other
landowners often harassed and conflicted with the migrants.
More problematic still, the toxic emissions from the agricultural production that come
in the form of pesticides and nutrients created further threats to the birds on their migration.
So what Wilson concludes is that people and birds have interacted to create new ecologies
in which both seek to thrive.
But because partitioning the places of people and the places of birds is necessarily impossible,
ongoing conflicts emerge from this effort to conserve the flyaway.
That's just how it is.
So as Neil Smith and Emma Merris might predict, the question is not whether we can go back
to a natural system for migration.
This was precisely what managers attempted to do, but with frustrated results.
The question is instead how to produce an environmental matrix in which farmers, suburbanites and
birds can share the land.
We can find a more dramatic example of drafting and crafting novel landscapes in the Netherlands.
Here in the province of Flebelend is a 15,000 hectare nature reserve called Usvardersplossen.
That's a pretty big area, 15,000 hectares, that's about 37,000 acres.
And it's a place teeming with life.
So there's red deer roaming the landscape and feral horses traveling in herds.
There's an ecosystem of foxes and wild birds, including egrets and wild geese.
And heck cattle graze the landscape.
These are giant, hairy beasts that rumble across the marshland.
These cattle are stand-ins for the Orochs.
That's the extinct wild cattle of Europe that roam the land before the time of the Roman
Empire.
And for a fee of $45, you can experience this wilderness.
The park is like an island, located in the middle of one of the most urban, densely populated
places in the world, central Northern Europe.
But to be perfectly clear, the place ain't natural, not in the sense that it's a relic
of a previous landscape, not that it's conserved or recovered.
In fact, the land at Usvardersplossen was originally actually reclaimed from the sea.
Much like the rest of the Netherlands.
Back when Orochs roamed Europe, this place would have actually been under meters of water.
The park is created to mimic a late Pleistocene ecology, meaning 10,000 to 12,000 years ago.
But it's entirely man-made, and it's maintained at significant expense.
It was envisioned and created by biologists back in the 1980s, and it's totally artificial.
It's an Anthropocene landscape of the highest order.
This park is the product of rewilding.
Rewilding is a term where long-lost ecosystems are crafted by people from whole cloth.
In order to reclaim or create, landscapes as they might have been before human influence.
Such experiments are not uncontroversial.
Some purists might take issue with the authenticity of the effort.
I mean, given that the Orochs is extinct, human-bred heck-cattle might be argued to be a poor ecological
substitute.
Heck-cattle, actually, were bred by the Nazis in the 1930s in an effort to restore what
they thought was a pure European nature.
Such introductions have a lot of social and political baggage associated with them.
Who says which species are to be used and restored in such efforts, based on what criteria?
Other conservationists think that efforts at rewilding like this one are also a comical
waste of resources.
They believe that these efforts shift focus away from preserving landscapes and saving
species that have persisted and survived to focus on inventing whole new natures.
They insist that rewilding is a distraction at best and an effort that undermines traditional
preservation at its worst.
What these controversies tell us is that admitting that we have entered the Anthropocene and accepting
that some novel ecologies like these can be good ones doesn't take away the possibility
of disagreement or conflict.
Rather than a traditional environmental argument, one where one side would insist it's saving
nature, the other side would claim it's protecting people and the human economy, these arguments
are way more complicated.
That's because these arguments are about which natures, which geographies we want to produce.
Who are they going to benefit?
What's lost or traded away by choosing one kind of nature over another kind of nature?
And the one criterion that's taken off the table in a fight like this one is the idea
that one choice is more natural than the other.
This one criterion is removed from the debate in the world of the Anthropocene, which makes
way for a new mission, making responsible choices in a world where what people do typically
has enormous environmental impacts, which brings us back to the problem of Presopus
Julie Flora in India.
Clearly this is an invasive species.
Clearly it has some negative environmental impacts, especially in the way that it harms
natural grasslands.
It's also devilishly difficult to remove and it regrows from a stump, so every time you
cut it down, it grows right back.
Cutting doesn't have much of an effect.
Like the burning of the grasslands in South Africa described earlier then, this transformation
is one of these one-way trips, unless enormous energy and effort are exerted to remove large
swaths of the plant all the way down to the roots.
So practical question.
Should energy and money be put into removing this invasive tree?
Now for the local herders who live in the region, the answer is definitely yes.
They depend on those grasslands that have been impaired by the invasion of Presopus
Julie Flora.
There are many bird species that thrived in the grasslands that were here before.
There's also a clear benefit in extirpating this very thorny nuisance, but for local people
who make a living burning the tree for charcoal that's sold in nearby towns and cities, the
answer is no.
They get a huge benefit from this fast-growing tree.
And for some animal species that prefer the underbrush habitat provided by the tree, removing
a species would also be detrimental.
Now in a case like this, our criteria for deciding what to do will have to be about
whose purposes for the land matter more.
This is a political and economic struggle between different groups of people and their
fate, along with the fate of numerous species of birds and all the indigenous grasslands,
they all hinge on the fate of Presopus Julie Flora.
Or can the needs of both communities be met cost-effectively?
Rather than spending a lot of money and time removing the tree, maybe those investments
might go into supporting the herding communities, planting grasslands on other sites, or otherwise
offsetting the costs they bear as a result of the species invasion.
Maybe some of the profits from the sale of charcoal can be reinvested in grazing and
herding, or into the maintenance of bird habitats in other sites, so that instead of making
outrageous and somewhat irrational investments, you wind up making careful and thoughtful
investments of resources into producing natures that both wildlife and people desire.
So a range of choices are available to us in short when facing a dramatic environmental
transformation, and none of them depend on trying to determine which of our choices is
more natural.
Instead, we're confronted with a responsibility, a responsibility to weigh in on the needs
of people and other species, and accept that these changes have impacts that have to be
addressed.
In Anthropocene geographies, there's an ethical injunction reminiscent from pottery stores
around the world.
If you break it, you own it.
So I've spent the last half hour describing the quickly changing conditions of the earth,
and I've referred to this era of dramatic change as the Anthropocene, a time of tremendous
human impact.
I've reviewed evidence of the extent of our impact on the planet, and we're going to
see a lot more of that in this class, including land cover change, climate change, invasive
species.
These are all topics to which we'll be returning later in the course, but I've also reviewed
the ideas of a few influential thinkers who've invited us to think about the world as one
we co-produce with other species, in which change is inevitable.
So we're confronted with hard decisions about what kind of change we prefer, and why.
I've suggested in a nutshell that recent geographic research suggests that it's okay to be okay
with the Anthropocene, but with this comes an enormous responsibility to make deliberate
and reasoned decisions about our place on earth, and to address our disagreements about
nature as basically political ones.
Nowhere is that responsibility more pressing than in the area of climate change, and that's
the topic to which we'll turn next.
