Try to picture the Brazilian Amazon.
To imagine what a forest like this looks like in its deepest interior, you'd have to imagine
a few things.
You'd have to imagine layers of canopy blotting out the sun far overhead and then a thick
understory, another canopy or layer of vegetation underneath punctuated then by massive green
trunks shooting upwards.
And among these, the Capeoc tree is a giant whose topmost branches reach maybe 200 feet
in the air.
It has a trunk that reaches 10 feet in diameter and the leaves and boughs of one single specimen
could be home to more species of insects than exist in most American cities altogether.
So imagine a tree like that, but then thousands of others like it enmeshed in a teeming vast
dynamic verdant system.
Well, prior to 1970, the Brazilian Amazon had more than 4 million square kilometers
of this kind of forest cover.
By 2011, the extent of that cover was something more like 3.3 million.
So that's a decline of more than 700,000 square kilometers of area.
That's a mind bending scope.
It's an area bigger than the size of Texas.
So at its height, the rate of Amazonian deforestation was on the order of 20,000 square kilometers
per year, wiped out.
And in the forest, even today, 6,000 kilometers disappear every year.
That's something like 16 square kilometers every day.
So where did it all go?
In this lecture, we'll try to answer that question, reviewing the field of land change
science, which is an important part of the field of geography.
And in the process, we'll learn about the possibility of a forest transition, where
forest landscapes might be able to recover over time, and we'll conclude that while important
landscapes are badly threatened with development, forests do have the possibility at least
the possibility of recovery.
But first, let's think backwards.
We tend to think of deforestation and land cover change as a contemporary problem, a
problem of today.
But this isn't entirely true.
The startling transformation of the Brazilian Amazon that I just described is probably the
best known example of something that's actually been going on for a very long time, the transformation
of the global land surface by human activity altogether.
Since the time that humans first started using tools and fire, we've changed and altered
the Earth's surface repeatedly, clearing forests and grasslands, producing fields,
building structures and infrastructure all across the Earth's surface.
We've appropriated the Earth's generative capacity and its productivity to suit our
own purposes.
Deforestation was a well-known phenomenon in the classical world.
For example, the historian Strabo wrote in the first century BCE that the lowland areas
of the island of Cyprus were once covered with forests that prevented cultivation, but these
had all given way to farming and other activities, and Strabo goes on to describe how mining
in particular resulted in deforestation to supply smelters with copper and silver.
He explains how timber was felled for the construction of fleets and how areas were
fully cleared of trees to make way for farmland.
Indeed, urbanization and the expansion of agriculture had enormous effects on the indigenous
forest covered throughout the Mediterranean, and not just Cyprus.
Deforestation, in other words, is a really old problem.
Those kinds of changes accelerated, and they accelerated during the medieval period.
The world after 1200 experienced a rise in urban populations with an increasing demand
for food, and so an increasing demand for farms.
At the same time, improved iron technology allowed more efficient clearing of forests
and breaking of the land for cropping, because it's very hard to clear a tree like the Cape
Poc tree with a handsaw.
And nor was any of this unique to Europe.
The data are difficult to assemble, but it's likely that the Chinese cleared land on a
large scale as early as the 5th century CE, when whole forest areas were felled for civil
and military settlements.
By the end of the Tong dynasty, around the year 900, large parts of northern China had
already been fully transformed.
In fact, the Chinese imperial government from this period implemented protections against
forest destruction for agriculture and limited cutting in important watersheds so as to decrease
erosion.
Clearly, there wouldn't have been a need for government activity if high levels of
deforestation of the land hadn't already occurred.
Even the native peoples of the Americas engaged in large scale land transformation.
Despite some depictions of Native Americans living in a pristine and untouched wilderness,
the great and industrious societies of Native North and South America cleared the land of
forests, rerouted waterways to create artificial lakes and dams, and maintained prairies and
forests through extensive use of fire.
The landscapes of North and South America on the eve of the arrival of Europeans were
already greatly impacted by human action.
Clearly, human activity and industry have long had an impact on the Earth's surface,
but it wasn't until the revolutionary events of the Columbian Exchange after 1492 and later,
with the dawn of the Industrial Revolution in the 17 and 1800s that land cover change
would accelerate to a global phenomenon.
The rise of plantation economies, both in the Americas and throughout Asia, where British,
French and Portuguese colonists settled an intensified agriculture for global commodity
trade, that had a huge impact.
We'll discuss this topic later in the course, but colonial settlement and economy also
greatly increased the rate of land cover change and deforestation.
The increasing shift to industrialized production that followed only accelerated this process
further.
Demand for fuel wood, charcoal, and timber at the dawn of the Industrial Revolution coupled
with the rise of this large, hungry, urban population requiring farmland all led to widespread
forest clearance.
Consider this.
One day, several years ago, I went for a walk into Massachusetts Forest, and I'm rambling
through this thick forest after perhaps an hour I come across a stone wall.
Now, I ask myself, who the heck would put a stone wall in the middle of the forest?
And it only dawned on me, looking around at the mixed density of the forest in this area,
that the whole place would have been entirely pasture only 150 years ago.
In fact, most of Massachusetts was cleared of forest during the time of the Industrial
Revolution, totally denuded in fact.
One of the most comprehensive studies of historical global change was led by National Academy
scholar and geographer Billy Lee Turner, and it was entitled The Earth as Transformed by
Human Action.
And that study sought to determine just how much change had occurred in different regions
of the world over time.
And the results show that between 1700 and 1850, almost 5% of forest cover had been lost
in North America, and Europe saw a loss of 10% of its forest during the same period.
That century and a half were especially dramatic periods for deforestation.
In the years after 1850, as we'll see, some forests did recover, like the ones I described
in Massachusetts, but this represents a remarkable loss during the colonial and early industrial
eras, all the same.
But things went much, much worse in the colonized world.
There, starting in around 1700, forests were harvested heavily by colonial powers, and
this heavy deforestation continued on after 1850, even when it was slowing in Europe and
North America.
Between 1700 and 1980, tropical Africa lost 20% of its forest cover, as did Latin America.
South Asia lost 46% of its forest in the same period, and China, China experienced a remarkable
57% loss of forest, more than half of its forest gone.
Many of these regions, especially parts of Africa and Latin America, they're still losing
forest today.
So it's fair to ask, at this rate, will we have forests in 40 years?
Well, much of this forest cover loss has been tied to the integration of these regions into
a global economy, and that doesn't seem to be slowing down.
The rise in industrial activities in these countries and around the world, and the development
of modern agricultural production for export markets in Europe and the United States all
played a role.
So, as we'll see, the destruction of forests in poorer regions is largely driven by the
acceleration of global trade, and the demand for consumer goods in wealthy parts of the
world.
Forest cover change, of course, isn't the only kind of transformation that's occurred
in the modern era, although it's sometimes the most dramatic.
The amount of land dedicated to agricultural production has also increased, especially
since 1700, for example.
Lands dedicated to agriculture in China have increased from 29 million hectares to 230 million
hectares.
A hectare is a unit of land 1,000 meters in size, about two and a half acres.
It's a big chunk of land.
This growth that I've just described in cropland is very similar to the increase in South
Asia and tropical Africa, so we see forests disappearing and farmland expanding, and similar
expansions in farmland can be seen all over the world.
By 1950, 206 million hectares of land had been plowed and dedicated to agriculture in
the United States.
That is a very large area.
That's a four-fold increase from the century before, and this expansion in farmland came
not only at the expense of forests, which we've already described, but also at the expense
of the great grasslands, the vast prairies that once covered most or much of the middle
part of America, parts of America, Asia, and much of Africa.
Turned under the plow, these grasslands had once supported large and fantastic biodiversity,
including African and Asian elephants and a large number of important predators, all
of which are now threatened or endangered, at least in part because of this great change
in agricultural production.
It's estimated that human beings have captured on the whole, through their activities, around
20 percent, one-fifth of the Earth's net primary productivity.
So what is that?
That is all the photosynthesis, all the vegetative production, all the growth in the world has
been turned, at least a fifth of it, towards human activities only, and that's a pretty
radical assertion.
Human activities on the landscape have fully transformed the life of the planet, harnessed
it as an engine in the service of people, and put countless species at risk as a result.
Some of the most detailed and quantitatively rigorous estimates of this transformation
have been presented by the geographer Vaqlav Smil, who is a writer and a thinker you should
get to know.
In his dense and very powerful book, Harvesting the Biosphere, good title, but it's got a
real, really revealing subtitle, what we have taken from nature.
Now, Smil is an interdisciplinary polymath, really a genius, and like so many geographers,
he's interested in lots of things, but his reputation is one of especially astounding
frankness, just likes to speak the truth, very careful calculation and pretty common
sense logic.
We see Smil in action, to soak all this up, but in plain terms, he's asked, how much
biomass is there?
How much do we consume, and what's the trend?
Well, Smil avoids simple catastrophic predictions, which he insists will always be wrong, but
his dense historical picture is clear, and based on many of the statistics I've already
described, we're using a vast portion of the Earth's productive capacity, and as poorer
people become wealthier, they're likely to consume more stuff, to say nothing of the
rate of consumption from people who are already wealthy.
So if we keep going at this rate of increased consumption and resources, Smil explains,
we would have to double or triple the productivity of basic biomass all around the world to keep
up.
In other words, to catch up with our own consumption, we would have to greatly expand the productive
capacity of nature of the Earth, and that's not very likely.
So where's all this pressure coming from?
Well, it's clear that human activity has long served to transform the Earth's surface,
as I've mentioned, but there's been an acceleration of that process, and the loss of forest and
grasslands and expansion of farmland has been incredibly dramatic, especially in the last
few centuries, and here's why.
Three interacting factors led to this transformation.
One, economic integration.
Two, infrastructural revolution.
And three, population settlement.
Now, none of these can be examined separately, and their entanglement is an important part
of our story, so let's look at them together.
Consider again the case of the Amazonian Rainforest.
Several factors have come together here to create a real catastrophe in deforestation.
First, state development policy in the region has put an emphasis on exploiting the resource
frontier.
The Brazilian government has stressed programs in road building, and these provide access
to regions really deep in the forest that had previously been impenetrable to mining
companies and timber companies and ranchers and small farmers.
So starting with the Trans-Amazonian Highway, that was back in 1972, infrastructural development
has led the way to deforestation in all the decades since.
Within its first two decades, the Belim, Brasilia Highway, as it's known, which was
begun in the late 1950s, opened the land to settlement by more than 2 million people.
You've got to imagine lots of people flowing in on this road into the forest, and the growth
of this network of roads in the region over time, it creates an unmistakable pattern if
you look at it from the air.
Initial forest cover loss follows the main highway after it's been laid across the forest,
and then secondary roads begin to emerge off the main road.
Seen from air photos and satellite images, the distinctive signature of a human footprint
is totally unmistakable.
There are big spines of denuded landscape which reach deep into the forest with smaller
spines leading off to fields and to clearings and pastures, and this creates what's been
called a fish bone effect for what it looks like.
Forests begin to decline along that spiny lattice, and work of new road construction leads out
into these bone-like structures.
In initial phases, mining and timber companies come in and clear the largest areas and trees,
but these are followed later by small holder settlers, that is people who settle the land
to bring crops and cattle.
And state policy further reinforces this settlement, because so-called productive use of lands,
in other words farming or ranching, can assure a settler official land rights over time.
As such, there's no incentive for a settler to rest the land or leave trees there, or
allow it to reforest, or to put it to anything except intensive productive use.
By using it, the settler owns it.
None of this government activity and policy would make much difference, however, without
massive international markets for the commodities that come out of the deforested land.
Initial clearance of much of this land was done by timber contractors, for example.
Timber exports from Brazil represent a roughly $200 million dollar annual industry.
Now once cleared of timber, a vast majority of the deforested land in Amazon is converted
to livestock pasture, nor is this production in any way for subsistence.
Brazil exported more than half a million head of beef cattle in 2012, so these pastures
are being used to produce export-oriented crops.
Brazil is also the second largest exporter of soybeans, which is a big part of this
story.
In fact, between 2001 and 2004, a few short years, the areas of the Brazilian Amazon under
intensive mechanized soy production grew by 3.6 million hectares, remembering that a hectare
is considerably larger than an acre.
This is a large area of land.
In short, the forest is being consumed by people, not in Brazil, but very far away in the wood,
in the meat, and the biofuels that we consume in the United States or in Europe.
So it's critical to point out that all of this deforestation didn't happen without a
fight, and it was contested by many people in the region.
In a series of increasingly well-organized movements, many local groups in Brazil banded
together to resist the destruction of the forest and the appropriation of their land.
The most famous of these in the Amazon was led by someone named Chico Mendez.
Mendez organized local peasants whose economy depended on tapping rubber from trees in the
forest, and they united with indigenous groups to oppose state settlement policies.
Mendez became a key founder of a vocal international movement to resist the relentless destruction
of these forests.
And although he was assassinated by a rancher in 1988, his efforts inspired numerous campaigns
to promote the preservation of the rainforest that are still ongoing today.
Brazil is only one case, of course.
While the global forces of deforestation are common and repeated around the world, every
region or case is unique.
In Southeast Asia, for example, a key driver has been the proliferation of palm oil plantations.
All native forests have been cleared, only to be replaced by this single-cash crop, which
has become one of the most commonly consumed food oils in the world.
Indonesia supplies more than half the world's palm oil, and exports of the product have
increased at roughly 27% per year all throughout the 2000s, so a curve would look like this.
And what is palm oil good for?
Well, according to its own industry reports, the product can be found in practically half
the products you might come across at the supermarket, including things like cereal
and cookies, there's a lot in cookies, soaps, cosmetics.
The world has an unmistakable appetite for palm oil, it seems.
And the process of clearing forests to plant palm oil plantations, large swaths of tropical
lowland forests have been cleared.
Approximately 7 million hectares of palm oil plantations have already been established,
and the Indonesian government is seeking to establish 1.4 million more hectares in the
short term in that country alone.
So what's the result of all this?
The result has been the near total destruction of orangutan habitat.
This already rare great ape may go locally extinct as a result in one of its last major
habitats on Borneo.
Some governments have tried to halt the pace of tropical deforestation, but their efforts
have produced some mixed results.
The work of the geographer Eric Lambin helps explain why this is.
He and his team at the Woods Institute for the Environment at Stanford University have
puzzled over the statistics and satellite imagery to understand patterns of forest
cover changes.
To do this, they examined timber exports and wood processing throughout the tropical world.
Their conclusion is that even when a country can control the rate of deforestation locally
within its own perimeter, this only moves the pressure for deforestation around through
what they call a kind of leakage.
Vietnam provides us with an exemplary case.
Here, the government made heroic progress in halting the cutting of upland hill country
forests to conserve their resources and to decrease erosion and to protect habitat and
do all that forest good.
They succeeded with a matching decrease in hardwood production, producing less wood from
these forests.
But the country of Vietnam curiously continued to profitably export hardwood furniture and
other valuable wood products.
How did they do it?
Well, they illegally imported hardwood forest timber from the country of Laos right next
door.
Vietnam protected its forest at the expense of the forests in Laos.
Deforestation wasn't halted, it was simply moved around in a kind of economic shell game.
So clearly, the general trends and drivers of land cover change paint a pretty grim picture.
Large areas of the Earth's surface have been transformed and the main drivers have changed,
great settlement and resource policies, global integration of markets, frontier migration
of settlers, consumer demand for products like palm oil worldwide.
All these things continue unabated, which would give you reason to be concerned.
But all hope is by no means lost.
Evidence from around the world suggests that some areas that were once deforested have
over time shifted back into forest cover.
And this means that not all land transformations are one way.
We may be able to recover or create land covers we previously destroyed and transformed.
And this shouldn't be entirely surprising.
Returning to my walk in the Massachusetts woods, you'll recall that I came across a stone wall,
the product of some farmer clearing the rocks out of his land hundreds of years before and
making a cleared field and a big bounded pasture in the process.
Now, this wall is surrounded by a thick forest.
So what happened?
Well, first, the viability of farming on difficult Massachusetts soils made farming uncompetitive
there, especially as new, more productive land was cleared in the Midwest.
Second, a massive migration of people from the New England countryside to the cities
during the Industrial Revolution occurred in the early 1800s, further encouraging land
abandonment, right?
So uncompetitive farming in Massachusetts, moving west to the Midwest and settlement
of people into cities leads to the opportunity for forests to sprout out of what had been
pasture and agricultural land.
And all of this together allowed Massachusetts to slowly return to forest on its own.
Forest now cover approximately 60% of the state.
And it's not without new risks from other threats, including suburban development and
invasive species.
The forests are not saved for all time.
But nevertheless, Massachusetts is a dramatically wooded environment relative to the landscape
of pasture and farm that had dominated there 150 years ago, in any case.
And recoveries like this aren't unique to North America.
Europe lost more than 30 million hectares of forest between 1700 and 1950, only to see
this rebound dramatically in the years since, recovering about half the forest cover that
was lost.
It would seem that countries throughout the world have reached a turning point where forests
recover more quickly than they're lost.
Forest cover in the United States declined from around a billion acres after the 1600s
to reach a low of about 700 million acres or about 30% forest cover in the early 20th
century, before a turnaround began to occur.
Forest cover in the U.S. is around 747 million acres today, Costa Rica has likewise witnessed
a recent expansion of their forest after reaching a nadir, a low point of around 30% forest cover.
There are many common drivers of this turnaround, which geographers refer to as a forest transition.
First, rural to urban migration and declining population growth, a topic we're going to
talk about in future lectures, simply leave too few people in the countryside to work the
land.
And this results in land abandonment, an abandonment of farms and the slow natural return of forests.
Government policies, in many cases, can also strongly encourage forest recovery.
Forest protection policies worldwide have had some impact, most typically where some
kind of economic transition is already occurring.
The creation of the U.S. Forest Service around the turn of the 20th century, for example,
represented a huge and important intervention.
Designed originally to maximize economic forest production, the Forest Service also helped
design methods for replanting and regrowing forests to sustain the industry.
The boom in forest industries throughout the 20th century also created incentives for
new forest plantations, especially in the southeastern part of the United States, which
is now one of the biggest areas of timber production in the country.
It's a region where a major forestry industry still thrives today.
And it's also possible that international policies might have some positive impact.
Currently, a new international framework is under consideration called UNRED, which stands
for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Decredition.
And this is an international policy that would actually allow wealthy countries to pay poorer
countries if they avoid deforestation.
This would head off deforestation in places where it hasn't significantly occurred yet
at all, places like Gabon or Suriname, where we might predict very soon there'll be deforestation,
but if we can get in front of it, that decreases that possibility.
Needless to say, a policy like that does not rule out the possibility that forest extraction
will simply move around to other parts of the world, not engaged in red programs.
But this innovation does create new incentives to keep forests on the land.
Either way, it's increasingly evident that forest loss isn't inevitable.
Some kind of forest recovery is sometimes possible.
Now to be clear, of course.
Forests that emerge through forest transition may not be ecologically similar to those that
were lost in the first place.
So we can deforest a region who's a great deal of biodiversity and come back and allow
it to recover without necessarily getting new species coming back that were the same
as the ones that preceded.
They may be less diverse and they can certainly never reverse species extinction.
Once you lose a species, you can never get it back.
Nevertheless, land cover change clearly isn't just a one-way street.
There is some room for hope.
Equally encouraging, it's possible that even where people have transformed landscapes, these
new land covers may be compatible with preserving native biodiversity and the health of ecosystems.
In other words, not all human landscapes are bad landscapes.
Some are good.
Consider the coffee plantations of India.
Now coffee was introduced to South Asia from Africa maybe a millennium ago, but expanded
dramatically during the time of British colonialism.
Integrated into large international markets, India's 178,000 coffee growers, those are
individual entrepreneurs, together produce enough coffee to make India the fifth largest
coffee producing nation in the world.
It's a significant export earner.
But unlike many coffee regions, a majority of plantations in India grow their coffee
in a complex shade system where coffee plants are intercropped with tall timber-generating
tree species which create a kind of complex artificial forest canopy.
Now this landscape, it isn't natural.
Not in any meaningful sense.
Many of the species are imported.
The land is heavily managed.
It's weeded.
Some products of this simulated forest are harvested and they're marketed internationally.
So it's not natural.
Most importantly, these coffee plantations at some point replaced existing forest land
cover.
So it has to be considered deforestation of some kind, at least in the broadest sense.
Even so, taking a short walk through a coffee plantation in southern India in the state of
Karnataka might raise some questions in your mind about how humans actually impact the
land.
So as you're walking through a forest like this and you look up, the layers of canopy
can be seen overhead and even to the untrained eye, they're not so different than the layers
of nearby natural or reserved forest areas.
You can also catch glimpses of important indigenous birds and amphibians, frogs, multicolored
frogs all under leaf cover and thriving in ponds and if you're not careful, you'll step
on the scat of wild mammals scattered all around including that of the civet, which
is a small cat-like mammal native to the region.
So it might surprise you, but this is considered deforestation at all because these farms
are behaving like forests.
That's what my team and I are trying to determine right now in our own research.
Teaming up with researchers from the University of Wisconsin, the University of Illinois and
the Center for Wildlife Studies in Bangalore, India, we're trying to determine what kinds
of wildlife thrive in coffee plantations and what kinds of human management decisions tend
to encourage biodiversity.
So what have we learned so far?
Well, we've learned that these plantations contain more than 100 bird species including
a dozen extremely important local species whose habitat has been threatened by farming
and development.
And we're also finding dozens of amphibian species, as I mentioned, native frogs that
are very sensitive indicators of ecological health where you find frogs, you have a healthy
ecology and many of these are critically threatened with extinction.
So clearly, people can manufacture economically viable landscapes that serve many of the functions
of native forest cover and not all land cover change is necessarily bad for biodiversity.
This is sometimes referred to as win-win ecology or reconciliation ecology, which is a fancy
term for having it both ways.
Just like Robert Wilson's description of the Pacific Flyway in California that we discussed
in a previous lecture, this is Anthropocene nature.
But we've also learned that these species could still be at risk.
Many plantation owners are intensifying their production, which that involves removing many
tree species and increasing inputs of things like pesticides and other decisions which
are likely bad for local diversity.
Now why would these farmers want to do that?
It's too soon to tell, but one factor may be that there's a scarcity of workers.
Workers who had long lived in and around these plantations are increasingly moving to the
city to seek better wages and living conditions.
So plantation owners are replacing wage laborers with mechanization and higher intensity production.
If that's true, it would be very ironic.
Precisely the factors that have led to forest transitions and forest recovery elsewhere,
urban migration, declining population growth, are actually encouraging coffee growers to
dismantle those very parts of their farming system that most resemble natural forest.
It may be possible then to address and improve worker pay and living arrangements to keep
the traditional system intact, but for now this win-win system is sort of at risk.
And the more general point remains true.
It is possible to imagine human-created or anthropogenic, anthropo-people, genic, genesis,
farming covers that mimic and reproduce the ecological functions of nature, and these
kinds of outcomes need not be restricted to plantations.
Many urban areas have become sites for the return of wildlife and birds.
Farms can play a key role in maintaining important wild species, and as we've seen previously,
a human-influenced world doesn't necessarily have to be a barren one.
So when it comes to land cover change, the glass is half full and half empty.
Without question, human beings have transformed and appropriated an overwhelming proportion
of the Earth's surface to the detriment of existing ecosystems and other species.
The loss of forest stands out really as among the most dramatic of these changes, but as
I said, it's not the only one.
And the driving forces behind these changes, including economic integration, infrastructural
change, population settlement, these don't show any signs of abatement, so there are
reasons for real and immediate concern.
At the same time, there are signs that in many places we may have already arrived at
a turning point on land cover change, and that we're already beginning a transition
back to a historical land cover.
So now I return to the question I raised at the beginning of the lecture.
Will we have forests in 40 years?
Well, looking at current geographic research, the answer should be a cautious yes, so that
should be good news.
And it is true that we have a lot to do and a lot to be excited about and a lot to be
optimistic about, but every day we're learning new ways we can share the land with other
species even as we put it to some kind of human use.
Though this might be good news, we'd have to temper it somewhat if we consider growth
in human population.
After all, we may be able to share the planet if we are only 7 or 8 billion people, but
what if our numbers become double or triple that?
Now that's a fair question.
And in my next lecture, I'll review what we know about population growth to answer it,
and you might be very, very surprised at what you're going to learn.
