In the highlands of Madagascar, right now, someone is probably lighting a fire.
That fire will burn somewhere wildly and range over miles, leaving a brown scar on the landscape
that might appear as massively destructive.
Within days, however, once a good rain arrives, the landscape is going to burst into a growth
of pasture grasses along with a mix of other plants which thrive at this elevation.
This riot of growth will hold down the soil, keeping it from eroding on steep hillsides.
The fire also fights back locusts, ticks, and mosquitoes and encourages the growth of
indigenous pine trees.
Once the grasses have grown enough, local people will graze cattle on the recently burnt
terrain.
And the social and cultural system that we're describing here is remarkably suited for the
configuration of climates and landscapes where we find it.
And none of this comes automatically.
The Highland-Malagasy people have a social system that helps them coordinate the burns
and a culture that instructs them in the role and importance of fire.
This technique and the terrifically complicated culture and knowledge that supports it is
so well adapted to the climate and the elevation and the topography in that part of Madagascar
that we might be tempted to ask, just how much influence does the environment have over
people's ways of life, over their social systems?
If we look at similar Highland areas in other parts of the world, will we find similar people,
similar practices, and similar cultures?
In some ways, of course, these questions are a familiar restating of one of the oldest
questions of geography.
How much does our environment explain who we are as individuals or as groups or even
as a species?
How does geographical context influence culture?
Now, by geographical context, what I mean are environmental conditions like climate
or topography, but also the economic and the built environment, things like fields and
buildings and infrastructure.
To what degree do these impact us as people and how?
In this lecture, I'm going to review some of the many ways that geographers think about
the geographical context and how it influences people.
And in the process, I'll introduce three core concepts that geographers use to understand
the world, place, region, and adaptation.
So I'll show you how local places set the context for people and their experiences and
I'll show how larger regions encompass distinctive cultures and how adaptation to differing environments
is a remarkable quality common to all humans on the planet.
Finally, I'll review work by some geographic thinkers to take these concepts to a more
deeply historical level and to explore the problematic argument that geography actually
determines history and society, an argument that I will suggest is grossly overstated.
So we'll begin by considering the geographies of everyday life and the concept of place.
Places are the local settings in which human activity occurs on a day-to-day basis.
They're distinctive, they have unique and often difficult to describe qualities.
And they comprise physical features like mountains or beaches or plant or animal life, as well
as human-designed cultural and economic qualities like architecture, forms of livelihood or religion.
Geographers assert that experiencing and making places are fundamental human qualities.
People experience their settings, relate to them emotionally, and succumb to their influences
often unknowingly.
Consider some place in the world that you know.
One of the obvious ones is a neighborhood.
Neighborhood has a distinctive kind of housing, a topography, and a look and a feel.
So do you know when you've entered or exited your own neighborhood?
Sure.
Is it by reference to a sign or a boundary or a line on a map?
Probably not.
And yet, you know where you are and we know when you're there.
In this sense, people make these places by assigning emotional or personal qualities to them, familiarity.
This is my neighborhood, for example.
This is my place.
Now, do these places exert an influence on people?
Absolutely.
And a rather obvious example, people who live in toxic environments exposed to industrial
effluence experience remarkably different health outcomes and life expectancies than
those who live in other places.
In a less dramatic or unpleasant example, living in a small town encourages different
kinds of social interactions than living in a dense urban downtown environment.
Some influences of place are more complex, however, but also more profound.
Consider the case of Detroit.
In 2012, Central Detroit, an area about 140 square miles, didn't contain a single chain
grocery store.
This is an area that has already faced a number of challenges throughout the late 20th century
and the early 21st century, having been blighted by disinvestment, by housing abandonment, by
foreclosure, and by depopulation.
Between the year 2000 and the year 2010, that city went from just under one million residents
to just over 700,000.
That's a 25% decline in a single decade.
And even before this time, investment in commerce and support for local businesses had not always
been the highlight of the city's history, especially in dense urban African-American neighborhoods.
American Americans in Detroit make up about 80% of the population.
For our purposes here today, the key point is that the landscape of urban Detroit has
experienced high levels of disinvestment, leaving people without access to things like
grocery stores, places where basic foods, including vegetables and fresh meats, could
be purchased.
As research by Professor Monica White from the University of Wisconsin has shown, the
vacuum left by the absence of these food venues has been filled by liquor stores, convenience
stores, and other commercial sites where fresh food is rare or non-existent.
This condition, what geographers call a food desert, is an incredibly important component
of urban Detroit as a place.
It also has a very real impact on the people who live there.
With the only stores available to people, specializing in the sale of alcohol, tobacco,
lottery tickets, food choices tend to be limited to foods that are highly processed
and heavy in sugar, salt, and fat.
Health outcomes for people in Detroit have followed from this reality.
Hypertension, diabetes, and heart disease are all found in Detroit at rates far higher
than the rest of Michigan.
Urban Detroit might be considered an unhealthy place, an unhealthy place in this sense.
One thing to keep in mind is that surrounding communities, especially Gross Point right
next door, and other suburbs, do have grocery stores, and some parts of Detroit's urban
population actually live pretty close to these nearby places.
But the boundaries for residents feel very real.
Many local people would prefer not to cross out of their neighborhoods to more largely
white areas.
This emphasizes that place is bounded both by physical geography and the built environment,
but also by our culture, and by the often intimidating social geographies that exist
in a place like Detroit.
So place clearly exerts an enormous influence on people in both their bodies and their minds.
But what's also important to remember here is that places aren't fixed, and they're
not static.
They're remade all the time.
And in the case of Detroit, radical and exciting transformations are going on right now relative
to improving food access, and people's health, and the experience of people in their neighborhoods.
And these changes are ironically a product of the same devastating economic changes that
have been visited on the city in the last few years.
The clearing out of whole city blocks, owned to economic collapse, has left a lot of vacant
land available.
And remarkably, all across the city on these abandoned properties, local people are doing
something interesting.
They're farming.
Groups like the Detroit Black Community Food Security Network are supplying tools, teaching
farming and gardening methods, and using vacant land to actually grow vegetables and
build community self-reliance.
So in the process, they're remaking the place and changing the context within which they
live.
Their everyday environment looks and feels different in the process.
It's greener, and it's managed by people in their communities out in public with rakes
and shovels.
Everyday places make people, but people have the capacity to remake places.
The same thing can be said of things at a larger scale.
While places are immediate, and they have a look and feel that's distinctive and are
experienced and defined as part of everyday life, larger areas are also distinctive or
coherent.
Geographers refer to these larger areas made up of numerous smaller places as regions.
It's an inexact term, but a region, put simply, is a large, informally defined area that shares
a number of physiographic, economic, and social or cultural attributes.
Like places, we know most regions intuitively, and refer to them all the time in the course
of our lives.
When we say, for example, upstate New York, we're invoking a region.
Without question, the areas contained within this larger region are incredibly diverse.
The countless little towns of the region don't have a lot in common with bigger cities like
Syracuse.
Nonetheless, the topography and economic systems of the region are somewhat coherent.
Moreover, the regions identified precisely because it's different from, and has a complex
relationship with, the eastern seaboard region of the greater New York City, Megalopolis.
Many regions are defined specifically around the distribution of a particular and distinctive
culture or language.
So we speak of Amish country in Pennsylvania, Britain in France, or Catalonia in Spain,
and when we do, we're talking about an area where a particular culture or linguistic group
prevails, kind of cultural region.
But we also understand that the region has other shared characteristics, like a distinctive
farming system in the case of Amish country in the United States, or widespread architectural
and social patterns, as in the Plotin region of France, or important regional political
commitments, as in the Catalonian region of Spain.
The regions are social and cultural in this sense, and they also can be potentially political.
Nonetheless, physical features and climate also have enormous influence on the constitution
of regions.
One of the most interesting regions in the world is the Sahel.
The Sahel is a roughly defined band of land which stretches west to east across the continent
of Africa, and it's wedged beneath the harsh arid climate of the Sahara in the north, and
the verdant and rainy tropics of central Africa.
This strip of continent is defined by its climate.
It's semi-arid, seasonally wet and dry by turns, and often extremely hot.
It has vegetation to match its climate, a mix of thorny trees and shrubs, along with
open grasslands.
Closer to the Sahara, the vegetation is necessarily sparser than it is when you get closer to
the equator, and the transitional character of the Sahel is sort of its chief character.
But the cultures and societies of the Sahel are also distinctive.
Among the best known and most historically important cultural groups in West Africa,
the Fulani are residents of the Sahel.
Fulani people are spread across the whole band of the Sahel, with populations in countries
like Mauritania, Ghana, Senegal, Mali, Niger, among many others, and Fulani are traditionally
or historically a pastoral people.
This means they herd cattle, taking advantage of these vast grasslands which are this part
of Africa.
This livelihood has imposed some pretty specific demands on the Fulani, since rainfall is
very, very highly variable, and tends to move south and north with the seasons, herders
and Fulani people can't stay put.
They need to move in a carefully arranged system of migrations that maintain and maximize
their opportunities to raise and sell cattle.
This tendency to move around has huge advantages for the region's ecology, because migratory
cattle constantly move through grasslands in a way that serves as their resource base
instead of staying put and heavily overgrazing one site for long periods.
The overall pressure of grazings is spread widely then all across the Sahel.
There's a kind of genius in this, and it reflects pretty deep ecological knowledge that people
like the Fulani have about their regional environments.
It also shows how climate can figure pretty big in what people do, people's practices.
The widespread movement of the Fulani also puts them in interesting and dynamic relationships
with surrounding communities.
For example, Fulani have a historically peaceful and economically vibrant relationship with
the cultures living to their south, including farmers like the Sanufo people, who the Fulani
have historically traded meat for grain and other products of agricultural life.
Migration is also linked to many parts of Fulani culture.
Traditional Fulani clothing is well suited to movement in hot environments.
There's a cultural stress on cattle wealth amongst the Fulani, measuring somebody's significance
based on the size of their herd.
This reflects their traditional migratory pastoral society.
And though most Fulani now live in settlements and towns, many of these cultural characteristics
can still be found in Fulani communities.
It's as if the region, in a sense, was writing itself into the culture.
This is only one example of how human geography intersects with its regional context, but
it stresses that the characteristics of a region unquestionably influence the individuals
and groups that live there.
These influences are realized in what geographers call adaptations.
Adaptations are the myriad creative solutions to the complex geographical puzzles that people
and societies and civilizations face.
And adaptation is truly universal.
People in the South Pacific have built thatch roofs in this region since before recorded
history, for example.
Just these, the islanders of Bali weave a roof they call Alang Alang, which is made
from the tough blades of the stems of a local grass which has the same name.
The plant, known in Latin as imperata cylindrica, is sturdy and has a high tensile strength.
Now, the obvious reason people use this grass to thatch in Bali is simply that it's there.
The grass is widely available as basically free, but there are adaptive reasons too.
A well-woven thatch roof stands up to 100 mile per hour winds.
So while Bali's out of the hurricane zone in this region, it experiences gale force
winds every year from the tropical storms that sweep through the region, and thatch roofing
is used to protect the houses.
It's true that thatch roofing can catch fire, but it's a remarkably sturdy adaptation to
a wet and windy climate.
Many people still use thatch construction throughout the South Pacific today.
Now Bali is maybe a kind of exotic, romantic example, and a great place to visit.
But it drives home a key point about adaptation.
There's often really good reasons for why people continue to do something that may seem
backwards or traditional to an outside observer.
People forget this fact about adaptation at their peril.
I'll give you an example.
In an effort to improve agricultural production in the northeastern state of Orissa in India
several years ago, international development workers introduced high-yielding American
breeds of cows.
They imported these cows from the states.
These animals were intended to displace the traditional breed of Orissan cows who tended
to be lean and poorer milk producers.
Local breeding bulls were actually slaughtered, and new animals were brought in with the very
best of intentions, always the best of intentions.
Needless to say, the cows died.
Poorly adapted to the local ecological conditions, the heat, and the local forage crops, these
imported animals fared really poorly.
People were actually worse off after the development effort than they were before.
Adaptation to geographic conditions, again, sometimes trumps new innovations from elsewhere.
Now, these examples pertain to something that might be called traditional or non-industrial
regions or societies.
Does adaptation matter in modern societies?
Modern economies?
Sure, probably more so.
Take Iceland.
Now, here's a cold environment with limited fuel resources, and it runs at a positive
energy balance.
Positive energy balance means it's producing more energy than it's consuming.
Depending on imported fossil fuels for less than a percent of its overall power, in other
words, it's generating all its own power, how does it do it?
The secret lies in adaptation to the environment.
Iceland is perched atop a so-called geological hotspot, and it sits right along the mid-Atlantic
ridge, which is a place where two tectonic plates are tearing apart from one another,
and new land is being created by infernal geological forces.
New land is created as the plates move apart, and magma seeps upwards from the Earth's
mantle and it hardens.
This makes Iceland incredibly geologically active, riddled with volcanic activity, and
constantly in the midst of tectonic activity.
But when geology gives you lemons, it's best to make lemonade.
Iceland has five huge geothermal power plants, and these plants use the molten heat of the
Earth, so near the surface, in a place like Iceland, to produce about a quarter of the
island nation's energy.
Like the fulani and the islanders of Bali, the modern Icelandic economy reflects the
signature of its geographic conditions.
And this is the marvel of human adaptation.
Geographic conditions vary enormously, creating distinct regions.
But people, societies, cultures, and economies adapt to these conditions and thrive using
a kind of genius loci, a kind of spirit of the location or place, and they thrive wherever
human beings can be found.
This basic fact of human geography might lure us into a more ambitious thesis.
Given that people adapt to their geographic conditions, is it possible that certain geographies,
only to their special qualities, wet or dry or hot or cold or flat or mountainous, is
it possible that these conditions tend to lead to more or less advanced or sophisticated
civilizations over time?
Does geography, in this sense, directly determine the outcomes of development we see all around
us?
Now, there are several clues in the global landscape that might lead us to this, as it
turns out, problematic hypothesis.
Most notably, many countries and places near the equator currently experience far lower
standards of living and economic growth in areas closer to the poles.
Is there something in the climate, the geography of the equatorial region that determines or
explains this?
Since the dawn of geography as a field, researchers have occasionally pursued this line of questioning
and investigation, but usually with little luck.
Perhaps the best known and most thorough version of this argument was put forward by Jared
Diamond in his well-known 1997 book, Guns, Germs, and Steel.
A researcher and professor specializing in physiology, ornithology, and ecology, Diamond
tried to offer a comprehensive explanation for the distribution of modern development.
He did it trying to use geography.
To summarize this more complex analysis, he essentially argues that those parts of the
world that were able to amass significant population densities earlier than others tended
to become dominant civilizations with more advanced technology.
These population densities were driven by the earlier advent of consistent and productive
agriculture.
And agriculture, in turn, is found in places that are more temperate and span large east
to west areas, at least according to the theory.
So just follow the logic.
Early shapes of continents provides early agriculture.
Early agriculture provides booming populations.
Booming populations create advancement and economic sophistication.
So areas of successful growth and advancement are hypothesized to have a few other more specific
local conditions as well, like indented coastlines, things like that.
These conditions largely prevail in the Near East and Europe, Diamond insists, leading
to a significant head start for civilization in Europe, and the eventual European political
and economic dominance of the world.
Diamond also argues, as other geographers have, that the isolation of the Americas from
the disease ecology of Europe, Asia, and Africa made people there highly vulnerable to epidemics
that followed the European discovery of the New World at the end of the 15th century.
That's the germs part of Gums, Germs, and Steel.
There are many things that make this argument attractive.
Most notably, it helps to explain why some places are thoroughly underdeveloped, especially
sub-Saharan Africa, without resorting to a racist argument.
As Diamond correctly points out, the genetic differences between people in Africa, Europe,
or Australia are so incredibly small, they're so trivial as to render them useless in trying
to explain major differences in development.
So if it ain't genetics, then it must be geography, right?
It should also be noted that many parts of the argument are uncontroversial and very
powerful.
Several of them are going to be discussed in later lectures.
Population growth and agricultural development are indeed closely intertwined.
And we'll point this out later when we get to the agricultural section of the course.
Disease ecology depends on the history, diffusion, and interaction of people, which is something
we'll also talk about.
And the European conquest of the Americas, as we'll cover in our discussion of the Colombian
exchange after 1492, was in part a result of mass epidemics there, with real important
implications for economic history.
So in this sense, Diamond has assembled some important arguments about why geography matters.
But the evidence is way, way more muddled, and the counter-examples are simply too many
to conclude that geography determines development.
First, there are a lot of places that do meet the characteristics described by Diamond for
agriculture, but where intensive agriculture did not evolve, like parts of Southern Africa
and Australia.
Second, people in many places domesticated crops as early or even earlier than Europe,
including parts of Southeast Asia.
And yet, these did not emerge as dominant, at least not in the time that Diamond was
writing in the late 20th century.
More obviously, China, East Asia, and much of South Asia fit all of Diamond's geographical
requirements for a dominant civilization, but these were very poor places, until very
recently.
This can't be explained simply through the use of geography, factors of history, economics,
especially colonialism, and other key issues you'd have to consider them.
But part of the problem with this argument is that it sets out to explain why such and
such a place, that is in this case Europe, was politically and economically dominant
in the 19th and 20th centuries, which happens to be the time that the author is writing.
That's a totally arbitrary choice.
If Diamond had picked 1491 as his date, it would be far harder to say Europe was dominant.
In fact, a large group of competing economies and civilizations were thriving all over the
globe at this time, as we'll discuss in a later lecture.
On the other hand, what if Diamond had written his book in 2060 instead of 1997?
It's very possible that a different set of regions might be economically ascendant by
that time, for reasons we'll also examine later in the course.
Some of the greatest investments in Africa today are being made by Asian investors, especially
from China.
If, by a later part of the century, the region is economically ascendant and Africans are
speaking more Mandarin Chinese, what underlying geography would Diamond have used to explain
this?
More bluntly, why start with Europe and why assume that the present is the best indicator
of the processes that drive history?
So in this sense, the very question Diamond asks, why is Europe dominant is a kind of
Eurocentric question?
Assuming that social evolution eventually ends or culminates in Europe, and by implication
North America, and working backwards from there, determinism makes a pretty bold and
ultimately unfounded assumption that Europe is the measuring stick against which other
cultures and societies should be measured.
This is highly problematic.
Finally, the determinist argument overreaches and is too unidirectional.
We've already seen in this lecture that geography does matter, at both the local and regional
scale, to the affairs and habits of people.
But what we've also seen is that people's adaptation is a creative affair, that people
often alter the conditions of their context and to remarkable effect.
People in Detroit, faced with limits provided by their economic geography, overcome it through
creative recreation of the land itself.
Iceland's resource limits are imposed by their geography, yet people creatively harness
some of the most adverse qualities of their island's geology to become a powerhouse.
It's clear that a universal one-way rule of geographic determinism, right, where geography
determines society as opposed to the other way around, is neither credible nor particularly
useful in a world that's as dynamic as the one we're living in.
So what alternative do geographers provide to determinism?
The answer lies in the tools we've already reviewed, place, region, and adaptation.
With those tools and reviewing the cases of human adjustment to the world around them,
we can strongly assert that people creatively gear their actions, culture, and even their
identities to the context in which they're enmeshed.
People are the products of places and regions, but these words, place, region, and adaptation,
can also be used as action words in the sense that they make people make places.
They create regions, they adapt the earth itself, right, to suit their purposes.
People are, by their nature, tinkerers, they work the earth, recombining the elements of
the world around them, and changing themselves, their cultures and economies, in the process.
Here's the example of the rice economies of Asia.
First domesticated in South and Southeast Asia more than 7,000 years ago, rice plants
proved to be able to grow quite intensively to produce great food surpluses and to support
large growths in population.
Over the millennia, agricultural systems evolved that could absorb all that extra population
as labor, refining the techniques of rice growing and physically changing the geographic
landscape, carving it up into vast pools and dikes of patty rice cultivation in China,
India, and Indochina.
Now, this patty rice system is one that requires complex social systems just to manage it.
People have to organize to open and close water gates to maintain and repair water systems.
They have to cooperate extensively and share labor and seeds, since rice fields are interlaced
into larger, interdependent, and connected systems of fields.
The transformation of these landscapes and the hydrological systems that have been created
for rice now demand these social systems, and these social systems, in turn, led to
new modes of innovation, new social interactions, new rice cultures, new economies.
Rice landscapes left by previous generations set the conditions for the later societies
that evolved to farm them.
Future generations would innovate new agricultural systems and landscapes to suit the needs of
the rice cultures and economies created by those who came before them.
By the early 20th century, the rice economies of the region were among the most sophisticated
and complicated and complex in the whole world.
The new geographies and societies that emerged from this kind of ongoing interaction impinge
on one another in a way that we would describe as dialectical, which is a term that simply
means that each part is transformed through its relationship to the other.
Rice and people are changed as they evolve together.
In that sense, it can be concluded that people make geographies, but never the geographies
entirely of their own choosing.
To summarize, what I've tried to do here is review the many ways that geographic conditions
at different scales impact us as individuals and societies and people.
And in the process, I've tried to introduce some useful geographic concepts, including
place, region, and adaptation, which we can use to help us sort through the way geographies
set the term for human lives.
And I've tried to provide some wide-ranging examples of how we're all changed by our geographic
context, but we've also learned that any theory of determinism where geography shapes humanity
in a one-way direction is pretty poor fit for the way people and their geographies interact.
Instead, the evidence suggests we've got to embrace a model of geography that's dialectical
where context and society are mutually transformed, and this is because people also transform
the world, and they often do so at vast scales.
If things like hot climates or huge deserts have influenced people's adaptation over time,
it's also true that these climates and these deserts are themselves constantly being transformed
by human activities.
The extent of human activity and transformation of the Earth is so vast that today many scholars
have proposed to give our current geological era an entirely new name, the Anthropocene,
and it's to this remarkable trend that we'll turn in our next lecture.
