In the year 1405, Admiral Cheng He was sent by the Ming Dynasty of China, with a navy
of 62 enormous vessels to call upon the kings of the Indian Ocean.
He'd take a second voyage on behalf of the emperor in 1408.
On those two voyages, this gigantic Chinese imperial navy and its ancillary trading vessels
would visit places across Asia, including Java, Sumatra, Malacca, and the island of
Ceylon, stopping at places all along the Indian coast.
This massive flotilla, represented not only the military and technical might of China,
it showed the high level of economic integration and interaction that we're developing across
east and south Asia at that time, and China and India weren't alone in this.
The great city of Cairo straddled the trade routes to the east from the Mediterranean,
growing into a huge capital of perhaps a half million people linked by trade to Europe and India.
Arab traders were making their way to Asia by way of the Persian Gulf since before the
9th century, so by 1400 they had integrated the great trading ports of East Africa,
including Mogadishu, Zanzibar, Mozambique, all together into a commercial and cultural
archipelago, even Europe, emerging from a quiet period of relative isolation,
was linked firmly to global trade by 1400, especially through its burgeoning Mediterranean
ports at Genoa and Venice. And these changes had profound influences on regional culture in the
lives of people all around the world, while many indeed most people at this time remain
disconnected from the global economy and practiced subsistence farming in small communities.
More and more people were involved in new urban cultures and economies.
They were encountering more diverse and cosmopolitan contexts, new languages,
and vibrant social exchange. In other words, a new geography of global spatial economic connections
was beginning to make new places, new ways of living, even new kinds of people.
Now in our era of jet travel and satellite television, it's easy to think of the world of
this bygone era, the world that came before our modern economy, as being one of economic seclusion
where places and small towns lived in isolation. It's especially tempting to think this way about
the distant times before the 15th century, picturing in our minds a medieval period of isolated
warring cultures sitting around waiting for the Renaissance to happen. And what I want to suggest
in this lecture is that nothing could be further from the truth. I want to show that the origins
of our global economy emerged very early on and in places all over the world. And in the process,
I want to introduce some key concepts in economic geography. But more than this,
I want to emphasize the central point of the course, that people make and are remade by
the geography in which they find themselves. So far in the course, we've explored this
theme by examining the influence of the geography of natural environments,
climates and forests and so on, on human activity. And we've also examined the reverse process,
the impact of people on the natural world around them. People make the environments around them
and are remade. For the next section of the course, however, I want to demonstrate
that much the same can be said about economic and cultural geographies. That is,
the distributions of economic and cultural activities create the geographies in which
human activity and interaction occur, but these cultures and economies are always being changed
and literally moved around by people. The picture that should emerge in your mind
is a restless, shifting mosaic of human geography. So to begin with, in this next section of the
course, we'll consider global economic geographies, the systems of production and trade that have
spanned the world for centuries. In the process, we'll address several questions. Is global trade
really new? Have Europe and North America always been at the center of global economic power?
How did they get into that position? What will the global economy look like now that its center
of gravity has begun to move east to China, India and elsewhere? For the next half hour,
I'll begin this discussion of global economies by introducing some basic principles in economic
geography. First, I'll introduce the idea of economic structure of a region. That is, the share of
economic activity dedicated to different kinds of processes and activities. And next,
I'll introduce the concept of central places. These are concentrated areas of economic activity.
Following this discussion of geographical concepts, we'll examine the world economy
of the 13th and 14th centuries, which though very different from our own,
show some of the same qualities of contemporary global trade and represents the dawning of
economic differentiation and capitalist economic geography. Surveying the early global economies
of Asia and the Middle East and Europe, I'll draw a central conclusion. While the global economy of
the 20th century centered around the western powers that emerged from colonialism, prior to 1400,
the world's economic geography was configured very differently, with multilateral trade spread
across many, many economic centers, including and especially those in Asia. But first, we'll
need to learn some language to talk about global economic geography. The core concept is a simple
one, economic structure. When geographers talk about economic structure of a region or a country
or a place, they're simply describing the predominant kinds of economic activities that
go on there. And these are typically broken down into categories. These categories include
primary activities, secondary ones, tertiary ones, and ordinary activities.
Primary economic activities are all those associated with developing and harnessing raw
materials. And that would include activities like farming and fishing, but also mining.
Secondary activities would include processing of those materials into value added goods or
products. And this generally includes all classical industries ranging from craft activities to full
scale mechanized and assembly line manufacturing. So raw leather is produced through primary activity
of livestock raising, but turning leather into shoes is a secondary activity.
Tertiary economic activities refer to commercial activities, including marketing and sale and
exchange of goods, as well as other services that might range from accounting to warehousing
and personnel services. Coordinary activities, where they exist, includes all parts of the
knowledge and information economy, including information and data management, education,
research and development. Now, when you look at the specific economic geography of a place or
region, it's not unusual for places to specialize in a limited range of economic functions. This
specialization often gives a place or region a kind of signature. Some towns or regions might be
strictly agricultural, like rural parts of the Midwest in the United States or interior parts
of today's China. The newly burgeoning cities of China, on the other hand, are booming sites
of secondary economic activity, producing goods for international markets, as well as financial
services practiced in the mushrooming high rises of great cities of China, like Shanghai or Guangzhou.
Silicon Valley in California and the city of Bangalore in India, well known for software
production, they're famous for being hubs of ordinary activity. So each economic region has a
different economic structure, one with very different set of specializations and activities.
From a historical point of view, one of the most important developments in the 12th and 13th
centuries was the widespread development of market towns and early manufacturing sites.
So these are places that had more than primary agricultural activity. They began to serve as
commercial and trade hubs. And though important trading hubs and ports existed since ancient times,
the period before 1400 was one without a dense network of trade or a widespread distribution
of productive and trading activities. Prior to this period, one could imagine a world of
more isolated agrarian settlements with limited connectivity. England in the year 1000, for example,
though it would have been a place with some trade, was a region of agricultural hamlets that relied
heavily on self-sufficiency for everything from food to farm implements. Essentially,
it was a world of primary productivity. All over the world, however, new hubs of activity were
emerging. And by the 15th century, such centers of secondary and tertiary activity could be found
across Asia, Africa, and Europe and the Americas. Market towns began to emerge in this period,
scattered all around the world. And these markets would hold periodic fairs, providing consumer
goods that couldn't be found in the small farming towns nearby. At these markets, people might find
specialty craft goods or even the products of early industrial activity like textiles. People would
come from surrounding communities to sell their primary agricultural products and to buy secondary
goods. This represents a pretty big change. The distribution of these markets, as one might predict,
was heavily influenced by the limits of transportation. People could cart their goods only so far
for periodic fair. One could imagine that somewhere amidst a rough circle of a half-dozen smaller
communities, one larger community might sprout a weekly or monthly fair. And that community might
grow somewhat larger as a result of this commercial activity and begin to provide specialty services
and industries that smaller towns might not. They might also have been places where investments
in infrastructure like larger churches might occur. Now, if we pan out to a larger scale,
we can picture that these more central market towns might have between them a single yet
larger town, which might hold a major annual fair or maintain a regular market, emerging as a cultural,
administrative, religious, or educational center as well. To be clear, this kind of pattern isn't
just one we might see in the ancient or medieval world. I once had a summer job working on a ranch
in northeastern Colorado on the Great Plains. Now, the ranch where I worked was served by one
small town and with little more in it than a gas station and a grain elevator. You couldn't buy
much more than a stick of gum at that place. And there were a number of these small towns
scattered around the county. But located somewhere between them was a town where one could find a
doctor and a grocery store and a butcher and so on. And it was this town that hosted the weekly
Saturday rodeo. Now, needless to say, the larger annual rodeo was held in an even larger city
further away. This basic pattern of markets and economic specialization wasn't all that
different than the market towns of 15th century Europe or China, at least not spatially different.
The resulting economic landscape you should picture in your mind is a vast field of small
settlements with larger ones interspersed relatively evenly amidst them and a handful
of very large market towns or sites dispersed evenly amongst these. This pattern follows what
traditional economic geographers call central place theory. This is a concept made most famous
by the German geographer, Walter Christaller, whose book Central Places in Southern Germany
was written in 1933, but became more widely read after its translation into English
in the mid 1960s. Christaller was interested in the pattern of settlements across landscapes
and he made mathematical geographic and geometric predictions about the distribution of different
size settlements over space, explaining where you might get larger or smaller towns based on
markets for goods. Now, for our purposes, what's interesting about central places
is that they represent the increasing sophistication and specialization
of economic structure that we described before. These central places with the largest and most
ongoing commercial and industrial activity were often strategically located to link the regions
they served with larger networks or even more exotic trade. The region of Champagne in northeastern
France is a great example. Champagne was a place where famous markets and fairs emerged in the
12th century. The economic structure of these towns, with many secondary and tertiary activities
and even permanent markets, which was a big deal at the time, was far different than the
surrounding rural towns. They served as important central places and markets for higher order goods,
but they did more than this. As they grew, their strategic locations made them perfect places
to link local economies to global trade. As it turns out, Champagne has a pretty good location
between the developing Mediterranean ports of Italy, which received exotic goods like silk from
China, and the emerging industrial textile mills of Flanders. Caravans, with goods coming from the
east, would come to Champagne to be met by caravans carrying industrial goods from the north. The
result, for a while anyway, was an enormously vibrant hub in a complex global network. This
very local geography of urban development in France was part of a growing set of more
worldwide linkages in trade, and this pattern was reproduced in places across the globe.
From the port towns of southern India, the burgeoning market towns of China, the new
local economic geographies, and new urban cultures of far-flung places were just parts
of an emerging world of global trade. To reiterate the larger point, people were building new
economic lives for themselves in this medieval period, but ones heavily influenced by the more
global geography in which they found themselves. Economic geography was influencing local places
and cultures, even while those local activities were helping to build an increasingly widespread
geographic network of trade. Globalization, in a sense, had already begun. So, what did global
trade actually look like in the 14th and 15th centuries? Surprisingly, it had many of the key
elements of contemporary capitalism, although on a very constrained scale. The three keys
were already all in place at this time. One, money and credit. Two, pooled capital.
And three, concentrated wealth. First, money and credit. In Asia, Europe, and the Arab world
during this period, there were currencies. Frankish and late Anglo-Saxon currencies circulated
throughout Europe and the Eastern Mediterranean, although other regions and states maintained
their own currencies at this time and prior. Still, there remained a paucity of precious metals,
especially silver, available in Europe before the discovery of the Americas. Though currency existed,
there simply wasn't enough silver in Europe to jumpstart large-scale production and standardization
of money. Paper money was even rare, but definitely present as well. The Chinese had paper money,
which was backed by government assurance as early as the Tang Dynasty. That's the 9th century.
Even where paper money didn't exist, credit did. Traders could move goods from one place to another
with the promise of repaying or being repaid by someone either at a later time
or at the port of their destination. Now, that's a huge innovation for global trade,
and it was in practice all over the world by the 1300s. Another key to making long-distance,
high-volume trade work is the pooling of investments, the pooling of capital.
So consider this. To make a major trading voyage profitable, a cargo hold had to be filled with
very valuable goods, and the ship had to sail to its destination and then return
before returning any value to its owner. That's both incredibly expensive and is really,
really risky. How many people went broke after all waiting for their ships to come in?
For you Shakespeare fans, this is really the central part of the plot of the classic play
Merchant of Venice. And for good reason, global trade was risky. As a result,
really complicated partnerships for investment emerged at this time as well.
Families would join together to invest in voyages and caravans. The famous Marco Polo
probably didn't bring noodles to Italy from China, but he was part of a very innovative family business
that gathered investors together to undertake far-flung trade expeditions. In many places,
including China, the state would also help back those kinds of expeditions since they
were pretty expensive. Finally, in Asia, the Near East, and Europe, there was an emerging
class of people with a concentrated financial means to take these kinds of really bold economic
risks. Many of them were tied closely to states and governments, of course, so they didn't resemble
today's modern, independent entrepreneur or venture capitalist, but it is the case that the
growth of local economic activities in market towns had provided the undergirding of wealth
for a handful of people to somewhat freely invest in trading ventures like this.
So what we've established so far is that in the 13th and 14th centuries all over the world,
local networks of trade were creating central places, that is, places with economic structures
beyond primary production. And these hubs of commerce and industry were often located where
they could link far-flung trade networks we've also established, that the financial instruments
and wealth necessary to make long-distance trade were in place. These together heralded the birth
of what might be called global trade. Of course, the world's economic system was never and still
isn't today fully global. Much of the world of 1450 would have still been dominated by dispersed
agricultural populations, largely disconnected from the growing regional worldwide trade networks.
Nevertheless, a kind of archipelago or network of central places was emerging in this period
which began to stitch together commerce over really long distances. So what did this all look
like? Rather than think about it as a seamless web of global trade where someone in Paris could
simply buy commodities at will from someone in Calicut, we'd do better to envision a set of
overlapping spheres of trade. The sociologist and economic historian Janet Aboulagaud suggests
that there were perhaps seven or eight of these spheres which constituted the range of major
trading efforts within world regions. Within this pattern, which is sort of like a quilt
of connected regional trade areas, several circuits emerged. I'll go through them one at a time to
give you a sense of the vibrancy of global trade at this time. The first circuit was the vast area
of sea trade which would stretch from east across the East China Sea southwards. And this
connected the great spice ports of Malacca and other islands in Southeast Asia with silk markets
in East Asia like Peking which we now call Beijing. So you got to imagine huge ships
weighed down with fine silks striking out from ports in China and returning from the spice islands
with bags full of corns of black pepper. The trade in Southeast Asian pepper was so widespread
as a result of this trade zone that many kitchens in Europe had pepper mills as early as the 1300s.
A second trade zone was carved out by the famous silk route, really a network of routes which
brought the silks of China westward through booming trade cities like Samarkand and Bukhara
to the port cities like Kaffa on the Black Sea. Now that port was actually a Genovese colony
and would have traded with the incoming caravans some of the finer goods of Europe,
anything from squirrel fur to textiles from the low countries in northern Europe.
Another trade region straddled the Persian Gulf and then stretched from the Arabian seaports of
Hormuz and Muscat in the eastern Mediterranean ports of Palestine which were so violently
contested during the Crusades and that's why the biblical gift of frankincense which is actually
an incense created from resin harvested from trees probably came out of the port of Muscat
before it found its way to Judea. Well these same trade routes thrived 14 centuries later
and those ports were also connected south and westward by a vigorous trade zone in the Indian
Ocean which went as far south as the east African coastal ports of the Horn of Africa present day
Somalia and then eastward to embrace all the ports along the western coast of India and Ceylon
which nowadays we call Sri Lanka. Indian ports would have yielded cloth with unique colored
dyes and hand printing ships returning from Ceylon would be laden with cinnamon.
Bags filled with it and this is the product of local cinnamon trees where the bark is really
carefully harvested and then it naturally curls up into a scroll like stick. The spice today
actually looks precisely like it did back then and this Indian trade was also connected eastward
across the Bay of Bengal and back to the Strait of Malacca. On top of all of these were the vigorous
trade routes along the Red Sea which gathered all the goods of Africa and opened them to the north
and the east and this treasure chest would have included cloth, rhinoceros horns, iron and ivory
all traveling to Mediterranean waters. The first ivory that Europeans saw probably moved this way
from ports in Africa. There was also of course well established trade in the Mediterranean itself
with booming ports in Venice and Genoa and Alexandria as well as separate trade networks
that stitched together Europe from those Italian ports inland to those trade towns that we described
earlier in the industrial areas of northern Europe and this European zone was pretty much
the tail end of global trade. It was a final destination for Asian and African wealth.
These trade regions all overlapped of course and they intersected at their edges connecting one
sphere or circuit of trade to another. This fostered the development of entrepos trading stations
where merchants at the far edge of their journeys could sell their goods to be bought by traders
from an adjacent trade region. These interconnected entrepos propelled goods like silk and spices
forward from station to station and so loosely connected the whole world excluding the Americas
by about 1450. A word does have to be said about the Americas though north and south America weren't
tied into this first era of global trade they were certainly incredibly lively on their own
as a sphere of regional trade. Major markets span the length of the new world with some of the
largest and most magnificent being in Central America. Goods and people moved north and south
from the Andes to the Mississippi River Valley with major urban cultures in many parts of the
Americas and really highly sophisticated land use regimes on both continents north and south America.
These economies wouldn't be firmly connected to the global economy until 1492 of course
but we'll explore that story in the next lecture.
Instead the global space economy on the eve of 1492 was one that didn't include the Americas
but did connect pretty much everywhere else was also one that created opportunities for high
intensity accumulation and investment of capital. Some parts of the global trade network became
very wealthy and very powerful indeed though it would be unwise to make too many generalizations
it's fair to say that the most commercially active wealthy and interconnected of all the
regional economies within this fast network was East Asia. The empires of China were great for a
bunch of reasons including sophisticated civil service system a complex well organized agricultural
production system those rice economies I described earlier and a rich cultural tradition governing
social life but they were propelled to a great degree by their central position in this growing
web of global trade and with some of the most valuable commodities being produced in China
that's especially including silk but also many other goods like jade and silver Chinese traders
linked closely to the imperial state had a huge advantage in their efforts as mentioned at the
outset of this lecture Admiral Chang Ho's voyages in 1405 and 1408 were backed by the imperial
government but they also represented the enormous power of Chinese merchant capital put simply
China and Asia more generally was the center of the global economy in the 1400s. China and Asia
were trailed by other world regions but especially by Europe. Europe traded successfully in this
complex global web with exports like wine oil and timber and new semi-industrially produced
things like textiles to be sure but it also had some disadvantages it had little in the
way of precious metals to accelerate trade for example it came a little bit late to the development
of paper money its goods remained of relatively lower value than those of Asia or at least they
were bulkier and harder to transport than silk and spices so if one were betting on the future of
the world economy in 1400 you would probably have put your money on China as we'll see in
next lectures that bet would have taken a little longer to pay off than you might have predicted
even so China's position in the global economic geography of that time certainly seemed secure
so what have we learned I tried to demonstrate several things in this lecture first I've tried
to show that local economic activity and vigor is often the result of economic geography of a place
or region the way places are connected within more complex webs of trade strongly impact what
kinds of activity can and do occur there simultaneously of course as places and regions begin to develop
new activities and new economic capacity this changes their position in economic geography
it actually creates new geographic networks and connections for production and trade
and that underlines the more general lesson of the course again that people's choices and
inventions are constrained by their geographical context the places in which they find themselves
but these actions and innovations actually change the geography of the world around them
this is as true for economic geography as it is for the geography of land use or climate or disease
second I've shown that the network of trade and exchange that we know today as global trade
actually has its roots in things that occurred hundreds of years ago all over the world global
trade isn't as new as we might think and hence of today's economic geography can be found in the
economic geography of the distant past global trade isn't new third trying to introduce some basic
geographical concepts including regional economic structure and central places to help us describe
and analyze these kinds of patterns thinking like a geographer means thinking about how places
become economically different from one another owing to their relationship to one another
finally a core lesson I've tried to convey is that by 1400 vigorous trade and economic activity
were occurring all over the world more than this products were being cultivated and exported from
far-flung places including Africa Asia and Europe wealth was being generated in all of these places
as well and the dawning of something like capitalism could be seen in every corner of the world if
there was a world economic leader in 1400 it would have had to have been Asia a fact that makes the
recent contemporary rise of china really all the more interesting by 1900 however stunningly many
parts of the world had lagged economically and become incredibly poor including china at the same
time other places especially europe had surged ahead in terms of economic activity industrialization
global economic power economic geography had really changed between 1400 and 1900 so what the heck
happened the answer that we have to explore the geography of what we call the columbian exchange
and that's when the old world met the new world and changed the whole world in the process and
that's the topic of our next lecture
