Around the year 1000 CE, a Norwegian seafaring culture, what we today call Viking culture,
found its way to several parts of Greenland.
Around the same time, these Norse settlers boldly struck out further south and west.
Remains of the Norse settlement of Launce-Omedos in Newfoundland proves the presence of the
Norse in North America in this very early period.
When these hardy people likely settled even further south, maybe as far south as the St.
Loris River and New Brunswick, either way, we can clearly confirm that the Vikings arrived
in North America 500 years before Columbus.
So what the heck happened to them?
After all, today the people of Quebec speak French, English, and the native Inuit languages
of the indigenous people, not Norwegian.
Where did the Vikings go?
Clearly, their culture didn't survive in North America, but why?
One extremely good theory concerns the climate.
As it turns out, the Vikings traveled to America in a period that was coincidentally warm,
at least by historic averages.
In such a period, the sea ice would have been less extensive than it was later, allowing
easier travel and communication to and from Europe.
It would also mean less brutal winters than usual, and a significantly longer hunting
and fishing season during the summer.
The timing of the arrival of the Vikings, in other words, couldn't have been better,
at least in a climatological sense.
But this Viking spring, it didn't hold out.
As we'll discuss in this lecture, the warming didn't last.
This period of warming was actually followed by a cooling period in which the Viking settlements
would have faced serious resource challenges in a place increasingly disconnected from
their home settlements.
Now, there are a number of factors that undoubtedly hastened the retreat of the Vikings from North
America, including social and political opportunities at home.
But the abandonment of Viking settlements, perhaps around 1100 CE, was unquestionably
influenced at least in part by a changing climate.
So what I want to do today is to think about the implications of such a history for human
geography more generally.
In the next 30 minutes, I'll demonstrate that the climates of the earth are dynamic, meaning
they change.
This holds significant implications for cultural and human geography.
I'll briefly review the possible impact of climate change on past cultures, like the
Vikings, the Maya, and the Great Indus Valley civilization.
And I'll go on to explain how our current civilization is drastically influencing the
global climate in which we live, raising questions about how and if we will adapt to our swiftly
changing climate today.
In doing so, I intend to reinforce the larger point of this course, that geographic conditions
heavily influence what people can and will do, but that these same conditions, these
same geographic conditions are constantly altered, perturbed and recreated by people
themselves.
Climate is a case in point.
So what is climate and why is it so important to us?
Climate can best be defined as the temperature and precipitation patterns of an area or region
over the longer term.
Northern Africa's climate is predictably arid and semi-arid, for example.
South Asia's climate is a mix of subtropical and arid conditions, with a tendency to experience
a massive monsoon rainfall annually during the summer.
Some years it may be less dry in North Africa, and other years it may not rain as much during
the Indian monsoon, but the climate is a good and reliable general pattern over time.
This is distinct from weather.
Weather describes micro-scale and day-to-day variability of temperature and precipitation.
So when we're planning a picnic or what to wear, we go online and we check the weather.
We don't check the climate.
Weather and climate change moreover, and they're also very different.
Going from a mild summer one year to an abnormally hot summer the year after is a question of
climate changing weather.
But if summers are far hotter than historical averages and they begin to become the norm
over decades, begging the definition of normal, this is a question of climate change.
The rise and fall of an individual farmer's annual crop may be blamed on changes in the
weather.
The rise and fall of culture over longer periods, as we may have been the case with the Vikings
in North America, that might be the product of climate change.
Things that prevailed at one period in which a society adapted their technologies, determined
how they would farm and fish and organize their society, may change over a long period,
forcing civilizations to either change how they do things, to abandon their systems or
even abandon their settlements.
So does climate change?
You better believe it.
The science of climatology is complex and a full discussion is well beyond the scope
of this course, but for our purposes the important thing to understand is that the earth and
its climate system are dynamic.
That means they do indeed change over time and they do so for a variety of reasons.
Paleo-climatologists, these are scientists who study long term trends in temperature
and precipitation around the world, they've used a wealth of data to track climates in
the past.
These data include tree rings, fossil pollen, glacial ice, lake sediments, marine sediments
and corals.
And they use these records in the landscape to piece together the earth's past climates
and climate variability.
And their reconstruction of climate change over the last 2,000 years shows a whole lot
of volatility.
On average, and up until the last century, which has seen a lot of warming, land and
sea temperatures have been flatter, slightly trending downward, but this has been spiked
with periods of dramatic variability.
Notably, there have been occasions when significant warming and cooling has occurred.
For example, between 950 CE and 1250 CE, there was a period called the medieval warm period
when temperatures were warmer than those that came before and after.
These trends and changes can be chalked up to natural forces that have repeatedly acted
on the earth since before the time of humans, including volcanic activity and the earth's
orbital patterns.
Volcanic explosions, for example, can fill the atmosphere with materials that cool the
earth.
Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines provides us with a great example, a fairly recent one.
In June of 1991, Mount Pinatubo erupted, shooting gases and ash up into the atmosphere.
Measurements from the Aerosol Research Branch of NASA's Langley Research Center show that
roughly 15 million tons of sulfur dioxide entered the stratosphere.
Stratosphere is that part of the high atmosphere that has no precipitation to wash the debris
like this out.
The winds carried these materials around the planet where it helped form a dense haze
of particles and these shielded the earth from incoming solar energy for almost two
years and global temperatures dropped a little bit for the next 15 months.
Climate change can also occur because of variations in the earth's orbit and tilt, and these
lead to long-term warming or cooling.
These Malankovic cycles, which are named for their discoverer, the Serbian geophysicist
Maludin Alankovic, are the result of a lot of complicated periodic changes in the earth's
path around the sun and also its orientation on the earth's rotational axis.
It's hard to know exactly what these cycles have done in terms of earth's climate, but
they're clearly contenders for explaining the variability of the earth's climate record
over millions of years.
So the bottom line is that there's a number of ongoing earth processes that may cause
climates to change over time in both the shorter and the longer term.
The climate record, a measure of past temperatures created by using tree ring data, fossil pollen
and ice cores, has time and again shown that today's climate isn't the same as the ones
we've seen in the past.
Many of these changes have had obvious implications for human civilization, so that brings us
back to the medieval warm period and the Viking settlements in Newfoundland that I described
earlier.
The medieval warm period has been confirmed by paleo-climatology and falls exactly during
the time that Norse settlements were moving outwards into new sub-Arctic environments
in Greenland and most impressively, Newfoundland.
That warm period during the Norse expansion ended with a cooling period known as the Little
Ice Age, which coincides nicely with the Norse retreat.
The case of the Mayan civilization is a more complex one.
In roughly 300 BCE and 1000 CE, a group of people entered the lowlands of the Yucatan
Peninsula in what is today Mexico and Guatemala, and they began to organize their culture into
a highly urbanized, hierarchical, agriculturally productive, literate and complex civilization.
Now this civilization reached a pinnacle of achievement during what is known as the Maya
Classic period, which is dated roughly between 200 CE and 900 CE, that's rough figures.
Prior to 200 BCE, people lived throughout the region, especially in the uplands, but
not in urban settlements, and after 1000 CE, populations in the region dropped off dramatically.
Many sites were abandoned and the classic Maya civilization departed the lowland Yucatan.
Civilization persisted, of course, indigenous people, who identify themselves as Maya, live
on throughout the region today and observe a rich and varied culture, but the classical
period with its trade networks and huge temple complexes, enormous markets and fields falls
during this intermediate period.
There's some very fascinating and convincing research that suggests the rise and decline
of this civilization was perhaps influenced by climate change.
Detailed data on precipitation during this period have been pieced together from numerous
sources.
Maybe the most spectacular and coolest data come from scientists dating recently discovered
stalactites, these are hanging cave formations near the sites of Maya cities.
By dating these stalactites, they've confirmed that the period of highest urban growth came
at the wettest time in the record.
Early in the urban period, about 400 CE to 900 CE, and after that, there's a slow desiccation
of drying.
And as I mentioned previously, by about 1000 CE, populations in the region drop off and
the classic Maya civilization fades from the scene.
Of course, the dating is quite fuzzy here and climates may shift while changes in urban
civilization may be hundreds of years later.
No clear mechanism is demonstrated here, just some coincident timing.
There are of course also numerous other factors contributing to this decline as well, including
exhausting local resources and internal political struggles, a host of other issues.
So we need to be extremely careful before pronouncing that climate is unproblematically
linked to civilization, but climate does seem important in Maya history for sure.
In the case of the Indus Valley civilization is far more complex, sometimes called the
Harappan culture.
This Bronze Age civilization thrived between 2500 and 1700 BCE along the Indus Valley in
what is today Pakistan and parts of India, over an area larger than that of ancient Egypt
and Mesopotamia combined.
The culture was characterized by numerous cities.
These cities were organized on a grid and well planned and with drainage and sewage
and linked across the region and beyond by extensive trade networks.
These cities were clearly supported by a massive agricultural system, even though they were
perched on the edge of a desert.
The civilization experienced de-urbanization around 4000 years ago, effectively disappearing.
Was it climate change?
That's a good question.
The data are complex, but some interesting signals emerge from the noise.
It seems as though a very intense drought period occurred around 2200 BCE, one that
resulted in many problems in the contemporary civilizations of Egypt and Mesopotamia.
But this actually coincides with the greatest period of cultural and economic activity for
the Harappans.
Their agricultural systems, it seems, were geared precisely to depend on monsoon rains
and seasonal river flows.
Unlike the Mayans, Harappan cities would continue to thrive during a period of increasing
oridity and they'd do so for some time.
Here it seems, climate change and civil collapse are not linked, at least not in some simple
deterministic way.
Regrettably for the high Harappan system, drying in the region would continue unabated
thereafter.
As the region became drier and drier, the monsoon-driven floods necessary for Harappan
agriculture became less reliable and eventually people would abandon many of these sites and
settle eastward in the plains of the Ganges, giving rise to future Indian civilizations.
Of course, there are competing theories for the decline of the Indus Valley civilization.
Many people point to foreign invasions, social and political changes, and a collapse in
the trade networks that allowed the culture to thrive.
But evidence suggests that challenging climate conditions may have played a key role in both
the high and low points of the Harappan civilization.
Climate alone can by no means explain something as complex as the rise and fall of civilizations,
at least not all by itself.
Nevertheless, it's clear that the Mayan people were presented with dramatically changing
rainfall conditions at various periods of their history, and their response to those
changes contributed to the events that would follow.
For the people of the Indus, thoughtful adaptation, you will recall this term from a previous
lecture, adaptation of their system to changing climate conditions allowed them to survive
and indeed thrive through a period of severe stress.
But even they faced conditions that tested the adaptability of their urban society.
So what does all of this mean for us?
Clearly, alterations in the geographic distributions of climates around different parts of the world
have had impacts on past civilizations, though the degree of influence is debatable.
Clearly though, when societies have developed successful ways of living under the conditions
that their geography presents them, and then that geography changes, societies must change
too.
This raises some profound questions about our current condition, in which climate change
is occurring more dramatically and more swiftly than in any of the historical examples I just
provided here.
Global data sets from weather stations on land and sea worldwide show an average global
change of 1 to 2 degrees centigrade relative to temperatures between 1950 and 1980.
Organizers in the poles, especially in the northern pole, have far greater increases
in excess of 3 degrees.
Global data are pretty clear, it's getting warmer.
Some high end predictions suggest we could see between 3 and 4 degrees centigrade of
warming in the next century, warming that would be catastrophic for many species and
fundamentally change the way we live.
Local data are pretty compelling too.
Take winners on Lake Mendota in my home state of Wisconsin, for example.
During the winter, mighty Lake Mendota freezes over, providing ice fishers with a great place
to get a cold beer and sit in their shacks.
This lake is also probably one of the best studied lakes on earth with continuous measurements
and data sets all the way back to the mid-1800s.
Dr. John Magnussen, who is an aquatic ecologist and limnologist, has compiled records for
a full history of the lake.
As it turns out, the number of days that Lake Mendota was frozen during the winter in the
1850s was about 120 or 130 days, that's more than four months of frozen ice.
By the early 2000s, the lake was frozen for closer to 90 days every winter, or three months.
The 10 longest frozen periods on record fall between 1850 and 1910, the six shortest frozen
periods all within the last 20 years.
So the science is clear, the last millennium was one of slow cooling with occasional warm
periods, and we've now entered a dramatic warming period with a rate of change faster
than any in human history.
So why is climate changing so dramatically now?
In simple terms, we're capturing more energy in the cloak of our atmosphere than we have
before.
The earth absorbs energy from the sun, which constantly barbs us with radiation.
That energy enters the earth's system and is redistributed through complex interactions
like the movement of currents, the movement of winds and water and rising and falling
of air, but if energy just kept coming in from the sun and didn't go out, the planet
would experience a meltdown.
Of course, this doesn't happen.
Instead, energy is re-radiated from the earth back into space.
This is pretty much like what happens in the city during a long hot summer day.
On a day like that, the heat from the sun keeps the asphalt and buildings and all the
places around us, and when the sun goes down, the air in the city remains relatively warm.
Why?
Because the buildings and asphalt are radiating the energy they captured all day back outwards
into the cooler atmosphere.
This exchange into and out of the earth is ongoing, like in the city.
If the amount of energy that goes into a system is the same as the amount of energy that comes
out, then there's little or no change in the energy budget, but many things can regulate
the amount of energy within the earth's system.
Some incoming solar energy simply bounces directly back into space, and it isn't captured
in the earth's system at all.
But some energy enters the earth's system and interacts with materials on the ground,
like trees and rocks, before being radiated back upwards towards space.
This kind of energy, technically long wave radiation, can be trapped by the atmosphere
and some of it is.
This is good news for us because if this didn't occur, the earth would be really cold indeed.
The atmosphere's ability to capture radiation this way is called the greenhouse effect,
and it's an important element of the earth's system and it's what makes life on earth possible.
So greenhouse effect, good thing.
The amount of energy captured by the atmosphere depends on a complicated mix of factors, and
one of the most significant of these factors is related to the concentration of specific
gases in the atmosphere.
Some gases exert what climatologists call more forcing than other gases, meaning they
tend to trap more heat.
These gases are called greenhouse gases and include water vapor, carbon dioxide, and methane,
among many others.
And if the proportion of these gases in the atmosphere increases, we can pretty reasonably
predict the amount of energy trapped in the atmosphere and the earth's system will also
increase.
Greenhouse gas of greatest interest is carbon dioxide.
As discussed in the previous lecture, CO2 is closely associated with the industrial revolution.
The fossil fuels began to provide more and more energy to advance the rapidly growing
economy.
It's pretty clear that both of these trends are ongoing.
Greenhouse gases continue to increase in the atmosphere, and the planet is warming at an
increasing rate.
In fact, from 10,000 years ago to as recently as the 1950s, the quantity of CO2 in the atmosphere
was less than 270 parts per million, that's kind of a general number.
In just the last few decades, the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has skyrocketed.
That's 400 parts per million sometime in 2013.
That's an increase of almost 50%.
At the same time, things like ice cores and ancient pollen and tree rings tell us that
we're living in the warmest period of the last 120,000 years.
Climate change is definitely occurring, and human activities are definitely an important
driver.
So, even though there are many ways that climate can change as a result of natural, or at least
not human-induced, processes, things that we mentioned before, like volcanic activity
and Milankovitch cycles, something new is happening here.
The loading of the atmosphere with these greenhouse gases is a direct result of humans using fossil
fuels since the Industrial Revolution, and it has an unquestionable, profound and ongoing
impact on the climate system.
What makes these changes even more complicated is the fact that the energy that enters the
Earth's system does so differentially depending on where you are on the planet.
Energy tropics tend to be energy surplus zones where more energy comes in than goes
out.
Closer to the poles, energy deficits prevail.
That is, more energy goes out than comes in.
This is simply a result of which part of the Earth faces the sun.
This energy imbalance causes energy to spread outwards from the tropics around the globe.
This redistribution is a kind of engine that makes the swirling Earth's climate function.
When the net energy of the total system changes, it's likely that that complex swirling engine
of winds and currents will change as well, and areas around the poles that are covered
with ice might melt, adding water to the Earth's oceans and becoming part of a larger system
as a whole.
The bottom line is that the Earth's energy system changes, and its climate will change
with difficult to predict changes in patterns of temperature and precipitation in specific
parts of the Earth's system.
That is, change is ongoing, it's occurring, but it's very difficult to predict exactly
where and to what degree we will experience change.
It goes to follow that climate change will vary spatially.
Some places will become warmer than others, and some places will become wetter, while
others will become drier.
More extreme events are also possible in specific areas and parts of the system.
Difficult to predict, only the complexity of the climate system, heavy weather, storms
and flooding are definitely part of the equation.
Weather and weather are distinct, but changes in climate definitely mean changes in the
weather.
These changes matter enormously to us, so take agriculture.
Increasing annual temperatures and prolonged drought can be catastrophic for crops.
For example, there was a drought in the United States between 2011 and 2012, which though
it was not itself a product of global climate change, it still represents the single most
expensive natural disaster on record in the U.S., costing up to $150 billion, that's 1%
of the nation's GDP over its duration.
So that hints at the potential economic implications of a changing climate.
Of course, some areas could take advantage of warming, and we could expect that some
places with lower historic agricultural production, like parts of Canada, they might become new
frontiers for agriculture.
Nevertheless, in places that are already experiencing food stress like Sub-Saharan Africa, the impact
of climate change adds to regional vulnerability.
Changes in rainfall are especially hard to predict, but it's certain that there are going
to be a lot of them.
Owing to the complexity of the circulation of moisture on a changing planet, it's likely
that some places will experience decreased rainfall, and in some places the implications
of such rainfall reductions might be really serious.
Under the World Bank, 96% of cropland in Sub-Saharan Africa is rain-fed, in other words, it depends
on rainfall as opposed to groundwater resources.
Should rainfall decline in some parts of this region, the prospects for famine, which had
long been banished in many parts of Africa, are very real.
Conversely, increased rainfall is predicted elsewhere.
This might be a boon for some regional economies, since water can be used to generate energy
and support agriculture.
Nevertheless, the form that rainfall comes in presents some problems.
Projections of rainfall in parts of the U.S. Midwest, for example, suggest that rainfall
may increase by 40%, but that a majority of this rainfall is likely to happen in events
that are two inches or greater in a 24 or 48-hour period.
Think about what that means.
It means flooding, which threatens agricultural lands in river basins and also storm sewers
of major metropolitan areas.
In fact, if I was in charge of a storm sewer district right now, I would be very concerned
about the design of urban systems.
Designed for the rainfall regimes of the past, most city infrastructures are unprepared
for dramatic events of this kind.
I wouldn't want to run the municipal sewage system of Milwaukee or Chicago if these high-confidence
models are anywhere near correct.
The relationship between climate change and major weather events, including hurricanes
and tornadoes, isn't well understood either.
But it's nevertheless likely that the climate shifts we're seeing now may result in high-intensity
weather events.
In coastal zones, this is especially serious.
Strong or more frequent hurricanes in places like the Caribbean, the Eastern Seaboard of
the United States, or coastal Bangladesh and India threaten some of the largest population
centers on the planet, all those coastal regions.
Such storms, or even storms of more typical intensity, become more threatening if there's
even a modest rise in sea levels.
And as it stands now, sea levels worldwide are slowly rising, owing to both the warming
of the ocean itself, when the ocean warms up, it tends to expand with the heating, and
the added water flowing from the ocean from melting polar ice caps and glaciers.
New research shows that one quarter of New York City could be a flood zone by 2050.
Of course, not everyone on the planet is equally exposed to these kinds of impacts.
People in wealthy countries or neighborhoods need only crank up their air conditioners and
expect to pay a little more for food or bottled water or other necessities.
For a vast majority of people, however, climate exposure is a life-and-death matter.
So, paleo-climatological research has shown that the Earth's climate is dynamic.
It changes.
This information, coupled with historical population geography and archaeology, tells
us that some past civilizations have been faced with climate change and have been forced
to adapt, and sometimes they were forced to change their societies quite dramatically.
This also suggests some serious challenges ahead as climate change is occurring today.
Now, on the other hand, this period of climate change is profoundly different than those that
have come before.
Human beings now have better information concerning both weather and climate than in
any time in our history.
Our technical capacity to adapt and cope with these changes is considerable, and this mimics,
in a way, the remarkable adaptive capacity of the Indus Valley civilization which thrived
during a period of adverse climatic change.
We also possess the technological tools to actually change the pace and trajectory of
climate change.
Greenhouse gases are the prime source of current climate change, but we can have an enormous
impact on the quantity of those gases that we emit into the atmosphere.
We control that by shifting the sources of the global energy supply.
For example, owing to new extraction technologies for natural gas, the amount of available natural
gas skyrocketed between 2008 and 2013, especially in the United States, and prices for this
resource simultaneously fell.
Now, because burning natural gas has a lower impact on the climate than burning coal, the
large-scale shift from relatively more expensive coal to less expensive natural gas for energy
production actually resulted in a decrease in carbon emissions by the United States for
the first time in its history.
Let's think about that for just a minute.
What it means is that an unintended consequence of technology, unintended consequence of economics,
turned our energy use from one source to another with a measurable impact on greenhouse gases
that cause climate change.
This dials back the pressure on climate change, and it's a capacity that the Vikings simply
couldn't have dreamed of.
The best lesson then is that climate does impact the history of civilization, but in complicated
ways.
There are opportunities for adaptation and innovation in the face of climate change,
and more profoundly, it's clear that the climate that influences us is also now itself influenced
by us.
The relationship between people and climate may not have been dialectical or two-way
for people in the past, but it sure is for us today, which opens up many creative possibilities
for the future.
While much of the same can be said for the ongoing transformation of the Earth's surface,
its forest, and its grasslands, and its biodiversity, this is the geographic question we'll turn
our attention to next.
