Let's take a walk.
We're turning off a busy, polluted street in Beijing, China.
We're dodging dense, noisy traffic, and we're pivoting into a remarkable, skinny alleyway
hedged in on both sides by tall walls.
The walls mark the external boundaries of a sea-wan.
A sea-wan is a kind of courtyard housing that's characteristic of older homes from
centuries ago.
As we continue down this narrow lane, we see even smaller alleys turning off this main
alleyway.
As we look down one of these side alleys where only foot traffic and bicycles could fit,
we see some ancient steps leading through a small threshold, and beyond its open red
doors we can see inside the walls of a sea-wan.
Inside there's a small courtyard.
The archway that marks the entrance is ornate and sits adjacent to another, smaller entrance.
We can smell something cooking through this other door, and as we pass, we can see that
it's a noodle shop crammed up against this residential home.
We turn again and enter deeper into this labyrinth, which is really an intimate set of walls and
doors and homes and businesses.
In stopping for a moment, we suddenly realize we can only barely hear the grinding traffic
off of that main street that we entered from, and in this relative quiet, we could be walking
into another era, so where are we?
Well, we're in a hutong.
A hutong is a rare kind of place, a kind of neighborhood formed by a labyrinth of alleys
and residences which is unique to China and especially distinctive to Beijing.
They're formed by the historical creation of one courtyard after another, kind of accidentally
mapped out through the slow accretion of homes and businesses jostled together against one
another slowly over time.
Each hutong has its own distinctive character.
Many have their own important cultural histories, famous past residents, and a look and feel
all their own.
But all is not well in our hutong.
If we continue forward, we may hear the sound of bulldozers, jackhammers.
That's because hutongs all across the city have slowly begun to disappear.
This began in the mid-20th century and the modernization of Beijing, but it's accelerated
massively with the urban growth that's come in the last two decades from the Chinese economic
revolution, which we discussed earlier.
In fact, in the run-up to the 2008 Beijing Olympics, more than 62 square kilometers of
old Beijing were raised, displacing more than a half a million people and totally obliterating
dozens of these cultural marvels.
This was reported by UNESCO, the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Of course, nothing about this is unique to China.
Most of the deeply historic beautiful adobe neighborhoods, the barrios of Tucson, Arizona,
these were toppled in the 1970s to be replaced by parking lots.
Bucharest, Romania's architectural center, was destroyed in the mid-1980s.
A total of eight square kilometers of historic neighborhoods in Bucharest were sacrificed
to modern communist sensibilities.
Many of the red brick lanes of Boston, home to African-American communities and families,
were redeveloped away as the highway came through in the late 1960s.
So clearly, urban development has occurred around the world with really little regard
for local residents and cultures.
The more important point is that distinctive places, which are in all these cases the products
of local culture and residential life, these have been swept aside by massive economic
growth and change.
Distinctive places, in short, appear to be vanishing.
And since special and distinctive places are linked to local cultures, which are characterized
by different systems of meaning and significance, these distinctive places are disappearing.
We might predict more generally that under economic globalization and urbanization everywhere,
every place is becoming the same.
So let's explore that question, is everywhere becoming the same?
In the next half hour, we'll do our best to answer that question as a geographer would.
So we'll learn a few important conceptual tools from geography to help us on our way.
We'll first review the idea of place.
The idea of place is an important building block for geographers as they think about culture.
And we'll look at a number of examples of this signature concept in action.
Then we'll describe the concept of cultural landscape.
That's a process in which culture emerges on the land.
And using these, we'll consider the fate of distinctive places.
Stressing the ongoing proliferation of new kinds of places, we'll see that though it
might be intuitive to assume that global communications and economic growth, migration
and urbanization will lead to the convergence of a globalized single culture, such an outcome
may actually not be inevitable.
This is in part because people have a remarkable ability to project feeling and meaning into
any location.
In this sense, people have the ability to make a place.
So what do I mean when I say people have the ability to make a place?
To understand this, the first need to define one of our core concepts in geography, which
is place.
As we discussed earlier in the course, places are the peculiar concatenation of landscape
and soils and air and other conditions that lend a unique quality to different locales.
As such, we've described how places have an important impact on the people who live in
them.
We've described, for example, how some places, like say inner city Detroit, have historically
been less healthy ones, only lack of access to good food.
But there's something more to place, and this deserves consideration.
Places are distinctive, not only because of specific objective criteria like their buildings,
their infrastructure, but also for their meaning, the meaning that people bring to them.
Places take on special meaning for people because of their experiences of them and their
ideas about them.
And there are a lot of examples of this, and each reveals something a little different
about the power of place.
Consider sacred places.
Now, it isn't hard to imagine how churches and shrines are imbued with special meaning
by the people that visit them.
When we consider that many such places are strikingly plain and they're unadorned, they're
simple, you begin to understand how places are made by the people who experience them.
Entering a simple wooden church in Scandinavia, for example, religious practitioners are still
likely to be transported in some fundamental way by religious experience.
In this way, sacredness is made by people by ascribing a religious status to a place.
And nor does this have to be a building.
Consider that for members of local Hindu communities in some rural parts of India, a group of trees
might be viewed as what is locally known as an oran, a sacred grove, a place where a devi
or goddess might dwell.
Local residents feel differently when they enter a place like that, and they're much
much less likely to harvest wood there or otherwise disturb the landscape.
And even more radically, in some villages where Hindus may sense the presence of a goddess
in a sacred grove, Muslim villagers may say that the place is the resting place of a peer,
a saint.
And this remarkable shared experience across two totally different religions is called
religious syncretism, and it's a hallmark of many sacred places.
Many people who might not even describe themselves as religious may still experience this kind
of stirring or even mystical experience when they're in a place that they revere or they
venerate.
Many folks probably feel a sense of transcendence that John Muir communicated in his 1912 writing
of the Yosemite when they're in certain natural areas, and he says, I quote, everybody needs
beauty as well as bread, places to play in and to pray in, where nature may heal and
give strength to body and soul alike.
End quote.
Now here we bring sacred feelings to places far from traditional religious contexts.
A place is by no means only about the sacred.
People may imbue their childhood neighborhood with almost mystical qualities, especially
if they're returning after some period of time.
All fans describe baseball stadiums like cathedrals, and there are all place experiences by any
means even mystical.
As the sociologist Ray Oldenburg pointed out in his terrific and very geographical book,
The Great Good Place, some of the most important places in people's lives, they aren't churches,
they aren't even places where people live or work.
They're places where people gather, like cafes, pubs, general stores, barbers and hair
salons, and the significance of places like this is that they become distinctive of their
own communities, reflecting the entirely unique quality of the people who congregate there,
because distinctive kinds of discussions can occur in these kinds of places and they're
different from those you might have at the office or at school or even at home with your
family.
They take on an altogether different meaning than those other two kinds of places, home
and work.
They make up a critical third place using Oldenburg's language, which is special and
distinctive in our lives, even if our interactions there are sometimes normal or banal.
Gathering places are also critical to public life and the feeling of any city or town.
The Zocalos of Mexico are an emblematic place in this regard.
Zocalos are central plazas, common to even small towns.
The Zocalo in Mexico City is massive, it's one of the largest public gathering places
in the whole world, but it somehow manages to maintain a meaning-rich sense of place.
On any given day, spread out across this huge cobblestone space, you'll see a lot of tourists
but you'll also find Aztec dancers and labor protesters and local kids who are meeting
after school and old people out walking.
The Zocalos in smaller towns are equally important in Mexico.
Often dominated by a tree, garden or a pavilion, they're typically located between the seat
of political power and the local church.
The Zocalos are a kind of culturally distinctive kind of place, but one that serves a specific
cultural purpose, to gather and to display and to interact.
Many cultural events are held in Zocalos, people meet there to catch up on gossip.
And there's no town that I've been to in Mexico where I haven't taken the time to sit down
and observe life in the Zocalo.
Not only do I consider this one of life's really rare pleasures, it's a really interesting
way to look into the life of a community and kind of catch its rhythm.
Like churches and national parks and pubs, Zocalos are places.
Because people make them so, by investing them with meaning.
As geographers have long observed, people are able to make places, insofar as they're
able to ascribe unique qualities to a location, they venerate because it's sacred or it's
social or it's important to them.
And this hints at part of the answer to our initial question, whether or not places will
disappear.
Certainly, the capacity for people to use culture to ascribe meaning to places makes
such an outcome at least less likely.
But culture isn't just about meaning, it's also about practice, as you'll recall.
Those distinctive things that people do.
People don't just make places in their minds, after all, they make them by crafting the
world around them in the image of their culture.
People's distinct priorities and beliefs are, in this way, written right onto the land.
Consider what a small town in Texas looks like.
Many of its characteristics reflect somewhat universal problems in infrastructure.
Like that needed for storing and transporting agricultural products, which might differ really
little from, say, South Korea or Germany.
But a glance around reveals some things that are peculiarly local.
We would see specific denominations of churches, especially Southern Baptist ones.
We would encounter an architectural style that may still reflect the date of settlement,
perhaps in the 1800s.
And we'd especially notice the prominent location of the high school football stadium, a sort
of shrine unto itself lit up brightly on Friday nights.
So it takes very little experience or knowledge to know you're not in rural Korea or Germany.
So people tend to produce cultural landscapes that reflect the slow workings of their culture
on the land over time.
And this is very geographical observation.
The incredibly influential 20th century geographer, Carl Sauer from the University of California,
pioneered an approach to geography that focused on this very tendency, that stressed the role
of geographers in documenting and interpreting places around them to derive and explain how
differing cultures carved their way onto the land.
And this is an approach that actually came to dominate a great deal of 20th century geography
to the exclusion of some other approaches.
It still does provide some kind of interesting insights.
But for Sauer, a good hard look at the landscape could reveal what the systems of meaning and
economic and social priorities were of the people that created it.
In more complex contexts, you could imagine being able to discern the successive impacts
of a series of groups who may have occupied the same landscape over time.
In his classic 1941 essay, The Personality of Mexico, Sauer displayed this approach in
action, describing the physical characteristics of that region, overlained by native development
and infrastructure.
And in turn, the political patterns that followed colonization.
So here he depicts, Mexico is a series of interacting natural and cultural layers, creating
a regional pattern.
In particular, he remained fascinated by tensions between the northern and southern parts of
that country, and their distinctive patterns, which appeared to persist over long periods.
He described the native crops that emerged from the southern cultural hearth and their
associated agrarian communities, compared with the more frontier cultures of the more
rugged north.
He goes on to describe the uneasy way these distinctive cultural spaces interacted both
before and then after Spanish imperialism.
He's successive in interacting cultural patterns, he thought, gave the region its own distinctive
set of landscapes, its personality.
So people create landscapes that reflect their cultures, with the implication that these
cultural landscapes persist, and then impress their characteristics on the people that
come after.
Now, there's certainly a lot about this approach to geography that's limiting, in so far as
it pays too little attention to raw economics and politics that create those landscapes.
The approach known for many decades, actually, as the Berkeley school approach, has also
fallen somewhat out of fashion, but it's an approach that stresses some important realities.
People carry culture around with them in their heads, but they also work to carve out their
own environments on the ground, and this incessant working of the land creates landscapes that
reflect values and beliefs.
Working in such places also inevitably allows these landscapes to go to work on you, to impress
local meanings onto the people who live and work in cultural landscapes.
In a sense, this simply reinforces the central theme of the course.
People make landscapes, both by creating places that reflect their values and by investing
places with their meanings, those that reflect their culture.
But landscapes also influence people.
The cultural landscape, its distinctive characteristics, helps perpetuate and communicate people's culture.
We make geographies even as they make us, and this also helps us address our earlier question.
Are special places disappearing?
Armed with our geographical concepts of place and cultural landscape, I think we can begin
to answer that.
So, what we've learned so far is that people have the capacity to make places, both in
terms of meaning as well as landscapes, and this should bode well for the future of cultural
diversity.
There are reasons to be skeptical about this, on the other hand.
One of the main reasons is some of that the rate and trajectory of change in the world
is different now than it's ever been before.
Consider each of the forces that work around us, all of which we've discussed earlier in
this course.
First, let's think about environmental change.
Environments are always changing, owing to natural variability and to influences of people,
and as we've described in the first part of this course, the Anthropocene, this new
era, represents a sea change in how these interactions occur.
Because of global changes in the atmosphere and the landscape, we're entering a rapidly
changing environment, environment the likes of which we've never seen before.
So what might this mean for culture and place?
Now, given that many of the cultures of the world emerge from their special ongoing relationship
with their local environments, radical, rapid environmental change may make it really difficult
to establish a stable and meaningful relationship to nature, at least anything like the ones
we've known in the past.
So when a local environmental knowledge or system of knowledge about plants and animals
and weathers takes generations or millennia to evolve, what does really rapid climate
change pretend?
Economic change is very much of the same order.
The powerful revolutions in transportation and communication that we've already discussed
have allowed new cultural traditions and objects to circulate much faster than ever
before and to penetrate local places to a degree totally unknown previously.
We're going through what might be referred to as a great acceleration.
Well, that term is adopted by the International Geosphere Biosphere Program, that's an international
organization that studies changes around the earth, and it's one that they use to describe
quoting the massive acceleration in human activity since 1950 and the impact this has
had on the earth system, unquote.
But much of what they're saying there can be said about other kinds of speed-ups occurring
in the economy and in political cycles and so on.
So what does all this mean for culture and place?
Well, the rate of change is incredibly fast and apparently accelerating, and that means
that even as we work to produce and maintain attachments to the world around us, it's hard.
It's hard to imagine new, stable cultural traditions forming in a modern world and particularly
where, as Karl Marx once famously put it, all that's solid melts into air.
Consider the Inuit peoples of the North American Arctic.
Their knowledge and identity is rooted in hunting, fishing, and survival in a world dominated
by an Arctic ice sheet, permafrost land, and the companionship of many diverse species
that have evolved and adapted in cold weather.
Their landscapes and places are rooted in an economy linked to the land in fundamental
ways, language, cosmology, family relationships, and a sense of place.
These all developed and thrived between a specific range of temperatures for these people.
For the Inuit people, rapid environmental and economic change threatens the elimination
of whole parts of their culture, if not their culture entirely.
Some form of adaptation is essential, therefore, one that honors and preserves parts of Inuit
livelihoods and systems of meaning while adapting to a really quickly changing situation.
So here, some communities have linked up with academics to advance their interests.
For example, Professor Nancy Doubleday at McMaster University in Canada has been working
to connect Inuit people to the science that monitors Arctic environmental change while
securing with them the kind of decision-making authority, the power, that can help them
aid in maintaining that culture.
While this work stresses maintaining the rights of Native people to help manage and control
the resources around them in particular, especially as these are undergoing change.
This means collaborating with them on preserving Native culture, but also changing Canadian
laws to protect their rights.
Working with these communities, Doubleday represents the kind of research activity that
supports struggles to help people preserve places that are important to them even as
they adapt to change.
And we're facing a great acceleration of ecological and economic change, and these kinds of approaches
are really refreshing and hopeful.
They offer an alternative to just sitting back and watching passively as old and important
places are plowed under in the process of development.
They call on our ability as humans to not only protect our traditions, but also to create
new ones as we go, and that's good news.
But what about the Siuans and Hu Tongs that we walked through at the beginning of this
lecture?
These cultural features took generations upon generations to assemble.
Can these places that are being basically destroyed in Beijing and other parts of China
be replicated or replaced by people in the future?
So the last question is, what do novel places look like?
Can we be architects of new places and have authentic cultural landscapes in a world that's
changing this quickly?
Let's consider urbanizing Asia again.
In this case, hundreds of millions of people are moving to cities, almost all of which
will be built from scratch.
It is possible to think about creating places that are deliberately meaningful for these
people, but this has some limits.
One great example of this has been the effort by Chinese planners to create urban areas
that precisely mimic the architecture and styles and neighborhoods borrowed from Europe.
Take Sky City, a brand new urban development meant for newly wealthy Chinese.
To imagine Sky City, known as Chengdu Cheng locally, you simply have to imagine Paris,
although cut down in scale a bit because the city is nothing less than a miniature replica
of France's capital, right down to the replica Eiffel Tower, which stands about a third the
size of the original.
It's fastidiously designed to have even the most subtle trappings of a French city, from
the sidewalks to building styles, that the urban designers here have made a really remarkable
effort to bring Paris to China.
The problems with this kind of design are too many to recount.
Knowing what we don't know about place and cultural landscape, we probably predict failure
from a geographic point of view.
Why is that?
Well, first, a place created like this as a sort of immaculate theme park is not one that
allows much placemaking in the way we've already described, where people kind of spontaneously
impress their own sense and meanings into the landscape around them.
It's possible that Chinese residents will reinvent the meanings of these kinds of places,
but the effort by the planners of Sky City actually impairs that possibility by importing
already created meanings and mimicking foreign styles.
At the same time, there's not much of Sauer's cultural landscape here either.
There's been no opportunity, in other words, for people moving from other places to bring
with them their cultural priorities and slowly impress them into the built environment.
Sky City is so meticulously prefabricated that the landscape almost entirely disallows reworking
by locals.
So without the opportunity to impose new meanings on the landscape or the ability to impress
them onto the landscape through new practices, Sky City is strangely placeless.
On the other hand, prefabricated places are not always destined to failure.
Consider the city of Chandigarh in northern India.
Chandigarh was created almost out of a whole cloth in 1947 when India was divided to create
the sovereign states of Pakistan and India.
The partition of India left the eastern part of the prosperous state of Punjab without
a capital.
So the city of Chandigarh was designed and built to fill that void.
The map was drawn up under the direction of the brilliant and eccentric architect Le Corbusier.
His vision usually included large public spaces, highly rationalized and ordered blocks, and
grid-like structures that are sometimes criticized as being anything but organic.
In fact, the city is formed from a set of modules with a uniform size of exactly 800
by 1200 meters.
And these modules comprise neighborhoods called sectors.
Now you might predict that such a plan is destined to failure, kind of like Sky City.
And yet over time, this sterile grid somehow came vibrantly to life.
A visit to Chandigarh today does show some of the desired order that Le Corbusier intended.
Good streets that allow better flow of traffic than anything you're likely to see in most
Indian cities.
But the city isn't by any means sterile, where large potentially sterile plazas were originally
designed for public gathering.
They're now used for cricket matches, where sort of strange statues and architectural
cubes were meant to convey a kind of civic order.
People congregate for recreation, and they go there for meetings and to hang out.
If you ask the average person on the streets of Chandigarh what they think of their city,
they are very likely to tell you that they love it.
In short, though the city failed to meet its design expectations in the sense that people
are not using different parts of the city as they were originally intended to, Chandigarh
is actually clearly a kind of geographical success.
Now why is that?
Clearly, Le Corbusier's design, his design failed to precisely create a specific kind
of meaning and set of uses, but that open plan allowed local people to begin to graft
their own sense of place into the city and bring new meanings to the landscape, where
Sky City is placeless.
Chandigarh is unquestionably full of places.
This may also reflect some lessons we learned in our last lecture.
There, we emphasized how it's often not the distinctive deeply historical regional cultural
hearts that proliferate new and vibrant cultures, instead these new cultures come out of the
interaction of cultural traditions that encounter one another while they're both on the move.
Chandigarh is an encounter between a free-wheeling street culture and the use of public space
which is such a hallmark of India's urban life, merged with the new modern forms of
Le Corbusier's right-angled modernism, and these two forms integrated over time created
something truly magnificent, new, and persistent.
Chandigarh is, in this sense, a roadmap for maintaining a sense of place in our own bustling
global future.
The recipe may be, in other words, to foster new kinds of places, but ones which allow
diverse meanings and practices to migrate into them and interact kind of spontaneously.
These places would encourage a sort of geography of cultural experimentation, populated by
no single dominant culture but formed out of a great many.
Many of the really wonderful cities of the world have followed exactly this path throughout
their history.
So in this lecture, we've reviewed the prospect that places reflecting the distinct cultural
qualities of different locales might be at risk of annihilation.
We surveyed two key concepts from geography to help us in our evaluation of that possibility.
These were the idea of a sense of place and placemaking, as well as the idea of cultural
landscape.
Because people always impress places with meaning and create new places, there are a
lot of opportunities to imagine that even amidst the destruction of old places, new
ones might form.
We've seen that it's pretty near impossible for all local cultures and sense of place
to disappear entirely and be replaced with a single, flat, generic culture.
We've also reviewed some of the barriers to maintaining traditional cultures and fostering
new stable ones, located as we are, in a world where ecological and economic changes
always accelerating.
By examining the two experiments and making new urban places, we also suggested that experiments
for making new places require us to surrender any notion that we can fully control cultural
interactions and change.
This experimentation has also suggested to us that the best outcomes may come from totally
unforeseen cultural combinations and new encounters.
In the words of the geographer Michael Watts, quote, globalization does not so much mark
the erasure of place, but in a curious way contributes to its revitalization, unquote.
None of this, however, fully addresses an underlying problem we face amidst globalizing
cultural change.
That problem is one of culture and economics.
Cultural products are becoming more and more like commodities, so our distinct traditions
vanishing into a worldwide cultural economic machine.
Can cultural traditions thrive and new ones emerge?
What's the fate of local cinema and local cuisine and local music and dress in a world
of global film industries, worldwide fast food franchises, and increasingly consolidated
music and fashion industries?
And it's those questions that we'll turn to next.
