Imagine yourself standing in a huge white stadium perched on a forested hillside overlooking
the bustling southern Mexican city of Oaxaca.
That stadium is teeming with people.
They're cheering and they're clapping and they're watching a vast spectacle below.
The hot July afternoon air is filled with the sounds of music and you can see clusters
of people dressed in enormously colorful outfits, all different dancing through the stadium
below.
It's immediately apparent as you watch that this is not a single group of people or even
a single celebration, but actually a kind of convergence of different people, each with
different dances and different costumes coming together to celebrate entirely different
traditions and communities.
You've joined the Gala Getza.
This is a giant annual festival in southern Mexico in which the distinctive cultural communities
of the region celebrate and announce their different heritages.
Oaxaca is an unusual state within Mexico in this sense since more than half of its population
is self-identified as indigenous compared with something like 20% of the national average.
A map of Oaxaca, the state of Oaxaca, would show more than 16 different cultural groups
each with its own language, including the big groups like Zapotec and Mishtec who number
in the hundreds of thousands, but also the much, much smaller groups including the Chocho
and the Ishkatec whose speakers only number maybe in the hundreds.
Almost all of them are here at the Gala Getza representing their own distinctive cultures
and their own histories all with their own indigenous forms of dress and all with their
own dances and religious practices.
This is remarkable for a bunch of reasons.
First, it underlines how much difference there is in the world within a single state in Mexico.
In this case, there's more than a dozen entirely distinctive cultures.
What accounts for all this difference?
Why does culture vary so much from place to place?
Second, the Gala Getza is notable because all this difference appears to have survived
in the face of all those many forces that might eliminate it.
Since the time of the mass genocide and the epidemics following the Colombian exchange,
which we discussed earlier in the course, indigenous populations of the Americas have
been on the decline after all.
Coupled with the pressures on native languages that we discussed in just the last lecture,
there are a lot of reasons for local cultures to vanish, yet here they are.
So is everywhere becoming culturally similar?
And if not, why not?
And third, the Gala Getza is interesting because it's highly political.
The indigenous people of the region are announcing themselves, announcing themselves to the Mexican
government in this spectacle, reminding decision makers and political parties that they are
here, alive, and not to be forgotten.
Riots had attended the Gala Getza from time to time, especially when the event planners
have tried too hard to commercialize the event, causing a major indigenous backlash.
So where does culture leave off?
And politics begin.
The questions raised by the Gala Getza of Oaxaca are the topics of our next three lectures
on cultural geography.
Those lectures will explore, one, how and why cultures vary from place to place.
Two, when and why cultures and distinctive cultural places vanish.
Three, how cultural diversity fares amidst the pressures of economic globalization.
And four, how culture and politics are intertwined.
In this first lecture, we'll tackle the most fundamental question.
Why does culture vary at all?
In the process, I'll explain that culture is a system of shared meaning and shared practices
and that these vary from place to place both because of distinctive regional conditions
and distinctive regional histories, but also because new cultures are constantly being
born from global connections.
But first, what is culture?
And when we use the word casually in our day-to-day lives, the term seems to have a number of
different meanings.
We might be talking about events or resources that are enriching or meaningful to us like
museums or the symphony, as in cultural institutions, or we may use the term to distinguish these
kinds of institutions from things like television and comic books and blockbuster movies, as
in popular culture, or we might be describing people who do things differently from ourselves,
as in cultural groups, or we might be using the term to explain why people see things
differently, as in differing cultural values.
Now all of these common understandings of culture actually connect closely to the more
formal way researchers and scholars define culture, since they touch on what things mean
for people, what is the normal way to do things, and what things are valued and important.
And taken together, geographers and anthropologists understand culture to be a set of distinct
meanings and distinct practices shared by a group of people.
Now let's think about each of these, meanings.
By meanings, we're describing the significance that we give to things in the world around
us.
Consider a single example, a tree.
For members of one culture, a copse of trees might be seen as timber or a source of shade
and little more, but for some indigenous communities, these same trees might be the resonance or
connection to family ancestors.
The Malagasy people of Madagascar leave offerings at the base of giant Baobab trees, including
liquor and candy, as a sign of respect for ancestors dwelling there.
The key point, same trees, different meanings.
Now less exotic examples abound, mourners at a funeral in the United States or Europe
are most likely to wear black, for example, and this would be unthinkable in many parts
of Asia where mourners typically wear white.
Different colors, same meanings.
So meaning is a taken for granted significance of things, which we learn from our families
and surroundings and we grow up with and come to accept without too much reflection.
We are part of a shared culture to the degree that we share those meanings in common with
the people around us.
But culture isn't simply what we perceive or think, it's also what we do, our practices.
And by practices, I'm referring to the normal, everyday way things are done.
Much of this can be quite simple and banal.
Think about how we eat.
During my time living in rural villages in India, I never saw silverware.
We ate meals from large plates, often with more than one person eating from each plate,
and we ate entirely with our hands, specifically our right hands.
One would never dip one's left hand into food and put it to your mouth.
So this method of eating is perfectly accepted, it's widespread and in fact doing things differently
from what I just described would be viewed as pretty rude.
You see it in casual meals to wedding banquets in rural Rajasthan to this day, that way of
eating.
Now one could only imagine what kind of stairs you'd get on the other hand if you dug into
your meal that way in a restaurant in Paris.
Now here table settings and appropriate use of silverware is assumed at the dinner table.
A corresponding meal of fine dining in Tokyo would of course involve chopsticks, slurping
your soup is totally accepted in Japan as well whereas it might be frowned upon in London.
So what you can and should eat is another obvious difference in regional cultural practices.
Pork for example is frowned upon in some religions.
Dog has been eaten in some places and times as appalling as this might be to some modern
Americans, dog meat is still eaten in parts of China, Vietnam and South Korea though it's
admittedly very, very rare.
A great cultural geographer, Frederick Samuens in fact dedicated a massive study to the geographic
and historical variation in food avoidances in his classic work Eat Not This Flesh.
That book surveys things like pork avoidance in Judaism and Islam, beef avoidance amongst
Hindus and the variation of eating fish and chicken even camel.
What's interesting about Samuens' approach is that he exhaustively documents the history
of different practices showing how arbitrary they all are, how locally specific and how
much of what is sacred in one place is totally nonsensical in another and what he doesn't
do at least not to any great extent is try to explain why some people avoid some foods.
For Samuens it seems as for many cultural geographers the very fact of the difference
is the important matter.
Coming up with a universal explanation is secondary or maybe even a little beside the
point in any case.
There's a lot to be learned from this remarkable study but the key thing from our point of
view here today is that Samuens' work on food underlines how variable and contingent people's
practices can be.
But also how profoundly heartfelt and visceral.
I mean think about how eating dog might make you feel.
This is something that another person, a member of the same species living in the same moment
of history, they might not bat an eye at it.
Practices and meanings as you can see are all bound up together.
Culture in other words is by no means superficial, it runs really, really deep.
Of course this question of food barely scratches the surface of how cultural meanings and practices
can vary.
Some of the different bundled sets of meaning and practices have far reaching implications.
Consider different expectations about women's roles in society.
In some matrilineal cultures where family lineage is traced through the mother's side
of the family, women are also the main line of inheritance of property.
Take the Akan people of western Africa who can be found predominantly in Ghana and the
Ivory Coast.
Though not exclusively matrilineal today, historically they do indeed trace their families through
their mother's line and pass property down through the female side of the family.
That's radically different from other cultures that are probably more familiar to many of
us from Euro-American history where historically all property has been controlled by men and
handed down only to sons.
On the other hand, some cultures heavily circumscribe women's spheres of activity, the tradition
of perda is notable in this regard.
Perda taken from the Persian word meaning curtain is the cultural expectation that women operate
in a separate physical sphere from men, both spatially segregated from men and often covered
while moving around in public.
We can see this practice among certain culture groups across Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Pakistan
and Northern India.
This has really important implications for the opportunities women might have socially
and economically of course and it's viewed as highly problematic by many observers from
both inside and outside these cultures.
Now to be sure, things are not always as simple as they might first appear.
Women in perda may actually control and operate the family business for example.
They may exert far reaching political power.
In many regions, women may quietly manage property both inside and outside the family.
Nevertheless, cultural traditions like these do indeed govern some of the expectations about
women and set the terms of their interaction in the world.
Culture in other words has pretty large implications for what goes on in people's lives and economies
and these differences in gender roles can actually vary in close proximity to one another.
Consider dowry and bride price.
Dowry is a cultural and economic system in which families seeking to marry off their
daughters have to provide a significant financial gift to the family of the husband.
This has enormous implications for families since it puts them on a hook for often really
large financial encumbrances in order to marry off girls.
One might think about how this creates a problem in valuing girl children and families since
they represent a financial burden in that sense.
As a result, there's a strong pressure to abandon the dowry system in places where it's
both because of its problematic impact on household economies and its often disastrous
effects on women's lives.
Now compare the dowry system to its mirror image, the bride price system.
With bride price, the husband's family must pay the family of the intended bride in order
to marry.
Both of these, dowry and bride price, are cultural expectations.
They're distinct to specific groups, but they sometimes occur right on top of each other.
So, while many agricultural families in South Asia, for example, still operate under the
dowry system, families from herding communities who may live in the very same rural villages
may practice bride price.
This raises questions about how and why practices and meanings vary, and also points out a few
other important things.
It again underlines that culture is deeply political, and that's a point we'll return
to in later lectures, but which is evident when we think about how the expected roles
for women are sometimes tied to their social power.
And it also shows that culture is a kind of a process, not just a given thing, since
involves interactions with society in complex ways, and it varies over space and over time.
So, where do these cultural differences come from in a first place?
This is a question so large, as of course, to deserve its own course, but it's pretty
clear that geography and history matter a lot in the answer.
As you recall from the previous lecture, every language, in its own way, captures and communicates
a system of meaning, and in this sense, every language sort of contains its own culture.
Each such language emerged under its own unique local conditions.
In earliest human prehistory, herding communities moving their animals across the plains, hunters
and gatherers living in forests, and more settled people in irrigated agricultural river basins,
each of these would have had their own worldview, their own way of doing things, and their
own language in which they might capture that understanding of the world.
And in this sense, people's practice and the geographic context in which people function
set the conditions for distinctive cultures.
So as we've suggested before, there have been many thousands of languages in earliest human
history, and each tied to local geographically distinctive groups, different cultures.
This is as true today, as it was in prehistory, of course, a visit to communities in the high
Andes Mountains demonstrates this.
So here, among the many, many ethnic groups of the Highlands, are members of the Keshua
people.
These groups of people share a common family of languages.
They live at high elevation, they keep sturdy llamas from which they harvest wool, and they
plant and grow high elevation crops, especially potatoes.
This specific region and livelihood encapsulates some important common understandings and ways
of doing things.
In terms of meanings, Highland groups are Catholic, but also share common important mythologies
about their origin and about the spirits of the earth.
In terms of practices, the people of this region have very distinctive clothing styles.
Most women of the region are really well known for these bowler hats, which typically sit
high up on the top of their heads.
Men's dress is characterized by the poncho, usually hand-woven, colorful covering that's
both functional and expressive.
Both of these clothing traditions are bound up with the tourist trade and with the export
of certain commodities, but they're also an honest and very traditional part of regional
culture.
The key point is that a distinctive geography and way of life is connected to systems of
meaning and practice that we call culture.
Returning to early human history, we can imagine that there would have been as many languages
and cultures as there were different small groups of people, and that the source of cultural
variability is that endless fountain of creative human expression and expression in countless
unique contexts all over the world.
Culture varied geographically, in other words, for the simple reason that people interacted
with their geographic context in highly varied ways.
Clearly, however, as we reviewed in the last lecture, when large urban and agricultural
civilizations rose, especially as they became politically organized into empires, a consolidation
of languages followed.
As a notable example, though dozens of languages could be found on the Italian peninsula prior
to the Roman Republic and empire, Latin came to become hegemonic, not only there but across
much of Europe and North Africa.
In the process, we see cultural consolidation here.
The meanings and practices are controlled, imposed, and generalized.
These meanings and practices, as we noted in the previous lecture on language, are partly
contained in the language of Latin itself, which came to displace local languages.
But they're also conveyed through Roman law and Roman social norms and political systems.
Roman civilization in this way is in part about the consolidation of a shared culture,
which would include accepting Roman gods, of course, but also starting to think in a
Roman way and to even eat Roman foods and perhaps most notably to drink Roman wine.
What this means more generally is that concentrated urban and agricultural civilizations in different
regions of the world are important engines for generating and expanding some key historic
cultural traditions.
In these locations, these regions, there would have been a mix of large numbers of
people speaking a single set of languages, political organizations around central powers
and states, as well as early written language.
This has led many traditional cultural geographers to attempt to map the great cultural hearts,
the source of major world cultures from their origins.
When such a map would really highlight the earliest areas of agricultural and urban growth,
including Mesopotamia, the Mesoamerican heartland of the Aztec and the Maya, coastal West Africa,
the Nile River Valley, the Ganges River Valley, and today what is India, the Indus River Valley,
and what is today Pakistan, and the Wei River Valley in what is today China.
These are all cultural hearts.
What such a map would suggest is that core, common, major culture regions emerged in early
human history from which emanated important traditions and languages that moved outward
over time to heavily influence surrounding, smaller cultures, and to be sure, some of
the most dominant languages and cultures have emerged from these cultural heart regions.
Many of the things that make Chinese culture distinctive, for example, are rooted in the
practices and systems of belief that emerged thousands of years ago from the valley of
the Yellow River, a region including the Huanghou River and its tributary, the Wei.
As useful as all this is, it does a real disservice, of course, to the incredible variability
of cultures around the world more generally.
I mean, even if there are several major historic culture regions, as they are referred to in
cultural geography, it's clear that tremendous differentiation occurs even within these common
traditions.
Now, this is in part because such an approach to cultural geography that we described just
a moment ago ignores an equally important cultural process, and that's the interaction
of diverse cultures to create new meanings, new practices, new traditions.
Now, thinking back on our Andean Quechua people, for example, let's stop and reflect on the
things that make them distinctive.
Some of these things are quite clearly handed down from deeply rooted local geography and
history, of course.
The potatoes grown by Andean people, notably, are specifically adapted to these conditions
because they were likely domesticated very nearby.
The Quechua language is a descendant of that spoken by people living within the Incan Empire
centuries before.
But the Catholic faith, which is grafted onto indigenous beliefs here, that came with Spanish
conquerors.
Now, every town of appreciable size in the Andes has a Catholic church arranged around
a central square, mimicking the town planning of 17th century Spain.
Equally, those bowler hats perched atop women's heads are clearly imported, probably arriving
with railroad construction in the 19th and 20th centuries.
So what we today know to be Quechua culture, which is indeed unlike any other culture in
the world, it's partly created by the fusion of other cultures together into a new distinctive
form.
Most regional cultures are, really in this way, hybrids of cultures intersecting over
space and time.
And these hybrid cultures are no less real than their ancestors or their more dominant
neighbors and are probably more common than anything resembling a pure cultural form emerging
from some historic cultural hearth.
Most cultural vibrancy, in a sense, is a product of cultural, geographic interaction
and mixing.
Another rock and roll.
Now, any proper genealogy of this form of music is deeply geographical and characterized
by hybrids.
One of the greatest moments of rock's inflorescence, for example, was in the 1960s in Great Britain,
where the Rolling Stones and the Beatles were innovating very new but extremely distinctive
sounds.
But as is widely recognized, these sounds were directly inspired by American traditions
imported from the upper Midwest of the United States, including blues circuits that traveled
between Kansas City and Chicago, as well as the empire of rhythm and blues in Detroit
and the studios of the central south, most notably in Memphis, Tennessee.
Of course, these sounds are themselves the product of earlier geographic migrations.
The sounds that we recognize as the blues were carried by African-American people northwards.
That's part of great migration out of the south during the industrialization of the
northern United States in the early 20th century.
The sounds that these migrants carried with them was, of course, itself a distinctive
regional style of blues and gospel, but it, too, was rooted in yet further displacements.
The chord progressions, the scales of earliest blues, along with its distinctive shuffling
rhythms, they're all rooted in West African musical traditions, now characterized by their
signature drum styles.
It's hard to know the exact sources of all these sounds, but the powerful, hammering,
percussion traditions of the Yoruba people, for example, are unmistakable in later iterations
of American music.
Those sounds cross the Atlantic in chains in the period following the Columbian Exchange.
So the exact path and process of musical hybrids that came out of Africa with slavery and then
arrived in Britain from America centuries later is one probably best left to musical
historians, but the important lesson for us here is the remarkable and dynamic geography
of this process.
You can only get rock and roll through displacements of core cultural features in new contexts and
interactions between styles with different roots.
A map of rock and roll has to be one that shows movement and interaction from West Africa
to the U.S. South, to the U.S. North, and back across the Atlantic.
Rock music would be really poorly served by a map showing culture hearts or any more
static kind of geography, and this kind of cultural hybridization, it isn't unique to
so-called popular culture either, so consider Buddhism.
Now, Buddhism developed in the endogangetic planes of what is today called India.
Those planes span the whole way across Northern India like a wide belt from the mouth of the
Indus River in the Arabian Sea to the mouth of the Ganges River in the Bay of Bengal.
Buddhism comes to us through the teachings of the great cultural figure from this region,
the Buddha, in around the 6th century BCE, and it's based on the central idea that the
nature of reality is illusory and filled with the universal experience of suffering, and
we can break the endless bonds of this suffering through enlightenment achieved by reflecting
on and renouncing those conditions.
When we break the bonds of suffering, we've reached a state of enlightenment called nirvana.
Part religion, part philosophy, in the centuries following the birth of this tradition, Buddhism
was practiced in a distinctive way throughout India.
Today, you can still find carved caves in rocky parts of India where monks might have
retreated for years on end trying to reach nirvana.
Among these, the Ajanta caves in the central Indian state of Maharashtra are perhaps the
most spectacular, and they include vast ornate rock carvings made in the first few centuries
of the common era, but more modest caves can also be found, little out of the way places
in the forest where Buddhists might meditate on transcendence.
Astonishingly, however, Buddhism pretty much vanished from India before the 13th century
as both Hinduism and Islam ascended, though it's made a modern comeback in India its location
of origin is hardly Buddhist these days.
And yet, today we find it everywhere else in Asia, but in really different forms.
In the high plateaus of the Himalayas, Tibetan Buddhism is characterized by a strong monastic
tradition and a kind of pantheon of semi-divine figures called bodhisattvas, who can aid
the unenlightened to reach enlightenment through a form of meditation that's something like
prayer.
And in Japan, Zen Buddhism prevails, which has its own really different traditions, including
the importance of a teacher or master, in fact, a map showing the extent of Buddhism
around the world would show that Buddhism can be found in China, Mongolia, and across
the Southeast Asia as well to say nothing of California, but all with different local
forms of practice and belief, still rooted in some common central understandings.
Where did all this Buddhism and all these different Buddhism come from?
Really, like rock and roll, differing Buddhist traditions are the product of the movement
of a set of cultural meanings and practices over space.
As Buddhism settled into each distinctive geographical context, it hybridized with local cultural
conditions, pre-existing understandings, and social systems, and it created its own regional
form by mixing with other cultural traditions and other forms.
And feudalism at the time of Buddhism's arrival would have been far different than the social
structure of Japan several centuries later, and it would in fact be really surprising,
in fact, if they were all identical cultural forms, cultural difference, in other words,
is pretty much far more predictable than cultural sameness, which leads us to some summary lessons
from this lecture.
In the last half hour, we've established that culture is a distinctive set of meanings
and practices that people share.
We've seen that these meanings and practices are bound up with one another, and they provide
a common sense way for people to make sense of the world and act in their day-to-day lives.
Indeed, people rarely recognize that they themselves have culture until they meet somebody from
another culture.
We've also suggested that culture is not just a glossy sheen on people's lives, but
that it intersects in a pretty fundamental way with social structures and politics.
In the case of gender roles and norms, it's emblematic of these kinds of interactions.
We've ascribed the differences in cultures from place to place to a number of factors.
First, peculiar local geographies and languages of a region lend the way of life to people
there, a distinctiveness, and in this way, there's an endless source of cultural difference
owned to the variety of geographies around the world.
But we've also suggested that some dominant cultures have emerged out of major core areas
where some of the earliest agriculture and written languages grew into cultural hearts.
And finally, however, we've emphasized that much of the cultural distinctiveness we see
from place to place is actually the product of the interaction between cultural systems
to create new hybrids.
Cultural difference we've suggested is ubiquitous.
And yet, and yet we do see a decline in distinctive languages, the explosion of media and internet
resources that broadcast common or unified forms of culture, and the concentration of
people together into geographically discreet areas, especially cities.
So doesn't this suggest that cultural difference might actually be in peril?
Are distinct places likely to vanish from the earth?
It's that question that we'll turn to in our next lecture.
