In this video, I'm going to identify 11 specific kinds of behavior that might cause other people to
think you're weird or socially awkward. And with each of these behaviors are things you can do
to appear more normal or less awkward. Hi everybody, I'm Bruce Lambert from HowCommunicationWorks.com.
This is a channel where I teach you about communication skills so you can improve your
relationships, succeed at work, and be more confident and overall hopefully lead a more
fulfilling and meaningful life. I was on the social skills subreddit recently and a person
posted a very interesting comment and he said, when people ask you if they're acting weird,
don't respond with generalities and platitudes but give them specific advice. Basically,
this guy was saying, or I don't know if it's a man or a woman, this person was saying,
I think I'm weird and I get feedback in social situations that I'm weird or socially awkward.
But when I ask my friends, what specifically am I doing that makes you think I'm weird or
makes me seem socially awkward, they never give him or her a straight answer. They always respond
with platitudes like, oh, it's okay to be weird, just be yourself, ignore them. But of course,
for people who genuinely struggle, if they're socially outcast, if they're socially isolated,
because they're perceived as weird or socially awkward or unusual or abnormal or whatever it might
be, these are real concerns. People need real feedback. They don't need platitudes like, oh,
it's okay to be weird. If you're really socially awkward, it causes you to be socially isolated
and that's extremely painful and damaging to the quality of your life. People in that situation
need specific feedback about what they're doing. And without knowing you specifically,
I can't give you feedback on your behavior. But I did identify specific categories of behavior
that are about social norms of behavior and that if you violate them, you are going to be perceived
to be weird or socially awkward or abnormal. These are the categories of behavior that in my own
experience as a communication professional, when I see people violating these norms or when I see
people that are socially awkward or weird or socially outcast or isolated, it's often these
behaviors that cause that perception. And each of these behaviors is specific enough that they can
be corrected. It may take coaching, someone has to observe your specific behavior in order for
them to coach you and help you. But these are the areas that you might be able to target.
You could videotape yourself and so on, but actually coaching or therapy or some kind of
professional help is probably going to be needed to fix or remedy these problems if you have them.
I want to add one more thing before I get to the list and that is that when we perceive someone as
weird or socially awkward, it's kind of a gestalt perception. What that means is like,
it's an overall impression we get of someone and people who are not trained in communication or in
the observation of behavior, all they have is this overall impression, oh, that person is strange.
That person is different, they're unusual, they're awkward, but they can't when pressed to say,
what is it that makes them strange? Many people, because they're not trained in communication,
can't pinpoint exactly what it is about their behavior. But it's my belief that it is specific
behaviors. That's all that people can see. When people see you as abnormal or unusual or awkward
or whatever, all they have to go on is your behavior and then their inferences about you
based on that behavior. But I think it's specific observable behaviors that can be learned and
changed that are at the root of these perceptions that you are weird or awkward. And so here they are.
Number one, too much or too little eye contact. There are norms about eye contact and you cannot
make too much eye contact or else you seem like some sort of stalker or some sort of crazed lunatic
if you just bear down on people and look them in the eye too much, you're going to seem unusual,
weird or awkward. So too much eye contact is overbearing and uncomfortable and will make people
think you are violating these norms and they'll make the inference then you're weird or you're
socially awkward. Don't make too much eye contact when you're talking sexually normal to look away
for a while and then return your gaze to the person when you're done talking. It's not a staring
contest. Be sure to blink, be sure to look away, be sure to look down. Similarly, not enough eye
contact is also going to be perceived as weird or unusual. If you never make eye contact, you're
going to be perceived as really shy or withdrawn or not interested. The eyes are the window to the
soul. The face is the center of where most communication takes place in face to face ordinary
interaction. So you've got to make some eye contact when especially when you're listening,
it's more normal to make more eye contact. Even though the other person is looking away, you
should make eye contact. So when they look back at you, you're looking at them and they know that
you're listening. So make sufficient eye contact but not too much. Maybe that rule is hard to learn
and if you're awkward, you're thinking, I don't know how much too much is. I don't know how much
not enough is. This is why you're going to need coaching or you're able to have to study people
who are socially skilled and see how they make eye contact. Point number two, not enough or too much
interpersonal space or distance. And I think normally the issue will be not enough space,
but sometimes it could be too much. This is really closely related to eye contact. There's about a
12 to 16 inch, 12 to 18 inch in America. This differs from country to country. But in America,
there's like about a 12 to 18 inch personal space bubble that should not be violated unless you're
on sort of intimate friendly terms with a person. But in in ordinary social contact in public,
you have to respect this 12 to 18 inch personal distance bubble. If you're a close talker, right,
who talked about that Seinfeld or somebody like that, you don't want to be one of those close
talkers. You're going to be perceived as awkward, weird, and so on. People are going to make inferences
about you and your social skills. Even if you're a lovely human being, you must respect this personal
space bubble. Now this will vary from culture to culture. Norms of social distance are culture
specific, but in America, it's about 12 to 18 inches. So keep your distance. If you enter into
that distance, then people will feel violated that you're violating their personal space.
If you stay three feet away when you're talking to someone, they're going to think you're weird
because that's too far away to be standing for an ordinary conversation unless you're in a group
when the norms are for slightly greater distances and higher volumes and so on. So again, study what
you see in socially skilled people, make those judgments and copy those social distances too
much or too little distance will make you seem weird. Number three, poor oral hygiene or poor
general hygiene. There's no way to say it. Maybe you smell, maybe your breath is really bad,
maybe your body odor is really bad. And here again, there are culturally specific norms.
In America, there are these norms about showering every day that the smell of the human body in
America is taboo. You shouldn't smell. Your breath shouldn't smell. Your body shouldn't smell. You
should shower once a day and have all sorts of perfumy soap and deodorant and stuff like that on.
In other parts of the world, the normal smells of the human body are more acceptable and the
norms about breath or body odor are different. If you've traveled around the world, you'll realize
this because the people smell differently in different parts of the world. But in America,
if you don't brush your teeth, if you don't use mouthwash and you come close to people that can
smell your breath and it's really bad, they are going to think you're unclean. And they may then
make other inferences about you being a strange, isolated person that they don't want to interact
with. So in America, you can't have obvious body odor. You can't have a halitosis, bad breath.
You've got to brush your teeth, use mouthwash, chew gum, use breath mints, and you've got to
clean yourself. You can't have a perspiration that really smells or any other kind of body odor,
or the strong odor of food. It may not be fair, it may not be realistic, it varies from culture
to culture, but these are the norms in America. And if you violate them, you're going to be seen
as weird. Number four, lack of a filter. You say taboo things. That is, you use profanity when you
shouldn't. You talk about religion or politics in ways which offend people. You have no filter.
You say exactly what you think without regard to politeness or appropriateness to the situation,
or decorum, or respect, or poise, or dignity. You lack those things. You have no filter. You just
say whatever's on your mind without regard to relevance or appropriateness. And if you act
that way without any filter, people are going to think you're weird. The norms of human behavior,
the norms of human communication dictate that you avoid certain taboo topics, that you don't try to
raise too much controversy, that you don't shame people and embarrass them, and so on. So you have
to learn rules of appropriateness. So if I say be appropriate, you might say, but I'm weird,
I'm socially awkward, I don't know what appropriateness is. There are some rules that you can learn.
And I already mentioned a couple. You normally don't bring up religion and politics and sex
body parts, body odors, stuff like that, that's going to be really divisive in polite company,
or else you're going to be perceived as not understanding the norms of behavior. And anyone
who violates those norms will be seen as someone who's not safe to interact with,
otherwise known as weird or awkward. Number six, you don't cooperate in face work. So I have a whole,
a couple of other videos on Irving Goff and the expressive order and face work and so on going
all the way back to my very first video. So face is the positive social value we claim for
ourselves. It's dignity, pride, self-esteem, the fact that I am somebody who deserves respect.
So in ordinary interaction, you have a commitment not to embarrass yourself and not to allow other
people to be embarrassed, either to embarrass themselves or be embarrassed by you. So often
people who are perceived as weird or socially awkward don't know how to do face work. They're
not familiar. They don't know how to maintain the expressive order. And I'll link to my video about
the expressive order and what that is. They allow, they embarrass themselves by acting in strange
ways, which are violating norms. It's not okay to violate these social norms if you want to be seen
as normal. Or they allow other people to be embarrassed and they don't help repair embarrassment.
If other people are not confident that if they slip up that you'll help them avoid embarrassment,
you won't be seen as safe to interact with. And they'll see you as weird and abnormal. So if you
don't cooperate in face work, helping other people save face and not allowing yourself to lose face,
people might see you as weird or awkward. Number seven, too much or too little self-disclosure.
So self-disclosure, I wrote an email about this to my mailing list. I should post it on the website,
but I haven't. But I haven't made a video about this yet. Self-disclosure is the process of telling
people about ourselves, minor superficial details and then deep personal details about ourselves.
And generally, there's a progression. People who we hardly know, we tell them superficial
things about ourselves, like our name, what city we live in, what we do for a living,
maybe what some of our superficial interests are. And then as the relationship gets more intimate,
we reveal and disclose more intimate details about ourselves. That's the general progression
of self-disclosure. There are norms of self-disclosure. And if you violate them, you will be seen as
abnormal or awkward or weird. In the beginning of a relationship, do not disclose too much.
Your name, rank and serial number is about it, right? Your name, where you live,
what you do for a living, what maybe some of your hobbies are, if they're not taboo topics, you know.
Maybe what music or television or movies that you like or books, these are all safe topics.
And things that you could disclose about yourself early in a relationship where you're just meeting
new people. These are safe things to disclose. So don't disclose too much. If you meet new people
and suddenly start telling them about your deep psychological problems, about your addictions,
about your abuse history, about your mental health problems, about the most embarrassing and
shameful things about yourself or your life history, those things are all valid. Those experiences
are all valid. And eventually you want a friend that you can share them with, but not when you
first meet someone. It's not appropriate. People will be like, ah, too much information. This person
is weird and awkward. I don't want to interact with him. Similarly, if you never reveal anything
about yourself, people will not trust you. I used to know somebody. This person is not really part
of my life anymore, but I used to know somebody and she was a very good listener. So people would
tell her things, but she would never reveal anything about herself. So ultimately people didn't
trust her because if you never reveal anything about yourself, you're violating this norm of
self-disclosure, which says if I tell you something, then you tell me something of sort of equal
intimacy. You meet a new person and they tell you their name and where they live and kind of what
their hobbies are and what they do for a living. And then you reveal none of that information
about yourself. You violated this norm of reciprocity and self-disclosure and you're going
to be seen as weird. Number eight, you lack a sense of relevance. So one of the norms in conversation
is be relevant. You have to contribute to the conversation in such a way as that your contribution
is relevant to the previous conversation. That is, there's a specific topic being talked about
and the person who had the last turn at talk is talking about a specific topic and then it's
your turn to talk. You are obliged more or less to talk about the same topic or at least to say
something that is related to, relevant to the same topic. If you're perceived generally as awkward
or weird, you may have difficulty knowing what's relevant. So just stick to the same topic. Don't
try to change the subject too much. Extremely abrupt changes of subject will seem really strange.
If you deviate from the topic or say these non sequiturs, a non sequiturs of Latin for you
are not in the proper sequence out of place and a non sequiturs just to mention something on one
topic which totally is unrelated to the previous topic that was on the floor or being discussed
in the conversation. So if you are perceived as weird, it might be because you have not mastered
the sense of relevance. You must stay on topic. Number nine, you don't know how to gracefully
enter or leave an interaction. So there are norms around and rituals around entering and
leaving interactions. And if you enter or leave too abruptly or if you enter or leave too slowly,
sort of hard to know what it means to enter too slowly, but you can certainly leave too slowly
if someone is trying to end the conversation, they're going, all right, okay, great to meet you.
Wow, it's really a pleasure to have met you. I've got to get going. Okay, all right,
all right then. Okay, and you're still not leaving. Those are all cues for you to leave.
If you're missing all those cues and you linger and keep talking and won't let a person go when
they give you signals to go, they'll think you're weird or awkward and they won't want to interact
with you. So you've got to let people take their leave. Even if you want to keep talking with them,
when they signal that they're ready to leave, you have to let them leave. And when you enter
into a conversation, you can't just barge in if other people are talking, you have to enter in
slowly and appropriately. And if you're invited in to a conversation, because someone mentions your
name or they motion you over, you don't accept that invitation, you're going to be seen as awkward.
So entering and leaving are rituals, you have to master those rituals, or else you're going to be
seen as awkward or weird. Number 10, you don't use back channel cues. And so people never know
whether you're listening. A back channel cue is just something like, uh-huh. Oh, tell me more.
These are back channel cues, the little things that we do to let people know that we're still
listening. They give people cues that, yes, I'm still listening. I'm still here. They're important
on the telephone and they're important in face-to-face interaction. If you just sit there,
you think listening is about being silent and someone's talking and you're just...
They're going to think you're awkward or weird. You might be listening really
intently. You might be waiting for your chance to talk. But listening is actually an active thing
that you have to contribute. Uh-huh. Oh, yeah. Oh, that's interesting. Tell me more. Stuff like
that, that lets people know you're listening. So if you don't give back channel cues, people are
going to think you're not listening or you're not paying attention or you're just kind of weird.
And number 11, I don't have enough fingers for, number 11, you lack empathy. If people see you
as weird or awkward, it's possible that you lack empathy. Now, I have an entire playlist about
empathy, which you should check out because it's too big a topic for me to talk about in this video.
But it may be that you lack empathy. What that means is you may lack the ability to recognize
other people's feelings or to accurately identify other people's feelings or to relate them to
your own experience or to understand other people's perspectives, their plans, their goals,
their intentions, and their beliefs. Uh, you may lack the ability to say, to acknowledge people's
feelings. You may not have enough altruism or compassion when people are hurting that you
reach out and do and say kind things in order to help relieve their suffering. All of these are
elements of empathy. And if people perceive you a lot of the time as weird or awkward,
you may not have mastered empathic listening and empathic skills, which have to do with
feeling other people's feelings, identifying other people's feelings correctly, naming them,
asking people to elaborate on them, and then saying comforting things to them. As I said,
lots and lots of other videos, this whole channel is kind of an empathy channel. So there's lots
to learn if those are your skills. So there you have it. 11 specific behaviors that if you're
not adhering to the norms of behavior in these 11 domains, it's quite likely others will perceive
you as abnormal, weird, or awkward. The good news is all of these are learnable skills,
even if you might be on the autism spectrum or have Asperger's or other challenges in your life
that make it difficult for you to perceive social nuances, or maybe you just grew up in a family
where you didn't get this kind of training and you're just in a situation where you have a lot
more to learn. That's what this channel is for. And I really, really want to help. So I think that
the previous videos I've made on conversation skills and empathy and listening are targeted
a lot of these deficits. If you're struggling with this idea that you're weird or socially awkward,
it is because of these specific observable behaviors that you are capable of changing,
not without effort. And you may never be able to be as smooth as the most socially skilled person.
But I think you can greatly decrease the perception that you're weird or awkward
by working on these specific learnable social skills. I'll say one more thing about being
weird before I sign off. It's totally okay to have unusual ideas, unusual beliefs. One of the
platitudes that people say to people who are feel themselves to be socially awkward or weird is,
Oh, I like weird people. It's okay to be weird. I think what they're saying there is it's okay
to be quirky. It's okay to be unusual. It's okay to have slightly different beliefs.
But when we go, there are norms of human behavior, including norms for what attitudes and beliefs
we can hold in a given culture in a given time in history. If you go too far outside those norms,
you will pay the price as someone who's a non conformist and socially outcast and so on. So
you have to do that calculation on your own. If you have very, very, if you have beliefs that
are very far outside the norm or behaviors that are very far outside the norm, one of the prices
socially you might pay for that is a certain amount of ostracism or being isolated or perceived
as weird or awkward. But if you have normal beliefs and attitudes, which are within the
norms for our time and place in history, but that you just haven't mastered all these communication
skills, I think there's really a route for you to be seen as as much more normal than you might
here to for have been. If you like this kind of video, give it a like, smash that like button,
hit subscribe and you can see all of our other videos, hit the notification icon and YouTube
will let you know every time I upload a new video. Go on over to howcommunicationworks.com.
There's lots of longer form blog articles that I've written in the past that are on that. And if
you just the very first page of the website will be asking if your email address, if you give us
your email, we'll send you an ebook all about empathy, which is one of these important social
skills, which we think you'll find to be useful. Thanks so much for watching. I hope these tips
help you overcome what's really a painful situation to be seen as weird or awkward. We'll see you next
time.
