These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university-level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day,
you can finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn
if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year
in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected
by The Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled Human Prehistory
and the First Civilizations, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Brian M. Fagan.
Professor Fagan is a Professor of Anthropology
at the University of California in Santa Barbara,
where he's been teaching for over 35 years.
Born in England and educated at Pembroke College, Cambridge,
Dr. Fagan earned his BA, MA and PhD in Archaeology and Anthropology.
Professor Fagan has served as Director of the Bantu Studies Project
of the British Institute for Eastern Africa,
visiting Associate Professor at the University of Illinois, Urbana
and visiting Professor at Whittier College
and the University of Cape Town, South Africa.
Professor Fagan was a Guggenheim Fellow
and has received numerous awards including the Public Service Award
of the Society of Professional Archaeologists
and the Public Education Award of the Society for American Archaeology.
He is also the recipient of a Distinguished Teaching Award
from the University of California at Santa Barbara.
A prolific author, Dr. Fagan's numerous books include
People of the Earth and In the Beginning,
two widely used university and college textbooks
in Archaeology and Prehistory.
His other works include The Rape of the Nile,
The Adventure of Archaeology and The Little Ice Age.
He also edited The Oxford Companion to Archaeology.
Professor Fagan prepared the course guide that comes with these tapes.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture,
a timeline, maps, a glossary, biographical notes and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course you may find it useful
to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
