I want to stress that here we are not concerned with myth and legend or biblical wit.
This is a narrative based on science and on scientific research, much of it conducted
in the last thirty years, and much of it cutting edge, very new.
This is something which is rapidly turning our knowledge of the remote human past into
something vibrant and living, but beginning to find that people have behaved in remarkably
diverse ways over the last two and a half million years.
This then is a human free history constructed from scientific research.
It is not an account of the past based on fantasy, unsubstantiated legend or science
fiction, none of which have any place in our story.
I'm not going to tell you tales of the lost continent of Atlantis or of ancient space
people colonizing Earth thousands of years ago.
These are simplistic formulations by people who want a good story and don't necessarily
have the patience to contemplate the pains-taking, slow-moving pace of science.
This is a story based on science.
But this science has its own distinctive perspective.
Many westerners tend to think of the past in linear terms.
Why?
Because our watches chronicle the passing of time as our calendars do.
We have a linear view of human history.
And as a result, western science has constructed a linear view of the last two and a half million
years of human free history.
This constructed from a jigsaw puzzle of excavations, archaeological surveys and scientific
dating methods.
This linear chronology, and this course for much of it is organized in a linear fashion,
is the framework for our story.
Every episode here begins at the beginning and goes through time from the earlier to
the later.
This linear framework is very different from the cyclical view of time, which many ancient
and traditional societies possess or possessed.
These cyclical versions are often driven by different varieties.
The endless passage of the seasons, spring, the period of growth and rebirth, the summer,
when the plants grow to maturity, the fall of which time of harvest, and then winter,
the quiescent time, the time of death, and this endless cyclical passage of time of the
seasons is intimately associated in the minds of many societies with the age-old cycles
of humanity, birth, youth, adulthood, old age, and death, the endless cycle of humanity,
the expectation that life will continue after you have gone through the cycle of life and
that your successes and descendants will enjoy the same life as you have and was enjoyed
by your ancestors.
Many traditional societies find a linear view of the past somewhat threatening.
This course is offered with respect, as a scientific account of what happened in human-free
history and why.
The cyclical views of the past offer perspectives into the world views of individual societies,
and occasionally in the later part of the course we will refer to these cyclical visions.
But our course is based on a linear perspective and has a perspective internationally far
larger than the relatively narrow cyclical world views of traditional societies.
The prehistory of humankind is divided into six parts.
They coincide with major developments in prehistoric times.
Part one, beginnings, describes the archaic world of the first humans.
Here we discuss the controversial subject of human origins in East Africa, the fossil
evidence for human evolution, the archaeological sites, and the theories which surround the
exact nature of early human behavior.
Were we more ape-like, were we more human?
The debate continues to rage.
Then we discuss the evolution of later more advanced humans and their simple hunter-gatherer
societies, chronicling their spread over the old world, but not over the Americas, after
two million years ago.
Part one ends with the archaic forms of Homo sapiens, the immediate predecessors of modern
humans.
The Europeans, we stress particularly here the Europeans, the European Neanderthals of
100,000 to 30,000 years ago.
