There is no one overarching theme to the prehistory of humankind.
The subject is simply too diffuse to allow such a luxury.
But there are some pervasive issues which help us shape this narrative, a narrative
built not on the deeds of individuals, the pronouncements of politicians and kings, or
the rivalry of nations, but on millions of people living their lives, interacting with
each other, with neighbors, with husbands, with wives, with children, with grandparents,
with ancestors, with descendants.
And from this we have created a chronicle.
Human prehistory is a chronicle of increasing biological and cultural diversity, which is
reflected in our own biological, biologically and culturally diverse world.
And I think it's very important that all of us understand the deep roots of this biological
and cultural diversity.
But there's another very pervasive theme in this course too.
We humans may be diverse, but are also remarkably similar in the ways in which we behave, and
in the solutions we develop for survival.
For example, this is why many of the early civilizations developed such institutions as
divine kingship, spectacular public ceremonies, and so on.
Because this is a logical solution, if you do not have fossil fuels, to the problem of
creating and maintaining a large state.
The late Stephen J. Gould, the biological anthropologist, once remarked that we are
all products of the same African twig.
Here's correct, before current evidence suggests that modern humans originated in Africa.
And I hope this narrative reflects the fact that we are all products of the same African
twig on this huge, bushy tree of human evolution.
Another very pervasive theme of this course is the ever-changing background of environmental
and climatic shifts.
In considerable but not total part, the ways in which people have adjusted to climate change
have shaped our free history.
Climate change is millennial.
None of us noticed that, the fluctuations of the Ice Age.
But it also can operate in drought cycles which last several generations, or in the El Nino,
which may last a year.
And increasingly now, with the greater sophistication of paleoclimatology, we are able to look at
these climate changes and assess what effect they had on human society.
Often they were like a pebble dropped in the pond, where the consequences politically
and socially can be markedly noticeable in the archaeological record.
Human prehistory is inevitably a chronicle of sites and artifacts, of animal bones and
other archaeological data.
Some people have remarked that it is written in stones and pottery, a dreary subject of
best.
But ultimately, free history, like history, is the story of people as individuals, as
members of families and communities, and groups.
So above all, this course is about people and how they behaved.
Many societies described in these lectures have different and distinctive ways of explaining
their world.
This is what one might call the mirror of the intangible, the beliefs which shape society
and its responses to every kind of challenge imaginable.
Inevitably, these intangibles have vanished on the winds of history.
Only occasionally can we get an insight into how people thought or their beliefs, because
the chants and the dances have vanished.
All the remains are the material surviving remains of these beliefs.
And wherever possible in this course, I'm going to try and bring these beliefs to the
forefront, be those of a chromagnon shaman or a mire lord.
This is above all a course about people.
People surviving, flourishing, dying out, moving, responding to the constant challenges
of an often hazardous world.
And a chronicle of people dealing with one another with all the complexity and sophistication
that we today deal with other nations.
Please, from the very beginning, do not think that prehistory is simple.
It was as complicated human existence in those days as it is today.
We have more technology now, but what has not changed is the dynamics of people dealing
with one another, and that is what prehistory ultimately is all about.
From this introductory lecture, I've summarized the organization of the course.
I've stressed that this is a narrative account of human prehistory from our origins over
two and a half million years ago in Africa, right up to the advent of literate civilization.
I've stressed that the course summarizes four major developments in the human past.
Human origins, the spread of modern humans and archaic humans, the origins of food production,
and the beginnings of civilization.
The course follows a chronological organization, I've stressed, and this means that in the
first lecture, I will, next lecture, I will talk about the very, very beginnings of human
origins among the non-human primates.
