And in this particular part of the course, we begin our story in South Asia, where civilization
began along the Indus River, somewhat later than it did in Mesopotamia, but by 2000 BC,
people in big cities were trading regularly with Mesopotamia, with Bahrain, with the Persian
Gulf. And this network of interconnectedness, this web of interconnectedness, spread rapidly
until, in the Christian era, it encompassed not only the Indian Ocean, but also the East
African coast and China. There was this huge international trade involving downwind sailing
ships, camels, and camels themselves were domesticated quite early on, but the issue
isn't the camel, it's the saddle upon which the rider rides or carries cargo, because
the essence of the camel is to be able to cross deserts. So you had the ship of the
desert and the ship of the ocean, and this created this huge interconnected world, from
which sprang, among other things, the spectacular civilizations of the Khmer, of South East
Asia, Angkor what? Angkor Tom, these huge ceremonial centers which were built to gratify the grand
diligent desires of powerful Khmer monarchs, some of the most spectacular archaeological
sites in the world. And in the final part of the course, we go to China, and then from
there into the very final part, into the Americas. The history of Chinese civilization unfolds
from its origins in increasingly complex agricultural societies, before 3000 BC, with the emergence
of the legendary dynasties of North China, Sia, Shang, and Zhao, and we unfold the story
and tell it right up to the unification of China by the first emperor in 221 BC and end
with the flamboyant hand dynasty of China, which traded, among other things, with Africa.
This world of interconnectedness in part six gives way to an entirely different continent,
and the ancient Americans tells the story of sophisticated Native American societies
which arose over the last 3,500 years. We begin with the Pueblo cultures of the North American
Southwest, and the aggressive chieftains which developed in the South and Southwest, often
called the Mississippian culture. This spectacular culture was based on profound spiritual beliefs
which we know a surprising amount about thanks to anthropological research.
Two lectures then describe the lowland and highland Mesoamerican civilizations. I should
mention that Mesoamerica is that part of Central America where civilizations developed. We begin
with the mysterious, little known Olmec, then explore ancient Maya civilization in the lowlands,
and then on the highlands we describe the rise of Zapotec civilization, the great city
state of Tehatiawakan, and the militaristic Aztec civilization overthrown by the Spanish
conquistador Hernan Cortes in 1521. Finally, two lectures explore the development
of civilization in the Andes, along the arid Peruvian coast and high in the mountains,
including the gold-decked Moche state, Tiwanaku, and Chimo, and finally the astounding Inca
empire destroyed by Spaniard Francisco Pizarro in AD 1532.
A flamboyant, long-stretching narrative, complex, but alas, the one thing about it is that it
is lamentably incomplete. I've tried to overcome the limitations of the evidence, but designing
a course which is a flowing narrative, which moves forward at the expense of technical detail
to linger on overarching themes and issues, over controversies rather than the minutiae
of individual often obscure sites and academic theories. This is a field peopled by specialists,
but the issues are enormous, and they are very fundamental to our understanding of ourselves.
