Part 2, again six lectures, covers modern humans.
It begins with the controversies surrounding the origins of Homo sapiens sapiens, modern
humans ourselves.
As you will see, we think that they originated in tropical Africa, and we then trace their
spread across the old world and into the Americas during the late Ice Age, between
about 100,000 and 15,000 years ago.
This was a period of tremendous innovations in human society, such as new more sophisticated
technologies, the first open water navigation, and the first effervescence of full human
cognitive abilities, the ability to reason, to plan, to conceptualize theoretical ideas
and ritual concepts.
It's the first appearance of art, for which symbolic life is part of human experience.
In Part 3, the pace of cultural evolution is rapidly accelerating.
In farmers and herders, in six lectures, which begin immediately after the end of the Great
Ice Age, we start seeing people beginning to cultivate the soil and domesticate animals,
somewhere around 10,000 BC in Southwest Asia, when people suddenly start cultivating wild
grasses.
Why did they do this?
We examine some of the theories which seek to explain this abrupt changeover, and then
we visit some early farming sites in the region, especially the ancient town of Jericho, one
of the earliest farming settlements in the world.
We note our agriculture and animal domestication also took hold in other regions independent
of Southwest Asia, among them the domestication of rice in Southern Asia, and cereals and
rice in East Asia.
We analyze these developments and their momentous consequences for the later course of history.
And then study the first appearance of cultivation in the Americas, somewhere around 5,000 BC.
We should not forget, at the time of the Spanish conquest of Mexico and Peru in the early 16th
century, the Native Americans were probably the most skilled farmers in the world, who
domesticated an extraordinary range of plants, among them tobacco, potatoes, and tomatoes,
which today are staples of world civilization.
We tell the story of the spread of farming into Europe, perhaps, and this is pure speculation,
in part the result of a great natural cataclysm.
When the Black Sea, instead of being a freshwater lake, became the Black Sea itself, a brackish
body of water, flooding hundreds of square miles of prime farming land.
And we also survey the first colonization of the offshore islands of the Pacific, Micronesia
and Polynesia, the last land masses to be colonized by prehistoric humans.
Parts 4 to 6 of the course examine the earliest civilizations in the world.
Part 4 covers the Eastern Mediterranean.
We begin by examining the major theories which account for the appearance of civilization,
and then we trace the early history of urban civilization in Egypt and Mesopotamia, the
land of the pharaohs and the land between the rivers.
We also describe the Minoan and Mycenaean civilizations of Crete and Greece, and the
complex Eastern Mediterranean world of the 2nd millennium BC, the Assyrians, the Hittites,
and the other powers which competed in South-Waste Asia for control of trade routes and powerful
sources of major raw materials.
Part 5 takes us into archaeologically less well-known parts of the world.
We examine Africa and Asia.
And here we look closely at one of the major themes of the course, which can be summed
up in one word, interconnectedness.
Few human societies have ever lived independent of others.
Few are self-sufficient.
Many of them enjoyed constant contacts with neighbors who gave them commodities and foods
and luxuries they might not otherwise have had.
And this constant interconnectedness accelerated after the development of agriculture and even
further with the arrival of civilization.
