Probably the most famous of all the primordial hominids is a hominid nicknamed Lucy, found
by Maurice Tyab and Don Johansson at Hadar on Ethiopia's Awash River in the 1970s.
This diminutive creature lived about 3.18 million years ago, stood about 3.5 to 4 foot
tall and was a form of Australopithecine, one of the ape-humans made famous by Dart, the
classic examples of which flourished around two million years ago, but it may have been
an ancestor of the later Australopithecines, it flourished till at least three million
years ago.
So you've got Tamai, you've got Ardipithecis vammemensis, you've got Anemensis, and you've
got Lucy, which is also known as Australopithecis afrenensis, the Australopithecine of the Afar
region of Ethiopia.
All these fossil forms are profoundly confusing to layperson and to many scientists as well.
As I've said before, a generation ago, people thought of human evolution as a straight line.
It's much less confusing, if mentally you think of it as a bush with many branches,
one of which led eventually to the evolution of toolmaking humans.
If you think that way, then some degrees all these Latin names don't matter so much,
and if you just remember the words Australopithecis and Homo, that reduces it to two very simple
lines, the Australopithecines and the human line itself, and we'll get back more into
this in the next lecture.
Probably the most dramatic evidence for what is probably Australopithecis afrenensis comes
from Laitoli in Tanzania, dating to about 3.59 million years ago.
And this is one of these very rare moments in archaeology where a moment in time is frozen.
Just like a snapshot.
This particular moment, 3.5 million years ago, two harmonids walked across and through
a dry riverbed.
Now it so happened that they did so in the aftermath of an eruption by a local volcano
which had deposited soft volcanic ash on the ground and in this dry watercourse.
They walked across this volcanic ash which hardened in the sun, and the ash preserves
their footprints.
So just for this one moment, we can look at harmonids as living people, not just fossils,
their feet.
This remarkable site was excavated by Mary Leakey, the wife of Lewis Leakey who was a
very expert excavator.
And she was able to establish these two harmonids walked with a rolling, slow gate with their
hips swiveling at every step, quite unlike modern humans who stride freely.
Unfortunately the constraints of the studio prevent me from giving you a complete demonstration,
but it's the difference between swinging your hips and striding.
So just for one moment, we see these creatures which aren't human, but clearly they have
a part of the story of human evolution.
