These were but a few of the many hominid forms that flourished in East Africa two million
years before the first tool-making humans appeared on Earth, somewhere around two-and-a-half
million years ago.
They are newcomers to us.
We don't know much about them.
The pace of discovery is slow but sure, involving multidisciplinary teams, and spectacular
discoveries like that of Tamai are far and few between.
But we know a number of things.
As the hominids evolved, so did their brain size.
This is a highly controversial aspect of human evolution, with some authorities linking
greater brain size to the increased consumption of meat out on the savannas after five million
years ago.
Others believe that the need for more meat required an ability to use one's knowledge
to develop ideas about where to find predator kills and the higher densities of animals.
You see, these evolving hominids had a much more sophisticated interaction with the environment
than non-humane primates.
The point is, if you are a hunter or a gatherer, as we find with later societies, even living
hunter-gatherers like the Sands of Southern Africa, one of the most vital components of
their lives is intelligence, information, information about what lies over the horizon
beyond that outcrop of rocks, where the game is, where water is, and where wild vegetable
foods are.
And many people believe that the larger brain of the very first humans, and of evolving
hominids, allowed for greater social intelligence, which allowed our very earliest ancestors
to cope with the greater complexities of living in close juxtaposition to others.
But we must stress that this was not just one hominid line.
There was a tremendous diversity of hominids in East Africa and, in other parts of Africa,
many of which we haven't even discovered yet, who were undergoing processes of evolution.
We know only the most general features of this.
For example, at the very end of this first, very early chapter on human evolution, about
three million years ago, the descendants of Australopithecus afarensis split into different
lines, among them the earliest true humans.
We're going to describe these hominids, the earliest toolmakers, and also the earliest
human behavior, in the third lecture.
In this lecture, though, we've looked at the very earliest chapter of all, at the environmental
changes, which caused it to be more open country.
We've looked at some of the adaptations, larger brain size, upright posture, the need
for greater mobility, the realities that living on the savanna, you had to have a much more
varied diet, which included meat, and of course, meat requires either scavenging from
big game kills, or running animals down, or trapping them, or even just simply throwing
stones at them.
You have to become adept at chasing and catching and stalking to get close to the animal, which
as we will see in a later lecture is terribly important, where you've got to get so close
that you can wound it fatally.
We've looked at the very inadequate fossil story, which begins about seven million years
ago with the discovery of Tomai, somewhere around the time when apes and humans, the
lines split from one another, if molecular biology is to be believed.
And from there, we looked at hominids after four and a half million years ago, Ardipithecus
Ramadus, Australopithecus anemensis, and Australopithecus afrensis, lucy, and the remarkable footprints
at Laitoli, which for just a moment give us a view of hominids as living beings.
This then is the very first chapter of human evolution, and the next lecture will pick
up the story after three million years ago.
