Homo habilis is skeletal anatomy. It gives a mosaic picture, both of apes and humans.
Homo habilis had longer arms for climbing in trees. It was adept at climbing. Could
it therefore have slept in trees safe or comparatively safe from predators rather than living on
the ground where it would have to camp on a living floor? Almost certainly looking at
the anatomy, it spent quite a lot of time in trees and its behavior may have been more
like that of an ape than a human.
Are scientific predecessors thought of human evolution as a gradual and progressive mechanism?
But the Australopithecines, Homo and their predecessors now known from recent discoveries
show a very different picture. There were long periods of relative evolutionary stability.
Then there were bursts of sudden change caused by new selective pressures resulting from altered
circumstances such as environmental change or alterations in the organization itself,
the organism itself. Such a rapid change may have occurred between three and two and a
half million years ago. This is one of the critical periods of human prehistory.
Who then was the first human? Controversy of ages, as it does with so much of paleontology,
whether a few, few finds. It wages not only over the definition of what is anatomically
a member of the genus Homo, but over the relationship also between different hominids three million
years ago.
Enough is known today to divide the hominids after three million years ago, and I stress
after not before, into two very broad groups. The first of these groups comprises the Australopithecines
and Homo habilis. I use the name here for convenience. All of these hominids have a
low body mass and a skeleton which combines bipedal-pedalism with an ability to climb
in trees. The second group includes all later human forms, including ourselves. We have
a larger body mass, a modern human-like physique that functioned well in open country, and
only limited ability at climbing. A vast chasm anatomically and behaviorally separates
these two groups, with the second group appearing in Africa about 1.9 million years ago. Before
that date, human behavior was much more ape-like than human, and this break between the two
occurred somewhere between two and three million years ago, whether it was almost immediately
after Homo habilis appeared, or somewhat later, we do not know.
For many years, paleoanthropologists assumed that the first humans were somewhat similar
to modern living hunter-gatherers in areas like the Kalahari Desert, where the sand lived
to this day. They argued that the earliest humans had base camps, that males hunted
and scavenged meat, and females collected plant foods.
This assumption came from research into modern-day hunter-gatherers, and was also based on the
assumption that the older-vi living floors, quote-unquote, were in fact campsites where
people ate and slept. In fact, modern research has suggested something very different.
This research isn't done in the field. It's done in the laboratory. It is done by studying
very intensely the cut marks, fracture patterns on the bones found on the older-vi floor.
