Now, both Australopithecus robustus and africanus were thought, forty years ago, to be the first
tool-makers, people who fashioned tools, and Raymond Dart thought that they used bones
to club animals and to break bones, but in fact subsequent research has shown that the
bones which Dart thought were made into tools by Australopithecus were in fact chewed and
dropped by hyenas.
It's very difficult to identify the earliest tools, because really the only material which
survives in the archaeological record is durable material like stone, and if there's one comment
about human free history, it is written in durable materials, stone tools, potchards,
and so on.
Our knowledge of human behavior is very incomplete.
I vividly remember, in 1960, meeting the famous South African anatomist Philip Tobias
in an airport, and we sat down and had lunch, and he said to me in the middle of lunch,
we have handy person, and I looked at him and said, run that past me again, and he said,
we have handy person, Homo habilis, and he explained to me that Louis and Mary Leakey,
and this is yet been announced publicly, had just discovered a remarkable hominid at Old
of I-Gorge in Tanzania, one of the most famous archaeological sites in the world.
It was a small, gracile hominid, with thin bones, but a rather more rounded skull, and
more human characteristics, than the Australopithecus.
You should remember that a year earlier, Mary Leakey had discovered a robust Australopithecus
at Old of I-Gorge.
This was a dramatically different creature.
It wasn't with such heavily built bones.
It was lighter, more nimble, and it was found on a surface in the middle of a scatter by
a lake bed of stone tools and broken animal bone fragments.
Louis Leakey had confidently identified immediately he discovered this animal, that Homo habilis
was the first toolmaker, the very first hominid ever to manufacture stone tools.
Now, the point about this is that we know that chimpanzees, for example, use sticks
which they chew to dig grubs out of anthills.
We also know from research in West Africa, that chimpanzees take stones, may even flake
them a bit, and use them to pound nuts to get at the fruit within, and that they'd done
this for many generations.
But this is not the same as making a stone tool, because stone tools made by Homo habilis
and other hominids were very much more complex than these simple chippings by chimpanzees.
So Tobias, who was retained to look at the fossils, said that this creature, unlike Australopithecus,
was the toolmaker, the first human, whence Homo habilis.
His name has stuck.
Whether or not there are other creatures in the same group called generically Homo, as
Homo habilis, is being debated.
At the moment, we simply do not know.
In this part of the course, we're going to talk a lot about a site called Aldervai Gorge.
Aldervai Gorge is a huge gash in the world-famous Serengeti plains in East Africa, which are
famous for their game, their huge herds of game of wildebeest and other animals, which
are a mecca for tourists today.
The same landscape, where a shallow lake flourished two million years ago, was a paradise for
game from the beginning of human history, and in somewhere around 100,000 years, an
earthquake caused a huge gully, or gorge, to be cut through the Serengeti plains, hundreds
of feet deep.
The sides of this gorge exposed the deposits of a shallow lake, which formed and dried
and formed and dried over many hundreds of thousands of years, and it was by the side
of this lake that some of the earliest known humans once stopped, butchered animals, and
moved on.
