Once out of Africa, Homo erectus seems to have thrived in cooler environments, in China,
and elsewhere, perhaps as a result of the domestication of fire.
For many years, some of the earliest evidence for fire was said to come from China.
In fact, this evidence has now been disproved, and the fires are thought to have been of
natural origin.
In the year 1891, a Dutch surgeon named Eugene de Wa had an obsession with the missing link
between apes and humans, and he had himself transferred to Java, with the specific objective
of finding the missing link, the link between apes and humans.
Incredible although it may seem, he found the bones of an archaic human in Java, which
he named Pythagianthropus erectus, the ape-human who stands uprights.
He found this in gravels along the Solow River, in what is now Indonesia.
This was a beetle-browed human with a primitive-looking face and fairly modern-looking limbs, in short
a Homo erectus.
But when he returned to Europe in 1895, scientists greeted his discovery and claims with scorn.
Disillusioned, he went into seclusion and kept the fossils in a box under his bed.
But it was not until the 1920s, when new Homo erectus finds were made at Zogurian near
Beijing in China, that Du Bois was vindicated, for he was the first person to find Homo erectus
in Africa, in Asia, long before fossils came to light in tropical Africa.
He was a pioneer.
We still know very little about these very early human settlers in Asia.
During about 700,000 and half a million years ago, Homo erectus populations were well-established
in what is now Indonesia and Vietnam.
They flourished in a tropical forest environment, where bamboo and other wood resources provided
much of their toolkit.
All that survives of their toolkit are crude stone choppers and flakes, very much like
the ones found in East Africa.
Handaxes are only found towards Northern Asia and not many of them.
And it seems that these tropical forest people acquired much of their livelihood from smaller
game and forest plants, and not from larger animals.
They were forest people, not savanna people.
Humans were beginning to adapt to different environments.
No one knows when people first settled in China, but it was at least 600,000 years ago,
perhaps considerably earlier.
The most famous early human site in China is the Zugudian Cave, near Beijing, an area
visited by Homo erectus between about 460,000 and 230,000 years ago.
At least 40 individuals have been recovered from Zugudia and now notice that the number
of fossils is increasing, which makes our knowledge somewhat easier.
Most of them younger than about 14 years of age.
These people were deer hunters, using increasingly sophisticated choppers and flakes and other
artifacts such as scrapers.
They were highly mobile.
Again their life way was very simple.
For a million years, people were mobile hunters living in very small bands, with very little
change in the way they hunted and foraged.
It was very basic, what did become was more sophisticated, was their ways of hunting, as
we will see in the next lecture.
But it's important to realize that during early prehistory, humans were part of a vast
animal community.
They radiated north into Europe and into Asia, at the same time as many modern grazing animals
and predators.
