At some point, too, Homo Augusta, or Homo habilis, Homo rectus, tamed fire.
One of the great innovations of prehistory.
We do not exactly know when fire was first domesticated, but almost certainly I would
have thought it was domesticated as a result of a brush fire started by a lightning strike
or something like that.
This new artifact was very important.
It not only provided warmth, but it provided protection against predators.
It also could be used to cook food, as well on occasion as serving as a weapon in game
drives and so on.
It was, whenever it was domesticated, a defining moment, because for the first time it allowed
people to survive in far harsher environments where temperatures were extremely cold in
the winter.
It also allowed them to set fire to vegetation, to prey on animals fleeing from the flames.
And it provided, as I said, this crucial protection.
Quite when it was domesticated is a mystery.
Some people, and I'm among them, suspect it was earlier as 1.8 million in Africa.
There was some limited evidence for it.
Others believe it happened much later after a half a million years ago.
In a way, with the huge timescales we're dealing with, it doesn't matter.
What's important is that fire at some point entered the human armory.
We don't know whether Homo erectus or gaster was merely a scavenger, or whether humans
were now hunting large animals in their own right.
Most experts believe that at this point, people were now commonly hunting medium and smaller
sized antelope.
For example, Louis Leakey himself demonstrated that it was possible for a human to run down
a small antelope and wrestle it to the ground.
A dangerous pastime, but it can be done.
There's no question that that sort of hunting went on from the earliest times.
The question was, when did they start tackling a really big game?
We don't know.
About two million years ago, Africa's hominids were adjusting to cooler, drier conditions.
This expanded the area of open savannah, environments ideal for bipedal foragers who
thrived at the expense of forest-loving primates, and it seems likely that the human population
on Earth increased considerably.
And then, somewhere between 700,000 years ago and 1.8 million years ago, the date is
highly uncertain and very controversial.
Homo erectus, the first humans to spread out of Africa, radiated into a wider world.
They crossed a then much better watered Sahara, or traveled up the Nile Valley into Asia.
Today we look at the vast wastes of the Sahara and we think immediately of Lawrence of Arabia
and Shimmering Desert.
In fact, the Sahara as recently as 6000 BC was much better watered than it today, much
of it covered with shallow lakes.
I like to think of the Sahara as a giant pump.
During periods when rainfall was slightly high, and I'm never talking about it being
more than a semi-arid landscape, it would suck people in, would prey on the game, which
also entered the desert, living by permanent water supplies, and then as the desert would
dry up, which it did many times, it would throw them out to the margins.
This happened in 6000 BC, a critical factor in the emergence of ancient Egypt, for example.
It's interesting that thousands of Ashley and handaxes have been found in the depths
of the Sahara, many of them, alongside long dried up lakes.
Why did Homo erectus move out of Africa?
The movement may have occurred as part of a large interchange of mammals between Africa
and more temperate latitudes, which culminated about 700,000 years ago.
And please remember, this wasn't necessarily a one-way movement.
People may have moved back.
There may have been constant gene exchange between Asia and Africa for a while, and indeed
a recent discovery of a Homo erectus fossil in Ethiopia, dating to a million years ago,
suggests that this happened.
