An even more interesting find came from the western side of the lake, from a place called
Narekatomi. Here, a skeleton of a twelve-year-old boy, dating to about the same 1.6 to 1.7 million-year-old
period, was discovered in the remarkably complete state. This has given us an interesting snapshot
of archaic human anatomy. From the neck down, the boy's bones are remarkably modern-looking.
His skull and jaw look more primitive, however, and his brain, at that age, was about half
the modern size. The Turkana boy confirms a common theory. The different parts of the
human body evolved at different rates, with the body itself achieving a near-modern form
long before the head. But one thing is quite certain. The tool-making abilities of Homo
Lectis or Augusta were vastly superior to those of earlier humans. Technology changed
considerably. You'll recall that Homo habilis used older one technology, a chopping tool
flake technology, which used sharp-edged flakes as knives or to scrape bones, but now things
changed. Archaic humans began to flake stone on both sides, and they began to make pointed
stone axes with sharp edges, and also flat-topped cleaving tools. Modern experiments, and I
have done this myself, have shown that such tools are sharp enough to cut through the
hide of animals as large as elephants, and they slice readily through sinew and flesh
with great efficiency. These tools, which have a pointed end and sharp edges and normally
a fairly well-formed base, although obviously the early ones were far more primitive, have
many uses. The point about hand axes is that they were very versatile artifacts, like the
chopper and the flake. They could be used to butcher meat, they could be used to scrape
skins, they could be used to dig up roots, tubers, edible tubers in stream beds, and they
could also be thrown as fairly deadly missiles. People have actually experimented with this.
Over the next million years, and this technology lasted an enormous amount of time, the hand
axe became a highly sophisticated object. There were many shapes, especially in Europe,
where hand axes developed a great sophistication, given what they were. There are forms with
beautiful points, there are others which are oval-shaped, there are even some with a twisted
S edge, all of them highly effective cutting tools. This technology is known as the Ashulean.
It's named after the town of St. Ashule in the Somme Valley of northern France. It's
very interesting to note that discoveries of stone hand axes in the gravels of the river
Somme in 1859 and before, in the same levels as the bones of extinct animals, were the
first sign that humans had lived on earth at the same time as such extinct animals as
elephants in Europe. So this hand axe technology, and hand axes have been found by the thousand
and the gravels of the Somme and the river Thames and other European valleys, was a highly
distinctive technology which was very adaptable and was something that was portable and used
for many purposes, very different to the rather opportunistic tools of earlier times. To make
a hand axe, which an expert can do in two minutes, is quite easy, but to make really
ever find ones requires the use of bone hammers and all sorts of more elaborate techniques.
