The spears are remarkable. They're up to 7 feet 6 inches long, with tapering tails.
If you've got a tapering tail, it modernist stabilizes it, but it can cause the spear
to spin in mid-air, making it more accurate. And it seems quite possible that this was
the type of long spear which was used at Brock's Grove, carefully sharpened, lethally sharp,
which raises the fascinating question once again. When did humans start hunting large
game? The answer seems to have been that Homo erectus was fully capable of hunting large
animals with pretty lethal spears. But whether he did this when the animals got into helplessly
bogged situations, or whether he did it cold, is a matter for discussion.
I think the first hunting started with Homo havelis of smaller animals, but the bigger
ones, no question, Homo erectus was the first. How do we know this? There's another piece
of evidence, another site. A site called Torelba, northeast of Madrid in central Spain. A place
where there's a deep, or was, a deep swampy valley about 300,000 years ago. This was an
area frequented by large, now extinct elephants, who were migrating apparently between winter
and summer grazing. This site was a swamp, and a remarkable excavation showed that these
animals had either been driven or had got admired in swamp, and now became helpless.
They were probably killed in the swamp and were then butchered, and there was plenty
of evidence from Torelba of butchering. This is very solid evidence that certainly people
were not afraid to hunt a helpless beast, or perhaps to drive them. We can argue that
the first Europeans were eclectic and flexible hunters who relied on hunting, scavenging,
and plant foods. What they did not seem to exploit was small game, birds, fish, or sea
mammals, as modern humans did almost at once. It seems that people were living now in relatively
large groups at times, both to reduce the danger from carnivores and to improve the
chance of acquiring large animals. Cooperative hunting was a powerful weapon now in the human
armory. At other times, band size may have been much smaller, especially when plant foods
were more abundant. All of this argues for considerable social flexibility and intelligence
in Homo erectus, reflected in the larger brain size of these people. But they may have
been incapable of integrating their social intelligence, their ability to share food
and cooperate in the hunt with other aspects of human intelligence. We simply don't know.
They certainly were not the sort of hunters that modern humans were, or indeed as we shall
see that Neanderthals were. But they were certainly killing some large game.
The fossil record for the first humans is as incomplete as that in Asia, but it does
reflect considerable diversity. Apart from the 800,000 year old specimens from Spain,
a robust jawbone from Homo erectus, or possibly from a more evolved form, which sometimes
is called archaic Homo sapiens, where there was some evolution within Europe, comes from
Mauer in Germany, and dates to about 500,000 years ago. A heavily built thigh bone of a
human came also from Boxgrove, and that certainly is from Homo erectus, and it's about the
same age. By 400,000 years ago, humans lived throughout
western and central Europe. There are occasional finds of fossil skulls which show larger brain
vaults and more receding faces foreshadowing than the Neanderthals of later millennia.
The Neanderthals, the epitome of the cave people, the primordial Europeans, had an ancestry
among these earlier humans.
