By the end of this lecture, we have all advanced from 800,000 years ago to approximately 100,000
to 150,000 years ago.
This is really the last of our really major jumps in time, because now the world is getting
more crowded, and there are many more people interacting with one another, and the archaeological
record becomes more complete and better known.
If there's one rule about human free history, the later it is, the more we know.
One reason is that once we come to modern humans, we speak.
We can interact with people and past a little more closely than we can with Homo erectus
or earlier humans who were not as human as us.
But in the context of today's lecture, we know that by 150,000 years ago, several thousand
people lived across western and central Europe.
We suspect, and this is logical, that most of them dwelt in large river valleys and near
lakes.
Why?
Because we found thousands of finely made hand axes in the ancient gravels of large rivers,
made by hundreds of generations of hunters to butcher game and for other purposes.
This was a world when the generations passed quickly, where you were an adult by 12 and
probably dead by the age of 25, if you were lucky to survive that long.
The hunters were hunted.
They were predators.
Because you see, the life way of people 150,000 years ago in Europe was very little different
from that of half a million years earlier.
Modern mobility, large hunting territories anchored to permanent water supplies and probably
places where food supplies were more predictable in winter.
Small camps, constant ebb and flow of population, technology was simple, versatile, highly portable,
and much of it made of wood, of which we only have the smallest fragments.
People and the hunt depended on expert stalking, on far strengthened, sharp spears, clubs and
possibly traps, as well as cooperative hunting.
Stone tools were multi-purpose artifacts like the hand axes, used for butchery and many
other purposes, cutting wood, scraping skins, grubbing for tools, or roots, perhaps even
thrown sometimes at small game.
All scrapers and flakes sufficed for the many domestic tasks, for processing hides and
woodworking and other purposes.
There was none of the specialized weaponry and the more sophisticated artifacts which
appeared after a hundred thousand years ago in Europe and elsewhere.
What then happened in this archaic world?
On a day-to-day basis, the archaic answer could be very simply and tritely absolutely
nothing.
The rhythm of life passed from generation to generation with an ebb and flow of populations
across vast, still largely unexplored landscapes.
The world's population was teeny, confined to the more temperate and tropical parts of
the old world, and vast areas of the globe, notably the Americas, were still unpopulated.
Humans were versatile, humans were on the move, but they did not yet have the cognitive
abilities or the technology to master the climatic extremes of the Arctic North.
In this lecture we've described the first human settlement of Europe, one of the more
challenging environments colonized by archaic humans.
It was occupied somewhat late, perhaps as early as 800,000 years ago.
The date, as I said, is controversial.
We began by describing some very early, controversial fossils from Georgia and some that are less
controversial from Israel, which date to between 1.7 and 1.4 million years, respectively.
We stressed that what we know about the human settlement of Europe in the very beginning
is almost nothing and is based very largely on one fossil find in Spain.
And then we described three sites which reveal something of the life-way of Homo erectus,
Box Grove, Schoeningen in Germany, and to Valba in Spain.
We discussed the highly diverse human populations of Europe who were the ancestors of the Neanderthals,
described in Lecture 6.
And finally, we described the cognitive and linguistic abilities of early Europeans and
concluded that they were no match for those of Homo sapiens ourselves.
