200,000 years after that, in about 400,000 years ago, there's absolutely no question
at all that humans were living in Europe. Thousands of handaxes have come from the Thames
and the Psalms, as I told you in an earlier lecture, because humans were now living in
major river valleys and at strategic locations where game abounded.
The issue here, as it always has been for hunter-gatherers, is to live in places, or
at least anchor yourself, to permanent sources of water, to places where food resources of
all kinds are as predictable as is possible. For example, marshlands where grass for thatch
for houses or for shelters exists, or where you can acquire eddacle roots year-round,
where perhaps you can trap birds, or certainly where game comes to drink, or where game comes
to drink is where you hunt them. We have, fortunately, an example. A half-million-year-old
example. A site called Box Grove in southern England. Box Grove was a very strategic site.
It's a place where once, and today it was a quarry, where a shallow lake lay at the foot
of a 300-foot cliff. This shallow lake appears to have been a waterhole for animals large
and small, rhinoceros, bison, deer, horse, and smaller animals as well. The evidence
that Homo erectus butchered these large animals is absolutely indisputable. Why? Because the
bones of these animals have been found in a deposit by the lake, with clear signs, cut
marks from stone tools. Furthermore, they hunted some of these animals. Why? Because
a shoulder blade of a horse found at the site has in it a hole, which clearly was made by
a sharp-pointed spear, probably a wooden spear. It's a two-inch hole made by microscopic
examination, they tell us, by a spinning wooden spear. These guys knew how to hunt, but the
art of it was very tricky. Contemplate, if you will, for the moment hunting with just
a wooden spear. What is the accurate range of a wooden spear? Probably about from me
to the camera person over there, maybe 20 feet, because you've got to hit that animal
in an absolutely vital spot, or you're not going to kill it. You might wound it, but you
won't kill it. So what have you got to do? You've got to get really up close and personal
with that animal, through your skill at stalking. Literally, you've got to jump on that animal
to kill it. But with large formidable beasts, there's only two other strategies to work.
One is to dig a pit, and hope it will fall in. And the second one is to drive animals
over cliffs. All of you are familiar with the Paleo-Indian bison kills of the plains,
the famous epic bison drives. Here, at Box Grove, is a cliff. At the foot of the cliff
are the bones of animals by a shallow lake. It's entirely possible, if here for the first
time, Homo erectus would drive animals over the cliff, perhaps using fire, and then when
they were hopelessly wounded at the bottom, would get close and kill them. How do we know
they had wooden spears? How do we know there were any grounds for that two-inch hole being
a spear, apart from microscopic examination? Another find dramatically proves it. This
time from an open coal mine at Schoeningen, in northern Germany. So many important archaeological
sites are made by accident, and this early period where you're dealing with gravels
and so on from river valleys, many of these finds do come from quarries. At Schoeningen,
I share accident, a number of long wooden spears, not stone implements, wooden spears,
by the accident of preservation, survived in the Schoeningen quarry. These are four hundred
thousand years old.
