Probably the most complete fossil evidence for the archaic world as a whole comes from
the Sierra de Atapueca in northern Spain by the Grand Dolina.
The Sima de los Huesos, the pit of bones, a sinkhole in this area, has yielded the remains
of no less than 30 to 50 individuals dating to about 300,000 years ago.
This is a fairly sizable population, and it represents a more advanced human form, clearly
descended from Homo erectus, an intermediate to the archaic, primordial Europeans than
the Anathals described in Lecture 6.
Again, you're looking at a trend which we begin to see in Asia too, towards larger brains,
more rounded skulls, and a skeletal anatomy on the limbs, closely resembling that of modern
humans.
You're talking about people who were the ancestors of folk who were tough, nimble,
and intelligent hunters who had the ability to kill animals of every size, even if the
danger was extreme, which raises an interesting question.
Were these people capable of fully articulate speech?
We communicate emotion and anger and pleasure, and all sorts of subtlety with our speech,
even if it's on the telephone.
Homo erectus appears to have had a well-developed broker's area of the brain, the zone speaking,
associated with speaking ability.
The vocal tracts of Homo erectus were more modern than those of Homo habilis, which
suggests a considerable potential for articulate speech.
Two anthropologists, Leslie Aiello and Robin Dunbar, argue that the basis for language ability
appeared in humans about a quarter of a million years ago.
They believe that disability evolved as a way to handle increasingly complex social
information.
For example, if you're going to cooperate in a hunt, you need an ability to communicate
clearly what your plan is, who goes where, the strategy of the stalk, the strategy of
the actual driving of the animal, and the arrangement of the people who were going to
kill them and butcher them.
As group size increased, so did, we suspect, a capacity for language, which was used primarily
to communicate about social relations.
We are looking at a world where life was becoming more and more human.
But this is not to say that these people developed the kind of general purpose language we use
today, which enables us to communicate freely whatever the behavioral domain, whether it
be face to face, whether it be on the phone or with email or whatever.
Like us, in many ways, Homo erectus lacked the cognitive flexibility of modern humans.
Yet it was from this archaic human that first, more archaic Homo sapiens evolved, and ultimately,
and we shall see that it was not in Europe, that ourselves, Homo sapiens sapiens, ultimately
evolved.
How do we know they had not got fully articulate speech?
An interesting anatomical reason.
The larynx had not yet shifted into the position, which it is in modern humans, which allows
the enormous range of sounds which Homo sapiens uses in the course of interaction on a day-by-day basis.
