This find, like the Mansi, predates the first settlement of the West.
But there's a point about Ubedir which is different.
In a future lecture we're going to look at the origins of modern humans.
And we'll find that anatomically modern human beings were living in
South-West Asia in the area of Ubedir alongside Neanderthals as early as 90,000 years ago.
It was as if Africa and South-West Asia were part of a similar province.
And it may well be that the same was happening much earlier
and the people pushed northwards and westwards very much later.
We simply at this point don't know.
Judging from the settlement of Europe, my modern humans very, very much later
around 45 to 50,000 years ago, the first settlement of what is now
Temporate Central and Western Europe probably came during a period
of warmer interglacial climate.
As a result of the movement of people northward from warmer regions.
Basically there were two routes by which people could have entered Europe.
The one is from Southwest Asia into Turkey and across what is now the Dardanelles
into Bulgaria and Southeast Europe and then across from there into the Central and the West.
This route is entirely feasible.
Especially during a period of lower sea level during agglaciation.
The other route is across the Straits of Gibraltar.
Deep water, fast flowing tides and currents.
And this route seems to me less likely because it appears
that humans first developed effective watercraft very, very much later.
Of course someone may have drifted across on a raft or on a tree trunk
but this is very different from getting a founder population across
which is a much larger number of people.
What we are looking at here then is probably a settlement of Europe across the Dardanelles.
When? Probably around 800,000 years ago.
Although some scientists argue on the basis of controversial sites
for a much earlier date, around a million years ago.
But whatever the date, it was a settlement of momentous importance.
It was not a deliberate migration.
Some people living in Turkey didn't one day wake up and say
good morning, we're going to Europe today.
It was not a deliberate movement.
It was just as the first settlement of the Americas much, much later
was not a deliberate movement.
It was part of the ebb and flow of hunter-gatherer existence.
A family, a son might split off from his father's family
and move into a neighboring valley.
The wide-ranging, highly mobile existence at the time
meant that people would cover large distances
and that such expansions theoretically at any rate could happen very quickly.
What dictated it were the age-old factors, the seasons of plant foods,
the movements of migratory game, the endless movement from summer to winter
pasture of gregarious animals like reindeer, for example.
These were the factors that meant that humans moved over large distances.
And at some point, maybe around 800,000 years ago, they moved into Europe.
And here is everywhere, it is a patchwork of archaeological sites
which give us the picture.
The earliest solidly documented archaeological site in Europe
which has yielded fossil remains, is a site called Gran Dolina
which is at Atapueca in northern Spain.
It is a cave, or rather a sinkhole,
in which they have recovered well-preserved remains of Homo erectus
dating to about 800,000 years ago.
This is an isolated find.
However, there is no question that settlement was widespread by 600,000 years ago
when Ashleian handaxes appear for the first time.
