What, then, do we know about this very ancient Africa?
Even today, I should warn you, we have but the thinnest patchwork of human fossils and
important sites.
The distances are enormous, the archaeological record is rich, but has hardly been scratched.
You see, archaeologists to human, they prefer to work in the more spectacular areas.
North America, Europe, South West Asia, North America, where there are spectacular vans,
finds.
The archaeological record of the origins of humans is, to put it mildly, unspectacular.
But it is of crucial importance to our understanding of ourselves.
Over a century of work, we know that at least three grades of archaic-looking Homo sapiens
flourished in Africa, just as archaic humans and Homo sapiens had evolved in Europe.
These archaic Homo sapiens populations had evolved, ultimately, from Homo erectus and
Homo agasto, as we saw in lecture three.
All had largest skull vaults, and many other anatomical features like those of modern humans.
In particular, their limbs were modern-looking, their skulls were more rounded, and many of
the more extreme features of Homo erectus were reduced, as brain size increased.
The details of this anatomy are the domains of specialists.
All I can do here is very briefly summarize what we know at the moment.
Once again, I'm going to use some labels.
You'll find them defined in the course guide.
An early archaic human Homo sapiens, and I mean early, was widespread from southern to
northeast Africa about 200,000 years ago.
We know almost nothing about these people, except the few fossils we do have are heavily
built thick skulls with massive browvages, and other anatomical features which are much
closer to those of Homo erectus than other skulls.
Their ancestry is among very ancient humans in Africa.
We talked earlier about the difference between a linear scheme of human evolution and the
more bushing one.
I think here, particularly, you must think again of the bush, of many different varieties
of humans south of the Sahara.
One of these varieties, archaic, early archaic Homo sapiens, were heavily built, quite ancient-looking
humans.
Then there's another group, late archaic Homo sapiens, as opposed to early.
Now here, the picture gets very much more complex.
You're looking at a mosaic, and the word mosaic is a good word, of different features found
on the surviving skulls.
Some of the features, like browvages, are ancient.
They recall the early Homo sapiens and other archaic forms.
Others on the other hand, more rounded skulls, modern-looking limbs, tend to favor a more
modern grade of human, with the modern features tending to outnumber the ancient ones.
We're talking about a very scattered, isolated African population, numbering in a few thousands,
small bands, many of them living in extreme isolation, so the evolutionary pressures on
them were the result, very often, of isolation.
Now these more modern-looking creatures tend to date to around a hundred thousand years
ago, or somewhat earlier.
So they're a little later than the early archaic ones.
Then there's a third group, and this group is anatomically modern.
