What really happened in the long term, probably, was a very fundamental change in the way in
which people went around gathering food, whether it was hunting or plant foods.
The skills, the cognitive reasoning, the improved technology, they have turned humans from mere
scavengers and albeit skilled opportunistic hunters into super predators that could hunt
almost any animal on earth and could also settle in almost any extreme environment as
well.
And as we will see in the next lecture, when humans spread, they spread to every environment
in the world and the only one they did not conquer initially were the offshore Pacific
Islands because that required the development of deep water canoes, the development of foods
which could be stored, and long distance open water navigational skills.
When then did these critical, critical technological and cognitive changes take place?
We don't know, exactly, but a handful of archaeological sites in Africa show that there
were improvements in human technology at about the same time as modern humans appeared.
Ashilean hand axes, by this time, were out of date, they had given way to more sophisticated
and versatile toolkits based on the making of flakes, just like you saw within the antithaels.
This technology had appeared between 200 and 100,000 years ago.
A lot of sites in South Africa document the changes.
The Classes River Cave in extreme southeastern Africa lies a short distance from the Indian
Ocean and was occupied between 120,000 and 70,000 years ago, this critical time period.
The occupation levels of the cave include some fragmentary human remains, among them
the bones of anatomically modern people.
And then, about 70,000 years ago, the inhabitants of the cave suddenly started making small
thin flakes struck from these cores, and blades, long parallel sided flakes, from fine-grain
rock carried in from over 12 miles away.
Some of the blades became spear barbs, others became knives.
The tool kit was much smaller, lighter and more versatile, than the flake tools found
in earlier layers.
So there was a change, and another South African archaeologist, Hilary Deacon, believes that
the new tool kit coincided with deteriorating conditions, climatic conditions during the
last cold snap of the Ice Age, which began about 100,000 years ago.
Conditions were drier and cooler in South Africa, the hunt more challenging for those
with older, heavier weapons.
When conditions became wetter and warmer, the old tools reappeared.
In other words, people who were experimenting with different tool kits, they were using
their brains.
Perhaps Classes River and other South African sites are evidence for a new flexibility in
human behavior, an ability to adapt to changing circumstances at a level impossible for the
Neanderthals and Archaic Homo sapiens.
That is a fascinating problem, and a problem which will be the starting point for our next
lecture, which is the fundamental question, is when did people spread out of Africa?
When did these modern humans look at the wider world?
Here we've merely laid the foundations.
We've looked at how the origins of Homo sapiens are still largely a matter of speculation.
But we've argued that the weight of the evidence strongly suggests that modern humans evolved
in southern Saharan Africa over 100,000 years ago.
We've looked at some of the anatomical features.
We've looked at a technology, but above all what we have stressed is cognitive ability,
this dramatic change in the ability of humans to reason, to plan and to innovate and to adapt.
Because this is the big issue when we describe, as we will in the next lecture, the spread
of modern humans across the Sahara Desert and into the rest of the world, one of the
great diasporas of human prehistory.
