Lecture 8 The Great Diaspora
In the last lecture, we described the possible scenarios for the origins of modern humans,
we indicated that probably they originated in tropical Africa.
This lecture, the eighth, describes the dramatic spread of modern humans from Africa into other
parts of the world.
As with the story of origins, this is a narrative which has many gaps in it because of inadequate
archaeological evidence from many parts of the world.
But fortunately, we now know enough to be able to at least paint a convincing, reasonable
scenario of how this great radiation of modern humans took place and how.
First, we're going to describe how the Sahara Desert acted like a great pump, regulating
movement from the tropics to the rest of the world.
Then I'm going to look at Neanderthal and modern human settlement in southwestern Asia,
where apparently the two population groups lived alongside each other for over 45,000
years.
Then we'll discuss the modern human settlement of south and southeastern Asia and the offshore
islands, and we'll take a look at the evidence for the first settlement of Australia.
Finally, I'm briefly going to summarize the course of this great diaspora in northern
latitudes, as an introduction to a more full description in Lectures 9 through 11, where
we address such issues as the first art and the first settlement of the Americas.
As I said in the last lecture, most scholars believe that modern humans first appeared
in tropical Africa south of the Sahara between 200,000 and 150,000 years ago, maybe later.
However, the date when modern humans first spread out of Africa, like, as I said, with
Homo erectus, the date there is also speculative.
We don't really know when humans with anatomically modern features spread out of Africa, but
we do know, however, that the Sahara Desert played a critical role in the initial stages
of the diaspora.
As I've said before, we can liken the Sahara to a giant pump, sucking in animals and people
during wetter periods when shallow lakes flourished over much of the Sahara, and a great deal
of the desert was covered with semi-added grassland.
And then, as the climate became drier, expelled these human and animal populations to the
margins and became the added wilderness that we know today.
Being warmer, wetter periods, as pertained for a while before 100,000 years ago, the
Sahara, as I said, supported many shallow lakes and semi-added grasslands.
Now, this is a particularly favorable sort of environment for human hunter-gatherers
who are highly mobile.
And it is possible that this was a time when modern human populations settled in the heart
of the desert, living or anchoring their movements to these shallow lakes where animals came
to drink and to feed.
But then, we know that about 100,000 years ago, before today, the Sahara became much
more arid.
Once many lakes dried up, both animals and humans must have moved out in the face of
drought to the edges of the desert, not only the south, but also the north.
This period of increasing aridity appears to have coincided with the beginning of the
last glacial period of the Ice Age, when great ice sheets mantle Scandinavia, the Alps
and much of North America.
If this hypothesis is correct, Homo sapiens may have moved out of the Sahara and into
southwest Asia by about 100,000 years ago.
But we have no idea at all if this is true.
Which roots these early populations followed?
