Until about 50,000 years ago, the cold was extreme, but then it warmed up for a while.
The winters were slightly less severe, maybe the summers a bit longer, maybe annual temperatures
a bit warmer.
And this was the period when the first modern humans appeared in Southeast Europe, then
in Central, and then in Western.
This more temperate period is only a relative term.
It was still extremely cold, the environment was very challenging, with short, relatively
warm summers, but constant fluctuations from one year to the next, and violent variations
between the seasons with many months of sub-zero temperatures.
This was an extremely challenging environment, and must have required new artifacts and much
more hunting, sophisticated hunting skills.
And this is where modern humans really came into their own, because you see they had the
cognitive ability to plan, to think through problems, and to come up with ingenious solutions.
And what they came up with was a technology which I always describe as being very similar
to that of the familiar Swiss Army Knife, or the Leatherman.
A idea that you made carefully shaped, coarse, fine-grained rock, and then you took a punch
and you struck off a series of relatively standard-sized, punch-struck blades, long,
parallel-sided blades, maybe about this long.
And with all these standardized blanks, you could then produce all sorts of different
tools.
Think of a Swiss Army Knife, basically it's a chassis with strong hinges, and to these
hinges you attach knife blades, corkscrews, bores, saws, scissors even, and all these
different tools which are used for different purposes, you put it in your pocket and you
use it.
Think of the chromagnon technology in stone as being the same, for example, they produced
often these blades, backed knives, they produced some very lethally sharp points which were
probably mounted on the end of spears, they produced all kinds of scrapers, but above
all they produced a chisel, a burin as archaeologists call it, which is a blade with a chisel
end, a little spool is removed from the end, giving you a small rather sharp chisel end.
This had one priceless use, it enabled people to cut longitudinal grooves in reindeer antler
or in bone, and what they would do is cut along grooves in the hard outside surface of
the antler, fresh antler which is easily worked, then they would lever these long splinters
out and make a whole range of weapons and other tools in antler and bone, and here immediately
is a major difference with the earlier archaic humans like than the antletals, they were
using the full potential of bone and antler, this enabled them to produce an extraordinary
range of highly effective artifacts, for example, razor sharp antler spear points which could
be mounted in four shafts, and then the four shaft mounted on the shaft of a spear, or
a spear point simply mounted in a spear which were extremely sharp, much lighter, easily
propelled, and then they would produce also harpoons which are barbed points, detachable
spear points attached to shafts with a thong as often today used commonly with sea mammals
where you hit the animal and then you have got a line attached to it, and a weapon called
the spear thrower, now you will recall that earlier in the course we pointed out how difficult
it is to hunt animals with spears because you have to get really close to the animal
and you have to stalk it, you literally have to look it in the eyes before you can thrust
your spear hopefully into a vulnerable point, with a spear thrower you can be extremely
accurate and stand off a little further, also you can propel because the spear thrower is
literally a piece of bone or wood with a hook on the end and you simply go like that, you
flick it, you get much greater velocity from your spear, greater penetrating power and
more range, this was a major innovation, second only to ultimately the bow and arrow which
came later.
