And here, again, you see something new, personal ornamentation.
As we will see later in this course, there was tremendous importance placed on personal
ornamentation and rank, but for the first time here, you begin to see people wearing
bear's teeth, seashells, and other ornaments which may have been not only symbols of perhaps
a kin group you belong to, or just personal vanity, but beginning to show status and ceremonial
status and so on.
Because the other thing that happens here was that art begins to explode, and religious
beliefs become much more prominent in society, a topic we will address in much more detail
in the next lecture.
The late Ice Age was at its height 18,000 years ago.
Human social relations were now completely reconstructed, with, we suspect, much greater
importance being placed both on individual and collective identity, which is where ornaments
may have come in.
With much greater importance being placed on ties of kin, relationships of obligation
to people living in other bands, and on relationships with the supernatural, which is something
again we'll talk about in the next lecture.
The point is that for the first time, we really can see important regional differences in
European societies reflected in the artifacts they used, and the animals they hunted, and
the territories they occupied.
This is becoming more cultural diversity.
To a considerable extent, this is a reflection of the ability of modern humans to adapt to
different challenges and develop not only general but unique solutions to problems of
living in widely contrasting and often challenging environments.
Late Ice Age Europe was a region with very diverse food resources, including a remarkable
range of game animals, most of which are no longer present in Europe.
As I've said, the Cro-Magnon staple was the reindeer, which they hunted and killed and
stored the meat of in large quantities, returning again and again to the same locations and
rock shelters year after year.
But they also took other formidable animals, like the wild primordial ox, or aurochs, boss
primigenius, the primeval ox, a formidable frisky beast which only became extinct in
Poland in AD 1647.
The bison, the steppe bison, was another formidable animal.
Then they took numerous smaller animals, the red deer and arctic fox, many of which provided
specialized items like fur.
The most formidable animals were all the cave bear, the woolly rhinosophus, and the mammoth.
And even these they hunted sometimes, they certainly painted and engraved them.
So they had a lot of game resources, which were relatively predictable, and an ample
cushion of other foods if the reindeer migrations of spring and fall were small than usual.
There were summer plant foods, there were even sea mammals, if you were near the coast,
and there were fish.
They were beginning to exploit other animals.
They had a degree of economic stability unknown in earlier times, because they had the ability
to plan, to store, to schedule, and to think.
They were not nearly such opportunistic hunters as the Neanderthals or Homo erectus.
Seasonal salmon ones were an important food resource, and many large rock shelters in the
Laysaysie region of southwestern France were located near salmon streams.
Judging from modern analogies, they harvested salmon by the thousand and dried them for
later use.
Plant foods were abundant in spring, summer, and fall.
