But there's another side, too.
Many of these animals we know from sanat had intense spiritual power, and the power of
the hunter, and the power of the shaman, may well have come from drawing spiritual power
which lurked behind the cave walls, and perhaps the imprint of the human hand on the wall,
with black ochre, or red ochre, or soot, blown on the hand, leaving the impression.
Was the moment at which a shaman, or a hunter, or an initiate put their hand on the wall
and acquired through this imprint on their hand the spiritual power of the animals, of
the spiritual world, which lurked behind the cave walls.
Because in many societies, cave entrances and the cracks in walls are the places where
you enter the spiritual world, where you pass from the living world into the world of
the ancestors, of the forces of the spiritual world, where shamans could fly freely.
Now all of this is speculation.
It is, I think, informed speculation.
But the point is, that it seems likely, judging from the odd pictures of dancers and shamans
in rock art, where they're wearing animal headdresses and so on, that there were shamans in criminal
society, that for the first time we have evidence of people who bridged the living and supernatural
worlds.
If we do, this is very exciting, because we really get a really remarkable feature of
human society, this notion that the spiritual and living worlds are closely interconnected,
which is a pervasive theme and background to every human society in later prehistory.
And this is the earliest moment at which we actually see it.
So here we have an art tradition.
Here we have an interflowing of the spiritual and material worlds for the first time.
It's unfortunate that we do not know nearly as much about the societies who lived to the
east of the chromagnon domain, in central and western Europe and into Eurasia.
It is only in recent years that we have begun to really begin to understand the late Ice
Age societies which flourished far from the comfortable enclaves, and they were relatively
comfortable of northern Spain, southwestern France and Austria, on the rolling plains and
steppes of central and eastern Europe and far into Eurasia.
Make no mistake, this open-stepped tundra with its lack of trees and its scrub vegetation
intersected in places with shallow river valleys, which offered the best shelter, was a brutal
environment by any standards.
There was no environment on Earth like it today.
This was where winters could last for nine months, where subzero temperatures would follow
day after day for months on end, where the summers maybe lasted a brief two months, warm
and humid, where dramatic continental climate changes and seasonal changes were commonplace.
It was small wonder that the Neanderthals never managed to live year round in this place.
Why?
They did not have the needle and tailored clothing, the technology of layered clothing
which enabled people to live on the open plains through subzero winters to hunt if necessary
and certainly to go outside to fetch food or whatever from the pits which were dug
into the frozen permafrost that were filled with what you might call refugiated bone.
Modern humans were already on these plains in the river valleys of the Ukraine and the
Czech Republic as early as about 35,000 years ago, when they were well established there
by 25,000 years ago.
This was a place where there were no caves.
They were living on a rolling plain, the topography of which was formed by fine glacial dust which
had blown from the ice sheets far to the north.
So they had to create totally different shelter.
And what they did was to use locally available raw materials.
Often they had no wood, so what they turned to were the bones of mammoth and other animals.
