Now, Sartola had visited Paris some years before and seen some examples of Chromagnon
carvings and engravings on Antler, and he was struck by the similarity between these
carvings and the bison on the walls of Altamira.
He announced that he had found prehistoric art made by the Chromagnons.
The experts scoffed at him.
He accused him of forging the bison paintings, which he claimed to be the work of Stone Age
artists.
Until the day of his death, Sartola believed that this was prehistoric art.
Nobody else did.
He believed and accused him of having been bought modern artists into Altamira to paint
the paintings.
And then, in 1904, Sartola was vindicated, when some paintings very similar to those
from Altamira came from a cave which had been sealed since the last Ice Age, a cave
called La Mute, close to Lézésie in southwestern France.
This time, the experts were convinced that there was an artistic tradition on cave walls,
with many of the motifs appearing again on mobile art, on pieces of Antler and Bone,
and on weapons and tools created by the Chromagnons.
Since then, Chromagnon art has been recognized as among the earliest art traditions in the
world.
Which brings up the question of questions.
Why suddenly did humans start painting and engraving?
This clearly is connected with the development of the cognitive fluidity of modern humans,
the ability to take an idea and then transform it into an image.
At first, the experts thought this art was just people having an artistic revelation,
having a desire to create, and you walk into a cave and say, ah, today I will create some
bison which I saw outside.
But increasingly, people have realized that this was not so, that this art had a vital
symbolic meaning, with, as it were, a code, and this code was a sort of bridge between
the living and the spiritual worlds, that the Chromagnons lived in a living, dynamic
world of hunting and planting and changing climates and so on, but always they were surrounded
by this incoate spiritual world of forces, which they didn't understand, which affected
the continuity of human existence, and the art maybe was some way to bridge from the
living to the spiritual.
This is a lot of modern thinking, but vigorous controversy, as we see, surrounds the interpretation
of Chromagnon art.
Now, looking at these interpretations, we really should take a look at the art itself.
In general terms, Chromagnon art comes in two broad forms.
It comes as what the experts call mobile art, in the shape of elaborately decorated artifacts,
many of them obviously of ceremonial use, such as spear throwers beautifully made, harpoons,
sticks of antler engraved, with bison and horses and other animals, but it also comes
as immobile art, as what is called cave art, engravings and paintings.
Clearly the paintings are the most spectacular, but the engravings many of them show an astonishing
knowledge of animals and a great surity of touch, which is the characteristic of truly
gifted artists.
It is no exaggeration to say that the Chromagnons were brilliant artists in stone, in antler,
bone, clay, ivory, and probably in wood the latter having not survived.
In one cave in France there were even clay sculptures of bison a quarter of a mile from
daylight, deep, deep in a dark chamber.
At this point some ten thousand sculpted and engraved objects have come from late ice age
sites all over Europe and deep into Eurasia and Siberia.
This surely is only a teeny fragment of the art that was once used and cherished and produced.
This was a very rich culture, stylistically and spiritually.
