The people decorated their harpoons, adorned their spear points, turned the hooks of spear
throwers into elegant carvings of ibex, the mountain goat, and other animals.
On flat places of bone and antler, they depicted magnificent naturalistic engravings of such
topics as a herd of reindeer swimming across a river with salmon between their feet, a
magnificent famous engraving of a bison licking its flank with such detail that even the hair
texture is shown and the tear duct of the eye.
Many of these objects were sculptures in the mound, created with a sure hand, probably
executed by a small number of skilled artists, probably for ceremonial purposes which now
eludes.
This is exquisite art.
It's not as well known, however, as the rock art.
Paintings and engravings deep in the caves of southern France and Spain, which are in
their own right today, major tourist destinations.
It's safe to say that chromagnon art is the first moment in prehistory where we have a
tourist destination, other than Aldervai Gorge, which many people visit.
And these caves, to see them, is deeply moving.
But today, you see them under the harsh glare of electric light.
I want you to think of the art as something that people saw to the flickering light of
fat lamps, animal fat lamps, flickering in the darkness, with the flicker sometimes almost
making the animals look as if they were coming alive.
You want to think of this not as just dead paintings on a wall, but of an art that lived
off pictures of animals, which in their own right had movement and life and power, because
we can be sure that the chromagnons, like many hunter-gatherer societies today, lived
in intimate association with the animals, to whom they gave personalities, and to whom
they had a very personal relationship with.
These animals had power, they had movement, they lived, and they lived on the walls of
the caves.
You can see this at Altamira in northern Spain, where you walk deep into the hillside,
into a low chamber, where the artists, as I said, made use of natural protuberances
in the rock to shape the body of the bison, and make it, as it were, come a little bit
out of the rock.
Altamira was probably painted about 13,000 or 15,000 years ago.
Another famous cave, and one of the paintings is in the picture here on the back wall, is
Lascaux, a masterpiece of cave art.
This site was found in 1940 at the height of the German occupation, when some boys hunting
for rabbits with their dog lost their dog in an underground chamber.
They got a rope and a ladder, climbed down into this chamber, and there was this spectacular
freezes of giant bulls, like down in the background of this painting, horses, stags, and bison.
Many of the horses, with elongated necks, the aurochs, with its vast, huge horns, look
at the accurate depiction of the muzzle, and, down on the extreme right, some stags,
with giant horns, megaceros, aardish elk.
These animals painted again about 15,000 years ago, and sealed off in this chamber after
the ice age.
That's the most dramatic cave of all.
Mr. Gott de Chauvet, in southeastern France, a little bit east of the famous Lazy Caves,
was only discovered in 1994 by some speleologists who entered an underground chamber through
a teeny entrance in a remote gorge in the aardish.
Here they found themselves in a cave system which again had been sealed completely since
the ice age.
Its chambers contained magnificent freezes of lionesses, rhinosophases, and other animals
depicted with brilliant skill, where the artist with a few strokes would give the impression
of dozens of rhinosophases by putting multiple horns on the wall, just a stroke, and in one
freeze there was a picture of what appears to be a skin-clad shaman, a human, watching
over a scene, watching maybe the entrance of this chamber where people were going to
come in with animals on the wall with him.
