The dry Creeksite in the Nanana Valley of the northern foothills of the Alaska Range
dates to about the same period.
Now these sites, and we needn't worry about the specifics here, and several others, belong
within a poorly defined, and I use the archaeological term here, northern Paleo-Indian tradition,
which is a northern equivalent of the widespread Paleo-Indian traditions to the south, described
later in this lecture.
If humans first settled Alaska around 13,000 years ago, or slightly earlier, when and how
did they penetrate south of the great ice sheets?
This clearly is a fundamental question.
Did they travel by land, or along the continental south that mantled much of the Alaskan coast
at the time?
For years, geologists believed that a narrow, ice-free corridor led from Alaska into the
heart of North America during the late Ice Age.
One of the ice sheets covered the Rockies, the other, central and eastern Canada.
But we now know that this corridor to the south, which many years ago was almost considered
like a freeway for people to go up and down, never existed.
The two ice sheets were linked.
The only way that early settlers could have passed south over land would have been after
15,000 years ago when the glaciers did retreat and the land opened up, perhaps even slightly
later than that.
And they have then come down the coast.
There is no evidence for coastal migration, but remember that sea levels were much lower
and it's entirely possible that some groups moved southward along the coast into the Pacific
Northwest.
Again, the sites are underwater.
So you pay your money and your takes your choice.
Most people tend to favor the terrestrial route, but in fact, it's unproven.
We do not know how the first Americans came south or when they did.
The earliest archaeological evidence for human settlement south of the ice sheets is also
disputed.
But a series of sites hint at occupation after 14,000 years ago.
The best known of these sites is Monteverdi in southern Chile, radiocarbon dated to about
14,000 years ago, the earliest well-documented human settlement.
The site, which is way south, is a small settlement of wooden shelters in a forest environment
preserved in a waterlogged valley floor.
These people were both hunting and collecting plant foods and making a lot of their tool
kit out of wood.
So are other South American sites still not well-documented, which may date to this period.
In North America, the Meadowcroft Rock Shelter near Pittsburgh in Pennsylvania may date to
as early as 14,000 years ago, but the dates of the lower levels of the site are also controversial
because the dating has been questioned.
There are mammoth kills in Florida and sites in West Virginia that may date to about the
same time.
It's only at about 13,200 years ago that we really come into focus, because suddenly
the archaeological record explodes, it becomes more visible, there are many more sites.
So the scenario that evolves out of all this is probably, most likely, the first settlement
of the Americas occurred around 15,000 years ago.
There, I've stuck my neck out.
Maybe slightly earlier, maybe slightly later.
But I think the critical dynamic here was the end of the Ice Age, when sea levels rose,
glaciers began to retreat, and the climate in the far north was somewhat more livable.
Only a teeny number of people came across, and they didn't come across in one group,
they came across again and again, lots of groups.
Some groups may have come over and died out.
It's a very complex process we can never hope to understand.
And then at some point, maybe as early as 14,000 years ago, maybe earlier, maybe slightly
later, but certainly by 13,200, a well-established radiocarbon date, there were humans living
in the Americas.
These people, in small numbers, exploded into an uninhabited continent, teeming with animals
large and small.
Many large animals, which were soon to become extinct, animals totally unfamiliar in America
today, like mammoth, mastodon, wild horses, camelids, and others.
