Lecture 11, The First Americans
And now we come to one of the greatest controversies in all of human prehistory, the first settlement
of the Americas.
In the last lecture, we ended up very briefly in Siberia, in a crucible from which the first
settlement of America stemmed.
In this lecture, I'm going to examine this controversy from various angles.
I'm going to begin by outlining the fundamental questions, and then I'll describe the two
competing hypotheses for first settlement, very early or much later.
Next, we'll analyze the evidence for very early settlement, and conclude that the earliest
well-documented site dates to about 14,000 years ago, immediately after the end of the
Ice Age, which ended in 15,000 years.
The third part of the lecture describes the lost continent of Bredinja, the Bering land
bridge which joined Alaska and Siberia during the Ice Age, and we'll look briefly at the
biological and linguistic evidence that derives Native American ancestry from North
Eastern Asia.
And from there, we'll move on to a discussion of the archeological evidence from Alaska,
and discuss the route southwards into the heart of North America, by which the first
Americans must have traveled into this virgin continent.
And finally, we'll survey the limited evidence for human settlement around 14,000 years
ago, and the short-lived Clovis tradition, which began about 13,700 years ago, and lasted
for only 300 years.
So our compass chronologically here, again is relatively short, from the end of the
Ice Age, or maybe somewhat earlier, 15,000 years ago, up to about 12,000.
The first human settlement of the Americas is, as I've said, one of the great controversies
of prehistory.
There's something magical to scientists about having discovered the first, the best, but
particularly the first.
And as we've said repeatedly in this course, the Americas were uninhabited by human beings
until relatively late in prehistory.
Why?
They were far from the major centers of early human evolution in Africa and Asia.
Also they were in the far north.
The only access was in the far north, across from Siberia to Alaska, because this early
time people did not have the ability to cross oceans on boats.
The debates surround the routes, the age of first settlement, and the nature of the very
first people.
What their life way was like, and so on.
Unfortunately the debate is hampered by a lack of solid archaeological data.
Unfortunately also there was a great deal of passion, and people adhere to a particular
viewpoint and will not change it even in the face of firm evidence that it is wrong.
This is in short a far storm of competing views and a fallacious argument.
We navigate through this at our peril and with great care.
So the position I take here is going to be somewhat conservative for obvious reasons
because what we're concerned with here are baselines of research rather than out there
very controversial theories.
One thing at the beginning that everybody agrees, that is that no archaic humans, no
early homo sapiens, no homo erectus, no Neanderthals ever set foot in the new world.
The Americas were first settled by anatomically modern humans, homo sapiens sapiens.
There is also general agreement that first settlement came from northeast Asia by way
of the Bering Strait, either by sea or land, because the Bering Strait was dry land for
much of the late Ice Age after 100,000 years ago.
Why?
Because we know that sea levels were at least 300 foot lower during the late Ice Age than
they are today.
Why northeast Asia?
Simply the logic of geography because this is where America and Siberia are closest.
The other way would involve a lengthy journey over open water.
