How quickly do they spread through the continent?
We don't know.
Some people believe that the spread took only a few thousand years, maybe less.
Others believe it was a slower process, but the numbers, at the beginning, were very small.
We know something about these people, thanks to the archaeological sites dating to after
13,200, and these are the sites of the famous Clovis tradition.
After a site in Clovis, New Mexico, where the distinctive stone projectile points of these
people were first found, small projectile points with a longitudinal fluting flake, which thins
the base of the point so it can be easily mounted in a shaft or foreshaft.
These were people who had spears and spearfrowers who were extremely adept hunters, and it is
quite clear, although the evidence is still lacking, that these people had an ancestry
among the long-established, stone-age, game-hunting traditions of the far north.
Indeed, in the earlier days of the study of the first settlement, everyone thought of
the Clovis people as big-game hunters, with a capital B and a capital G, that this was
the stereotype that big-game hunters thundered into America and decimated the game, spreading
rapidly through the continent.
Today, we have a much more diverse view of the Clovis people, that, undoubtedly, they
were capable of adapting to very different environmental conditions, many of them relied
heavily on plant foods, and probably got much of their diet from edible vegetation of all
sorts of kinds.
Their numbers, however, were small, they were highly immobile, their territories were probably
large, but we do know that they focused very closely on fine-grained tool-making stone used
to make their projectile points.
In other words, they were people who were beginning to exchange goods between one another.
Their best documented from the Great Plains were a series of kill sites of their points
found in association with the bones of Mammoth and Bison, and it's quite clear that they
were, to a considerable degree, when the opportunity arose, and remember like all hunters, they
were opportunistic, that they were going for the large animal.
Why?
It yields a lot of meat.
Probably many of them, they drove into swamps, rendered them helpless, and then killed them.
We don't know, but about 13,000 years ago, these large animals, the famous megafauna,
as they're often called, became extinct suddenly.
This is a great debate.
Was it humans that caused these animals to become extinct and hunted them out of existence,
particularly the slow-breeding animal like the Mammoth or the Maston, or were these animals
which had flourished through the Ice Age, the victims of warmer temperatures, and increasingly
added conditions in North America and South America?
We don't know, but most people believe that humans probably played some role in the extinction
of these large animals.
Another thing is certain.
By about 12,900 years ago, when the Clovis tradition abruptly disappears, humans were
living in every part of North America, exposed by the ice sheets, from the fringes of the
tundra by the ice sheets, right into Central America with its tropical rainforests, and
throughout South America, there were people living down by the Strait of Magellan by
9,000 years ago.
But this settlement occurred rapidly, and once humans got into America, they stayed
there diversified and flourished, as we'll find out later in this course.
In this lecture, we've looked at some of the vigorous controversies surrounding the first
settlement of the Americas.
We've built a scenario and concluded that the first settlement occurred soon after the
end of the Ice Age, perhaps as early as 15,000 years ago.
We described the roots for first settlement and the probable manner in which it occurred,
and we concluded that the first Americans were highly versatile mobile hunter-gatherers
who settled North America then moved southward with considerable speed, preying on large
animals which became extinct about 13,000 years ago, and in the next lecture, we'll
describe what happened next.
