After 11,000 years ago, a couple of thousand years after the megafauna vanished, we find
a new pattern of Kalio-Indian society beginning to develop.
They continue to flourish throughout the Americas and adapt it to a great range of different
environments.
Everything from ocean coasts and river valleys and lake floors to desert, temperate woodland
and tropical rainforest.
There was only one region where the megafauna continued to thrive, and only one species
of them, the plains bison.
With the drier conditions after the Ice Age, the environment of the Great Plains became
much drier because of the rain shadow of the Rocky Mountains.
It became a short grass environment, a particular grass much favored by bison.
And the bison population of the plains was very large indeed, centered on large herds.
Here, Kalio-Indians and their successors continued to rely on bison for much of their meat,
hunting their prey on foot, with stone-tipped spears, exactly like the Kalio-Indians had
done.
But by this time, their projectile points assumed many forms, all ultimately derived
from Clovis points.
Now increasingly arid conditions on the plains reduced the abundance of larger animals.
Yet the surviving bison herds were larger and more mobile.
The bison is an extremely difficult animal to stalk and hunt.
They are suspicious, have a cute sense of smell, and were being stalked in open country.
It seems likely that individual hunting of bison, while a staple, was something that
required exceptional skill.
And when the opportunity arose, Kalio-Indians and later plains peoples found that the most
effective if wasteful way to hunt bison was by organizing drives when the opportunity
arose.
Now how often an opportunity arose to stalk and stampede a herd of bison into a gully
or over a cliff where they could be partially killed by the sheer weight of the animals
behind them stampeding, or be slaughtered when they were thrashing around helplessly?
How often this happened?
We don't know.
It may have been once or twice a generation, it may have been every year.
But fortunately archeologically, we have vivid evidence that the Kalio-Indians and their
successors hunted bison this way.
One of the most famous sites is the Olsen Chubbock site in Colorado.
Doug a generation ago, but dug brilliantly by an archeologist called Joe Ben Wheat.
It documents a Palio-Indian hunt of 8,000 years ago, in such detail that we even know
the direction of the wind on the day when the hunt took place.
Several groups of Palio-Indians who could probably involve cooperation with several
bands appear to have stalked and maneuvered a herd of bison, about 200 of them, into a
strategic position where it was possible for them to be stampeded between rows of people
waving bison hides and diverting them into a narrow arroyo, a gully.
From the direction in which the bison skeletons are facing in the gully, we know that on the
day of the hunt the wind was blowing from the south, because they would drive them from
downwind.
We can imagine the hunt, the careful stalking beforehand, the observation of the herd, the
encircling of the herd with stalkers, probably a process that took several days, and then
the momentous day of the drive.
The animals are stampeded as they move, people come up, rise up suddenly and wave bison hides,
directing the animals towards the fatal and invisible arroyo.
The leading animals stampede blindly, hesitate for a moment on the arroyo, but are pushed
into the gully by the sheer weight of the beasts behind them, within seconds there is
a thundering mass of helpless bison jammed in this gully, the ones at the bottom suffocated
by the weight of the other ones on top.
Some of the bison manage to escape or move away, but the hunters now don't worry because
at least 150 bison are jammed into this arroyo and perished.
The spearmen jump on the bison, avoiding flailing horns, and kill as many as they can see, leaving
the rest to suffocate to death.
