There are other changes too.
Global warming brought major rainfall shifts in more temperate regions of the world.
There was, at first, higher rainfall in southwestern Asia, in areas like the Jordan Valley and
the Euphrates Valley and the Nile Valley.
The Sahara Desert, once again, as we saw earlier in the course, supported shallow lakes and
semi-arid grasslands, which were a paradise for hunter-gatherers and later cattle herders.
Much of southwestern Asia, which today is lava-open vegetation, was covered with meditvanian
forest.
In Europe and Eurasia, the warmer conditions brought major vegetational and geographical
changes.
Focusing for a moment on western Europe, as the Scandinavian ice sheets retreated, they
retreated from northern Germany, exposed Denmark, exposed Sweden, exposed Norway.
They left behind them a huge glacial lake formed of glacial meltwater.
The sea levels rose, the sea flooded this lake, and it became the brackish Baltic Sea,
a major player in cultural events of the time.
The treelist steppe tundra of western and central Europe, which was so important in
chromagnon times, gave way to birch forest by 9000 BC, and then to temper it, what is
known as mixed oak forest, oak ash alder lime, by about 7000 BC.
These were major environmental changes.
They triggered major, major shifts in human life.
Why?
Because within a few thousand years, the familiar, admittedly ever-changing glacial landscape
and periglacial landscape vanished, and gave way to a world of forests, lakes, shorelines,
and rivers.
Very, very different.
You go within 5,000 years, or less, from basically an arctic adaptation to a temperate adaptation,
a major shift for hunter-gatherers by any standards, and it is a testimony to the flexibility
and the opportunism and the intellectual power of modern humans that they adapted to
it with brilliant success.
In Europe, the changes for the chromagnons or the successes of the chromagnons were especially
major.
The changes in the environment were so fundamental that clearly many of the old strategies for
hunting and gathering no longer worked.
Just as happened in North America, the megafauna, much of it, became extinct.
The woolly rhinoceros, the mammoth, the bison, these animals rapidly vanished and were replaced
or the forest animals who had existed before still thrived.
Deer became important, elk became important, forest and cold-loving animals still were
important in the diet, but the adaptation required very complex choices by people literally
from one generation to the next.
Until about 75 years ago, these people of this transition period, when the whole of
Europe changed dramatically, were a black hole.
We knew almost nothing about them.
There was a school of thought indeed which said, everything changed, the chromagnons
vanished or retreated north and it was empty.
But then, in the 1930s, a series of researchers in Scandinavia produced evidence that there
were in fact a number of really quite sophisticated hunter-gatherer societies where people lived
especially by lakes and shorelines and had adapted successfully to these new conditions.
