Let's now go away from temperate regions, having recognized these really major changes
and the changes in culture, adaptation to forests and lakes, coastal living.
Coastal living have not been big in the Ice Age as far as we know, and increasingly an
emphasis on intensive fishing and fouling as a way of survival, as well as plant foods.
People were moving away from the predominantly meat diets of earlier time into a much more
diverse, intensified world.
They were intensifying the food quest, which is an important point that comes up in the
next part of the world where we go to.
That is Southwestern Asia, or if you want to use the rather ethnocentric European and
American viewpoint, the Near East.
Southwest Asia, at the end of the Ice Age, experienced benign global warming, which bought
rather nice conditions.
It bought warmer and wetter climate.
The result?
A spread of oak and pistachio forests over much of the region, which at the time are bounded
in lakes and rivers.
And the nice thing about lakes and rivers here, the lakes particularly, is that we can get
core boardings from them down in the beds at the bottom and have insights into ancient
climate change in this region, which as you'll see was very important.
This was a rather favored area.
But while the Cro-Magnons were flourishing in Europe, there was only a very sparse population
of late Ice Age hunters around here, and these people were adapted to rather dry conditions
because during the late Ice Age this region was pretty arid.
But now, there was suddenly a bounty, particularly of nuts, full nut harvests.
These harvests of acorns and pistachios were critical because people could store the big
surplus of these for the rest of the year.
One of the major turning points in terms of the processing of food was the leaching and
processing of acorns, which have a high tannic content and cannot be eaten without processing.
Somehow they developed this processing just like they did in Western United States at
this period, and this provided fairly large food surpluses.
Now populations rose considerably at a time when food supplies were much more plentiful.
The classic picture, more food, more people.
Especially, and this is very important, in large river valleys like those of the Jordan
and New Freighties, again you've got the pattern we had in North America where people
are tending to settle in the areas where food supplies were diverse and plentiful.
They lived not only off the nut harvests and other plant foods like wild grasses, and I
stress grasses, but they also subsisted off desert antelope, particularly the small gazelle,
which migrated from one pasture to another in spring and fall, and they literally would
wait, trap them, kill them, lots of them.
So good were the food supplies that in favored areas where several environmental zones like
grassland and flood plain and forests were close to each other, that people settled on
what are known as these ecotones, and were so successful with their food storage and
their efficient weapons that they lived in more or less permanent settlements which were
almost as large as the farming villages which were to appear in a few thousand years.
So you've got a sort of move towards sedentism as it were a pre-adaptation to a much more
permanent life way.
It's a very important point.
This was an area where things were sort of getting set up for either a catastrophe or
an innovation.
The most successful of these people are known to archaeologists as the Natufians, the Natufian
people, named after a site called Natuf.
Now I try and avoid using these technical terms here because it's very confusing, but
this particular term is useful and we will use it again.
These people did exactly what I just talked about.
They particularly harvested nuts and wild grasses which they harvested with flint bladed
sickles.
We've got the sickle blades and what's very interesting that on the blade of the sickle
is a silicon gloss caused by the friction against the stalks so we know they were cutting
wild grasses.
Why do we know they were wild? Because we've found the seeds.
