This process, which was also practiced by many Native American groups in the
Americas, encouraged new growth for game to graze upon, and when the while the
game was grazing, you would hunt it. This was a very nice environment for hunter
gatherers. As I said last time, many of them acquired quite elaborate culture and
lived in more permanent settlements. But the younger dryers, thousand-year event
where in northern latitudes the climate literally plummeted back to near
glacial conditions, which endured for about a thousand years, and then abruptly
the warming was zoomed, brought an abrupt change to cooler, very dry
conditions around 11,000 BC in this area, marked contrast in the seasons, cold
winters, warm summers, but drier and drier. This immediately changed the
dynamics of life in this region. Why? Forest cover retreated. For example, the
site of Abu Huraira, which we'll talk about shortly, had run forests within
easy walking distance before 11,000 BC. But these forests were treated in the
face of greater validity, to the point where it was a major expedition to go
and harvest the nuts. So many groups turned more and more to wild grasses,
more open vegetation. They also responded by developing more effective ways of
storing the wild harvest so they could eat it in the winter, and by exploiting
the grasses more and more intensively. And one of the things they did was
improve their technology for grinding the grass to make edible meal. Many of them
were already living in sedentary settlements, and these sedentary
settlements, which were located in favorable areas, tended to perpetuate
themselves, because they were an adjustment to a world with less surface
water, and months on end when game and plant foods were in short supply. Just as
you find in the desert of North America, the Western deserts, groups tended to
concentrate around lakes or in major river valleys. But they took a new step
too. They started experimenting with the deliberate planting of wild grasses.
Immediately we think, ah, a big deal, a major step. Actually, it wasn't. Because,
and remember we go back right to the very beginnings of prehistory, one of the
keys to survival as a hunter-gatherer is to have an extremely intimate knowledge
of every detail of your environment. The grasses, which are edible, which have
medicinal qualities, where game feeds at certain times of the year, what the
effects are of an extremely rainy year or a dry year, knowledge passed from
generation to generation. And the fact that grass, wild grasses germinated and
grew, was no new knowledge at all. Everybody knew this. But until now, they'd
never needed to think of planting the stuff. And the Natufians had harvested
cereal glasses on hillsides and infertile valleys for centuries. And at the
same time were exploiting Desert Gazelle, another game on the lowlands. This
form of specialized hunting and gathering was widespread in Southwest Asia in
11,000 BC. And it was very, very effective. For example, the inhabitants of the
Abu Hurayra Mound, which we'll talk about it's in Syria's Euphrates Valley a little
later on, hunted Gazelle to the exclusion of almost any other game. Because the
Gazelle migrations were so large, they could come more than enough meat, dry most
of it, store it for the year.
