This set of selective pressure on glasses developed first in a small region of Southwest
Asia.
It's called the Levantine Corridor in the literature.
It runs from the Damascus area of Syria into the lower Jordan Valley, and across to the
Euphrates River Valley.
This corridor had reliable water supplies, a relatively high water table at the time,
which enabled foragers to go to another stage here, which is to shift wild grains from their
natural habitats into well-watered areas near streams and lakes, where they would create
fields of this.
In other words, they weren't just supplementing, they were expanding the range.
This may also have happened in Turkey.
We don't know.
The research on this is still at quite an early stage, and it appears though that many
of the earliest farming settlements in the world occur within this Levantine Corridor.
What I want to do in this lecture is document this transition in human life from archaeological
sites.
And then in the next lecture, I'm going to talk about why this happened, some other theories
people have developed, and then the consequences of it.
I thought it was a good idea to get the archaeological evidence down first so that we know what we're
talking about.
And I'm going to talk about two sites which document this transition and give us a general
impression of the changeover.
The smaller of the two is a site called Abu Hurayrah, located on an ecotone, the zone
between forests and savanna and flood plain and desert, in New Freighties Valley, a site
done, dug by an English archaeologist called Andrew Moore, who dug it with meticulous care.
It took him many, many years.
Abu Hurayrah began as a small village of a few families living in semi-sub-Davanian
houses partly dug in the ground in about 10,500 B.C.
They had simple reed roofs, these houses, supported by wooden uprights.
The climate was warmer and wetter than today.
The inhabitants harvested oak and pistachios in fall, as well as wild einkorn and rye.
And each spring, they killed hundreds of Persian gazelles as they migrated through the
of Freighties Valley, a migration as predictable as the traffic on a freeway.
With such a favorite location over many generations, the village grew to as many as 400 people.
It's a lot of people.
And think of the crowding and the social differences which would begin to appear.
Thousands of small seeds were covered by the sophisticated flotation methods I mentioned
document the effects of an increasingly dry climate of more and more dry years.
Hillman was able to show that at first the people relied heavily on einkorns and pistachios.
As the droughts intensified, the forests retreated from the other side so they turned more and
more to wild einkorn, rye, and other grasses.
They transitioned away from nuts.
They would do much effort.
But eventually, even more added conditions and perhaps, and this is something we often
forget about, the depletion of farward supplies caused the abandonment of the village.
They left.
They had them.
And then suddenly, in about 10,000 BC, a new village rose on the same site.
But it was quite different.
It was a site with small houses made of mud brick, with flat roofs and courtyards, with
small alleys going through the settlement, very like a southwest nation village of today.
And this time, the people weren't hunting and gathering.
They were hunting and farming, and they were cultivating einkorn, lentils, and rye, and
maybe other crops.
The important point is that this was so successful as an economy that the village grew rapidly
in size.
Within 1,500 years, by 8,500 BC, Abu Hurraida have covered nearly 30 acres, atop a low mound
of occupation debris.
