Then there was another change.
Within a generation or so, suddenly people gave up gazelle hunting, although they still
did it.
But it wasn't the primary food.
They owned herds of goats and sheep, domesticated animals.
Now Abu Hurraira was a farming village, a closely nicked community of one-story mudbrick
houses joined by narrow liens and courtyards.
It was a quite different place.
It was a permanent settlement.
People lived for centuries.
People flourished there until the site was abandoned forever in about 6,500 BC, a degree
of permanence that were imaginable in earlier times.
Much more dense population, with all that that implies which we'll explore in the next
lecture.
So there's one example of the transition.
Then there's another, Jericho.
Jericho, famous in the Scriptures for the famous Siege of Joshua, where he caused the
priests to blow their trumpets, and the walls fell down, and every man advanced straight
in front of him, and they put the inhabitants to the sword.
Very dramatic Old Testament stuff.
But what isn't known generally to a lot of people is that the modern city lies atop a
deep occupation mound, and some of the earliest farming settlements in the world, buried right
down the bottom of this mound, very, very difficult to explore because of the depth
of the site.
A number of archaeologists in the early 20th century excavated the upper levels of Jericho.
The Arnage and Bronze Age levels, and of course they were searching for the biblical
city.
But in the 1950s, a British archaeologist, Kathleen Kenyon, who had been trained on Roman
Britain, which is a very meticulous form of excavation, probed the lowest depths of the
mound, using stratigraphic principles, principles of observation of layers, which she had learned
on Roman sites in Britain.
She dug below extensive Arnage and Bronze Age occupation layers, and underneath this
she unearthed too much earlier farming settlements with substantial houses.
These caused a sensation, because this was in the early days of radiocarbon dating which
really came into use in 1950, and she was able to date the earliest of these to earlier
than 9,000 B.C.
At the time people thought farming maybe was 3,000, 4,000 B.C., somewhere around there.
Yeah, it was, the time was doubled.
The earliest settlement of all was a cluster of beehive-shaped huts, but what was fascinating
wasn't the huts, this is fairly reasonable, but this closely packed dwellings nestled
inside not only a rock-cut ditch nearly nine foot deep, but a well-built stone wall complete
with a tower.
The fortifications of this village are the earliest in the world, and the village itself
covered nearly ten acres.
High on earth but a humble farming settlement like this build a ditch and fortifications.
It's a depressing thought, maybe there was war, maybe they were fighting with neighbors.
Was defense needed?
We don't know, but it is a fact that in later centuries Jericho lay astride a strategic
route from the coast to the desert, maybe they had to protect the precious water supplies
of the perennial string that there was the anchor of Jericho, not only as a village but
also as a city.
Another theory suggests that these stone walls were in fact used for flood control with floods
of the Jordan, we simply don't know, like so many other archaeological controversies
the problem is unresolved.
But the fact of the matter is, is that Jericho is another very early farming settlement and
at the very base of the mound lies a small settlement by the permanent spring, which
I just mentioned, dating to about ten thousand BC.
As far as we know at the moment, and we could always be surprised because new sites are
always being found, serial agriculture was widespread in southwestern Asia by nine thousand
BC and probably began as early as ten thousand BC, didn't just begin in one place, it was
a logical strategy that was applied probably in many communities who were suffering from
drought, it was a logical defence against hunger.
The causes were not as we'll see entirely climatic, but the climate contributed to major
changes.
