These new farming economies spread like wildfire after 9000 BC. This was a highly
effective way of living. It had the consequence of poorer diets, shorter life
expectancy, more medical problems, because people were crowded into villages
with limited sanitation, but it was successful. Within 2,000 years, by 7,000
BC, there was considerable variation in farming culture throughout Southwestern
Asia, not only in the 11th Corridor, where so much began, but also in the
Zagrus Highlands of Iran, in parts of Mesopotamia, and in Turkey. Between 10,000
and about 6,000 BC, agriculture developed and flourished in all these areas, as did
the herding of sheep and goats. But it should be recognized that in these early
millennia, people still relied heavily on wild plant foods and on game. Why?
Because their crops were not that productive. But after 6,000 BC, more
productive cereal grains came into use, and the domestication of two more animals,
cattle and pigs, added to a fully agricultural and stock-raising economy
that was to persist in historical times in many areas in much more elaborate
forms. By 6,000 BC, you had basically a fairly multifaceted subsistence economy
over much of Eastern Mediterranean, and it was about to spread into Europe. This
period was one of the most periods of the most profound social change in human
society. The biggest change was the first appearance of some social ranking. Now
this social ranking, even in small villages, must have been closely connected
with the need to resolve problems, to regulate the distribution of food, and
particularly to deal with such issues as the inheritance of land. The popular catch
word for these people are headman or a chief. But one of the most powerful things
in these societies, almost certainly, were kin groups. Groups who were descended
from a common ancestor. And as social ranking in society began to be a factor,
some of these kin groups, old lineages, became more important than others,
wealthier than others, maybe were perceived to have superior spiritual powers.
And it is from this kin leadership, which was reflected in the common ownership
of land and the passing of land from one generation to the other, that the first
kin leaders or chiefs appeared. It's a very interesting issue, this whole thing.
We'll get back to it again later in the course. But becoming a leader involves
two things. One, it involves personal qualities, charisma. You can become a
charismatic figure, an expert, trader, a devout priest, whatever you wish. But then
one day, having attracted all these followers, you die. And your following
evaporates rapidly. It's rather like a rock star or a musician who dies. His
following changes or evaporates. That's very different. A sort of personal aggrandizer,
a big man, as the literature often is called, from somebody who inherits their
office, a hereditary chief who passes the office to his son because he's in the
same kin group, and he is the natural successor because he's in the same lineage.
It may have to be approved by the community, but hereditary office holding
came in quite early. We don't know when, but I suspect it may have been in some
areas as early as 6000 BC. Why do I think this? Because at Jericho, at
Eingesel and other sites, ancestors were revered and carefully preserved. There
was, of course, as we saw here, the Eingesel example. But the real issue here
was continuity, leadership, and the relationship with the land. And legitimacy
for leaders came from their links to revered ancestors, their membership in
prestigious lineages. And this may have been the way that leadership came, but
ultimately the most successful were charismatic people, people with strong
personalities who had the right credentials, but also had great ability,
like many of the pharaohs in Egypt, late times, or some of the Maya lords, and so
on. Here you see the first signs of chieftaincy.
