Modern theories also take into account something that I've emphasized a lot in the previous
few lectures, is that many post-Ice Age hunter-gatherers were pre-adapted to agriculture and animal
domestication.
Why?
They managed their environment to some degree and they managed their food supplies.
They had to.
Population pressure from growing local numbers, greater social complexity, and food shortages
were all factors we believe in the changeover.
So with the complex interplays between short-term climate change and food supplies, the classic
example the Young Adryus, Abu Huraira, the shift away from forest food, nuts, to grasses.
Ecological theories of the origins of food production, which are very popular, focus
on such ecological factors as long-term variability in food resources, and the effects of people
interacting with their foods, managing them, extending their ranges, and so on.
And proponents of these ecological theories talk of quote-unquote opportunities for the
introduction of agriculture.
Like at Abu Huraira, where people used certain foods like wild wheat more intensively and
eventually started planting them and extending their range and very rapidly domesticated
them.
The truth of the matter is that there is no one theory of the origins of food production
which embraces all regions of the world.
So much depended on local, cultural, and environmental challenges.
And ultimately, it wasn't ecology, it wasn't climate, which really mattered.
The ultimate key element, and the one that's hardest to identify, impossible to identify
really, is that of human decision-making.
All of us, whether we're a family, a community, or an individual, constantly interact with
one another and make decisions.
And we always make decisions for short-term advantage, very rarely for very long-term
ones, although obviously, for example, investing in a certificate of deposit for ten years
is a long-term decision.
But the short ones we make often have consequences we don't imagine.
And people wonder whether the key factor, ultimately, in the adoption of agriculture
were the people who made the decision to expand the range of a plant, or to plant grasses.
That decision, or those decisions, really were the ones that triggered everything else.
But if you step back from that, it may have been cycles of drought that caused these people
to say, OK, let us plant, we need food.
So the interaction between ecological and social pressures, the pressures of climate
and everything else, the pre-adaptation towards permanent settlement, the population growth,
all of these things come together, or came together, in this surprisingly rapid change
from hunting and gathering to the production of food.
And these new economies spread like wildfire.
If there is any doubt as to the success of it, just look how rapidly, and we'll look
at it, farming spread through the old world.
Look how many different places it came into being.
China, South Aster, Asia, Southwest Asia, the Americas, just to name four.
Once established, these new economies brought major changes in their train, all of them
having profound effects on the shape of human society.
Let's look at a few of these.
For a start, agriculture anchored people to their fields and caused them to live in permanent
settlements for long periods of time, not just a year or year round, like hunter-gatherer
base camp, but for generation after generation after generation, far longer than even the
most enduring sedentary hunter-gatherer settlement, and this changed the dynamics of human life
profoundly.
