Firstly, people live cheap by jowl with others, across a courtyard, across a narrow alleyway.
And people, as you know, can be volatile.
We can fall in love.
We can love.
Or we can hate.
We can be happy.
We can be unhappy.
We can be widowed.
We can get sick.
We can come to blows over the most trivial things.
Now in Hunter Gatherer Society, as I said earlier, you can move away.
It's more flexible.
But here, where you are living cheap by jowl with other members of your kin group and other kin groups,
you must have ways of developing, resolving conflicts of all kinds,
especially those involving the ownership and inheritance of land.
So here's one major difference.
When you do this, what sort of leadership is needed?
This is a very fundamental question which we'll come back to again and again.
Then, there's another one.
When you're permanently in a village, you're anchored to your fields.
You have to cultivate them.
They're around your village.
And the human relationship to the land, to the source of food, changes profoundly.
Even in the most early of farming villages, there were signs of a new, much more complex relationship
between the living and the ancestors, those who have gone before.
Why?
Because land ownership goes from one generation to the next.
It is a reasonable assumption that your successes will continue to cultivate the land as you have.
And it's fascinating that almost immediately, at sites like Jericho and Abu Hurra,
you find, for the first time, Anselester cults.
How do we know this?
Take a look at this picture on the wall.
This is a figurine made of clay from a site called Ain Ghazal in the Jordan Valley.
It is a figurine that was once probably dressed with clothing.
And it's clearly a portrayal of somebody with eyes, a well-defined nose, this paint on the body.
And you find figurines like this, or skulls plastered with the features of people who were living.
Ancestors.
At a lot of these early sites, clearly there was a relationship between the living and the spiritual worlds,
which was reflected in a relationship with ancestors.
You find exactly the same thing in Native American societies.
You find it in African societies.
These relationships were all important.
They were continuity.
They bound you to the land.
These spiritual relationships.
Very important.
Again, the intersection of the living and the spiritual.
Then there was another thing, and that is the issue of food surplus.
Food surpluses were critical.
You had to store not only the seed for the next harvest, for the next planting mother,
and you also had to have enough food to feed everybody through the year.
And these food surpluses and how you manipulate them began to play an important part in defining social relations.
Who, for example, managed the food surplus at above the household level.
Who made sure nobody went hungry?
Who used surplus food to trade for other commodities?
Critical issues in farming villages, much more so than in hunter-gatherers societies.
And then there were the realities of the endless cycle of the changing seasons.
These seasons bear much resemblance to the stages of human life.
To birth, youth, adulthood, old age, and death, spring, summer, fall, and winter.
The endless renewal of human life, of the fertility of the soil.
Fertility of the soil and of human life began to play an important role in household and community life.
Manifested increasingly in earth and fertility goddesses.
Now there's been a great deal of talk, uncritical talk, about mother goddess cults that were universal.
I'm not talking about that, that's airy-fairest nonsense.
What I'm talking about is the fact that there are figurines of such deities.
Normally female, which of course embodies birth and fertility,
which have close associations with agriculture, found in some archaeological sites,
among them a large village called Katahuyuk, which we'll talk about, which is in Turkey, dating to about 6000 BC or earlier.
