By 4800 BC, banned Keramik people were living in the Netherlands and Belgium, and as far
east as the Dnieper Valley in Ukraine, where mammoth hunters had once dwelt.
And what was the effect on the indigenous population?
What about the Mesolithic hunter-gatherers who had lived there since the late Ice Age?
The indigenous inhabitants of Europe.
This banned Keramik expansion resulted in continual interactions between these ancient
indigenous peoples, the bans scattered by lakes and rivers, and the newly settled Mesolithic
farmers, Neolithic farmers, who lived in one spot for longer periods of time.
We don't really know what these interactions are, but we can make a number of assumptions.
Firstly, Mesolithic groups were well aware of agriculture and animal herding.
But, many of them did not choose to take it up.
Why should they?
It's the same old game of the strategy.
They had enough to eat.
In southwestern Asia, people began by adopting the strategy of planting.
There was no point in adopting the strategy.
For example, Australian Aborigines are well aware in northern Australia that New Guinea
people cultivate a few miles away.
But they don't do it.
There's no need to.
But it may be that some of these Mesolithic people incorporated some aspects of farming
culture into their lives.
Because they well-ized only too well, and this is well documented from studies of hunter-gatherer
societies, is that agriculture is far harder work than hunting and gathering.
It's less leisure, which is a little known consequence of food production.
Many of them, however, did take up some form of herding, goats, and sheep.
Why?
These animals provided a reliable food source during the winter months.
We can't say much more than that, because a complex process of migration, interaction,
and assimilation resulted in the eventual spread of farming among all ancient hunter-gatherer
societies in Europe, even into the Mesolithic societies in Scandinavia along Baltic shores
who adopted agriculture as late as 3500 BC.
Of course, up there the growing season is much shorter.
The climate was more severe, but finally it took hold.
But it didn't hug hold by people saying, as I said, with other peoples, let's go to
America tomorrow, let's go to Belgium tomorrow.
It was the process, the end product, of generations of people doing their farming thing, living
on carefully selected lighter soils.
Ban keramic settlement, if plotted on a map, is very much limited to these carefully selected
lighter soils, to communities who settled in the same place for long periods of time.
In these communities, each household fell fed itself, but thanks to the mechanisms of
kin and the reciprocal obligations between these kin groups, larger groups of people
cooperated on large projects like clearing forests or building longhouses.
It was more complex, but everything still basically worked at the household and community
level.
It's interesting that many of the graves of banned keramic folk, the most richly decorated
ones are those of women, people who lived in longhouses, and commonly associated in
modern farming groups, with kin groups that traced their descent through the female line.
Some archaeologists believe that women may have had high status in banned keramic society,
even if political power and social authority resided, as it had in many hunter-gallower
societies, in older men with experience, and now with cattle involved and cattle are a
form of wealth on the hoof.
These men may have had wealth in the form of cattle they owned, and may also have controlled
trade.
But women seem to have had a pretty powerful role in this society.
