Ban Keramik was successful. By 4500 BC, farming settlement in Europe had become more clustered
with much more closely defined territories identified by different pottery styles. And
this was a time when territorial identity became more important and when communal burial
came into fashion. What are communal burial places? Places where generations of people
are buried, members of the same lineage are buried, where kin go to become ancestors in
groups. These communal burial places, we think, were burial mounds, large long burial mounds,
sepulchres where the ancestors resided, often placed on ridges and at other strategic locations
where they marked territorial boundaries. Now here in Europe we see the ancestor cult
well documented with burials and communal graves. Because the ancestors, as we said,
with Southwestern Asia, were the guardians of the land. Their burial places often fashioned
from huge boulders and buried under earthen mounds, sites known as megaliths, again my
classical education, mega, big, lithos stone. Important power symbols among people who were
more and more interacting with one another constantly. There was no such thing as self-sufficiency.
Europe was more and more becoming a web of interconnectedness. And in this territorial
marking, the grounding in the land and in the ancestors was of critical importance.
Between the 2800 and 2400 B.C., there was a change. These communal burials gave way
to individual sepulchres for important elders in Central and Eastern Europe. Now here things
were changing. Now leaders were emerging. You've got powerful chieftains who developed
in later Bronze Age and Iron Age societies. These were the beginnings of a more complex
socially ranked society, reflected in changing burial customs. And this was a time too when
ancient European societies came into increasing contact with the changing Mediterranean to
the south. So in Europe, you have an area that received the new economies, where initially
settlement took hold on the lighter soils, careful soil selection, slash and burn agriculture,
a fairly rapid spread as a result of the natural dynamics of a form of agriculture, which is
wasteful of land. And from there, you've got the lighter soils being increasingly crowded.
Territorial boundaries, careful grounding in kin ownership of land, the placement of
long barrows on prominent ridges, the marking of territory. And in some places, like the
famous site of Avebury and Stonehenge, which has huge stone circles, a very complex ritual
landscape, which defined the world of the ancestors arose over an entire area of southern
England. This was a very complex relationship with the land, and it affected a land where
the world was getting increasingly crowded. And then, after 2500 B.C. you would see the
emergence of chieftains, of individuals, powerful leaders. They may still have been kin leaders,
but they had individual wealth and power. And it was they that increasingly monitored
and controlled contacts, contacts with neighbouring people, with people afar, and with the burgeoning
Mediterranean world to the south. Europe was becoming more complicated. Soon there was
metallurgy, soon there was the plow, and the gradual clearing of much of the heavier soils
and the forests of Western Europe. Only here we've described, just briefly, the first farming
settlement of Europe after 6000 B.C., and we've shown how farmers spread from western
Asia into southeast Europe before 6000 B.C. when the climate was wetter and new adaptations
were needed. Then I've rather controversially suggested that the flooding of the Uxine Lake
was a cataclysm that became a catalyst for the spread of farming into the forested areas
to the northwest. I described the Ban Keramik tradition, the first European farming society
which spread as far as Netherlands and the Belgium. And finally we discussed, very briefly,
the complex relationship between people and the land, and the land and the ancestors,
central elements in European farming societies. And next time we'll do the same thing with
the first farmers of East Asia.
