The best evidence we have at the moment, and I do stress the words at the moment because
everything in world history is up for grabs, a single discovery can change so much, was
found many years ago by an remarkable American archaeologist named Richard McNeish. He investigated
a series of open sites, rock shelters, and caves in Mexico's Tehuacan Valley. The hunter-gatherer
groups living in this arid valley were hunters, but mainly plant foragers, and they placed
more and more emphasis on plant collecting after about 8,000 BC. Why? Simply because the
climate was getting drier, they had hunted out the game, and so plant foods were the
only substitute. How do we know this? Because the cave deposits in Tehuacan are very dry,
and McNeish was able to collect large samples, not only of wild plants, but when he got to
those levels of very early maize cobs as well. By about 4,500 BC, at least 90% of the Tehuacan
diet was wild grasses, cacti, and magwe. So much grass was needed that some form of cultivation
of native plants must have been essential by this time. Do we have the proof? No, but
it's clear that the scenario was developing in a very similar way as it developed in China
and in Southwest Asia. I should stress, though, that the archaeological record of this is not
nearly as complete as that, for example, from Abu Hurayra, the early farming site in Syria,
where they were able to use the flotation method to collect truly enormous samples of
plants, but one day hopefully they will do this in this area. The earliest small maize
cobs, not Tehuacan, but maize in Tehuacan Valley, appear at about 3,600 BC. By this time, people
had domesticated crops which were easily stored, maize, beans, and squash. The triumph of it
was probably domesticated by this time, maybe actually even earlier than this, we don't yet
know. The important point is, to compare with the time when Richard McNeish dug at Tehuacan,
we are now able not just to radiocarbon date the halves of the levels in which these cobs
were found, but the actual cobs themselves, which means that our dates for domesticated
crops are far more accurate than they were a generation ago. Now the earliest Tehuacano
maize cobs were smaller than modern day ones. They were less than two inches long, very
small, not nearly as productive as the maize of later times. But we can be sure of one
thing, maize would probably not domesticated in the Tehuacan Valley earlier than anywhere
else. Current estimates place the domestication of maize in southwestern Mexico, probably
near the Bolsa River, somewhere around 3,600 BC, or maybe a couple of thousand years earlier,
we don't know, the date is exactly not known, but certainly by 3,600 BC, and we also suspect
that maize reached the Tehuacan Valley some 350 short years later.
The common ancestral corn was an eight-road form of maize. It's known as maize de ocho,
and that's the corn represented in the Tehuacan Valley. It was a common ancestral corn, which
eventually spread thousands of miles from its original homeland after 3,000 BC.
Such then is the scenario for the first domestication of maize, Central America, probably southwestern
Mexico, perhaps as early as 4,000 or 5,000 BC, and certainly by 3,600. But what about
other crops?
