As maize was domesticated in Mesoamerica, other crops were tamed in the Andes.
Among them, a grain called quinoa, which has never rarely achieved the popularity outside
the Andes until recent years when it's become a favorite vegetable for foodies in upscale
restaurants in North America, and of course, a much greater and more important crop for
potato.
When was the potato, and where mucanoa first domesticated?
We don't exactly know.
The earliest date we have at the moment is somewhere around 2000 BC, that's after maize.
But in all probability, when the archaeological evidence is more complete, we will find that
these tubers were domesticated very much earlier, maybe two or three thousand years earlier.
I have no idea, I'm just guessing.
But I wouldn't bet the farm on 2000 BC, I think it's earlier than that.
But we do know that by the time of the Spanish contact in the 15th century AD, the Andeans
used hundreds of potato varieties.
We also know in Provences that the potato traveled to Spain in the pocket of Conquistador,
but really didn't become popular for a long time.
It was thought to be poisonous, it was thought to be an aphrodisiac, but when it did take
hold in Northern Europe and Ireland in particular, it became a staple.
And as you know, the Irish potato famine of the 1840s resulted from concentration on a
single potato variety.
In contrast, the Andeans used dozens, a very simple agricultural precaution.
Maize as opposed to potatoes first appeared on the Peruvian coast from the north as early
as 1800 BC.
It was to become one of the staples of lowland, Andean civilization, which we describe much
later in lecture 34.
What about North America?
Let's start in the Southwest.
In 10,000 BC, a scattered, teeny population of desert hunter-gatherer groups inhabited
the North American Southwest.
Their life-way, based on small game and plant foods, survived little change for thousands
of years.
Putting the tape as it were, thousands of years forward, between about 2500 BC and 100
BC, the climate of the Southwest was relatively stable, and perhaps somewhat wetter than it
is today.
However, as had been true from the very beginning, the environment was one where hunting and
gathering were high-risk occupations.
Why?
Because the rainfall was so unpredictable.
You had drought cycles, you had wet cycles, and the population expanded and contracted.
But obviously the realities of this very added environment meant that population densities
were low.
It also may have meant that there were occasional food shortages, and in added times people
tended to live as much as possible near reliable, permanent sources of water where the best
food supplies were to be found.
But under the circumstance, domesticated plants like maize and beans have an enormous advantage.
They're predictable and easily stored.
However, they're very difficult to grow in what, from an agricultural point of view,
with such a regular rainfall, are marginal environments.
The first Mesoamerican crops to cross the Rio Grande were maize, beans, and squash.
All probably cultivated in northern Mexico for many centuries by farmers who occasionally
maybe had sporadic contact with hunter-gatherers to the north.
One of the things about agriculture you have to remember is that hunter-gatherers, for example,
the California Indians, were well aware of agriculture.
They had no incentive to take it up.
The Australian Aborigines knew of farmers and the islands to the north, but again they
had no incentive to do it.
They had enough to eat.
But in the southwest, a combination of slowly rising population and food shortages may have
created a desire to start adopting the cultivation of maize.
