They collaborate.
From this collaboration in the food quest, perhaps more complex social organization develops.
At the same time, they become more interdependent.
There is a greater volume of exchange of foodstuffs and luchoes, much of it in the hands of more
entrepreneurial people, perhaps kin leaders, whoever, who inevitably began to rise to the
top of a somewhat elementary social pyramid.
And of course, great improvements were made in storage technology, because as you know,
farming is rather like a savings account at a bank.
You either make it grow or you deplete it.
And the combination of these innovations helped alleviate food shortages.
But inevitably people were living in the same places for much longer periods of time.
So again, here as they did in the Southwest, in Mexico and many other places, they turned
to the deliberate cultivation of local plants to include increased natural supplies.
They turned to native grasses, goosefoot, march elder.
They turned to goods and they turned to sunflowers.
These were being cultivated in many places as early as 2500 B.C.
But everywhere this cultivation was a supplement to a hunter-gatherer diet.
This lasted for centuries, because this hunter-gatherer society, based as it was in very fertile river
valleys with migrating water, foul and fish, didn't need that much extra food.
So much so, that for many centuries, this sideline agriculture, supported as well as
hunting and gathering, major social changes, including elaborate burial rituals and huge
earthworks which we'll describe in lecture 31.
And then, inevitably, maize and bean agriculture spread across the southern plains, into the
Midwest and Southeast, between AD 450 and 800, during early medieval times in Europe.
This was a new sort of farming, more demanding.
It required intensive labor on heavy river soils, and resulted in the transformation
not only of the landscape, but of society.
This wasn't supplementary agriculture, this involved land clearance, collaboration of
a lot of people, forests being felled, and the complete transformation of river flood
plains, the result being that, in many cases, the wild stands of foods vanished in the face
of much more organized agriculture, and with the transformation of the landscape and the
economy came completely new societies, which were based on the traditional beliefs of earlier
times, and culminated in the appearance of elaborate chieftains, described in lecture
31, the Mississippian chieftains, which were at their peak just before the Spanish arrived
in North America.
Everywhere maize took hold on a large scale, society became more elaborate, society became
more sedentary, social organization became more complex, and long distance exchange
assumed great importance.
Maize spread as far north as the St. Lawrence Valley, and was an underpinning of Iroquois
society.
The only places where it didn't take hold were the Arctic North and the West, the Desert
West and the Coastal West, where complex hunter-gatherer societies survived until European.
In this lecture we've described the origins of food production in the Americas, and especially
the story of maize.
We've surveyed the main crops and animals domesticated by ancient Native Americans,
and described three areas where domestication began.
Our main focus has been maize, which originated from the wild grass to Yosente.
We concluded it was first domesticated in southwestern Mesoamerica.
We described the spread of maize into North America and into the western woodlands, and
we've shown how in both these areas the new crop was the foundation for more elaborate
societies.
Maize was the staff of life, and now we've looked at agriculture as the staff of life.
It is time in part four to look at the world's earliest civilizations.
