Lecture 18, The Story of Maze
So far we've looked at the origins of agriculture and of animal domestication in the old world.
Lecture 18 takes us to the Americas, and this time we're going to tell the story of the origins of food production in the new world.
We're going to begin with a discussion of the major crops and animals domesticated in the Americas, and describe the three major centers of plant domestication.
Then I'm going to describe the archeological evidence for the domestication of maize from its wild ancestor, a grass in Central America called Tiosente.
We'll look at the archeological evidence for early maize cultivation in Mesoamerica, and I should add here that Mesoamerica is that area of Central America where the pre-Columbian civilizations arose.
And we'll see that this cultivation in Mesoamerica is as early as 3600 BC, if not considerably earlier.
And then we'll trace the spread of maize into the Andes region, where other crops such as the potato, one of the great crops of the world today, were domesticated as early as 2000 BC.
And then finally, we'll analyze what we know about the spread of maize and bean agriculture into North American Southwest and into the eastern woodlands of the United States.
You see, in the latter area, maize and bees farming transformed the landscape and helped foster the rise of North America's powerful Mississippian chieftains.
I should note here that we'll describe both the Pueblo Societies of the Southwest and the Mississippian in Lecture 31 in Part 6 of this course.
This lecture concludes Part 3, and our discussion of the origins and spread of food production.
In Part 4, we'll describe the origins of the world's earliest urban civilizations.
The Native Americans domesticated an extraordinary range of indigenous plants, some of which maize, potatoes, and tobacco in particular, as well as the tomato, were rapidly adopted by farmers on other continents after European contact in 1492.
In fact, at the time of Columbus, the Native Americans arguably were the most expert farmers in the world. They domesticated hundreds of forms of potato alone.
But the most important of all their crops was Indian corn, properly called maize, the only significant wild grass in the New World to be domesticated and farmed on a very large scale.
Root crops were another substantial food source as well, especially in tropical South America and high in the Andes.
But the Native Americans cultivated many other crops as well, amaranth, beans, chilies, and sunflowers, to mention only a few.
But there's one difference, apart from the different crops, between the Old World and the New, and that is in the area of domesticated animals.
In sharp contrast to the Old World, the ancient Native Americans had few domesticated beasts, but these included the alpaca and the llama of the Andes, and the dog, the turkey, and the muscovy duck.
They did not have the wild prototypes, as it were, to domesticate sheep, goats, and oxen, or horses.
The latter, too, of course, becoming important animals for riding and draft purposes in the Old World.
