How, then, did agriculture begin in the Americas?
Most experts now agree that there were two or three centers of plant domestication in
the Americas — Mesoamerica for maize, beans, squash, and sweet potatoes.
The central Andean highlands of South America for root crops, like potatoes, uluca and oca,
and the lowland tropics between Columbia, Panama, and Peru for squashes and other tropical
plants.
In later times, at least four major farming areas developed — Tropical South America,
the Andean region, Mesoamerica, and Eastern North America.
Tropical food production in the Americas may have begun in small-scale household gardens
in forest villages, in Panama, for example, as early as the ninth millennium BC.
That's very early.
Then you're getting into the sort of area of time of Southwest Asia or China.
But the problem is that in tropical environments like this, preservation conditions are so
poor that it is very difficult indeed for us to actually recover the material.
And such as we know about this comes mainly from plant phytoliths and other very inconspicuous
evidence.
But this small-scale horticulture of wild plants eventually developed into a much larger
scale, form of slash-and-burn agriculture.
Overcore, we talked about this with the Ban Keramic people of Europe, a process that did
not spread very widely in the Panama region till about 5,000 to 4,000 BC, just about the
time that maize was being domesticated in the higher areas of Central America.
Now the first domesticated plants may well have been squashes and bottle gourds, both
of which were in use probably in the lowlands and certainly in Highland Mesoamerica by about
8,000 BC.
But these obviously are domesticated plants of fairly limited application in terms of
diet.
The classic triumvirate of American crops was maize, beans, and squash.
Of these, maize was the staff of life at the time of European contact for people living
between Canada and Argentina and Chile, from sea level to high in the Andes, in rain forests
and in semi-added lands.
This crop was the staple.
This crop was the crop that allowed large, complex states to develop in some parts of
the Americas.
It allowed sedentary settlement, much higher population densities, and especially when
combined with beans was the engine which drove Native American civilization.
Obviously and inevitably, intense debate surrounds the wild ancestry of maize.
For years scholars looked for the wild prototype for a wild maize, but after years of controversy
it was finally proven that the wild ancestor of maize was not a wild form of the corn itself,
but an indigenous grass which grows naturally over much of Mesoamerica, a grass called teosinte.
The process of domesticating teosinte to turning it into maize, where well have begun as an
unintentional consequence of harvesting teosinte.
This is a grass that was gathered widely by hunter-gatherer societies before farming
came along, and just as happened with wild wheat, just as happened with millet up in
northern China, the gathering of the wild grass may well have created selective pressure
for more harvestable forms of teosinte, forms in which the spikes of the wild grass shrunk
into bunches.
In time this form of grass would become established by campsites and inabandoned refuse middens.
And in time too, perhaps people began weeding teosinte, then they began to deliberately
plant the modified teosinte.
And then soon the grass's reproductive strategy became dependent not on the wild, but on human
intervention.
And maize was the result, maize was domesticated.
Now this is obviously a theoretical scenario.
What archaeological evidence is there for early maize agriculture?
