The next generation of theories was solved around simple ecological explanations.
Some of these theories focused on the ecological potential of river flood plains,
fertile enough to produce huge food surpluses to feed growing populations.
Another body of theories pointed to the ecological diversity of local environments
in areas like the Nile Valley and Mesopotamia,
which allowed the earliest civilizations not to rely just on one food source,
but on foods from closely different neighboring ecological zones.
For instance, under this argument,
the Highland-Andean states of South America relied heavily on their lowland neighbors
for fish meal, cotton, seaweed, and other resources.
In turn, the coast received potatoes and other crops from the Highlands.
Such diversity provided protection against crop failure and famine.
A very pervasive group of theories discussed irrigation agriculture.
Such agriculture has the potential to support much denser populations.
Population as scholars of the 1920s to 1950s argued that some early civilizations
like those of Egypt and Mesopotamia were hydraulic societies controlled by massive
bureaucracies who controlled the canals, the building of reservoirs, and dykes, and so on.
In fact, more recent research has shown that large-scale irrigation works
were in fact the product of later stages of these civilizations.
For example, the Egyptian pharaohs didn't really get into irrigation seriously
until about the Middle Kingdom, that is after 1500 BC.
In recent years, some other theories have come forward.
Massive expansion of trade, massive engagement in warfare,
have been involved in theories that say that these were the primary causes of state formation.
In fact, much more detailed research in areas like coastal Peru and the Near East
has shown that the intensification of both trade and war was a consequence of,
rather than a cause of statehood.
What then do we know about the rise of early civilizations?
This is all getting rather confusing.
We can say a number of things.
Firstly, the world's original civilizations came into being during periods of major social and economic change.
This means, and we will survey these developments later in the course,
means that simple one-cause explanations of civilization like warfare,
irrigation, or trade are inadequate.
As a result, recent theories of the origins of state involve multiple and often intricate causes.
We can divide these theories really into two broad categories.
Many experts see the early civilizations as very complicated living systems
with many interacting components or subsystems which contributed to cultural change
so that an emerging more complex cultural system in an early civilization
developed by interacting with the very much more complex ecological system of which it was part.
They had an ecologically based theory, and they argue these theories for a multi-causal explanation
in which many factors among them, climatic and environmental change, played major roles.
You cannot blame people for having these theories.
For example, the rising waters of the Persian Gulf after the Ice Age
may have created favorable environments in lower Mesopotamia for much larger settlements and more intensive agriculture.
Something we will look at in lecture 20, a transformation of the low-lying delta of southern Mesopotamia
which happened so fast that the landscape literally would have changed within the compass of a single generation.
