Lecture 19 The Origins of States and Civilization
Now we come to a watershed in the prehistory of humankind.
We begin our extensive exploration of the world's first civilizations, the pre-industrial
civilizations.
Part four of this course surveys the very first civilizations of all, which appeared
in southwestern Asia about 5,000 years ago.
But before we get into specifics of Sumerian and Egyptian and other civilizations, we must
look at some of the background, because the rise of civilization has been one of the great
academic discussion grounds of the last century.
How do we define civilization?
This lecture begins by looking at that and some of the common characteristics of what
archaeologists call states or pre-industrial civilizations, a pre-industrial civilization
is one that does not depend on fossil fuels, but depends on human hands for labor, or sometimes
just simply civilizations.
And then next, we'll analyze the major early theories surrounding the origins of states,
just like we did with agriculture, the theories which invoked single, often very simple causes
for the appearance of states.
And then finally, we'll spend time surveying current thinking, which assumes that many factors
were involved in the creation of pre-industrial societies, some of them ecological, and then
of course other social, the all important roles played by individuals and groups.
I'll argue that a unique period of social inequality and cultural change in the eastern
Mediterranean region about 5,000 years ago allowed ability, individuals of exceptional
ability to forge the first civilization out of much smaller chieftains, a complex process
and still little understood.
The point is that we really can't look at the early states without looking at some of
their commonalities, what were they, what are the salient features about them, what made
them different from earlier, more egalitarian societies.
And the way we look at this is through archaeological theory, so today we're going to explore some
of those theories.
Five thousand years ago, the world's first literate civilizations appeared in southwestern
Asia, in Mesopotamia, and along the Nile River.
That appearance was a major turning point in the human past.
Part four of the prehistory of humankind describes the earliest civilizations in Mesopotamia,
Egypt, and the eastern Mediterranean.
We span a period from the fourth millennium BC to about 1200 BC, compared with the earlier
parts of this course, our chronology is beginning to shrink, but beginning to think in centuries
rather than tens of thousands of years.
But first, what do we mean by civilization?
If you go to Websters, or you go to the ultimate arbiter, to me an Englishman of the English
language, the Oxford Dictionary, you will find a definition of civilization that implies
civility, a measure of decency in individual behavior.
Such definitions reflect value judgments, or what is called ethnocentrism, looking at
things from our own cultural values, because what may be civilized in one civilization
may be antisocial or baffling in another.
For example, the accumulation of great wealth by individuals is common in our society, but
baffling in many others, and so on and so forth.
Today, archaeologists, and I'm not going to spend a lot of time defining civilization
in this course, tend to use the term as a shorthand.
Baffling means urbanized state-level societies.
In contrast, earlier and other societies without cities, and other features we'll look at in
a moment, were pre-state societies.
Very simple definition, really a wag bag into which we put all measure of different pre-industrial
civilizations.
