The civilizations described in this course I refer to and already have referred to as
pre-industrial civilizations.
Why?
Because they relied on manual labor rather than fossil fuels, such as coal, to power
the civilization as it were.
This means that one of the critical elements of a pre-industrial civilization was that
somewhere, somehow, somebody had to be able to command the unquestioning loyalty of hundreds
if not thousands of people for public works, to man their armies, for agriculture, for
irrigation systems.
And that was the big feature of these civilizations, the ability to control labor.
Now there are many different variations between individual pre-industrial civilizations.
For example, the Inca civilization of the Andes is quite different in many of its institutions
from that of the ancient Egyptians.
But these two, and all the others, share a number of common features.
What we must do now is have a quick look at these, because they are very, very central
to the notion of a state, to what I talk about when I talk about a civilization.
The first feature is that all these societies, whether Egyptians, Sumerians from Mesopotamia,
or Mayan from Central America, all of them were based on large cities.
What is the city?
For the purposes of this course, it's a community with more than 5,000 people, teeny by our standards,
but by the standards of the ancient world, large.
A complex settlement with very large, complex social organization behind it.
Why?
Because cities require complex infrastructures.
And society as a whole had a very large, complex social organization which has been
likened, as we will say many times, to a social pyramid.
A few people at the top, a lot of people below.
Another feature of states, they control much larger territories than societies did in earlier
times or ones that did not form part of civilizations.
How did they do this?
By trade, by force, by political fiat, by tribute, and taxation.
Because all the pre-industrial states share a type of economy which was based on the
centralized accumulation, and I stress the word centralized, accumulation of capital
and social status through tribute and taxation.
In other words, a few people monopolized trade and exchange, they monopolized redistribution
of food supplies, and so on.
Everything flowed to the center.
This type of economy allowed the support of hundreds, often thousands of non-food producers,
artisans, bureaucrats, priests, the notion being that here for the first time you have
a large number of people who didn't cultivate the soil.
You've moved beyond the notion of a household which supported itself.
People now bought their food in markets, were paid wages in rations, as was the case in
Egypt, and substantial segments of society never went into the fields at all.
Concombitant with this, the centralization, was another major change, an advance in all
these societies towards some form of record keeping, science and mathematics, and most
important at all, some form of written script, or a close alternative, like for example the
famous Tipu, the Inca knotted string, which was a form of code which expert scribes, and
I think you can call them that, kept inventories of what was in each district of the Inca civilization
simply by knots on strings.
