The city assumed many forms, from the compact walled mudbrick settlements of early Mesopotamia,
to the elaborate Maya ceremonial centers of Mesoamerica, with their core populations
densely in the precinct center of the city and a scattered rural population in much
smaller settlements in the surrounding hinterland.
Those of what is a city abound?
But the most common arbitrary one, as I already mentioned, defines their lower limit of population
at about 5,000 people, but a density of population much higher than that in small settlements,
a defining characteristic.
In fact, many of the early Mesopotamian settlements, cities, were simply agglomerations of individual
villages which found it better and more economic to live closer together, and I wager that
the quarters of these different cities, in fact, comprised close kin, people who used
to live in a village, and so on.
Cities have another characteristic too, they are marked by specialization and interdependence
between the city and its rural hinterland.
The city was a central place in the region, providing services for smaller settlements
around it.
Most early cities had major marketplaces, like the great marketplace of Aztec Tenochtitlan,
where agricultural produce was sold and exchanged as well as all sorts of other goods.
Cities had a level of complexity and organization far greater than that in a village or town.
They were centralized institutions, almost invariably with major public buildings and
ceremonial structures around a central precinct.
Their institutions preserved law and order, regulated trade, maintained security, often
behind imposing city walls.
They were, like states, strongly centralized institutions.
One can liken them to a pyramid, with a teeny elite and a solitary voulu at the pinnacle,
with a huge mass of commoners at the base, again the notion of a pyramid.
The city lies at the very core of the state.
But how did these states originate?
A huge theoretical literature, mushrooms every year, which goes on and on, writing basically
about the same things.
All we can do here is navigate rapidly through some of the major ideas.
Writing about early civilization began with the writings of Vera Gordon Child of Agricultural
Revolution fame, who wrote about not an agricultural revolution, which we described in lecture 15,
but about an urban, urban revolution.
Now the Victorians, 75 years earlier, had followed the Greeks and Romans in believing
that Egypt was the cradle of a human civilization.
But the discovery of Sumerian Mesopotamian civilization in the late 19th century showed
that civilization's origins were much more complex.
In the 1920s, University of Chicago Egyptologist James Brested coined an enduring phrase,
the fertile crescent, a curve of territory which encompassed the Nile and Jordan valleys,
the highlands of Iran, and lowland Mesopotamia.
He described this fertile crescent as the cradle of civilization.
Gordon Child in the 1930s went further.
He wrote of this urban revolution, I just mentioned, in which metallurgy, the formation
of cities, and more intensive agriculture, including irrigation, as well as specialized
artisans, played leading roles.
Ultimately, he argued, a class-based society came into being, based not on the traditional
ties of kin, but on economic classes, on skills, on being a soldier or a priest, writing
more effective long distance transportation such as sailing ships, and then eventually
wheeled vehicles, and a state religion, were all essential ingredients of a pre-industrial
civilization.
The notion of an urban revolution was popular for many years, but is now seen to be so simplistic
for many of his features, which Child identified were in fact characteristic of earlier civilizations
as societies as well.
But all scholars now agree that three elements of the urban revolution hypothesis were of
great importance, large food surpluses, diversified farming economies, and agriculture, irrigation,
agriculture.
