Now, this wasn't a trade where caravans marched in large numbers, a great deal of this trade
was by exchange from one community to another.
But something is beginning to happen here at the beginning of the fourth millennium BC.
Because the trade isn't just between one city-state and another, over, say, a distance of a hundred
miles.
You're now seeing much, much longer distance connections developing.
Connections which linked Southwest Asia, Mesopotamia, with Eastern Iran, even with the Indus Valley in Pakistan.
So the Indus Valley was linked to Mesopotamia, Mesopotamia to Anatolia, modern-day Turkey,
those areas eventually to the Nile and the Mediterranean coast.
You were developing a much, much larger lattice of interaction, or as some people call it,
the world's first world economic system, or first global economy.
This is a bit overdrawn, but for the first time you're finding human societies treating
on a very much larger scale, where they're really dealing with civilizations like themselves,
with individual rulers or whatever, at much longer distances.
There is no question too that this much larger connection is connected also with the improvement
of long-distance transportation, sailing boats developed on the Nile and in Mesopotamia.
World carts came in very rapidly, draft oxen, donkeys used for caravans.
In other words, people were moving off the tyranny of the limited load carried on people's
shoulders, which was always a problem to save for the mile and the Aztec who did not have
draft animals.
And from this developed not just Sumerian civilization, but a much larger Eastern Mediterranean
world.
Sumerian civilization itself was born of the growing interdependence of city-states in
Mesopotamia.
Each of them was small.
They competed.
They fought.
They traded with each other in a very, very volatile political and diplomatic environment,
where there was constant negotiation, an intricate pattern of ever-changing alliances that came
into being and evaporated and came back generation to generation, city to city, ruler to ruler.
The point you must understand, however, which I emphasize again and again, is that Mesopotamia
was not unique, for cities were also developing in other parts of Southwest Asia as far afield
as the Indus Valley in Pakistan and on the Iranian plateau.
This volume of long-distance trade which resulted resulted in much larger political ambitions.
The trade increased much of it carried by donkey caravans and by ships, and inevitably
as society became more complex, so city rulers became more secular and the priesthood a specialized
occupation.
They may still be divine kings, but their primary concerns were secular, particularly
in the world of Sumeria, where civilization was a world of constant bickering and shifting
alliances.
Some city-states like Ur, famous for the excavations by the British archaeologists Leonard Woolley
before World War II, had periods of great political strength and prosperity when they
dominated their neighbors.
And then, just as swiftly, perhaps the result of a reign by a couple of less competent rulers
and ambitious neighbors, they would tumble into obscurity and become vassals of a neighbor.
There was no permanent political unity, no vast state like you find in Egypt.
It was constant warfare waged by the world's first standing armies.
This was not informal warfare, this was institutionalized warfare, because standing armies were one
of the keys to maintaining political power.
This was a patchwork, quarrelsome, volatile, but with enormous potential.
Some Sumerian cities nurtured powerful rulers, like the wealthy individuals buried in the
famous royal burials at the ancient city of Ur, excavated by British archaeologist
Leonard Woolley, as I told you, in the 1930s.
He reconstructed a funeral where the mourners had dug a deep, funerary pit, buried the body
of a prince in a stone burial chamber at the foot of it, surrounded by his faithful
retainers, who were sacrificed to accompany him in death in all his glorious Golden Vagalia.
And then...
