Fifty-nine people filed into the burial pit down a ramp, including wagons drawn by oxen,
all of them wearing the regalia of their various offices in the court, courtiers, soldiers,
serving women, and so on.
And each of them carried a small clay cup.
The ramp it's blue, a signal was given, and all the court, the fifty-nine people, drank
this cup, which apparently contained some poison, and laid down in order and died.
The pit was then filled in with more sacrifices, and the funeral was over.
The expectation was that the ruler would carry on in the same style in the next world.
This funeral was constructed brilliantly, reconstructed brilliantly by Leonard Woolley.
Unfortunately his excavation notes are too inadequate, and the site itself, the burial
was destroyed during excavation that we do not know, in fact, whether this is an accurate
reconstruction, but knowing Woolley's work, it's probably quite likely.
Over time, it's inevitable that the ambitions of some of these city-state rulers extended
far beyond Mesopotamia.
Inevitably, too, they sought to control the lucrative trade routes which crossed the
Syrian desert to the eastern Mediterranean coast.
By 2500 B.C., after six hundred years of civilization, Akkadian cities to the north of Sumerian
country, around modern-day Baghdad, were competing with their southern neighbors for power and
wealth.
In 2334 B.C., King Sargon of Agadi, south of Babylon, extended his domains by trade
and military campaigns to include not only Sumer, but northern Mesopotamia.
He was a very able monarch, and his successes were not.
Political chaos followed a severe drought in the north.
The Akkadian kingdom collapsed abruptly, and King Ur-Namu of Ur took control of Sumer
and Akkad in 2112 B.C.
Unlike Sargon, Ur-Namu and his successors of the Third Ur-Royal Dynasty were expert
administrators and diplomats.
Their great empire flourished for 120 years, during which time they established, and very
important things, a persistent tradition of Mesopotamian civilization which combined
trade, conquest, ruthless administration, despotism, with tribute to forge large, poorly
integrated and highly volatile empires that spanned the world between the Mediterranean
and the Persian Gulf.
And then, in 1990 B.C., Sumerian civilization gave way to Babylonian civilization, and then
to the great imperial empire of the Assyrians.
But by that time Mesopotamia was a much larger world.
It was part of a much larger universe, the universe of the Egyptians, the universe of
the eastern Mediterranean coast, and of the Hittites, which we'll talk about later.
We have moved on from a small-scale civilization, from the beginnings of Mesopotamian civilization,
which we described in this lecture, starting with the village societies which flourished
on the southern delta after 5700 B.C.
We described the growth of towns into cities, communities like Erech and Rook, by 3800 B.C.,
also innovations like writing and metallurgy, which followed.
We've explored the beginnings of Sumerian civilization, with its patchwork of competing
city-states and extensive interconnections which laid the foundations for the volatile
Mesopotamian civilizations of later times, and for a much more interconnected world.
Part of this new commercial and political world was Egypt, which we describe in the
next two lectures as the counterpoint to Mesopotamia.
