So writing developed from a simple inventory system and the earliest
cuneiform was probably used purely for record purposes to record inventories
and commercial transactions and the contents of temple storms because the
point being that if you are going to control a trade you've got to know what
you're trading what the contents of your storms are and how you can allocate
them in times of need or for reward or for tribute or whatever. So inventorying
really was probably where writing first began as I said in the previous lecture
a very different thing from the literacy of our own civilization. It was a
thousand years or so before Sumerian writing became much more and created the
world's first literature. There's a wonderful book about Sumerian
civilizations by a man called Samuel Cramer. It's called the Sumerians. It was
written a good quarter century ago but it's a marvelous well-written essay
which draws not only on archaeology but on literature and in there you can read
prayers and laments and the exercises done by schoolboys even parts on an
agricultural manual which show you the enormous flexibility and potential of
Sumerian writing which unleashed a whole area of human creativity which had not
flourished before. But again this literacy was confined to a relatively
small number of people, the scribes, people of power who went through demanding
training to learn this from a very early age and it was they that controlled in
information and in a well-sense unless the king himself was literate they also
controlled the ruler because literacy was power. Another thing developed at about
this time about 3500 BC in Mesopotamia and that was the first copper metallurgy.
Copper is a lovely metal. It's shiny. It's ideal for ornaments. It glitters in the
sun and it's no coincidence that at first copper was a highly valued prestige
material for shiny ornaments. It was easy to melt. People who could make pottery
could soon learn how to melt copper and more than a thousand years was to pass
before metalsmiths learned how to alloy copper with lead or tin and to make bronze.
What's the advantage of bronze? A much tougher working edge so that you can use
metal objects for cutting down trees for growing crops and above all as weapons.
Bronze was strategic weapon, metal, copper was purely an ornamental one. Another
point about lead and tin was that they were aware to find the sources were
limited and trade in metals intensified once bronze technology came into use.
So you've got cities, writing, metallurgy, intensified trade, irrigation
agriculture and lattices of interaction and small city-states and it was out
from this matrix of developing city-states at Sumerian civilization developed
in Mesopotamia one of the world's earliest civilizations after 3100 BC. It did not
suddenly appear Zeus-like from nowhere. It was the culmination of centuries of
rapid economic, social and political elaboration. It emerged at a time when
even moderate-sized towns maintained trading and other connections with people
living considerable distances away. Let's take the example of Uruk. Uruk, one of the
world's earliest cities, acquired obsidian, that's volcanic glass, metals, wood,
seashells and other exotic materials from as far away as the eastern Mediterranean.
