Ramesses was almost ambushed.
He and his personal regiment fought off a contingent of the Hittite army until they
were rescued, and then the next day, after fierce fighting, there was an inconclusive
battle.
The result?
A treaty.
And one of the bizarre coincidences, the treaty is inscribed on one of Ramesses' temple
walls in Karnak, and tablets, describing the same treaty and identical wording, have been
found in the Hittite capital at Bogoskoye.
In other words, there was a balance of power set which lasted for a considerable period
of time.
It was a game, as I said, of cat and mouse.
The whole thing depended on gold.
As long as Egypt had gold, it had a powerful political presence.
And gold came from Nubia.
The new kingdom pharaohs conquered Nubia far more intensively than their predecessors.
They took control of lucrative trade routes which had hitherto been controlled by the
Nubians, by indigenous black Africans, and effectively turned it into a colony.
And the pharaohs maintained a high official of great prestige at Waset, or Thebes.
His job, it was called the king's son of Kush.
Kush, being the kingdom in Nubia, was to administer Nubia along Egyptian lines and milk it for
all they could get.
In the classic colonizing fashion, an Egyptianized Nubian nobility arose over the centuries,
and the worship of Amun spread far to the south.
Nubia's gold mines were worked by prisoners of war and slaves and convicts working under
the harshest conditions.
Egypt was an imperial power.
But never again did it ever achieve the heights it enjoyed under Seti and Ramesses II.
The last of the great new kingdom pharaohs was Ramesses III, who came to the throne in
1187 B.C. at a time of intensifying political struggles along and beyond Egypt's frontiers.
He spent most of his time protecting Egypt from incursions, from desert Libyan nomads,
and from the so-called sea people, seamen, professional warriors, and just other warriors
and brigands who lived hand to mouth on the edges of the eastern Mediterranean states.
And then in 1200 B.C., a savage drought wreaked havoc on the Hittite Empire.
The sea peoples turned in desperation on Egypt, but were driven away by Ramesses' army.
There were dramatic pictures of these inscriptions on temple walls showing them fighting ships.
And with Ramesses III's death, in 1151 Egypt changed forever.
It entered a long period of unrest on its frontiers.
By 1100 it was effectively again two countries.
The fabled wealth of the Egyptians faded into history, and the pharaohs' diplomatic clout
faded also with their wealth.
A thousand years before Christ, the great pharaohs were but a distant memory.
Much of the wealth of these pharaohs also looted from their tombs.
After 1070 B.C., Egypt gradually became a cockpit for various foreign conquerors, and
even came under Nubian rule in a beautiful turn of history for a period in the late 8th
century B.C., when Nubian pharaohs restored the old order.
And then, after a long period of Greek influence and rule from lower Egypt, the land of the
pharaohs became a province of the Roman Empire in 30 B.C.
A magnificent chronicle of 3,000 years of changing civilization.
It's really fascinating how you see Egypt transforming from a despotic power of divine
kings to a land headed by shepherds of the people, with a flowering of art, to the great
imperial years of Seti and Ramesses, when Egypt was a great power in a world of competing
great powers.
And we'll look more closely at this late Mediterranean world of Egypt's heyday, when
we look at the Minoan civilization of Crete in the next lecture.
