We know, for example, that in about 1070 BC at the end of the New Kingdom there was probably
more wealth in gold in Egypt underground than there was in the land of the living.
It was a huge business, burying the wealthy.
Amun was all-powerful.
His priests had an enormous say in the affairs of the kingdom.
They owned the temples of Amun, owned or the priesthood of Amun, enormous tracts of land.
This gave them, in the view of some people, more clout than they should have.
The classic business of the secular and the religious in a state.
In 1353 BC, Pharaoh Akhenaten came to the throne of Egypt.
Akhenaten has been judged harshly by history.
No one really knows whether he was a religious extremist and evangelist, a heretic, a crazy,
or a very smart man indeed.
One thing is certain, he was, in religious terms, a man of very different beliefs.
He considered himself and his family as the sole intermediaries between the people of
Egypt and the sun god.
And he ordered the temples of Amun closed.
The ancient religion abolished in the favor of the worship of the sun's disc, Atten.
This was a dramatic move, a move which, no one knows who tries to change a conservative
institution, must have created consternation and havoc through the kingdom.
Whether he did this out of pure religious belief, or as a bold move to undercut and
destroy the power of the priests of Amun, we do not know.
But certainly he embraced a very pure form of sun worship, where he worshiped the sun's
disc, Atten.
He also deliberately moved his capital to Elamana, downstream of Thebes, where he reigned
for seventeen years.
Interestingly, directly he died.
His capital was abandoned, which makes it a wonderful treasure trove of information for
archaeologists, because there are not deep stratified layers above Arkhanaten's capital.
And over long-term campaigns, we are beginning to get a plan of his capital, of his royal
precinct at one end of the town, where he lived in splendid isolation, of the processional
way, which bisected his city, and at the other end, the public precincts and the temple,
and the place, the court, where he would appear on his carefully rationed public appearances
to honor officials with extra rations and ornaments and so on.
We are knowing more and more about life in Arkhanaten's time, thanks to these excavations.
And we also are learning a great deal about an extraordinarily naturalistic art style,
which he encouraged and fostered, epitomized by the famous bust of his queen Nefertiti,
and epitomized, too, by beautiful pictures of flowers, birds, and more naturalistic depictions
of the pharaoh and his family, often basking in the rays of Atten, the sun disc.
Was he a heretic?
Was he just a religious fanatic, or was he a man who believed in drastic political solutions?
We don't know.
We probably never will know, because we have no documents that bear on us, and certainly
he made the effort to try and chisel away the name of Amun from all the temples where
it appeared.
But one thing is certain.
A lot of people may have paid lip service to this move.
What else could you do when the king is all powerful?
Particularly if you're a high official.
But directly he died.
A troubled kingdom, where there had been a great deal of disorder, where Egypt's prestige
overseas was affected, and where there were powerful factions maneuvering for power after
he died.
The worship of Amun was restored with dramatic speed.
