The Minoans also worshiped on hilltops or in caves, where shrines were visited at certain
times of the year or times of need.
There is also evidence from Canasos, among other places, that their religious beliefs
may have included the occasional human sacrifice, something that may have been connected with
the fertility of the soil and rainfall.
So what do we make of this civilization?
It's very different from that of Egypt or Mesopotamia.
It's not a civilization of city-states, nor is it a highly unified kingdom under a supreme
divine monarch, nor is it an empire.
It appears to really, in a way, be a sort of commercial network.
You have Canasos, the biggest palace, in northern Crete.
You then have a series of smaller centers, like the small town of Gornia, dug by the
first woman archaeologist to dig in Crete, Harriet House.
Probably ruled by an independent ruler who may be paid tribute to Canasos, and there
was a constant interaction and interconnectedness between these different small kingdoms, and
together they constituted a civilization with record keeping and a very complex, I
suppose you would call it, commercial operation.
That kept track of transactions, kept track of ships' cargoes and so on, kept track of
tribute, because one thing is certain, Minoan ships and sailors and traders were respected
over a wide area of the Mediterranean world at the time, and in Egyptian records there
were tales of a distant island far on the horizon called Keftu, and Keftu was Crete.
And then suddenly Keftu vanishes from Egyptian records.
Why we don't know?
But there is one possible hint, although a very vague one.
In about 1628 BC, and the date of this event is much debated by the experts, a huge volcanic
eruption on the island of Santorini, north of Crete, blew the center of this island
into space, and I mean blew it into space.
If you go to Santorini today, there is this huge crater with a volcanic cone in the middle
which represents the chasm left by this enormous violent explosion.
A huge cloud of volcanic ash fell on central and eastern Crete.
High tidal waves must have lashed its northern shores.
The prevailing northwest winds carried the ash far over the eastern Mediterranean.
How do we know that?
From deep sea cores, where the ash forms a very distinctive level.
Make no mistake, by any standards, this was a huge cataclysm.
To the point where some people have speculated, albeit rather boldly, that this explosion
in fact represents the legendary death of the last continent of Atlantis, which sank
below the waves, although it must be confessed that this theory really has no grounding in
fact whatsoever.
The disaster which rivalled and publicly exceeded the great volcanic eruption of the island
of Krakatoa in Southeast Asia in 1883, must of course damage Timinoan civilization which
lay so nearby.
In fact, the community on Santorini, Akratiri, the village we've already mentioned, was
bedded under many feet of fine volcanic dust, to the great delectation of archaeologists
who can see a Minoan village, a remote one, abandoned while it was still being used with
even the pots and domestic artifacts and beds still remaining in the houses.
Ash must have blanketed many fields on Crete, but it does not seem to have destroyed civilization
itself.
How do we know this, because the palaces continue to thrive until about 1450 B.C., when the
second Canossos palace was destroyed by fire.
