A diversity that was fostered by constant trading activity.
And inevitably, over the centuries and generations, there was a trend to much greater political
and social complexity.
And a trend towards increasing interaction and interdependency between widely separated
communities.
Why? Because many of these islands lacked critical commodities and they depended on
others for regular supplies of them.
Egean society fostered remarkable art traditions and skewed metalworkers, but it achieved its
greatest complexity on Crete, while mainland Greek society lagged behind for many centuries
with only sporadic connections offshore.
And Crete became the focus of the earliest Greek civilization of the communities of the
Egean, and this focus was based on trade.
The Minoan civilization was first described by archaeologist John Evans, an Englishman,
just over a hundred years ago, in the year 1900.
Evans was a man gifted with near sight, and he used his minute eyesight to study teeny
seals which he found in antique stores in the flea market in Athens.
And when he asked where they came from, the merchants told him they came from Crete.
And in the years before the turn of the century, he visited Crete again and again, looking
for the sight of the fabled Minoan civilization.
He found it on a pottery strewn hillside at Knossos near the modern-day city of Iratlion.
When he started digging there in 1900, almost immediately, he found an elaborate network
of rooms and storehouses and passages, in short, a complex temple, and palace, all in one.
He named the civilization after the legendary King Minos of Crete, because he recalled the
ancient Greek legend of Theseus and the Minotaur.
King Minos was said to keep the Minotaur half human, half beast, in a maze under his palace,
and surrounding cities sent girls and boys as sacrifices to the Minotaur.
When it was Athens' turn, young Theseus, the son of the King of Athens, was sent.
He made his way, with Minos' daughter's help, Ariadne, into the maze, using a thread to
find his way out, and killed the Minotaur.
Our Evans was struck immediately by the maze-like quality of Knossos, and he believed that Minos,
his existence, had at least some basis in historical truth.
So he named this remarkable Cretan civilization the Minoan civilization, a very apt name.
Evans excavated at Knossos for over thirty years.
He and later researchers have established that Knossos was first established by village
farmers as a small farming community in about 6100 B.C.
Just about at the same time as the large village of Sattelhuyuk, described in Lecture
15, was occupied in Turkey.
This was a simple community.
Knossos farmers lived in rectangular, sun-dried brick houses in a settlement that soon covered
a considerable area.
Clearly their farming expanded, and so did the settlement.
By 3730 B.C., the people were trading.
There were signs of long-distance trade in the deposits of the settlement, in the form
of such exotic imports as stone bowls.
And then, in 2100 B.C., the first palace appeared at Knossos, and this is one of the distinctive
features of Minoan civilization.
First was centered not on large cities, but on palaces.
Palaces where the elite lived, which also served a shrine-like purpose.
