Crete was heavily populated during the height of the Minoan civilization.
There were numerous towns and villages throughout the island, many of them with two-story buildings.
Thanks to a natural catastrophe, the village of Akratiri, on the island of Santorini, 77
miles north of Crete, has survived under many feet of volcanic ash.
You can wander along the alleyways of a compact settlement of two-story houses on the walls
of which you can still see brightly painted freezes.
What was the underpinning of Minoan civilization?
Two words, international trade.
The Minoans were expert sailors who kept in close contact with surrounding lands, the
Aegean Islands, the Turkish mainland, Cyprus, the eastern Mediterranean shore, and Egypt.
Minoan skippers plied the seaways of the eastern Mediterranean, coasting from port to port in
heavily laden sailing vessels.
Minoan commerce depended on basic commodities, olive oil, timber, and wine.
Exchanged from metal ores from Cyprus, mainland Greece, Turkey, and elsewhere, for ivory and
other exotic materials from the eastern Mediterranean lands.
The pharaohs were important customers for timber.
Cretan visitors appear in Egyptian wall paintings, while the palace of Averison Delta bears
Cretan murals, obviously painted by a Minoan artist.
The Minoans worked the entire Aegean, but to what extent Crete controlled the islands
politically is a matter for debate.
There was certainly strong Minoan influence on the closest islands, such as Santorini,
but probably it never ruled over many of its neighbors.
Cretan civilization reached its height between 1700 and 1450 BC, at a time when Crete was
self-supporting in food and basic raw materials.
That's an important point, but it gave them a stability and independence which was rare
in the ancient world.
By this time, Minoan ships carried commodities from all over the eastern Mediterranean from
as far away as central Europe and North Africa to different parts of this world.
Now such a high volume of trade mandated some form of record keeping system.
The Minoans used no less than three scripts inscribed on clay tablets.
The earliest one came into use around 2000 BC and has been described as haraglific.
It is still undeciphered, as its successor called Linear A, which appears to comprise
lists of commodities, offerings to the gods, and perhaps taxes that were paid.
A third script, Linear B, has been partially deciphered and was written in an early form
of Greek, used by the Mycenaean civilization, which we describe in the next lecture.
Minoan religious practices differed sharply from those of the Egyptians, Sumerians, and
other contemporary civilizations.
Minoan beliefs were centered on caves and palaces, where people offered sacrifices to
individuals who metamorphosed themselves into deities.
There were no supreme Minoan rulers, or divine kings in the sense of an Egyptian pharaoh,
or an Assyrian despot or conquering a war.
The palaces served as the backbone of religious life.
Minoan theory has it that the Cretan nobility had a vested interest in portraying themselves
in divine forms, to the point that the imagery of gods and rulers fused into one.
If this interpretation is correct, then the so-called throne room at Knossos was a chamber
where a ruler accepted offerings in his or her role as a deity.
It's worth noting that some Minoan gods and goddesses appear on the palaces' walls.
