It was an increasingly international world, and then in the Nile you have
Egyptian civilization, conservative but changing, much more stable, although it had
its periods of confusion, which endured for some 3,000 years with ancient
religious beliefs that thrived and survived into classical times and even
beyond, the rule of divine kings, a unified linear kingdom, which was
gradually and inexorably drawn into the wider world of the Eastern Mediterranean,
a world in which the Egyptians had a great deal of clout because of their
wealth in gold, and their connections with Nubia and tropical Africa. But it
was a world which were increasingly was dominated by traders and by soldiers. In
the case of the Minoans and the Mycenaeans, you find the consummate traders
taking maximum advantage of their world in which interconnectedness was the key
to survival, cashing in on their seafaring skills, cashing in on their
ability to produce large quantities of wine and olive oil, their potting abilities
which enabled them to transport this commodity, the timber which abounded on
Crete, and these commodities for which the world was hungry circulated
through the Eastern Mediterranean world, on trade routes by sea and land, which
outlasted the reins of individual monarchs, the rise and fall of kingdoms
large and small, because for all the volatility of ancient civilizations, the
rise of the Assyrians, the rise of the Babylonians, and there were but collapse,
the caravans that carried the essential commodities of the ancient world, timber,
metal, pottery, olive oil, wine, and so on, continued. Caravans that went by land,
across deserts, looking neither left nor right, connecting people who might
politically be enemies, who all knew that the mechanisms of trade had to
continue whatever the politics. Societies with radically different religions and
way of governing themselves, divine kings in Egypt, powerful secular lords in
Mesopotamia, chieftains who reigned from palaces in Mycenae and Crete, but all of
them together, cooperating, interacting in a world which was becoming more and
more interdependent. And this interdependency, as we will see later in this
course, was to extend into the Indian Ocean, into Southeast Asia and as far as
China, linking vast areas of the world in what I would call a web of
interconnectedness. And this interconnectedness is the big message of the
story of the early civilizations. They began independently, but gradually and
inexorably, they were brought closer and closer together into a world where there
were more people living, where the deeds of one state had an impact on the
fates of others. A volatile world, a world where everything was powered by
human hands, not by fossil fuels, where communication was still simple, a world
of pre-industrial civilizations. And out of this crucible, which is a word I use
many times in this course, of innovation and trade and competition, were forged
the roots of Western civilization. In the rest of this course, we move out of
this rather familiar Eastern Mediterranean world to explore states in other
parts of the world, in South Asia, East Asia, Southeast Asia, and in the
Americas. In this lecture, we've described Mycenaean civilization. We've
described the Uliburin ship, the Hittite civilization, and the rise of iron. In
part five, we're going to go into the Asian civilizations, because part four
ends with this lecture, with our journey through the very earliest civilizations.
In part five, we go to Asia, which developed during the heyday of the
Mediterranean states, civilizations distinctive and different, adapted to the
unique circumstances of their own environments, developing their own
religions, their own environments, our own solutions to problems of their
environments, and then, gradually, the interconnection with the wider world
developing over many centuries.
