By 1600 BC, full Mycenaean civilization developed at the time when Minoan civilization was at
its height in Crete.
It should be noted at once that the Mycenaeans owed much to the Minoans, including their
writing system, Linear B, which developed out of earlier Cretan scripts, a script Linear
B, which has been partially deciphered, which allows us to get some insight to the volume
of trade and the transactions that took place at major Mycenaean palaces, among them Pylos
in the western Peloponnese of southern Greece.
Like the Minoans, and there were some similarities here, Mycenaean rulers based themselves on
imposing citadels.
The major ones were at Mycenae in the eastern Peloponnese, at Pylos in the west, and at
Tirrens, which lay on the plain of Argos, close to the modern town of Naplion.
Mycenaean Tirrens are remarkable for their massive fortifications, built of large, coastly
filtered belt boulders, and also for their imposing gateway defenses, defenses against
archers.
In contrast, Pylos on the west coast was apparently unfortified, as if the region was
more peaceful than the Aegean coast and hinterland.
But this need for defense seems to have escalated in the thirteenth century, when the defenses
of both Mycenaean Tirrens were expanded significantly.
To what extent does Homer's Iliad and Odyssey reflect the Mycenaean world?
We've got to be very careful here, because there is this 300-year time gap between the
possible date of Homer and Mycenae.
But clearly there were some similarities.
This was a society where wealth in goods, and bravery in war, and aggressive leadership
were clearly important qualities for leaders.
We know from Homer's descriptions that palaces at the time, like Mycenaean palaces, were
centered around a central hall with a raised hearth known as a merragon, a megaron.
The best-preserved, at Pylos, was lavishly decorated with painted wall freezes, and may
have had a second mud-brick story above.
Now, like Knossos, the palaces of the Mycenaeans were administrative centers of small kingdoms,
with storerooms for agricultural produce and luxury manufacturers.
Rulers also acquired wealth from taxes imposed on rural communities around their palaces
within their territories.
Such linear B tablets as been deciphered include references to blondes, weapons, and vessels,
to female textile workers, and to metalwork, and perfume, and other artisans who made all
kinds of luxury products, as if the palaces were also major craft centers.
This was a world where each ruler controlled local production, where each ruler lived in
considerable luxury, for example, or references in the Pylos tablets to ebony chairs, and
ebony came from Egypt, inlaid with ivory and gold.
This was not a poor civilization, and it was also a civilization of considerable technological
skill.
The gold ornaments are magnificent.
The Mycenaeans also were expert engineers.
At Mycenae, they built a network of paved roads with bridges and culverts around the
citadel, as well as large dams for storing water and canals to divert winter floodwaters.
There's another similarity with Homer.
Mycenaean civilization is remarkable for the weapons of war which are so prominent in the
art and in the inventory.
Shields, spears, swords, chariots, and these chariots may have served as mobile archery
platforms.
So they were warriors, and much of the warfare must have involved competition between different
kingdoms.
