Now this trade had another effect. It played a major part in the spread of a new metal,
in the spread of iron tools and weapons and iron-working technology across the eastern
Mediterranean. Copper is an ornamental metal. Bronze is a fighting metal, and a metal that
was used to make agricultural tools. Iron is the metal of the warrior, the metal of
the farmer, a utilitarian metal which made tough working edges and was to revolutionize
both warfare and farming. We know that iron was first smelted in the middle of the second
millennium BC. Perhaps in the highlands, immediately south of the Black Sea. Are the
Hittite kings, realized immediately that this new metal had many advantages, for its sharp,
tough working edges were invaluable for weapons and for farming and woodworking, and of course
they realized being a militaristic civilization the great strategic advantage of iron. They
are known to have parceled out gifts of iron, very sparingly to other monarchs. There is
a blade of native iron in a dagger in Tutankhamen's tomb. Now one of the advantages of iron was
that iron ore sources are very abundant, unlike copper and tin. So, it rapidly, once
the technology spread, once the techniques of making iron tools became known, the technology
spread rapidly over a wide area of Europe and Southwest Asia, initially as a prestigious
metal, and it was some time before both domestic developments like axes and hose were made with
the new technology. It was, predominantly, a strategic metal at first. After 1200 BC as
iron was becoming more common, repeated migrations of foreigners flowed into Turkey from the
Northwest, disrupting life within the Hittite Empire, and then in Greece. Rebellious vassals
of the Hittites, like the strategic trading city Ugarit, immensely wealthy, which was
really under the Hittite sphere of influence in the Eastern Mediterranean world divided
up by the Hittites and the Egyptians, threw off the Hittite yoke, yoke, and rebel. This
was merely symptomatic of a much larger problem. The Eastern Mediterranean world collapsed
in chaos as the great powers either fell apart, were seriously weakened, or, like Egypt, withdrew
into themselves. Indevitably and eventually, economic recovery came in the hands of the
Phoenicians, consummate traders from the Eastern Mediterranean whose ships traveled the length
and breadth of the Mediterranean. This was a new world of the Assyrians and the Persians,
of classical Greece, the Etruscans, and eventually Rome, when the Mediterranean was linked from
one end to the other by highly intricate mercantile pies, which drew both Europe and North Africa
into a long civilized universe. And this also was the milieu from which Western civilization
emerged. In this lecture, in its immediate predecessors,
we have described the growth and emergence of a complex Eastern Mediterranean world,
a world that began with the development of the Sumerian city-state, and the patchwork
of small kingdoms of Mesopotamia, which struggled again and again to become larger kingdoms
even near empires, which were linked by trading connections, which eventually extended as far
as the Eastern Mediterranean coast onto the Iranian plateau, and eventually made contact
with the Havappan civilization of the Indus Valley, which we'll talk about later.
