Lecture 24 The Eastern Mediterranean World
In the last lecture, we described the Minoan civilization of Crete. And at the end, I said
that the Minoan civilization collapsed in the face of a takeover by the Mycenaean civilization
of the Greek mainland, that the gravity of civilization shifted from the Aegean to Greece
itself. In this lecture, I'm going to take the story a little stage further and look
at the Mycenaean civilization and the Hittite civilization of Turkey and the world of international
trade which developed in the Eastern Mediterranean in the late 2nd millennium BC. A period of
time here isn't long, just several centuries, but it was a period of immense importance
to the ancient world. First, I'm going to survey Mycenaean civilization
with its palaces and small states, a society of warriors and traders, which took over where
Mycenaean civilization had once flourished. From Greece, I'm going to move to the Eastern
Mediterranean, where the Hittites, as we said two lectures ago, vied with the Egypt and
Mittany for control of the lucrative trade routes of the Eastern Mediterranean coast,
the Levant. Then, which is unusual for this course, we'll
describe the remarkable finds from a single site, the Ulubrun shipwreck of southern Turkey,
which contained a rich cargo from nine different areas of the Eastern Mediterranean world.
And finally, we'll discuss the collapse of this world in AD 1200, a collapse which effectively
ended the era of the earliest civilizations in this pivotal part of the world.
The German archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann, who achieved international fame for his discovery
of ancient Troy, his claimed discovery, because in fact he wasn't the first person to find
it, of the mound of Hyselic up by the Dardanelles, was the first person to excavate at the Rockgirt
Citadel of Mycenae in southern Greece. He excavated there from 1876 to 1877. Excavations
which yielded spectacular chiefly burials adorned with golden masks, all of them interred
inside a circular area within the fortifications of the citadel.
Schliemann claimed, because he had an obsession with Homer, that the burials were those of
King Agamemnon, the king who conquered Troy, and the burials were also those of other
Homeric heroes. His finds caused an international sensation. Kings followed his excavations,
but we now know that what he had actually unearthed was a much earlier society, that
of the Mycenaean civilization, which flourished about three hundred years earlier than the
time described in Homer's epics. This was a remarkable civilization, despite its lack
of connections with Homer. It was a Bronze Age civilization, adapted to the precipitous
landscape of mainland Greece, which made ideal terrain not for the development of large uniform
states like Egypt, but for small autonomous states. You see, the mountains break the terrain
into small fertile valleys, which formed the focus of different kingdoms. Now these kingdoms
first became visible around 2000 B.C., at about the time the first palace was built
at Canossos. And this was a time, as we saw with the Minoans, of the expansion of long-distance
trade in the Aegean and throughout the Eastern Mediterranean. But on the mainland, much of
the trade was of the different area. It was trade to the north. Because Mycenae lay at
the ultimate edge of temperate Europe. Among the commodities which passed north from the
north into the Mediterranean world were lumps of amber, prehistoric resin which rubbed had
magical properties. Soon, rich grave goods proclaimed the presence of a small, wealthy
elite among the Mycenaeans.
