This was a world of constant ebbing and flowing alliances rather like Sumerian
city-states. This was not a stable environment politically, but one where
people were vying for power and prestige and control of trade and so on.
Because you see, like the Minoans, the Mycenaeans were aggressive traders who
maintained a large fleet of merchant vessels. We know this because of
discoveries of Mycenaean painted vessels and other containers in locales as far
distant from Greece, as Egypt, the Levant, and Cyprus. Many of these vessels were
small painted containers which once held, we know from analysis, perfumed oils.
Analysis of the constituents of the pottery clays using spectrographic
analysis show that most of the pots came from the plain of Argos in southern
Greece, close to Mycenae, and as I said, the modern city of Naplion. But Mycenaean
ships ranged widely. They traveled constantly to the eastern Mediterranean
and also to the west, to Sicily, southern Italy, Sardinia, even as far as Malta and
perhaps even southern Spain. In Sardinia, the Mycenaeans were seeking copper, but
most Mycenaean trade was within the confines of the Aegean Sea and apparently
included the transport of slaves, at first. In about 1200 BC, Mycenaean
civilization collapsed. The great palaces were abandoned. New fortifications
appear at Mycenaean tillings. Pylos was burnt to the ground. This, as we saw in
the last Egyptian lecture, was a period of international and political change and
turmoil. Trade contracted. Even Egypt was attacked by the roaming sea peoples. And
in this cataclysm of change, the Mycenaeans vanished into historical obscurity.
While the Mycenaeans prospered on the Greek mainland, the Hittite civilization of
Anatolia, modern-day Turkey, rose to prominence in the eastern Mediterranean
after 1650 BC, and rapidly extended its power into the Levant, where its armies,
as we heard, competed with those of Mitten-East of the Euphrates and Egypt. And, as we saw,
Ramesses II and the Hittites divided the Levant between them in a memorable treaty,
a treaty that held until the collapse of Hittite civilization at the hands of invaders
from the north, somewhat around 1200 BC, this period of chaos. Mycenaean civilization was
an integral part of this ever more complex eastern Mediterranean world, where distant
lands were linked by seaborne trade routes over many centuries. This trade was lubricant
of an ever more complex world. We know of this maritime world as a result
of occasional fortunate archaeological discoveries of ancient shipwrecks.
In AD 13, BC 1310, the date is known from retrieving dates from the ship's timbers.
A heavily laden merchant ship sank off the Uluburin Peninsula in southern Turkey,
taking a rich cargo with her. It seems she may have been cast on the rocks by a sudden
south-westerly squall. Underwater archaeologists George Bass and Kemal Poulag have dissected
this ship in an extraordinarily masterly excavation, the wreck lying more than 90 feet below the
surface, and they've put together an extraordinary portrait of an truly exceptional cargo.
And by sourcing the origins of the cargo, they have been able to reconstruct the voyage,
which apparently began on the Levant coast. The ship may have been of Canaanite or possibly
Syrian origin. She coasted her way west in the classic anti-clockwise pattern of the trade,
which would take a merchant ship to the Aegean, then across to Egypt, and then up the eastern Mediterranean shore.
