And, secondly, there may have been episodes of really major flooding.
The problem with flooding is that it's very, very difficult to pick up in the archaeological
record.
Samortama Wheeler, who excavated Harapo in Mohenjadaro, found some skeletons, which
he said were the victims of a flood, right at the top of the site, but only a few skeletons
and those cannot be used really as evidence of flooding.
But you have the evidence of a drastically modified environment by production of food
production, you've got chronic erosion, you've got dense urban populations, you have earthquakes,
earth movements, which cause a major river to dry up, and you've got all the ecological
ingredients for a major disaster.
And what is the only defense in these situations?
To disperse, disperse into smaller communities, and that is what happened, but these smaller
communities were of immense importance because in them were preserved some very important
cultural traits of later times, perhaps among them the roots of Hinduism.
By 1500 B.C., a new crop was growing in India.
It was growing in the low-lying Ganges Valley, hot and humid, to the east, a place where
the wheat and barley of the much drier Indus Valley would not grow.
Weiss, as you know, was a very, very productive crop.
And as a result, the gravity, the center of gravity of South Asian civilization shifted
eastwards to the Ganges.
It didn't happen at once.
It happened, as we will see, many centuries after the collapse of Harappan urban civilization.
But there was this shift to the east, which was to have momentous consequences for the
later history, not only of South Asia, but also of Southeast Asia.
But by the time Harappan civilization collapsed, a notion, a pattern of civilization, was firmly
established in India, and it was a matter of time in South Asia before further civilizations
arose, and this time they rose with the economic foundation of rice.
The greatest legacy of the Harappan civilization may be religious beliefs, the roots of modern
Hinduism, but it also laid another terribly fundamental root, or foundation, for history,
and that was the sea-going roots that linked the Indus with Mesopotamia.
Of course, when the cities survived, there may have been a decline in this trade, but
no one is suggesting that the trade and the contact did not continue, because the contact
between these two areas by coasting ships and even overland was one of the ingredients
which led to the Indian Ocean becoming such a major center of trade in the Christian era
much later, which, as we will see in the next lecture, was of great importance to the development
of civilization not only in Southeast Asia, but also on the African coast.
But here we've looked back at the foundations.
We've described the origins of the Harappan civilization in India, and its development
in part as the result of expanding trade with the Sumerians or Mesopotamia after about 2600
B.C.
I've looked at some of the differences very briefly between Harappan and Mesopotamian civilization,
epitomized by the large cities and apparently humble bearing of Harappan rulers, were in
a very different world than the megalomaniac world of Assyrian monarchs or Sumerian monarchs.
Or even later in Southeast Asia of Khmer monarchs.
These people may have been very spiritual leaders, and we have concluded that the spiritual
roots of Hinduism may lie far back in Harappan times.
And finally, we described the collapse of Harappan civilization due in part to environmental
change, and we've commented that there's this strategy when a city collapses, which
we'll also find much later with the Maya, where people simply disperse into villages.
They disperse because the viability of cities and maybe the authority of the rulers is evaporated.
The connections and the ideas were fertilized in South Asian mines and surfaced again in
the story of later South Asian civilization described in the next lecture in the course.
