But at the same time, there was a major shift, apparently, in trading patterns.
Hitherto, the being trade with the highlands of Buluchistan, maybe a little bit with the
Iranian plateau, and a great deal of the local interaction, because, like everywhere
else, interconnectedness was one of the keys of survival in a very demanding environment.
Not now, the people of the Indus came in direct touch with people living in the Persian Gulf,
and they came in touch with Mesopotamian civilization.
This trade was conducted by sea.
What boats were used for this trade, we do not know.
But it seems that the trade was conducted by coasting from the Persian Gulf down the
added shores of Buluchistan to the Indus, and there was a port called Lothal, at the shore
on the shore of Gujarat, which was one of the ports where these ships came.
We know that after 2600 BC, in the middle of this period of explosive growth, the Sumerians
of Mesopotamia were obtaining ivory, metals, exotic oils, and wooden furniture by sea,
from a land called Meluha.
Meluha, we believe, excuse me, was probably the Indus Valley region, far to the east.
Their trade expanded.
By 2350 BC, there were even records of Meluha villages settled near the Sumerian city of
Lagash, in southern Mesopotamia, and in other locations.
Now Lagash was one of the major Sumerian city-states of the day.
So clearly, this was a highly organized trade conducted by full-time merchants, who had
a major impact, not only on Sumerian civilization with all the exotic goods and ideas they
brought in, but also on the growth of civilization along the Indus.
As this civilization expanded and became more sophisticated, the new Indus cities became
part of a huge trading network which linked the eastern Mediterranean, parts of Eurasia,
and western and southern Asia were loose and ever-changing economic ties.
And I want to stress that in this part of the course, one of the big themes is these
connections, long-distance trade by sea and land, as the sort of conspexus of the eastern
Mediterranean, where the Asian world got larger and larger and more closely intertwined.
The roots of the global economy really do go back to this form of connectedness thousands
of years ago.
Also a word here about terminology.
We're going to talk in this course, in this lecture, about the Harappan civilization.
Sometimes in the literature, you'll find people talking about the Indus civilization.
It is now known as the Harappan civilization after the city of that name, and that's the
terminology I'm going to use here.
By 2500 B.C., the people of the Indus Valley had mastered the problems of their capricious
environment to a considerable degree, and their civilization now emerged.
The Harappan civilization, named as I said after the city of Harappa, developed and flourished
over an enormous area of just under half a million square miles, a huge region considerably
larger than modern Pakistan, and certainly much bigger than that of Egypt or Mesopotamia.
Now, it's a little misleading this figure.
It will be a mistake to think of this vast area as the center of a homogeneous civilization.
The core area, where the influence of the great Harappan cities was largest, was about
some 300,000 square miles.
But in addition, there were many regional variations of Harappan civilization, most members of
which still lived in farming villages, small hamlets and villages, close to their fields,
life unfolded at the community and the household level.
