Partly, on what can only be described as racist grounds, the notion that other peoples with
other faiths were inferior.
In contrast, Ahsoka and his priests encouraged expanded trading activity and particularly
travel along maritime trade routes, along well-known open water passage courses, which
extended not only into Southeast Asia but also far to the West.
So you got developing the beginnings of long, long distance connections between people who
never met face to face.
The Maurian Empire declined in 185 BC, but the trade continued and expanded.
And like so many things in history and prehistory, it was an event on the other side of the world
which really made a difference to this trade.
In the year AD70, the Roman Emperor Vespasian prohibited the export of metals from the Roman
Empire to combat inflation.
This development turned India's merchants' eyes in a new direction to the Southeast where
they knew there was great potential.
But at the same time, they tried to work out ways of circumventing established and
well-pleased Roman trade routes.
In this, they were helped by the seasonal cycles of the monsoon winds of the Bay of
Bengal and the Indian Ocean.
They were successful.
In the reign of the Emperor Nero, who reigned just before Vespasian came to power, the annual
trade deficit between Rome and India was a staggering sixty million denari a year, a
huge sum of money.
It was Rome's taste for luxuries which fueled the trade, which had roots in much more ancient
commerce.
The incense trade in Frankincense and Meur, for example, there was an absolutely insatiable
demand in Egypt for these spices, these perfumes, which had long linked the Nile and the Red
Sea with the incense states of Southern Arabia.
Ever since Sumerian times, merchant ships had coasted along age-old inshore routes,
sailing from Arabia into the Persian Gulf and on to the distant Indian coast.
The way you should think of these maritime facts, which of course go right back to other
questions, is as you would think of a desert path.
They passed from bay to bay, from headland to headland, every stepper knew where shelter
could be taken in time of storm, where the best offshore winds were to be found, and
at what seasons of the year the passages could be made.
They sailed in vessels with Latin rigs, long wooden yards set on a short mast, which gave
you a long leading edge for the sail, which enabled these boats, unlike foreign afterships,
to sail against the northeast monsoon winds, which did not blow particularly strongly,
but using them they could sail along the coast for mile after mile.
Along the Arabian coast, from the mouth of the Red Sea, and from there I could either
turn into the Persian Gulf and make their way up to Basra, or they could turn the corner
to India, sail southeastward.
Now, this sort of knowledge, like the navigational skills of the Pacific Islanders, is something
that is not written down, it's something that is passed from father to son, from skipper
to mate, from crew to crew, as very jealously guarded professional secrets.
