Lecture 26, South and Southeast Asia
Lecture 26 continues the story of South-Eastern Asian civilization, starting with the collapse
of the Harappan civilization, which took place around 1700 BC, the period when the great
cities of the Indus ceased to exist and the Harappan population dispersed into smaller
communities.
First, I am going to describe the Vedic period, a time when a wave of cultural change and
perhaps major population movements, the evidences uncertain, swept South Asia from the Northwest.
Then we'll evaluate very briefly the controversies over the origin of the Indo-Aryan or Sanskritic languages.
Then I'm going to describe how iron technology and rice agriculture caused the center of civilization
to move eastward to the Ganges Plain, hot and humid, as foreign conquerors descended on India.
And we'll show how conflicting religious doctrines of Brahmanism and Buddhism were part of the crucible
which formed Maurian civilization, which flourished in the Ganges valley and further afield between
the fourth and second centuries BC, were coming into the prospectus of the last 2000 years.
And then we'll show how Buddhism encouraged foreign trade with the Southeast Asia and with a much wider
world.
And then finally, I'm going to describe a catalytic event in the more recent history of this area,
the discovery of the monsoon wind cycle in the first century BC, which enabled people to sail from Africa
and Saudi Arabia to India and back in the course of twelve months.
A phenomenon which created a vast world of interconnectedness across the Indian Ocean and beyond.
During the centuries after the collapse of Arapan civilization, a long process of population movements,
assimilation of outsiders with local culture, and a cultivation continued in South Asia for a thousand years.
These centuries are sometimes called the Vedic period, a time when Indo-Aryans speaking peoples
spread into what is now India and Pakistan.
This event, if it occurred, is described in the Samhita, a compilation of the hymns or Vedas of the Rigveda.
Now many of these hymns were composed earlier and then passed from generation to generation by word of mouth over many centuries.
They tell of heroes and conquests, of battles and military campaigns, of figures that were larger than life.
To what extent does the Samhita reflect historical reality?
Well that's much debated. One school of thought believes that there were many migrations into South Asia,
where the migrants married with local groups, the intermarriage giving place to the Indo-Aryan
Sanskritic languages spoken widely through South Asia today.
Another school of thought believes to the contrary, that there was no invention at the Indo-Aryan languages
developed indigenously in South Asia and were present many centuries earlier.
I must confess, being a non-linguist and an archaeologist, I tend to believe that probably a great deal of this developed
indigenously within the confines of South Asia.
But whatever historical reality, the period between 1700 and 800 BC was a time of major cultural change and technological innovation.
By 800 BC, an indigenous iron technology flourished throughout South Asia.
As you know, in the eastern Mediterranean iron was first developed as a new technology in the second millennium BC.
Here it appears to have developed somewhat later, but it had one very, very major consequence.
It accelerated the growing and production of rice.
