The rulers of Aksum lived in imposing palaces, built of timber-reinforced masonry, buildings
of local design, but owing something to Roman and particularly Arabian influence, the Arabian
influence on Aksum was constant.
But Aksum's most spectacular monuments are the royal sepulchres.
Each king was buried in an imposing sepulchre, topped by tall masonry columns, some of them
was 108 feet high.
Each of them carved to represent multi-story buildings, as it were palaces for the dead.
There were imposing riches in this kingdom.
Aksum for seven centuries after the death of Christ was a gateway to tropical Africa
for a rapidly changing Mediterranean world.
The state's connections extended as far as Rome and Byzantium to Syria, Armenia, even
to the shores of the Persian Gulf and India.
If ever there was a state which was a symbol of this new, much more international world
I mentioned last time, it was Aksum.
It lay at the center of a web of trade routes that linked the Mediterranean, India, and Africa,
and it was the predecessor of the ardently international world which emerged with the
emergence of Islam in the seventh century.
In the fourth century AD, Aksum's rulers adopted Christianity.
They were the first African state to do so.
In fact, they challenged the Nisq, expanding Islam in the eighth century.
But as Islam grew stronger, and the rainfall in a period of warmer times grew more erratic,
everything went into decline, and erratic rainfall caused the population of the highlands
to disperse.
But even to this day, there are flourishing Christian communities in Ethiopia, which are
the legacy of Aksum.
But its most important legacy was to be a gateway for the African world, an African world that
lay at the edge of a vast ocean.
In AD 70, an anonymous Egyptian-Greek skipper compiled the Periplus of the Eurothraean Sea,
the set of sailing directions to the Indian Ocean, which I mentioned last time.
This manual is remarkable because it describes not only the major monsoon ports, but also
the east coast of Africa, south of Somalia.
A place where ivory, rhinoceros horn, and the much-priced aphrodisiac, tortoise shell,
and mangrove poles, for wood, for woodless Arabia, were to be found.
For centuries, this little-known East African coast lay on the edge of the Indian Ocean
world, visited by occasional traders, but as the monsoon trade intensified in the late
1st millennium AD, East Africa was drawn into the expanding web of interconnecting
this of the Indian Ocean world.
By the tenth century, as Aksum was going into decline, and medieval Europe was coming
to the fall, Islam and Islamic merchants from Arabia had reached the East African coast.
They founded small stone-built towns, clustered at strategic bays.
Their descendants are still there today.
Lamo in northern Kenya was such a port.
So was Mombasa, also in Kenya.
And then the southern port of Kilwa, off the Tanzanian coast, where an important sultan
dwelt and handled much of the trade with southeast Africa.
For many centuries, this port, Kilwa, was an important transshipment point.
For many centuries, gold and ivory and slaves were sent north and east to Arabia, and to
India in heavily laden dows.
