And over the next four centuries, powerful chiefs made their headquarters at the foot
and on top of this hill and in the valley below.
They built enclosures, small-sized ones, between the large boulders on the top of the hill.
And down in the valley, they built a vast, freestanding stone enclosure, known to archaeologists
as the Great Enclosure.
This was the resident of the paramount chief of this place, and the site itself became
known as Zimbahoye, venerated stones, a Shona expression meaning chief's houses or graves,
Hwintz, Zimbabwe, or Great Zimbabwe.
So powerful are the nationalistic sentiments aroused by Zimbabwe that it has now become
the name of a form of British colony, the Southern Rhodesia.
Now Great Zimbabwe prospered greatly, both as a religious center, a ritual center for
rainmaking, and also as a focus of the coastal, gold, and ivory trade between AD 1114-50.
Now we're not talking about constant caravans going backwards and forwards with the interior,
we're talking about occasional expeditions which penetrated from the coastal plain up
the escarpment onto the plateau and engaged in barter of glass bead strings, seashells,
Chinese porcelain, and other baubles for which they took tusks, gold, and presumably the slaves
to carry the ivory on the backs of, because there was no other way of moving it.
And between about AD 1114-50, the three centuries before Europeans arrived, Zimbabwe was a great
focus of this trade.
Zimbabwe's great enclosure was a secluded place with massive stone wall of easily quarried
granite more than 800 feet long and 32 feet high.
This was the resident of the chief who dwelt inside in a large mud and thatched dwelling.
As for the enclosures atop the neighboring hill, they were in important cult centers
for both rainmaking and ancestor worship.
This was a wealthy, sacred place.
By the 15th century, Zimbabwe was the most prosperous of some ten cattle chieftains
that flourished on the plateau.
Not that they controlled a great deal of territory, probably at the most about a hundred miles
across, sufficient land to allow both shifting cultivation and large-scale grazing of sizable
cattle herds.
Now cattle require a great deal of water and they also require a great deal of pastureage.
For example, it was once estimated that had the Marci people of East Africa who were cattle
people living in a relatively small territory at the end of the 19th century, been allowed
to continue to expand their herds without the constraints of colonial government or cattle
disease, they would have required by 1960 the whole grazeable territory of Kenya, Uganda
and Tanzania taken together.
So the demands on land were high, but it was successful at Zimbabwe's height as many as
18,000 people may have lived in the general vicinity of the site.
Now Zimbabwe's chiefs measured their wealth not only in cattle but in imported goods such
as Chinese porcelain, glass, seashells and of course gold and ivory.
This is all very well, but they lived in an environment of unpredictable rainfall, endemic
cattle diseases and only moderately fertile soils.
One expert is estimated that only about half the soil on the plateau was cultivable for
any length of time.
So one of the reasons they took up this trade and encouraged it, irregular as it was, may
have been as a sort of prudent risk management strategy for chiefs who were accustomed to
raise armies and enforce tribute assessments over a wide area.
It was another source of wealth of being able to gain the loyalty of people with gifts.
But the risk management strategy failed.
In about AD 1500, just as the first foreign caravals explored the East African coast, Zimbabwe
was abandoned and the gravity of political power moved further north toward the Zambezi
where the trade weeks were prospering.
