East African coastal civilization was distinctive and cosmopolitan, a blend of African and Islamic
culture in towns controlled by prominent merchant families.
It was an Islamic culture with a very strong secular, secular foundation.
And behind this narrow coastal strip, behind mangrove swamps, lay the vast little visited
African interior, from which gold and ivory and copper cane bought the coasts by intermediaries
through exchange from community from community over hundreds of miles.
This East African trade generated enormous profits.
Why?
Because African ivory was much in demand in India.
Now it's a little known fact that the ivory of the Indian elephant is rather brittle, whereas
that of the African elephant is much softer and much more meanable to carving.
Carving for the ornaments, which was such an important part of South Asian ritual.
At the same time, while this was one of the staple trades, as were textiles from India
coming the other way, more prosaic commodities like mangrove swamps from coast poles from
coastal swamps were also staple of the trade.
So was iron ore.
In exchange, coming into Africa for all these tropical products, which included a certain
amount of gold, were cheap Indian cloth and particularly glass beads, strings of glass
beads because glass was never made in Africa.
And also, the people of the stone towns collected thousands of seashells, cowries, conus shells
from local beaches, and sent strings of these baubles like the cheap glass beads, for goods
worth a fraction of their value of the exports into the far interior.
You see, a glass bead or a seashell had enormous prestige value in the far African interior
as a symbol of chiefly authority.
As a result, this trade, an interconnected dependence between two developed a symbiosis
which was to India for centuries.
How much of Kilworth's gold and ivory trade, being off the Tanzanian coast, came from the
south, from a place called Safala, which is south of the mouth of the Great Sambezi River.
This vast river served as a conduit to remote and little known interior, to remote sources
of gold and ivory, which lay on the plateau interior over 3,000 feet above sea level,
hundreds of miles inland.
This, to most people on the coast, was completely unknown territory.
But here, occasional trading caravans visited a series of cattle kingdoms, founded by Shona-speaking
farmers and herders, who as ancestors had lived there for many centuries before the
first outsiders arrived from the coast in search of gold and ivory.
This was cattle country, high altitude, fine pasture land for cattle, plagued a little
bit by endemic cattle diseases and by irregular rainfall.
But it was sufficient for a series of powerful cattle kingdoms to come into existence on
this rolling plateau between the Limpopo River, which is now the northern boundary of
South Africa, and the Zambia River, which is the frontier between Zambia and Zimbabwe,
and Mozambique and Zimbabwe.
Now the largest of these kingdoms, at the time when Islam reached the coast, was centered
on a valley and a low hill, which lay at the head of a defile, which brought moisture
and cool winds from the distant Indian Ocean.
Fogs mantled this hill during the dry season, and inevitably this hill became a center
for important rain-making ceremonies and ancestor cults among the local herding and farming
people.
Before we call for much earlier in this course, we talked about the importance of ancestors.
Among Shona-speaking peoples in Central Africa, the ancestors really were the guardians of
the land, and these cults, and the cults of spirit mediums, were of enormous importance
in establishing a relationship between the people and the land.
