The point was this, if at the core there was a strong ruler, a competent ruler, a powerful
ruler with good military ability and a good army, the periphery remained loyal, the boundaries
were well set.
But if the leader was weak, or in times of famine, or in times of war, very often the
outer reaches of a state would disintegrate and become briefly independent states, then
perhaps rejoining the main state.
It was like a concertina, constant fluctuation, and this fluctuation puppeted lord against
lord dynasty against dynasty, and the Shang probably were one of the more powerful of
these dynasties.
This was a time of constant warfare, most of it on foot.
And then in 1300 B.C., the chariot was introduced from the west.
These became ceremonial artifacts.
They were used by the elite, but apparently not on the battlefield.
There were actually chariot burials, where the cast, as it were, of a wooden chariot
is preserved in the grave in earth and can be reconstructed.
Shang civilization was dazzlingly wealthy, especially famous then and now for its superb
bronze metalwork, for ritual vessels made with intricately fitted clay molds.
This sophisticated method contrasts sharply with the simple casting and hammering methods
used at the time in the west.
The shapes and the decoration and uses of Shang bronze vessels were vitually prescribed.
They were used at banquets honoring the ancestors.
These were entirely prestigious and sacred artifacts.
Shang was probably the most important early civilization, or we should say tradition of
early civilization in China, but it covered only a small area of the northeastern part
of the country, surrounded by other still unknown states, which came into being at much
the same time.
Many of these may prove to be as important as Shang, but it's Shang that gives us a
definition of a society with a chasm between the rulers and the ruled, a chasm that was
to become even more extreme in later societies, a civilization where life was of no importance,
where the king served as an intermediary with the divine ancestors, and a civilization where
warfare and personal prestige were all important.
It's very important to understand also that the foundations of thousands of years of Chinese
civilization were laid during the Shang period and before, and it's also important to realize
that the legendary dynasties of Hia, Shang and Xu had a very solid grounding in actual
historical reality.
At the moment, we do not know the names of the kings, one day we may do, but we have
a picture of a civilization which shares with the west many common features, the use of
human hands, the pyramid-like organization of society, the chasm between the ruler and
the ruled, the use of writing, the importance of metallurgy and trade, but there are important
differences too which have defined of a society that was distinctively Chinese from the very
beginning.
We've described in this lecture the beginnings of civilization in northern China, and we
began by describing the increasingly complex Longxianoid cultures from which the very first
Chinese civilization arose in about 2000 B.C.
Then we surveyed what the Chinese historians tell us about their early history, the three
mythic dynasties, Hia, Shang and Xu.
Next, we described what archaeology tells us about Shang civilization, the urban clusters,
the great social gap between elite and commoner and the ritual role of the king in Shang society
as an intermediary between the living and the ancestors.
Finally, we made point that Shang civilization was surrounded by still other known states
and was not that large, one of many such developments in China.
And in AD 1027, the last Shang ruler was overthrown by a rival state to the west, Xu, which we
describe in lecture 29.
