Until later, the questions and the replies have vanished, but in later times, the questions
after the Diviner and the replies were inscribed on the shoulder blades.
The point of all this description is to show that in nearly every respect, the institutions
and economic practices in the Longxianoid societies foreshadowed the much more complex
Shang civilization, which appeared in northern China before 2000 BC.
But Longxianoid cultures were not alone.
They were a regional tradition, one of many such traditions that developed in China before
civilization appeared.
We've emphasized them here simply because these traditions are the best known and because
the archeology of northern China has been investigated more intensively than that of the South.
Chinese civilization then had its own distinctive cultural roots.
Do we know anything from historical records about the very first Chinese states?
These historians of the Han dynasty, which flourished from 206 BC to AD 220, which we
describe in lecture 29, traced the main elements of early Chinese history, the major events.
They came up with a scheme, a sequence of three major dynasties in the north, Hia, Shang,
and Xiu.
And eventually, these three dynasties, after many vicissitudes, led to the accession of
the first emperor of a unified China, Qin Shui Hengdui, in AD BC 256.
Now traditional Chinese history begins with three shadowy mythological ancestors.
The first is Fu Qi, the common ancestor.
Then there was Shen Nong, the first planter of crops, and Xu Rong, the inventor of fire.
Then five equally mythical rulers follow before the beginnings of Chinese history proper with
the Xia, the first of the three historical dynasties.
Now all of this clearly is well-established oral tradition, which was set down by the
Han historians maybe earlier.
One is reminded of ancient Egyptian myth, which had these long dynasties of pharaohs
going back in a long line to the very first pharaoh.
And before then, there were divine pharaohs, lords of the spirits, linear orderly dynasties.
But the one thing one has to realize, that these linear dynasties bear no resemblance
whatsoever to historical reality.
No question there was a Hia dynasty, no question there was a Shang dynasty, but the linear
nature of this really disguises an extraordinarily complex political situation, where different
states of a small scale vied with each other, just like they did in Mesopotamia.
The settlements were different, the setup was different, but the notion of competition
and constant maneuvering for power is very familiar.
Now we know honestly nothing about the Hia, except that a study of place names associates
this particular dynasty with the Henan province in the middle valley of the Huangru River
in northern China.
We also know one other esoteric piece of information.
During the reign of the fourth Hia king in 1876 BC, there was a solo eclipse.
From the archeological point of view, both Hia and the later Shang dynasty belong in
a single archeological culture known as Shang civilization, the term Shang being interchangeable
for the purposes of this lecture and indeed the archeological literature between the archeological
culture and the historical dynasty.
