Shang culture began in about 2000 BC.
It ended with the overthrow of the last Shang ruler by a Xu, a Xu ruler, in 1027 BC.
It was a dynasty, a dynasty that presided over a loosely knit, probably constantly changing
kingdom.
The archaeologists divide this same culture into three broad phases, and here we're looking
at something bigger than just the Shang dynasty.
The early two-phase, from 2000 to 1760 BC, is technically early Shang civilization, but
it actually coincides with the Hia dynasty, and really it's better to think of these as
dynasties part of a cultural continuum.
Then, in the subsequent early gang phase, from 1760 to 1300 BC, you get the first phase
of the Shang dynasty, whose rulers overthrew their Hia predecessor in the 18th century
BC.
Finally, the An Yang phase, which lasted from 1300 to 1027 BC, began with the move of the
royal capital to the city of An Yang, an enormous site spread out in dispersed capital, which
extended nearly four miles along the Huan River.
So you have these phases, and you have these dynasties.
What exactly were the shape of these civilizations?
From the very beginning, and here again I'm a little bit reminded of the pharaohs of Egypt.
Both Hia and Shang rulers lived apart from the common people.
They lived in what one can only describe as splendid isolation.
The commoners lived clustered around the royal compounds, these rulers lived in compounds,
or in rural rural villages in the hinterland of centers like An Yang.
Some Chinese historians, for example, is very apt, refer to a green circle of farming villages
which surrounded the royal centers, the compounds.
And this green circle epitomizes the vast social chasm that separated the elite from
the skilled artisan and the artisan from the commoner.
In some ways, early Chinese states were the ultimate in social pyramids.
Shang cities were much larger than long-shanoid enclosures, with some fortified areas enclosing
the staggering amount of 800 acres.
At the city of Shengzhu, an immense compound with rammed earth walls extended 40 miles,
4.5 miles around, and reached a height of 30 feet in places, separating the royal precincts
from a halo of sites around the main royal compound, bronze workshops, cemeteries, pottery
kilns, and commoners dwellings.
An Yang, the first Shang city to be excavated in the 1920s and 30s, was even larger, but
it lacked the huge enclosure wall at Shengzhu, a ritual center covered about two and a half
acres, part palace and part temple, surrounded by cemeteries for nobles and commoners, and
by all manner of artisans' workshops and farming villages.
It's probably more accurate to refer to Shang cities as urban clusters, for they were far
more dispersed than later compact, densely populated Chinese cities.
An Yang is famous for its royal tombs, which tell us much of the nature of the Shang elite.
They were found in a cemetery of 1,200 burials.
The 13 royal sepulchres stand out because of their size and their contents.
Eight of them were cruciform shaped, with a wooden burial chamber in the center of
the pit.
It was richly decorated and lacquered.
