In the previous lecture, we looked at the origins of Chinese civilization, and we made
a number of important points about it. Firstly, we mixed legend with history. We talked about
the Hia, the Shang, and the Xu. We showed how the archaeology basically confirms to some
degree the legend, and we talked about the omnibus name of the Shang civilization, and
we looked at some of the subdivisions of the society, and we made an important point
that at the time when Shang dynasty ruled, there were probably all sorts of small states
in northern China competing with one another, a patchwork, a word we've used a lot in this
course of different political units who were all vying for power and prestige, and it seems
that things like warfare were relatively common. We ended the lecture with the collapse of
the Shang dynasty in 1027 B.C. In this lecture, we take the story a little further, and we
cover the period between the collapse of the Shang and the collapse of the Great Han dynasty,
or that stage of Chinese civilization, at about the time of Christ. In the first part
of this lecture, I'm going to describe the western and eastern Xu periods, a time at
which densely populated cities appeared in northern China. It was also a time of intense,
even endemic warfare. Then we'll review very quickly the warring states period of the late
first millennium B.C., which culminated in one of the defining moments of Chinese history,
the first unification of the whole of China under the Emperor Qin Shuihangdi in 221 B.C.
And we'll show how the lavish outliers of his tomb, terracotta regiments, carts, and many
other things reveal something not only about the way he waged war, but about the lavishness
of his court. And then finally, we'll summarize the achievements of the Han dynasty, which
bore China in contact with the West via the ancient Silk Route of Central Asia, and with
India by connecting to the ancient monsoon wind routes of the Seat Southeast Ocean. Asia,
in other words, we're going to go back to this persistent theme of interconnectedness.
In lecture 28, we saw how urban clusters and states first developed in northern China
during the time of the Xi'an and Shang dynasties, during the period about 2000 to 1027 B.C.
As I said also, archaeologically, the material remains of these dynasties, such as we know
about them, are grouped under the generic archaeological label of the Shang civilization.
Now the third of these legendary dynasties was the Shu. These people were firmly rooted
in history, and the rival Shu dynasty overthrew the last Shang ruler in 1027 B.C. For the
next two-and-a-half centuries, the centralized government imposed by the Shang disintegrated.
These subject kingdoms pulled themselves away from the very loose central authority
of the Shang dynasty. This was called the Western Shu period. It was followed in 770
B.C. by the Eastern Shu period, a time when the rulers of the day, for reasons that we
don't understand, moved their capital eastward. It was also a time of dramatic changes. In
Chinese society. You will recall that the capital of the Shang and Yang was a very
spread out place. It covered about four miles. But now things have changed. For the first
time you find classic, crowded cities in the classical sense appearing. It was also a time
not only of overcrowded cities, but a moment when ironworking technology came into widespread
use affecting military strategy and agriculture. And a time also when trade expanded exponentially
to the point where for the first time we find coinage being used to standardize transactions
and the values of items and commodities.
