In another effort to stifle social dissent, and also to try and feed everybody, the Han
made many industries, as well as coinage, state monopolies, among them ironworking,
which was a logical way to control weaponry, and to, in some way, fend off the danger of
rebellion.
These were also aggressive rulers.
The Emperor Wu Di, who reigned from 141 to 87 BC, waged massive campaigns about against
warrior nomads in the north.
Like Shuihang Di, he was concerned about the security of his domains, so he extended his
predecessors' Great Wall far to the west, as far as the Tarim Basin in Mongolia, and
established guard towers along it.
Now this expansion of the Great Wall had an unexpected side effect.
It provided a protected corridor to the west, through central Asia.
This was the first leg of the celebrated ancient silk road, which passed silk and other luxuries
overland to the west.
Few merchants made the entire journey, while the goods were passed from trader to trader,
from caravan to caravan, along the way.
This was a very important development, because both goods and ideas flowed into China along
this ancient route, as well as the other direction, among them Buddhism, which arrived from India
in the first century AD.
Wu Di also campaigned in the south.
He campaigned against Vietnamese kingdoms.
He and his successors also maintained commercial and diplomatic ties with newly arisen states
in southeast Asia.
The Han really looked out.
They were traders.
They were engaged with the outer world.
Han ships traveled as far as India.
They brought China into the orbit of the monsoon networks of the ancient Indian Ocean trade.
So again, we've got an expanding international world, and until AD 200, when the dynasty
fell and China once again was fragmented, China was an active part, the Hanu, an active
part in this huge web of interconnectedness, which now linked China with Southeast Asia,
Southeast Asia with South Asia, South Asia with Arabia and the Persian Gulf, and through
the monsoon winds with the Red Sea and East Africa as well.
There was an international world now, well established, and right in the eastern core
of this was Southeast Asia, where the Chinese, the Han, maintained an active presence of
merchants and diplomats who give us a few portraits of the remarkable states which
arose in that area just about at the time when Han was beginning to fragment.
This lectures continued the story of Chinese civilization after the collapse of the Shang
dynasty.
I made a point, and that was how fragmented these states were, and I described the eastern
and western Shu, and the development of cities and ironworking, and the endemic warfare which
culminated in the unification of China by Emperor Qin Shui Deng Di in 221 B.C.
I analyzed the steps he took to unify China administratively.
He created an empire, and we talked about both the known and potentially known spectacular
archaeological discoveries at his great sepulchre.
Finally, we traced the fortunes of the Han dynasty, which overthrew his own city, the
Qin city, and created a vast dynasty which expanded China's influence along the Silk
Road of Central Asia and into Southwest Asia.
And by that time, new states were rising into prominence in Southeast, which we will describe
in lecture 30.
