In the 8th century B.C., cities still covered large areas, like An Yang had, with the residences
of the elite defended by rammed earth walls. Relatively few people lived behind these fortifications.
This was the compound of the elite. But three centuries later, the character of urban settlement
had changed completely. Cities were no longer clusters of compounds, workshops, and rural
villages. They were densely occupied, with thousands of inhabitants living in tightly
packed precincts. The largest eastern shu city, Yangshuo-du,
may have housed as many as three hundred and sixteen thousand people within a compact area
of about seven and a half square miles. This was a large city by any standards. It was larger
than, say, Tenochtitlan, the Aztec capital, or Teotihuacan, the capital of Mexico. It
was larger than many European cities of the day, much larger. But such large cities were
the rarities. They were also royal centers, with the elite living in palace areas within
or close to the cities. Now, in Shang times, there had been a separation. These compounds
were really separate in spatial terms. Now, the enclosures were within the clouded cities,
as if perhaps, and this is a guess, royal power was somewhat weakened. At the same time,
the function of the city seems to have changed considerably. Eastern shu cities were centers
of government, not only centers of government and of ritual, but for trade and manufacturing
in a compacted sort of way. Things were being pulled together. Control, control, control
was the issue here, and it was closely supervised. For example, these cities had plentiful armed
boundaries after the 5th century B.C., and their products were sold to the surrounding
rural population in large urban markets. You've got still the notion of the green circle,
that the residents in the countryside, the peasantry, surrounding these increasingly
large and clouded cities. For the first time in China, you've got true cities in the classic
Western sense with complex relationships of interdependency with surrounding rural populations.
Yes, a chasm separated the two, but there was a considerable interdependence between
them. One of the big factors in all these changes
was the independent development of metallurgy in China. Now, this occurred considerably later
in the West. You'll recall that iron was first melted somewhere in northern Turkey, probably
at about the time of the Hittite civilization, perhaps around 1500 B.C. In China, it developed
later, but was widespread by 500 B.C. When the Chinese started using iron, they had one
advantage over the West. Their artisans had long been producing bronze vessels with high
iron content. So, as iron became more and more available, they began to develop fully
iron tools. The metal came gradually into use. It was no great invention. It was just
a convenient material. And then there was a very, very fascinating difference between
iron smelting in the West and in China. Now, Western smiths smelted iron without adding
carbon to it. They forged the iron with repeating, repeated hammering and heating. This was
a very laborious process. The Chinese, on the other hand, with all their expertise with
bronze casting and the use of iron for basically alloying copper, added extra carbon to the
iron during smelting. This lowered the melting point of the iron and yielded not a spongy
sort of bloom, but molten ore. Now, molten ore you can cast. So, they cast it into molds
to produce finished products, just in the same way as for centuries they had been doing
this with bronze. So, almost immediately, iron technology in China was way ahead of
the West, with all the implications for military strategy and so on, and the widespread use
of iron that you can imagine.
