And he made sure that his subjects worshiped him as a God.
Jayavarman was a God-King.
All of the sources of an increasingly centralized government preserved the cult of the God-King.
Everyone was expected to subordinate any individual ambitions they had to perpetuate the existence
of the King on Earth and his identity with the God in the next life as well as this one.
Jayavarman II ruled for forty-five years, like Egyptian pharaohs.
Longevity of rule and ability almost invariably meant a stable kingdom which progressed.
He was the first of three dynasties of Khmer rulers who presided over a volatile state
that reached the height of its prosperity between AD 900 and 1200, the period roughly
of medieval times in Europe.
The Khmer King was the varman, the protector, and his noble priests who served his every
wish and need were the instruments of political power.
The noble families presided over a bureaucracy of patronage which supervised every aspect
of Khmer life, controlling labor forces and food surpluses raised by very, very carefully
controlled and taxed agriculture and also by tribute.
They served the God, they served the King.
For instance, the most important ritual of all was the custom of building a magnificent
temple to house the royal linger, the phallic emblem of creative power, and this spilled
over into an extraordinary investment by the thirty rulers who followed Jayavarman II
in massive shrines on mounds in an area called Angkor, which was the hub of the Khmer universe.
And this is where the greatest Khmer archaeological sites are to be found.
The Cult of the Divine King reached its height when King Sir Yavarman II built the great
temple of Angkor Wat in AD 1117.
Angkor Wat is the largest religious building in the world.
It beggars the imagination.
It dwarfs the largest Sumerian ziggurat.
It dwarfs the pyramids of Giza.
It dwarfs the Parthenon, Tikal, and great Maya cities.
It is quite simply colossal.
Every detail of the temple, this great structure, reproduces the heavenly world in a terrestrial
mode.
The highest tower represented the cosmic mountain Meru, where the gods lived.
The remaining four towers depict Meru's lesser peaks.
A great enclosure wall depicts the mountains at the edge of the world, the surrounding
moat, the ocean beyond, a model, a symbolic model, of the cosmos.
You find that Mesoamerican rulers did the same thing.
They built their cities as symbolic models of their world.
During his lifetime, Sir Yavarman used the temple as a palace.
When he died, his remains were buried in the central tower so that his soul entered the
divine image and made contact with the royal ancestors.
He became, as one, with Vishnu, the master of the universe.
Vankor Wat really taxed the resources of the kingdom at a time of vicious strife with
neighboring kingdoms.
But that didn't deter Vyayarman.
He ordered the walls of Vankor Wat covered with the most magnificent friezes of sensuous
dancing girls, of armies with war elephants advancing into battle, of all the glorification
of his rule, his kingdom, and the cosmos.
It is, quite simply, a masterpiece, but a masterpiece built at enormous cost.
This was a centripetal empire.
Everything flowed to the center for the benefit of a divine king.
Far more than a pyramid.
It was completely centralized.
