By about AD 1, the web of interconnectedness was rarely coming home to roosts in Southeast
Asia.
The maritime networks which linked the major rivers in Southeast Asia had become part of
a much larger commercial world, a commercial world where the monsoon winds dictated to
a considerable degree the annual rhythm of trade.
How widespread was this trade?
We have a fascinating example.
Indian trade pottery from South Asia has been found as far east as the island of Bali, 2700
miles away.
And with trade links like that, it is clear that there were connections between very
distant lands indeed, and we know that in hand times Chinese ships who visited Southeast
Asia also regularly visited Indian ports.
You see, Southeast Asia with its low-lying sheltered coast was a vital link now in a chain
of trading ports that linked China to India, and India to the distant Roman emperor.
You recall when we talked about later Indian civilization, we pointed out that Ahsoka and
other Maurian rulers described in lecture 26, who governed their empire from the Ganges
Valley.
What Buddhists?
They had overcome Brahmanism which had preached isolation.
Buddhism on the other hand preached overseas contact, trade, commercial success, and as
a result of this, contacts between India and Southeast Asia accelerated rapidly, long after
the Maurian times the impetus continued, and it accelerated in the late 1st millennium
B.C. and continued.
It was one inevitable result of this.
The patchwork of powerful rulers and chieftains in Southeast Asia learned brand new ideas.
They discovered fresh ways of looking at the world very different from the traditional
ancestors to worship of their forefathers.
In time they became familiar with the Brahman and particularly the Buddhist concepts of
divine kingship.
As we've said several times in this course, divine kingship is a vital component in many
pre-industrial states.
It was very important to the pharaohs, for example.
It's extremely important to the Maya.
But no state, no states ever, carried it to such an extreme extent as did the commerce
states of Southeast Asia in the 2nd millennium B.C.A.D.
Divine kingship revolutionized, and that word's not too strong, social and political
organization in Southeast Asia.
They developed a society where everything depended on the divine lord at the center
of the state, whose diplomatic and military abilities were all important.
These really were states where ability of one man was all important simply because that
person had so much power.
There's a term that many experts apply to early Southeast Asian states.
They call them mandalas, circles, circles, which I mentioned before, with the Shang,
like concertinas, which expanded and contracted as different kingdoms interacted with one
another.
But the key element here was the spiritual and personal qualities of each ruler, because
these qualities in large part define the fate of his kingdom.
