Lecture 31, Pueblos and Mound Builders in North America
We now come to part six of the prehistory of humankind.
And now, in this last part, we move to the Americas, and then the next few lectures will
describe the sophisticated chieftains and states of ancient America.
In lecture 31, we're going to examine some of the powerful chieftains which developed
in the North American Southwest, and also in the eastern woodlands of what is now the
United States.
We begin by describing the origins of the Pueblo societies of the Southwest, with their deep
indigenous roots in the remote past.
We visit Chaco Canyon and Mesa Verde, two great centers of ancestral Pueblo societies
about a thousand years ago, and we show how interdependence, that common theme in this
course, and drought were two major factors in ancient southwestern life.
After briefly describing the Hobokam tradition of the Southern Arizona Desert, we'll follow
maize and beans into the eastern woodlands, where elaborate burial rituals and earthwork
construction have been practiced for many centuries.
Finally, we'll describe the Mississippian tradition, the apogee of chieftains in ancient
North America, which flourished about a thousand years ago.
Christopher Columbus landed in the Indies in October 1492, an event which some observers
have compared to their modern equivalent of finding an alien society in outer space.
The impact on Europe, on the ideas of western civilization, was enormous.
And as European explorers, missionaries and settlers, fanned out over the Americas, they
encountered a staggering array of Native American societies, teeny bands of hunter-gatherers
foraging over vast territories in desert lands, others living off salmon fisheries, or in
tropical rainforests, others subsisting off sea mammals and fish in the High Arctic.
Then there were subsistence farmers, cultivating every kind of temperate and tropical environment
imaginable.
It is said, with considerable justification, that probably the ancient Native Americans
were the most skilled farmers in the world in 1492.
And the newcomers came in contact with other far more elaborate North American societies.
Those of Southwestern farmers dwelling in large, mud-brick pueblos in the Southwest.
Volatile, elaborate chieftains, with sophisticated religious practices and burial customs, in
the South and the Southeast.
And the same diversity extended into Central and South America, where magnificent pre-industrial
civilizations dazzled Spanish conquistadors and soon vanished in the face of epidemic
diseases and aggressive conquest.
Part six of the prehistory of humankind describes some of this extraordinary diversity of agricultural
and state-level societies.
In lecture 18, we told the story of plant domestication in the Americas, and described
maize, beans, and a wide variety of other native plants, including the potato, as the
staples of Native American societies.
But the staff of life for North America were maize and beans.
As we saw in that lecture, maize spread northward from Central America, into the Southwest,
and was well established in this arid and demanding region for agriculturalists, by
the time of Christ.
