This sudden decline, this volatility, is one of the most marked features of Maya civilization.
It was never a stable civilization that lasted for centuries without dramatic shifts like
that say of the Egyptians.
It was a society made up of city-states, just like ancient Sumeria was, and these city-states
were constantly interacting and fighting and quarrelling.
And really, literally within a generation, a city could collapse and a neighbor would
come into prosperity.
And for some reason or other, and it may have just simply been the exhausting of the agricultural
soils around El Meridor, it suddenly collapsed.
It was a pre-classic Maya city.
A magnificent place still being excavated.
One of the problems with the archaeology of the Maya is that the scale of these cities
is so large that it takes years and years and large teams of archaeologists to investigate
even a small part of the cities, largely because they are overgrown with dense forest.
The institution of kingship was at the very heart of Maya civilization.
Now rulers linked their deeds to those of gods and ancestors.
And just a simple look at the cities shows us how society was embedded in a matrix sacred
space and time.
We know from decipherment of the scripts that the Maya maintained both a secular and a religious
calendar, the secular calendar concerned with the cycles of the agricultural year.
And an elaborate script helped define Maya kingship and civilization itself.
As El Meridor collapsed rapidly, Tikar, one of the great Maya cities, and nearby Huakstan
stepped into the economic and political vacuum.
And with this event, the classic period of Maya civilization began, lasting from about
AD 300 to 900.
Tikar itself had begun as a small village in 600 BC by the second century AD, more than
40,000 people lived in or around the urban core of Tikar, with its elaborate complex
of more than 100 buildings.
The great plaza itself, which has now been partially reconstructed and cleared with its
plastered surface, was the setting for public ceremonies conducted on the surrounding pyramids.
These were seen as sacred mountains topped by small temples whose open doorways were
gateways to the other world, to the layered cosmos of the Maya.
This entire city and all Maya cities were symbolic models of the cosmos, of a land of
trees and lakes and sacred mountains, and the temple doorways at the top of the sacred
mountains were the entrance to the other world.
And it was through this entrance that a Maya lord in trance would pass and fly freely in
the supernatural world.
Tikar's ruling dynasty was founded in AD 219.
We know this from inscriptions at the site, and they managed to reconstruct the dynasty's
rulers.
39 of them inherited Tikar's throne over more than 600 years.
Now the continuity here was based on genealogy, on succession and relationship to divine ancestors.
Here as with other civilizations, there was a pinnacle at the top of the ruler and priests
and high nobles and a nobility, and below them the pyramid of subsistence farmers.
The many served the few.
Great public ceremonies set in the heart of this symbolic world validated the contract
between the ruler and the ancestors and the ruler and the people, so that the royal ancestor
ensured the perpetuation of life and the application of the forces of the supernatural world.
