There was an emerging ideology of chieftainship, in which control of trade and exotic items
like tropical bird feathers, an obsidian that's volcanic glass, and a knowledge of distant
lands and markets were vital to an emerging ideology of chieftainship, to an ideology
that was just as important as it was in other parts of the world, like Egypt.
These general developments took place in many areas of the Highlands and Lowlands, but by
far the most famous of these early emerging more complex societies was that of the Olmec.
The Olmec occupied a revered place in the legend and law of later Meso-American civilizations.
Bire priests and lords recognized the profound cultural legacy that they owed to these ancestral
Meso-Americans.
So did the Aztecs of the Highlands, whose rain-guard Claloc may have originated among
the primordial deities of the Olmec.
Earlier generations of scholars thought of the Olmec as a sort of mother civilization
for Meso-America, the ancestor of all later civilizations in the region.
This was a simplistic model, perhaps appropriate at a time, when we knew so much less about
Maya civilization than we do now, or about the civilizations in the Highlands, and it
dates from a time before the decipherment of Maya glyphs, which have thrown so much light
on the society.
Today we know that Olmec, in fact, was a series of powerful chieftains along the Veracruz
and Tabasco coasts, which may have influenced adjacent areas very considerably.
Now Olmec societies flourished in a time when art motifs, religious symbols, and ritual
beliefs were shared among chieftains in many different regions.
Why?
As a result of constant contacts between kin leaders and regular exchange and trading
activity.
Indeed, Olmec art and artifacts have been found over an area twenty times that of the
core Olmec region.
They've even been found in pre-Maya burials under the great Maya city of Copan in Honduras,
a long way away.
What do we know archaeologically about the Olmec?
We know that they lived along the Mexican South Gulf coast, between about 1500 and 500
BC, in a low-lying tropical homeland, rich in animals and plant foods.
The birds, fish, and land animals of the forest soon formed an important part of a remarkably
sophisticated art style, which was to leave a permanent imprint on Mesoamerican life.
Both the beliefs and the art, which depicted these animals and plants, had ancient indigenous
roots.
They were one of the foundations of an ideology that gave animals personality, that created
deities that were half human and half animals.
By 1250 BC, the people of San Lorenzo in the Veracruz region lived on an earthen platform
set in the midst of swampy terrain.
Soon, their leaders of these people erected platforms and plazas around the platform where
they lived.
A century later, they began erecting monumental portraits of themselves, huge scowling faces
snarling with contemptuous expressions, clearly portraits of rulers.
But here was a setting, a setting of pyramids and plazas, a setting for public performance
of ritual, a persistent theme in later Mesoamerican civilization.
Another Olmec site, La Venta, close to the Gulf coast in the same general reason, rose
on an island in a swamp, with mounds forming oar.
The lineating, should we say, a rectangular plaza.
Here again, huge sculptures depict rulers with expressions of contempt, nearby a throne-like
stone blocks which show seated figures, perhaps rulers, and often also jaguars, because the
power of the jaguar, the forest beast, the dangerous tiger, of a dangerous carnivore,
I should say, was definitely associated with shamanship and rulership.
