You could keep it going by nourishing the sun god.
How many people were sacrificed in Aztec domains in a year?
Nobody really knows.
Cortes estimated, or a secretary estimated, about 20,000.
The figure is probably high.
One thing is quite certain.
It seems, for many years, that the Aztec have been accused of being cannibals, even the
great American historian who wrote the Congress to Mexico, William Prescott, talked about
sumptuous banquets of human flesh.
If the Aztecs ate any flesh, it was purely for ritual purposes.
After the sacrifice, the body was tumbled down the steps of the pyramid, the head cut
off and displayed on a skull rack nearby, and the body dismembered.
But there doesn't seem to have been widespread consumption of human flesh.
By the time of the Spanish Intrader, in 1519, Aztec society was moving ever closer to a
rigidly stratified class system, with a despotic monarch, nobles, merchants, and warriors
forming distinct segments of society.
It was a society that was probably under a lot of stress.
It was preoccupied with war, and with prestige, and with the placation of the sun god, with
the sacrifice of human victims' hearts.
By all accounts, the empire was an uneasy patchwork of tribute kingdoms, many of whom
resented the harsh demands of their masters, and were ripe for rebellion.
And it's very interesting to speculate what would have happened had not Hernán Cortés
survived in 1519.
How long would Aztec society have continued before it collapsed?
One thing is certain, it would have collapsed because simply of the volatility of these
states, it would have overstressed itself, and some state on the periphery eventually
would have prevailed.
In the event, the Spanish conquistador Hernán Cortés and a few adventurers arrived at the
gates of Tenochtitlán in 1519, the Aztec ruler, Moctezuma, had heard stories earlier
of mountains on the sea, and when Cortés survived, he sent emissaries to look.
They took with them the regalia of the feathered serpent Quetzalcoatl.
Why?
Because Moctezuma was convinced that Cortés was the returning Quetzalcoatl.
Because Aztec legend said, when Tula collapsed, the Toltec city, and remember that the Aztecs
claimed ancestry from the Tula, from the Toltecs, it is said that there was great controversy
between the followers of the feathered serpent and a militaristic god called Tezcatlipoca.
Tezcatlipoca's followers prevailed.
The feathered serpent, Fed, fled from Tula, came to the Gulf of Mexico where he crafted
a raft of serpents and sailed over the horizon, vowing to return in the year one reed by grotesque
historical coincidence.
Hernán Cortés arrived on the coast of Mexico in the year one reed.
So it's more wonder that Moctezuma assumed that this was a returning Quetzalcoatl, determined
to cease his throne, perhaps returning inventions.
The emissaries were very puzzled when Cortés rejected their guests' gifts, threw them
in irons, and fired cannons.
The rest of the story is famous.
Cortés and his motley army of adventurers, bolstered with rebellious states, advanced
inexorably to the highlands while Moctezuma vacillated.
And in the end, the Spanish prevailed.
After a bloody siege in 1521, Mesoamerican civilization in the form of Aztec civilization
passed into historical oblivion.
And in this lecture, we've described the ancestors of the Aztecs, Monte Alban, Teotihuacan, the
Toltec, and then finally, the remarkable rise of Aztec civilization, the ultimate expression
of Mesoamerican civilization, a ruthless, tribute-driven empire which existed to nurture
the sun god in a cyclical world.
And in the end, as the Aztec prophesied, this world ended in tragedy and chaos.
