But soon it became a small town, again as growth of a settlement, growth of population,
more productive agriculture, close to a lake.
And some platlico art has strong Olmec influences as the institutions of nascent civilization
spread far and wide, not by population movement, but by through constant interaction and trade.
By 50 BC, as El Mirador was flourishing in Maya country, some centers on the highlands
had acquired considerable size and complexity.
They established a basic pattern that was to endure for centuries.
Large century centers ruled by a small elite which served as commercial and spiritual
locales, served by rural populations living in hierarchies of lesser communities scattered
through the surrounding countryside.
Not particularly large states, but in places the populations were very dense.
Two major cities' states dominated the Mesoamerican highlands in the first part of the first millennium
AD.
This, of course, was the time when classic Maya civilization reached its peak in the
lowlands, up to 600 AD.
Monte Alban, in the valley of Oaxaca, was a small village back in 900 BC, built on a
hill overlooking the valley.
The settlement grew rapidly.
By AD 150, just as El Mirador was collapsing, Monte Alban became a major city.
The population rose to about 30,000 people, between AD 500 and 700, when the city was
at the height of its prosperity.
By now, the village had become an elaborate complex of palaces, plazas and temples.
Atop are now artificially flattened hilltop.
The city itself straddled at least three hills, with at least fifteen residential subdivisions,
each with their own plazas, probably residential areas based on large kin groups.
The size of Monte Alban was staggering.
The paved, main plaza of the city, between AD 500 and 725, was 975 foot long and 450
foot across, bounded at each end with platform mounds.
The rulers and their families lived in a complex of buildings on the north platform, which
was the formal setting for meetings with high officials and emirates from other Mesoamerican
states.
It was, by any standards, an impressive state.
Monte Alban coexisted peacefully with another expanding state, Teotihuacan, on the edge
of the valley of Mexico.
In about 750 BC, this was a small, scattered set of villages.
By 100 BC, the village was getting bigger, and two powerful chieftains were vying for
power in the valley of Mexico.
One of them was Teotihuacan, in the east.
In the west was Cuycúl loco, and then a natural catastrophe occurred.
A major volcanic eruption destroyed Cuycúlclo without any warning at all.
The city was buried under volcanic ash.
Its rival, Teotihuacan, was now master of the valley and of the adjacent central highlands.
As I said, in about 200 BC, Teotihuacan was a large village.
Over the next eight centuries, the village became an enormous city, and what is remarkable
about it is that it was laid out according to a master plan, which was adhered to over
many generations, and at a time when life expectancy was probably in your 20s and 30s.
So there was very powerful ideology to maintain this plan over so many generations.
Why did this happen?
Probably because the city was envisaged and built as a vast symbolic landscape.
