It was he who advised the Aztecs to reinvent themselves.
As other people did in history, these conquerors reinvented themselves.
They put themselves under the protection of a hitherto obscure sun god, Wichlow Pochty.
The Visio and his rulers created a vast tribute-gathering machine and backed it with ruthless military
force.
They created another form of centralized state, a tribute machine, where, if you conquered
people say in the lowlands, you assessed them for tribute each year, and this was recorded
and delivered.
And if it wasn't delivered, they thumped you with an army.
It was backed with ruthless military force.
By 1500, just under two hundred years after the founding of the capital, over five million
people lived under Aztec rule, from northern Mexico to Guatemala, from the Pacific to the
Gulf of Mexico.
This was far from a monolithic empire.
It was a mosaic of ever-shifting alliances controlled by a teeny, teeny group of rulers
and high officials.
Just as like most other pre-industrial civilizations, everything was run for the benefit of the
elite, backed by a supremely efficient tribute and tax-gathering machine.
Everything was inventoryed.
The threat of military force stood behind the machine.
So did a pervasive religious ideology.
Every conquered city, every kingdom was assessed tribute in products or raw materials.
Thirty-eight cities did nothing but provide firewood for the capital.
Everything emanated from or came to Tenochtitlan, a dazzling and highly organized city of more
than two hundred and twenty thousand people.
Large residential precincts and thousands of acres of swamp gardens surrounded the central
precincts, the hub of the Aztec world.
This again was a model of the cosmos.
A great plaza, dominated by the temples of the sun god Wichlow Potschli and the rain
god Plaloc, formed the central precinct.
From this, four causeways emanated, dividing the Aztec world into four quarters.
Aztec market, the market at Tenochtitlan, is said to have been attended, according to
the Spanish, by sixty thousand people a day.
It is said that the bell of the temple, or the gong of the temple, or the drum of the
temple actually to be perfectly correct, could be heard two miles away.
This was a place which revolved around the sun god, around the nourishment of the sun
god to perpetuate life.
And at the focus of all this, was human sacrifice.
The Aztecs believed that Wichlow Potschli, the sun god, was nourished by the blood of
human hearts, and their warfare, much of it, was conducted for the purpose of gathering
prisoners for human sacrifice.
Their society, which was rigidly stratified, included a large warrior class, with different
classes of warriors, the highest being the eagle warrior.
And to be captured in battle, and sacrificed on a sacrificial stone, with your chest being
opened with an obsidian bladed knife, and your heart dashed on the idol of the sun god,
was considered an honorable death.
It was known as the flowery death, because when you died the soul of the warrior went
up to travel with the sun god in the heavens.
Again, it's the verity, the cyclical nature of human life, the continuity of human life
that was all important.
Because you see the Aztecs believed that they lived in the world of the fifth sun, that
they lived in a finite world that would end in earthquakes and other violent catastrophes.
The world had been created on the pyramid of the sun at Tenochtitlan.
It was to die.
