A landscape of artificial mountains, the pyramids, foothills, which were lesser mounds, caves
like the sacred cave underneath the Greatest Pyramid, the Pyramid of the Sun, and open spaces.
All of this replicated the spiritual world, the cosmos of the city.
The grid-plan of the city was bisected by the three-mile street of the dead on a north-south axis.
We should mention that the name street of the dead is a modern name.
We don't know what the inhabitants called it.
Between AD 1 and AD 100, the time of Christ, the colossal pyramid of the sun rose on the
east side of the street of the dead, 200-foot high, with 700-foot sides.
Its immense staircase and five stages dominate the plaza and buildings around it.
The one thing when you go and see Teherotiracán, and I beg you if you go there to Mexico to
go and see it, it's one of the great archaeological sites of the world, you stand in front of
this pyramid and you are dwarfed by it.
You feel insignificant in its presence, and that was precisely the effect the architects
wanted.
This was a statement of power, and the plazas below, where hundreds of people gathered,
were diminished by this enormous sacred mountain.
And under this mountain, this pyramid was a natural lava cave, a symbolic entrance to
the underworld, discovered by accident when restoration work on the pyramid was being
done some years ago.
This huge complex of pyramids and plazas, which also includes the Pyramid of the Moon,
Pyramid of the Moon, where they recently discovered human sacrifices, was intended to
dwarf the individual.
Even today, every time I go there, I feel overwhelmed.
The sheer scale of this city is enormous.
It's huge.
Two miles south of the Pyramid of the Moon, the street of the dead intersects with an
east-west avenue, dividing the city into four quadrants, each with their own color and their
own spiritual associations.
A huge square enclosure called the Suidadela stands at the intersection, and this is complete
with a temple to the feathered serpent Quetzalcoatl.
From recent excavations, we know that at least 200 people were sacrificed in the foundations
of this temple, whose facade, which displays the mask of Quetzalcoatl and the mask of the
rain god Plaloc, depicts the moment of creation.
Tehatea Bacan covered at least eight square miles.
It teamed with dense urban populations, with artisans and traders from all over the Mesoamerican
world.
There were even foreign enclaves, where visitors are residents from Oaxaca and Veracruz-lived
traders who brought critical commodities, like tropical bird feathers, obsidian pottery,
and stuffeds from the lowlands to the greatest city on the highlands.
But Tehatea Bacan was far more than that.
It was an important place of pilgrimage, a market place for the Valley of Mexico with
uneasy alliances, with people living at much greater distances.
It was a hub.
It was familiar with the lowlands, with Oaxaca, with the Pacific and Atlantic coasts, and
it received products from all of them.
This was a vast state, very, very powerful.
Tehatea Bacan's inhabitants lived in wards based apparently on kin ties, and more commercial
considerations, such as crafts, or merchandise, or jobs they had.
The names of the rulers are unknown, but clearly they had shamanistic roles just like
the Maya.
They made public appearances, which were publicly carefully rationed, and they were considered
to be gods.
There were signs that in the latest stages of its history, the rulers of Tehatea Bacan
became more militaristic and indulged more in human sacrifice.
