Lecture 34 The Origins of Andean Civilization
Now we travel southward from Mesoamerica to the Andes to look at the beginnings of Andean
Civilization in South America.
Lectures 34 and 35 cover the subject according to the altitude of the civilizations.
In this lecture we look at the civilizations of the coast, and then in the second lecture
we look at the civilizations of the highlands and culminate with the Inca civilization.
We begin by defining two poles of Andean civilization, the one on Peru's north coast, the other
in the south-central Andes.
Then we survey a popular theory, which argues that coastal civilization originated in part
because of the rich Pacific fisheries nurtured by the humble current close offshore, which
produced huge food surpluses.
Then I'll describe the early ceremonial centers erected by scattered rural communities which
are the first signs of the emergence of civilization.
We analyze the Chavin cult, an art style and religious beliefs mark this cult which spread
widely on the coast and in the highlands between 900 and 200 BC.
Finally, we'll describe the flamboyant Moche state of the north coast, which flourished
from about 200 BC to AD 600, before being weakened and destroyed in part by a series
of natural disasters.
In AD 1500, the vast Inca empire, known as Tawantinsunu, the land of the Four Quarters,
extended from high in the Andes mountains, through dry highland plains, to foothills,
tropical forests, and coastal deserts, some of the driest terrain on earth.
Organizers of people lived under Inca rule, ruled from the Inca capital at Cusco, high
in the Andes, the inhibitors of a tradition of civilization which extended back more
than 3,000 years.
In this lecture, number 34, we discuss the origins of Andean civilization, the very basis
of this long, long history of civilization.
We start on the coast, we look at the foothills as well.
And then in the next lecture, lecture 35, I'll examine the predecessors of Inca civilization
and the formation of the extraordinary Inca empire and some of its institutions.
For many centuries, two poles of Andean civilization developed.
The one was centered along the north coast of modern-day Peru, one of the driest environments
on earth, the other was in the south-central Andes mountains.
They were two poles, but only the Inca succeeded in unifying them into a single kingdom, a
single empire.
But, and this is a very important, persistent theme of Andean civilization, societies on
both poles of civilization interacted and traded with each other constantly.
They had to, because both needed commodities grown or produced by the other.
The north pole of civilization in the Andes was centered on the virtually rainless coastal
desert where over 40 rivers and streams fueled by mountain runoff dissect the arid coastal
plain.
They are, rather like the Nile, a set of arrows which flow through the dry landscape, watered
by spring mountain runoff.
