This initial period, as it's called, of Andean civilization saw an elaboration of ritual
life and the appearance of new forms of religious architecture.
For example, there's a site called El Paraiso on the Chilón River, which is a large, U-shaped
ceremonial site built in about 1800 BC.
This comprises at least six huge buildings of plastered boulders painted in brilliant
hues.
It's in a U-shape.
Then there's another site, Huaca, Florida, on the Rio Rimac, eight miles inland from
El Paraiso, which was built a century later.
This was even larger, with an adobe and boulder platform 840 feet long and 180 feet wide,
tearing 100 feet above the densely irrigated land, which once surrounded it.
Now, what's interesting is that these structures were built not by city dwellers, but by people
from many surrounding communities.
After thousands of years, hunter-gatherer communities had lived mainly at the coast.
Why?
Because of the extremely productive fisheries and also because of the clumps of plant foods
which grew near the mouths of the rivers in the damp, foggy environment right at the
coast.
But by now, the focus of settlement had changed.
People had moved from the coast inland.
At a time when irrigation agriculture was coming into widespread use.
Michael Mosley believes that irrigation required a major reorganization of labor.
And that this reorganization, and clearly you're really going to alter society if you're
going to get into large-scale agriculture, coincided with new artistic traditions and
religious architecture.
Here again, you're dealing with the relationship between the living and the spiritual worlds.
And one of the ways that the Andeans did this was to ritually manipulate smoke and water,
a way of bridging the stratified layers they believed in of air, earth, and bodies of water,
the Andean cosmos.
It is believed that these vast open courts of coastal U-shaped ceremonial complexes
may have housed sacred gardens and orchards irrigated with specially manipulated water
supplies.
Water, here, was the staff of life.
As irrigation assumed greater importance, so growing communities turned from informally
organized land reclamation to highly structured irrigation works controlled by a central authority
with powerful religious connections.
Sitchinalto in the Kazma Valley was built in 1400 BC, a huge U-shaped ceremonial complex
with sunken courts, clasors, and flanking mounds.
The main public performance was very much part of Andean civilization, like it was of
Mesoamerican.
But what kingdoms and what leaders control these vast early shrines remains a mystery.
Was there then an Andean equivalent to the Mesoamerican's Olmec?
The answer is yes.
There was a defining art style, the Shavin art style, which spread over an enormous area
of the highlands and lowlands in about 900 BC, long after the building of these U-shaped
shrines on the coast.
This seems to have been a defining ideology, a defining set of religious beliefs, centered
on a place called Shavin de Huantar in the Andean foothills.
This shrine, with its terraces, was home of an elaborate well-developed iconography.
Shavin de Huantar itself, a terraced shrine, had a truncated pyramid, which was a hollow
honeycomb of passageways and rooms.
