The center appears to have been a place of mediation between the heavens and the underworld,
and here again, as in the Andes, as in the Mesoamerica, as with the Maya, shamans mediated
between the living and the supernatural.
We know that from the sculpture that were the transformations of humans into animals
depicted, they probably used music and elaborate costumes, appearing as jaguars, eagles, and
other animals.
At the same time, the priests could cause water to thunder through tunnels and channels
in the shrine, replicating the link between the wane-giving mountains above the temple
and the lairs of the cosmos.
It must have been a very dramatic performance with the water thundering through these channels.
So much so, that between about AD 250, sorry, I beg your pardon, 850 and 200 B.C., Chavine
de Juanta was an important place of pilgrimage with a sizable population, but it never became
a fully fledged state, and eventually, center of pilgrimage evaporated and collapsed, but
its religious ideas endured, and they again were one of the catalysts for the development
of civilization both on the lowlands and on the highlands.
After 200 B.C., a series of wealthy states flourished along the north coast.
The longest-lasting and most powerful of these was the Moche state, which endeared for 800
years.
Its major centers and irrigation works lay in the Chikama and Moche valleys, and it
became one of the first multi-valley states, and actually maintained loose political connections
far down the coast.
We don't know a great deal about the Moche, unfortunately, because many of the burials,
which normally are such an informative aspect of coastal archeology, have been looted, but
thanks to a fortunate discovery in 1989, we have finally learned something of the remarkable
rulers of this society.
It was a society closely focused on intensive agriculture in the valleys and on the coastal
fisheries.
And it appears to have been presided over by a series of noble families, probably who
were related to one another, which lived at different major centers.
One of these centers was a place called Sipan, a major center in the Lombayak Valley, where
in about 400 AD, a series of Moche lords were buried in their full regalia.
They were discovered by Lutus, but fortunately Walter Alva, a Peruvian archeologist, was
able to move in and excavate three magnificent royal burials.
The discoveries from these sepulchres, which are less known than those of the Pharaoh Tutankhamun
in my view rival those of the Egyptian Pharaoh, and in some aspects are even more spectacular.
The three men were buried in their full, few regalia.
They wore magnificent gold masks.
On their heads were feathers and an elaborate crescent-shaped headdress, which glittered
of gold.
They wore elaborate body ornaments in gold and silver, which represented the polarity
of the world as represented as the sun and the moon.
They wore cotton raiment, elaborate necklaces, sandals, and cowed sceptres.
And a recent exhibition of the finds from the tombs, there was a mannequin of a lord
of Sipan dressed in his full regalia.
And they had a light playing on him, and the mannequin moved slightly.
And you could imagine just for a moment what he would look like if he glittered in the
sun as he stepped out of a temple high on the pyramid, and below him in the plaza would
be a crowd attending a ceremony.
And here was this man who appeared glittering perhaps in the setting sun, with the sun glittering
off the gold planks on his dress and off his headdress.
It must have been a magnificent sight, a living sun god.
Who were these people?
