In the previous lecture, we ended with the collapse of the Moche civilization around
AD 700, the result in considerable part, we suspect, of natural disasters like earthquakes
and El Ninos.
Now in lecture 35, we're going to continue our exploration of Andean civilization by
moving to the highlands and charting the later course of Andean civilization.
We begin at the southern pole of Andean civilization, in the highlands, nearly Titicaca, where
the Tiwanaku state came into prominence among earlier smaller kingdoms in the late 1st millennium
AD.
As Moche faded into obscurity, so Tiwanaku became important.
This civilization with its pervasive religious beliefs collapses in about AD 1000, and then
we go back to the coast, to the north coast, and examine the flamboyant state of Chimo,
which is described in the second part of this lecture.
Now the Chimo were expert irrigation farmers and metalworks in the tradition of the Moche,
and ultimately they were conquered by the all-conquering Inca, whose rise to imperial
conquerors and whose huge empire, Tabut insinu, forms the latter part of this lecture.
We're going to describe the organization of the empire and the Inca passion for organization,
all the also the institutions that fueled endless Inca conquests.
And finally, we'll take a look at the weaknesses in this great empire, which collapsed in the
face of a small party of Spanish adventurers in AD 1532.
You recall in the last lecture, we talked about an important cult and pilgrimage center,
Chavin de Juanta, in the Andean foothills.
As Chavin rose to prominence in the northern foothills in the first millennium BC, small
kingdoms appeared for the first time around Lake Titicaca to form the beginnings of what
is known as the southern pole of Andean civilization.
These states appeared at a time when more intensive alpaca and llama herding and potato
agriculture began to transform the Altiplano landscape.
By 1200 BC, before even Chavin came into provenance, these polities had developed widespread trading
connections which even extended as far north as the north coast.
You are dealing, you see again, with this interdependency for different products between
highlands and lowlands which, like in other parts of the world, transcended temporary
political developments.
There always was this need for products from both each areas.
And at the same time as they were trading with the north coast, the people around Lake
Titicaca were beginning to develop woven textiles and irrigation agricultural techniques
which spread to the southern coast of what is now Peru.
And one of the catalysts for this trade was, of course, the domestication of the llama.
But the llama has serious limitations as a beast of burden because it can only carry
about 35 pounds, but nevertheless, small caravans of these moved constantly between
highlands and lowlands carrying such products as fish meal and so on.
This interconnectedness increased.
By AD 450, after the time of Christ, Tiwanaku, a center at the southern end of Lake Titicaca,
was becoming a major population center as well as an economic and religious focal point
for the entire region.
Much of its prosperity came from the trade around the southern shores of the lake.
At the same time, it also became a major religious center with a great sunken court and large
earthen platform known as the Acapana.
During heavy rain, water would gush out of this sunken court at the summit of the platform
and fill a large moat surrounding the ceremonial precincts.
