This was a new role. He soon presided over a small kingdom, promptly proclaimed that
he was a living God, and created a new religious cult of empty, a celestial divine ancestor
associated with the sun. In other words, here is a divine ruler, I have an imperial vision,
I have a divinely sanctioned job, conquest. And then, around 1438, a brilliant warrior,
Kusi Inka Upankwi, became the Inka ruler. With great arrogance and assurance, he assumed
the name Pachakutye, he who remakes the world, and set about reforming and transforming the
Inka domain into a state. He did a number of things, which would have a lasting impact,
and to create fatal weaknesses in Inka civilization. He began by fostering a new cult of the royal
mummies. This seems bizarre to us, but actually the logic behind it was to reinforce continuity.
At his death, a ruler was mummified, but at his death, he continued to live in his palace,
in his mummified form, and to own all his possessions. His devoted followers would talk
with him, eat with him, and the deceased mummy attended all the great ceremonies of state.
This symbolism was of vital importance. Why? It ensured the continuity of Inka life. And
not only that, but more important even, it reinforced the relationship between the royal
ancestors, the living leader, and Inti, the sun god. Perhaps even more pervasive than
this was another custom introduced by Pachakutye, but probably also used at Chimo, and that
was the institution of split inheritance. Under this custom, the dead Inka, the dead
ruler, retained all his possessions and all his land. All of the new ruler who succeeded
him acquired was prestige, the title of Inka, or supreme Inka, and little else. This meant
that he had to acquire his own wealth, his own land, to live in royal splendor, and ultimately
to support his mummy. Now since all the land around Kusko was owned by the early rulers,
each new supreme Inka had to acquire royal estates by the only way available, by aggressive
conquest. So ruler after ruler expanded the Inka domains. Fortunately for the Inka, these
were a series of extremely able rulers. For example, by 1493, the Inka, Topa Upankwi,
extended the empire into Ecuador, Bolivia, and Chile. His armies also conquered Chimo,
whose water supplies were already under Inka control. By the time of the Spanish Intrada,
Inka domains extended far into Ecuador in the north, and were beginning to expand into
the rainforests on the eastern side of the Andes. Here, however, Inka armies were hampered
because they were not used to fighting in heavily vegetated terrain.
Now here was Tabon Hinsuyu, the land of the Four Quarters, a vast empire. Fortunately
for the Inka, their rulers were far more than conquerors.
