Archaeologists believe that this precinct may have been a symbolic island where Tiwanaku's
rulers would appear dressed like gods or birds or animals on ceremonial occasions, again
the powerful undercurrent of shamanism.
It's worth mentioning here that many of the inspirations of the religion and iconography
of these Andean states came from the Amazon forest on the other side of the Andes.
Like Shafin, Tiwanaku developed a striking art style which reflected the powerful sacred
iconology, iconography, and the motives included eagles and jaguars and also anthropomorphic
gods.
One of these gods may have been a personage called Viracocha, the ancient Andean sun god.
The rulers of Tiwanaku carved out an empire in the south-central Andes in the time-tried
manner of Andean civilizations.
They carefully controlled trade with the lowlands and the lama caravans.
They conquered neighboring kingdoms and they colonized them.
The reason they could develop this state was a remarkable ancient agricultural technique.
It is an area very prone to frost and of course frost decimates potato crops in dry fields.
But the people of Tiwanaku and their predecessors developed an ingenious system of raised fields,
which they would water and put canals by, and the effects of the water caused a mist
to form over the fields and nullified the effect of frost protecting the fields from
frost.
And this produced several crops of potatoes a year and was enormously productive and
allowed the food surpluses, which permitted the civilization to do all sorts of other
things and to develop.
This field system seems to have drawn largely into disuse after the collapse of Tiwanaku
in about AD 1000.
But interestingly enough, archaeologists have reconstructed it by excavation and then built
new fields and the traditional agricultural technique with its natural protection from
frost is coming back into use.
The last I heard about 1200 acres of these fields had been planted by Bolivian peasants.
Tiwanaku's state endured for a long time by Andean standards.
But it collapsed in the 11th century when, so ice cores from high in the Andes tell
us, a severe drought affected the Tiwanaku homeland.
Grants were a major problem for Andean agriculture as they were in Maya country in Mesoamerica.
They also affected Moche farming.
Obviously, because if you have a drought in the mountains, the runoff into the coastal
valleys is much less.
But although a drought affected Tiwanaku's homeland, many of the institutions and particularly
the religious beliefs endured, albeit in modified form, in Inca imperial practices
four centuries later.
The Inca themselves admitted that they owed a tremendous spiritual and other debt to Tiwanaku,
and Tiwanaku to them was a sacred place.
It was the place where Viricotcha had come from.
As Tiwanaku and other neighboring highland states collapsed at the end of the first millennium
AD, the north coast once again rose into prominence.
The northern pole came back.
New states arose in Moche's place, among them Sikan, S-I-C-A-N.
But in turn, these were decimated by El Nino flooding and by political disruption.
It's very hard for us to understand how vulnerable these states were to El Ninos.
In a society where life expectancy was short, where information was passed from one generation
to the next by word of mouth, the institutional memory must have been very short, and the
memory of strong El Ninos and their destruction may well have not endured long, especially
as often happens as as much as sanctuary might pass before another El Nino came.
So they were very vulnerable.
