They were, for a start, brilliant propagandists who reminded everyone that they were gods
constantly, and that everyone's welfare depended upon them, like the Pharaohs and others.
They were careful to reward bravery and battle, and to bring economic advantage to those they
conquered.
Now, this is a very startlingly elementary thing, but people have got to see an advantage
in being ruled by someone else, and the Inca succeeded at that for all their ruthlessness
because they were very clever to combine economic benefits and incentives with rewards and justifications
as well as with a powerful ideology.
They were careful to honor local lords, and provided they were loyal, gave them considerable
authority.
But above all, the Inca rulers were consummate administrators.
They were propagandists who happened to be administrators, rather a rare combination.
They presided over an empire of extraordinary cultural and environmental diversity.
And they did this without written records, just a system of knotted strings.
This required, of course, extraordinary numbers of people whose memories acted as inventories.
Pau went insinu, the land of the Four Quarters, radiated out from the center of the world
at Cusco, high in the Andes.
Layed out in a cruciform plan, Cusco was centered around a central plaza bisected by two rivers.
In the south lay the Coriancia, the Temple of the Sun, six one-room buildings with gold-covered
walls surrounding a central courtyard.
A closely fitted masonry wall surrounded the entire complex, masonry by the Inca, is famous
for its tight fit, it's wonderful.
And in front of this was a garden of golden plants in the form of a shrine, in front of
a shrine with a golden image of the sun.
Inca architects were master builders.
They dragged granite boulders to the capital, then trimmed them with river cobbles to fit
perfectly with their neighbors.
You can't even fit a credit card through some of the cracks.
And with this they created earthquake-proof walls.
Such efficiency was typical of an empire divided into four provinces and run using carefully
modified institution like the meter tax, a meter labor tax adopted from earlier states
by careful inventories of what lay in storehouses, the ubiquitous storehouses found in every community.
The essence of efficient Inca government of distant lands was efficient communications.
They created an elaborate road system that linked ancient roadways like those of the
Chimu with other systems with zig-zag narrow paths that went high in the Andes where there
were regular west houses and where llama caravans passed constantly.
It is said that the Inca could pass a message from Lima to Cusco by runner quicker than
the Portuguese, the Spanish could do it with a horse.
They could move armies, dispatch messengers, and send llama caravans with trade goods for
length and breadth of Tauant insunium.
Their passion for organization impinged on everyone's life.
They divided society into twelve age divisions for census and tax purposes, with adulthood
lasting as long as you could do eight days' work.
And they used the Kipu, the knotted string, to keep accurate inventories of everything,
the knots and combination knots indicating supplies of grain, and so on.
The contents and resources of conquered lands and the contents of village storehouses was
a powerful instrument for ensuring social conformity.
But by the early 16th century, the institution of split inheritance had caused such expansion
that the Inca were running out of places to conquer and there were horrendous logistical
problems.
And it was at this moment that civil war waged over succession, and the Spanish adventurer
Francisco Pizarro landed in Tauant insunium in 1532.
He captured the supreme Inca, murdered him, and a year later became a master of the greatest
of all Native American empires.
In this lecture, we've traced this latest story of Andean civilization from the fall
of Omoche through the rise and fall of Tiwanaku to Chimor with its institutions that were
taken over by the Inca which created the greatest empire of all, the land of the Four Quarters.
