But the Chimu state became dominant in the early 2nd millennium AD.
It became the dominant force on the coast.
And like their predecessors, the Chimu Forge, a multi-valley state that controlled 12 river
valleys with at least 125,000 cultivable acres, all farmed by hand.
Imagine the organization it took to see that this was done at the community level, at the
household level, at the neighborhood level, at the regional level.
Now Chimu's rulers, Chimu's rulers, were ambitious conquerors.
They conquered a neighboring valley, and then they would reorganize its irrigation schemes
to the point where they would build large reservoirs and even canals that connected
one valley to another.
In other words, they were making the scale of the agriculture much larger, and to some
degree might therefore reduce to some degree the vulnerability to El Niños.
Chimu, which is the homeland of the Chimu, grew and grew.
By AD 1470, the Chimu controlled over 620 miles of coastline, and they also controlled
a staggering proportion two-thirds of all the irrigated land along the Peruvian coast.
This was a wealthy and powerful kingdom.
The focus of the Chimu state was the city of Chan Chan at the mouth of the Moche River.
It covered eight square miles, a rather straggling capital.
But in the center were nine royal enclosures, laid out in a broken rectangle at the center
of the city.
These were the royal compounds.
Each ruler of the Chimu built his own compound, a palace which eventually became his tomb
and his shrine, the walls isolating them from the view of the commoners and others who lived
outside while also providing shelter from the coastal winds.
Now the way they built these, and the way they maintained all the agricultural systems,
well probably the same as probably used the same by the Moche and by even earlier people,
was an institution known as Mita, a compulsory work tax performed each year by every commoner
to build adobe pyramids, to build roads, to maintain irrigation canals, to build royal
enclosures, and lavish these royal enclosures worth.
They were vitally decorated, the walls providing privacy.
Each had its own water supply.
And here the rulers lived in seclusion and here they were buried.
This notion of divine rulers living in seclusion is a very powerful one in pre-industrial civilizations.
The pharaohs of Egypt lived in seclusion and their appearances were carefully rationed.
So did myelords, so did Chinese kings.
It's a very common, common form, and why?
Because you set the gods apart, and when they appear it's very carefully choreographed.
The biggest modern equivalent to this, or of course the willy isn't an allergy at all,
although it's interesting, are things like Queen Elizabeth of England's
opening of the Houses of Parliament or her coronation.
These are moments of validation, or presidential inaugurations to some degree.
These are moments of validation.
In addition to these royal compounds, some 6,000 nobles,
Chan Chan, lived in smaller compounds, while more than 26,000 artisans and their families,
many of them expert weavers and metal workers, lived in small houses on the western side of the city.
And what's interesting about Chimor is that in many ways it anticipated the Inca Empire's institutions.
