Lecture 36, Epilogue
And here we are at the last lecture in this course, the prehistory of humankind.
The first part of this last lecture discusses the end of human prehistory during the European
Age of Discovery from the 15th century AD onward, for in some parts of the world prehistoric
times ended in the 20th century.
Then when we've talked about that, I'm going to summarize what I think to be the four major
chapters of human prehistory, the archaic world, the appearance and spread of modern
humans, the origins and spread of food production, and the development of states.
This is what has provided the framework for the narrative in this long course.
And then finally, I'm going to talk a bit about the importance of an understanding of
human prehistory in today's world, the contribution that it makes to our comprehension of diversity,
among humanity, of the ways in which we are similar and different.
The final chapter of human prehistory began with the European Age of Exploration, with
the rounding of the Cape of Good Hope, which started in a series of voyages, started in
the 1530s by Prince Henry the Navigator of Portugal, who sent his caravals ever southward
around Africa, around the bulge, and then in 1488 Bartalma Diaz rounded the Cape and
the route to India was open.
And of course, it continues with Christopher Columbus's journey to the Indies and the European
discovery of the Americas.
And after that, for five centuries, an increasingly elaborate and industrialized Western civilization
clashed with a multitude of non-Western societies, many of them still living in the ways they
had lived in ancient times, in all parts of the world.
This clash of cultures, as it is sometimes called, has witnessed the inexorable destruction
of hundreds of subsistence-level societies, hunters and gatherers, herders, farmers,
and others.
As we know, from Aztec accounts of the Spanish conquest, and from oral traditions recorded
in other parts of the world, often the people visited by Europeans thought that the strange
visitors were gods, but all too soon, and wherever they appeared, the strangers proved
all too quickly not to be deities, but also to be human, aggressive, warlike, and acquisitive.
And really one of the most telling comments of this is the Spanish conquistador Bernal
Diaz, who was a young man, sailed with Cortes, and was with him when they looked down from
the valley of Mexico at the glittering city of Tanáctitlan, the Aztec capital.
And in his seventies, Diaz wrote this extraordinary essay on his experiences on the context, and
he described how the conquistadors were amazed at the sight of this dazzled, brightly painted
city and wondered if it was all a dream, and then he ended this lyrical description with
one sentence, but now all that we saw then has been destroyed, and that epitomizes the
clash of cultures.
At first the contacts were fleeting, but soon Europeans came in larger numbers to trade
for furs and seek for gold, to refit their ships or to convert the heathen.
And then in many places a flood of land-hungry colonists soon followed the first-ed visitors
in search of farming land and new homes, escaping poverty at home.
Almost inevitably, the indigenous population, once direct descendants of once flourishing
prehistoric populations, lost their land which had been vested in many cases in the
same kin groups for centuries.
Within a few generations they were either assimilated into the newcomer's society, where
they almost always lived on the margins, or preserved a shadow of their former life
on remote marginal lands.
