The insatiable more of industrial civilization, run not by human hands but by fossil fuels,
completed the process of destruction, fostering unending demands for raw materials of all
kinds.
The mass population movements of the 19th and 20th centuries had catastrophic effects
on the last remaining societies with direct ancestry in the prehistoric world.
Today, there are no parts of the world where human societies are untouched by industrial
civilization, even if there are some groups still, deep in the Amazon rainforest and in
New Guinea, who have not had sustained contact with the wider world.
In a well-sense, human prehistory ended in the 20th century AD.
This course has told the story of two-and-a-half million years of human prehistory, from our
origins among the primates in tropical Africa before the Ice Age to the European Age of
Discovery, a vast stream of time, a huge palimpsest and panoply of human experience.
It's hard to grip the complexity of this story, so for convenience we can think of
it in four broad chapters, which, however, often overlap, and these, as I said, are the
chapters into which I've divided this course.
The first chapter is the longest, covering over 2.2 million years.
It's the prehistory of the archaic world, of the first humans, of humans different
from ourselves.
It began with human origins, over two-and-a-half million years ago, and with the appearance
of the first tool-making hominids in sub-Saharan Africa.
And as Charles Darwin forecasts back in the 19th century, Africa is the cradle of mankind.
It continued with the evolution of Homo erectus, with the dispersal of archaic humans out of
Africa into Asia, and with the development of fire when we don't quite know, but perhaps
as early as two million years ago.
Over the next one-and-a-half million years, humanity evolved slowly in many parts of the
old world.
These developments culminated in the appearance of archaic Homo sapiens in Asia and of the
Neanderthals in Europe about a hundred to a hundred-and-fifty thousand years ago.
When we come to the second chapter, ourselves, the appearance of anatomically modern humans
in sub-Saharan Africa between 200,000 and 150,000 years ago, the nature of this appearance
and how it happened remains one of the great controversies in human prehistory.
After discussing the various controversies, I concluded that an African origin was most
likely, and from there we traced the spread of Homo sapiens, sapiens across the Sahara
desert and into southwestern Asia, and we raised one of the question of questions, which
is the moment, the exact moment, when humanity acquired the full cognitive abilities and
potential that we have today.
Perhaps it was around 45,000 to 50,000 years ago, because it was then that modern humans
spread into Europe for chromagnons, and then rapidly, during the late Ice Age, we spread
to all parts of the old world except the offshore Pacific islands, and we'd done this by the
end of the Ice Age some 15,000 years ago.
And then, at some still unknown date, and this again is a major controversy in our knowledge
of prehistory, small numbers of modern humans spread into the Americas as well.
This is a much shorter chapter than the first chapter.
It's marked by a tremendous elaboration of human society, also by the appearance of
the first art.
It began with the appearance of the first humans about 200,000 years ago.
The art appears about 30,000 years, maybe a little before, and the chapter ends at the
end of the Ice Age about 15,000 years ago.
And then, about 12,000 years before present, chapter three begins.
Now this was a defining chapter in human history.
The moment when hunter-gatherers in Southwest Asia, and perhaps elsewhere, turned from foraging
and hunting to serial cultivation and animal herding.
