As I told you in the course, food production also began in other areas, like East Asia.
It appears to have begun later, but it may have begun at about the same time, and then
it also began in the Americas.
The new economy spread rapidly in the old world within a few thousand years.
May's cultivation began in Central Africa, America, at least five thousand years ago.
The exact date is uncertain, it may be a little earlier, and maybe a little later.
And here, as in the old world, the importance of food production lies not so much in its
invention, as in its consequences.
Permanent village settlements, much closer relationships with the land, you are anchored
to this land.
Much more complex social and religious institutions are concerned very often with the ancestors.
And as we found with the Cro-Magnons in chapter two of this story, an intimate relationship
with the spiritual and symbolic worlds.
And does the backdrop to this higher, more densely packed human populations?
By the time of Christ, subsistence farming was practiced everywhere in the world where
it was practicable, or where there was a need for it, and don't forget that there were some
societies who were well aware of farming, but did not choose to take it up.
And then we come to the fourth chapter, the shortest, which began about five thousand
years ago in Southwest Asia, and some three thousand years ago in the Americas.
The emergence of the pre-industrial civilization, a world of divine rulers and strongly centralized
governments, of teeming cities, writing, and metallurgy.
This was also the period when some lasting human conditions of today came into being.
Chronic social inequality, rural and urban poverty, endemic warfare, despotism, and slavery,
to mention only a few.
In a real sense, we live with the legacy of the pre-industrial world, and we still grapple
with the same fundamental, economic, political, and other social problems as did our remote
predecessors.
And this pre-history, this last chapter of pre-history, ended with the Spanish Intrader
into the Americas.
Four chapters, two thousand five hundred million, two point five million years of time.
This sheer length and diversity of history means that pre-history is no intellectual
curiosity to be studied by archeologists alone, or merely to be the subject of museum displays
of spectacular artifacts.
All too often, it's been ignored, it's been considered as a sort of sideline or a relevant
backdrop to the history of more recent times.
This of course is sheer nonsense.
The story of humanity before writing is vital.
Its engaging importance is to all of us.
You see, human pre-history is the story, not of the Americans, or of British, or the
French, or the South Africans, or the Polynesian Islanders.
It is the story of humanity as a whole, wherever we live and however we live.
Until recently, it's really not been possible to tell this story, because archeological
investigations are still in their infancy in many parts of the world, and until the
late 1950s we lacked dating methods which enabled us to date not only when things happened,
but how fast they happened, and when they happened in different, widely separated parts
of the world.
But today we can no longer ignore pre-history as part of our history.
We have at our fingertips a compelling chronicle, not only of our ultimate origins among the
apes, but even more importantly of the remarkable biological and cultural diversity of humankind.
Pre-history reminds us, not that we're different from one another, but that we are all so similar
to one another.
We all come from a common African origin, perhaps as recently as 100,000 years ago.
Pre-history is a celebration of human diversity.
