Chris, talk to me about how you define consciousness. I think I'm going to use your paper, The
Neutral Basis of Consciousness, as the foundation for how I'm going to approach the questions
for this interview. How would you define consciousness and why is it important to make
certain differentiations, for example, contents of consciousness versus level of consciousness?
Yeah, let's run through that. Well, I follow most people in defining consciousness as
having subjective experiences. And I think that the distinction between level and content is
important because it probably involves different ways of doing the experiments and thinking about
the brain systems involved. So level of consciousness at one extreme, a high level of
consciousness, you are having subjective experiences. And then of course, you can go into a low level,
sometimes, for example, people who are in this minimally conscious state after brain injury,
they will sometimes have contents of consciousness, but maybe not. And then when you're unconscious
or in coma, you're not having any subjective experiences. Now, the contents of consciousness
is, of course, is talking about what are the subjective experiences. And in particular,
I and many others in the brain imaging world have been fascinated by the observation that when we
are conscious, we are aware or conscious of some things that are impinging on us and not aware
and other things that are impinging on us. And perhaps the most famous example of that is the,
which I'm sure you have seen the video of the gorilla. So this is where you're instructed to
watch this video. And there are people playing basketball or something, and they're in red shirts
and white shirts, and you have to count how many times the people in the white shirts pass the
ball to each other. And at the end, you ask them, did you see the gorilla? And they say no.
Even though if you hadn't been given that instruction, I'd been looking for other things,
you would have obviously noticed the gorilla. So there are many situations where you can show that
even though your senses are being stimulated, this doesn't actually reach awareness. It goes into
the brain, but it doesn't become conscious. And that's exciting, because you can then ask the
question, what's the difference between the brain activity associated with things that you're aware
of, and the brain activity associated with things that you respond to, but are not aware of. Now,
in that case, that's not about the level of consciousness, because in both, this is the
level is the same. But then you're aware of some things and not of others. And that's why I think
that's important. I mean, it's also important for us clinically, because you're working,
obviously, from a clinical perspective, I mean, even myself as a doctor, we have to know,
we use the Glasgow Coma Scale or whatever sort of steps you try and differentiate between how
conscious someone is versus how conscious they're not. But it's very different from subjectivity.
When it comes to the neural basis of consciousness, Chris, how often do you get,
let's say, feedback from people in a negative manner, trying to tell you that there's no way to
find a neural basis of something that is subject. The neural correlates of consciousness do not exist,
and nearly correlations. How often do you get this? And what are your responses to that?
Well, I mean, since they are correlations, that's why we call them the neural correlates of
consciousness. So they don't, as on their own, explain how consciousness emerges, or why
consciousness emerges. So one often gets this question. And I guess I would want to say the
way I would try to get around this problem is to start asking questions about what is the function
of consciousness? What is it for? And as I say in the paper, I think that consciousness is a sort
of biological phenomenon. It's rather than something that physicists can tell us about.
And that means that I think it evolved so that in early organisms, we're not conscious.
And it's only more recently, in evolutionary time, that consciousness has emerged. And then
from that point of view, you have to say, it must have had some advantage. It must have given some
advantage in order for it to emerge. And then you can, you can then ask very difficult questions,
like at what point in evolution did it emerge? What sort of creatures of consciousness are
conscious? And what sort of creatures are not conscious? And that's beginning to approach a
sort of mechanistic idea, because if you, if you can work out what consciousness is for,
what advantages it gives you, and then you can look at the neural correlates of that,
you might start to think about how you could actually make something conscious,
which I'm talking about AI now. I mean, what would you have to,
how would you program a computer or a robot so that it actually was conscious?
I say I have no idea, but
I was going to ask you, like, what do you think? Let's, there was something I was going to ask
you about later on. I mean, if this is something that has evolved, it must have other ways of
evolving. I mean, if the virtual selection has done this, possibly artificial selection is going
to do the same with us. Do you think it's possible for us to do this? Considering that the framework
we use today, I mean, you using the Bayesian brain framework, I mean, for the listeners,
just so that I can give them some context, I've quoted you in my dissertation a couple of times,
and I mean, I used your work to help, help my work. And so thank you for that. First of all,
your contributions to the field. But the way you guys approach it, I mean, Friston,
yourself, I've read so many of you guys' papers. It's very much part of this Bayesian framework.
And we'll talk about its implications with schizophrenia, etc. later on. But do you think
we're going to do this with AI? Yes, I think so. I mean, I remember, I mean, this has been
sort of floating around for a long time, even before we got DeepMind and all these people. I
remember about 30 years ago, down to a meeting where an engineer was presenting this computer,
which he had programmed to show attention, it could attend to some things and not to other
things. And then he was saying, isn't this amazing? And this is probably the basis of
consciousness. And then some elderly philosopher in the back of the lecture theater got up and said,
have you got ethical permission to turn it off?
That's a very good question.
So that's sort of been hanging around. But there are all sorts of ethical implications
of this. I think, I mean, I don't know what the timeline is. I suspect not in my lifetime will
we have a conscious robotic type device. But one of the questions that I have asked the
roboticists who are trying to do these sort of things is it's all very well developing this
in this way. But I would the question I would ask, how would you know when you had achieved
your conscious machine? And I think that's one of the most difficult questions to answer.
Because it's so blurry, the lines. I mean, where do we draw these lines? It was the same
with humans. We made the Ian Vitale. What is life? What is not life? I mean, blurry questions.
That's very good. I mean, I'm very interested in that because I think in the olden days,
like in Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, for example, there was no distinction between life and
consciousness. If you gave it life, you also gave it consciousness. And of course,
the monster in the original is hyper conscious. It doesn't bear any relation to the thing in the
film version. And what's changed as we were indicating is we now have a very good idea of
what life is. And in some sense, can make it without genetic manipulation and so on.
And it's very much become divorced now from consciousness. So we would probably be happy
to say that viruses are not conscious and amoeba are probably not conscious.
So this distinction has now been made. But the big problem now is, as you say, is where does,
at what point does consciousness emerge? And how do we know that?
Exactly. Do you think that every time science makes progress in a certain field,
doubters and skeptics will find another way of adding a layer of importance to us?
Yes, well, I may be responsible for doing that myself, as we will see later on, probably.
I mean, I tend to show thought disorder you'll discover. So there's an example of this, I think,
in psychiatry. There's a very nice book that I had to review for Brain, which is about the
sort of history of psychiatry. And what was fascinating is that as soon as some psychiatric
disorder is resolved, it ceases to be part of psychiatry. So you had what was it tertiary
syphilis, which at one point, most of the mental hospitals had patients with this.
And then it was resolved and it was discovered precisely what it was. And then it ceased to
be psychiatry and also was more or less cured. And the same with epilepsy, that used to be part
of psychiatry, but it's now part of neurology, hunting is career now part of neurology and so on.
So psychiatry is always left with the things that no one can explain.
And I think that's the same phrase as you're suggesting, even if we explain consciousness,
there'll be something else. Or I think what will happen is there are all sorts of different
aspects of consciousness, and it will probably divide up into different things and people who
have already had different definitions of it. And there'll always be parts of it that we
haven't resolved yet. And the ones that we have resolved will say, well, that wasn't really a
part of, that's not what I meant by consciousness. So Chris, what do you think then about those
people who say that, I mean, subjective experience is merely just a form of introspection. I mean,
Daniel Dennett, Keith Frankish, I mean, this is just something we think we have. And it's just
because we're articulating it to ourselves and self-sufficiency, but what are your thoughts on
illusionism then as a theory of consciousness?
Yeah, I think there are two aspects that I don't really understand the idea that
consciousness is an illusion, because we all experience it. I'm more sympathetic, although
the idea is wrong, the idea is it has no function. And this goes back actually, at least as far as
Thomas Huxley, who had this nice metaphor, he says consciousness is like the whistle of a steam
engine, has absolutely no effect on the functioning of the steam engine. And my response to that is
it has a big effect on the functioning of other steam engines. And that's exactly why at some
point, I mean, when you're talking about other species interacting and humans, how important
it is for social interaction, social interaction, that's where you go about with this.
Yeah, that's right.
You want to touch on that? Let's talk about that. Let's get to that topic for a while.
Well, I'm trying to remember. One of the problems in this neuro-based studying neuro-based
of consciousness, and indeed studying subjective experience in general, is that we know about
our own subjective experience, but we don't know about anybody else's. And we rely on them telling
us about it, which is, as you say, is to do with introspection. And this, in fact, has a long
will, and for psychological terms, has a long history, because this is what Fechner was doing
in 1860, which is called psychophysics, which you basically make a noise and you say how loud
was that, which is a subjective report. And you get very, very robust, reliable results using
this. You can show that loudness, you know, follows an exponential scale in relation to the
actual physical intensity of the stimulus. It's very robust. So it really works. And then it
went into dispute because of behaviorism coming in and saying, you can't trust these reports.
And I think that's because people just didn't do the reporting properly. But certainly in the
studies of the neuro-based of consciousness, you have to say, for example, were you aware of the
gorilla or not, for example. And you rely on, or you can sometimes slightly more sophisticated ones,
where you say how aware of the gorilla, were you on a four point scale or something. And then some
people say, well, this is all very well. But when you see these neural activity, is it because of
making the report rather than just the experience? And my answer to that is that the ability to
make the report is actually a very important part of the experience, because this is this rather
wonderful thing that humans especially can do is we can tell each other about our subjective
experiences. And I think, and we can get onto that, but I think this actually creates all sorts of
advantages, which we can measure. And that gives you one reason why this ability might have evolved.
But I'm, I used to believe, I couldn't really quite understand how you could have conscious
experience without being able to, without knowing about it or being able to report it. But I'm now
persuaded that there is an earlier stage where you have the experience, but in a sense, you're not
aware of it. You're aware of the stimulus, but you're not aware of being aware of the stimulus.
This is this higher level, sometimes called meta consciousness. But I think for the one we're
studying human consciousness, the fact that we can report it is actually a very important aspect
of the experience. But then how important do you think linguistics plays a role here? Because we
obviously can't express ourselves as as great as we think we do. I mean, there's so much more
going on inside here, compared to what I can articulate to you. So do you think that's actually
could be a hindrance to the way we try and express ourselves to each other?
Well, I know, I think, in a sense, there's too much. If we try to express everything, we collapse.
And there's some work called coarse grainy or something you can actually, by reducing,
by using these clever ways of reducing what we're talking about to some simplified system,
we can actually get a better account of it than if we tried to put the whole thing across. So
there is that aspect of it. But I think also by talking to each other, we can discover first
what are the important things to tell each other about. And secondly, we can discover ways of
talking about them. In a sense, that's what art is all about, this new ways of
approaching experience and talking about experience and demonstrating experience.
And we're getting better and better at that. And this has become as complicated, because this is
all very cultural. And we would, there's, I don't know whether people really believe this,
but there's some idea that in ancient Greece, there was a big switch between the Iliad and the
Odyssey. And this was to do with the way they thought. So there's an earlier stage where
introspection consisted of hearing the gods telling you what to do. And it's only later on that this
became awareness of this is what you wanted to do. So there was actually a fundamental change in how
you understood yourself, which would obviously influence very much how you explained your
behavior to other people. So we, and you have this with children, for example,
when my grandson hits his twin sister, he says, you know, that was a mistake, I didn't intend to do it.
Whereas presuming an ancient Greek child would have said Zeus told me to or something.
So there are these very interesting cultural changes, which mean although our brains are
essentially the same as they were, whether it was 100, I can't remember the numbers 100,000
years ago, the way we use them and the way we talk to each other are dramatically different.
That's because of consciousness. What are the differences between the self and consciousness?
Or do you think that it was just one thing? Self consciousness is just its own thing?
No, I'm not sure about that. I mean, I think the self is a very important aspect of consciousness,
but there are all sorts of things that I am aware of that are not just about me, by hope.
Yeah. And certainly when we interact with other people, we become aware of what they are like.
So I think there's more to, I mean, I think the self is an important aspect of consciousness,
but it's not the whole of consciousness. Do you think it's just a model we've built?
Do you think? Yes. I mean, this is getting back around slowly to the Bayesian idea. Yes,
there are all these models, and we have a model of ourselves, which is very much determined,
in fact, by other people. So my model of myself is probably largely what I think other people think
of me. With this Bayesian idea, I know that when you look at, let's say, for example,
schizophrenia, it shows such a wide variety of experience of conscious experience. You can see
it as sort of a spectrum. I know Fletcher also does work on this, where he shows you how inherently
all perception can be seen as hallucination or all belief can be seen as delusion. And it's based
on these prior expectations and how we experience that. What are your thoughts on that? I mean,
because clearly, then everything is technically hallucinatory or delusional.
Well, yes, I partly imagine how I use the words, but this goes back along at least to Helmholtz,
is the idea that perception is not like being a camera. It's not the world coming into my eye,
and then I somehow make sense of it. I can only make sense of it if I have some prior expectation
of what is out there. This is what Bayesians call the prize, but it's really past experience,
prior expectations. An example of this is that story, I think it's maybe from India, I'm not
sure. It's about the five blind men who come across an elephant. And one of them feels it's
trunk and says this is a snake, and then another one feels its leg and says this is a tree, and
another one feels its tail and says this is a lion or something. So because in every case,
they're using their past experience, what this ought to be given what I'm experiencing now.
And similar to the whole bunny duck situation, if you've grown up in a place where you've never
really seen that rabbit duck illusion, where it's one of you duck, if you grew up in a place where
you've never seen a rabbit before, you're automatically going to see the duck. Yes, exactly.
And there's this very strong illusion that you must know about the inverse mask illusion. Yes.
So if you have a mask of a face and you see it from the inside, where it's effectively an inside
out face, you cannot see it as an inside out face, because inside out faces don't exist.
So yes, that's an example of the prior experience taking over.
And there's lots of data supporting this idea, I think.
I mean, basically, our sensations are extremely crude and minimal. I mean, vision,
we have this, we don't realize this, but there's a very small area in the middle of our field of
view where we see things in detail. And beyond that is all blurred, but we're not aware of that.
And we fill things in. And there's the famous example of the, what's it called, the blind spot.
So there's this bizarre situation that the retina is the wrong way around. So the blood vessels
are in front of the receptors. And then they all have to go through a small hole to get back to the
rest of the body. But we're not aware of this hole. We fill it in on the basis of what's immediately
around it. And you can fool the system to fill it in wrong and so on like that.
With that blind spot, even if you do, because there's that experiment, I mean, you close an eye
and you slowly move your thumb away and then suddenly your thumb disappears.
And still we know it's there and yet your brain, it's gone, can't help.
And there are many, many optical illusions like that. I mean, there's the Muller-Lauer
illusion where you see these two lines of different lengths, even though you know they're not different.
With the arrows at the edges, once you're close.
And the neck of cube, because it's in two dimensions, it can have three,
in three dimensions, it has two possible versions and you just switch between them.
But then how do we meet our beliefs and our perceptions, Chris? How do we, as scientists,
as people trying to figure out this neural basis, how can we trust anything we see?
Well, I mean, I think I would say one version of it, which is what Arnold said, I think, is that
our perception is a hallucination constrained by reality, which I also said in my book.
And as long as the constraints are good enough,
we're fine. I mean, that's the sense that we have a model of the world. What we perceive is our model
of the world, not the world. And as long as our model is good enough for what we're trying to do,
that is sufficient. And science operates the same way. So a nuclear model of how the world
works, which marks it works incredibly well. And then Einstein came along and showed us a little
bit at the edge of this model, didn't actually work and produced general relativity or whatever it was.
It was like Mercury. It was like one of the few things that Newton's theory just couldn't solve.
And so I think our perception is very much the same. It works most of the time. And occasionally
with these optical illusions, you find where it's gone wrong. And we can now understand them.
And what I mean, of course, my being so interested in the social aspect is that, say, we have our
own models of the world. And not only can we test it by seeing what happens, making predictions and
so on, but we can also test it by comparing it with other people's models. And there's a nice
cartoon I found somewhere, you know, which says that reality is a shared hallucination.
And that's interesting, because, in a sense, what goes wrong, perhaps in schizophrenia,
is they stop sharing. And then they can go off in these weird directions, because they're no
longer constrained by how other people see things. Yes, that's a very speculative idea.
Yeah. But so in other words, we're all having these hallucinations. And the only reason why
they work is because we're all sharing the same hallucination. And it's once someone diverges
on the spectrum, that they're no longer in touch with reality. And that's what obviously
something like schizophrenia or psychosis is. Yeah. And occasionally, we discover that we're
not sharing it. So, for example, people who are colorblind often don't discover that they're
colorblind until they're adults. So a friend of ours didn't discover he was colorblind until he was
a doctor and they complained that he was feeling the form was wrong. And that's because he didn't
realize they were different colors for different things. And perhaps the most famous example of
this is the dress. Yes. Where suddenly people wear that some were seeing it this way and other
people were seeing it the other way. Yeah, the blue and black and white and gold. Yeah. And it
turned out blue and black because they then went to Photoshop, right clicked on it, checked exactly
what color was in the dress is actually blue and black. When I told some of my friends that
they still they still think I'm lying to them. And this is not a story. And yet,
you know that we perceived it differently. One theory is I'm sure you know this is to do with,
of course, our perception of color is very depends on what we think is illuminating the scene.
And one theory about the dress is if you think it's being illuminated in daylight,
it looks one color if you think it's being illuminated in artificial light, it's another color.
So I mean, and again, this is an example. That's nice for me because of course, that's the prior.
Your prior is what you think it's been illuminating in which you have to take into account to
actually work out what the colors really are. Basically like the checkerboard illusion where
you see the shadow and the two grays. Oh, yes. And they look completely different. Yeah,
I think we think the different color. And it's not people tend to think that we're lying to them
when you show them that this is actually the same color. You have to legitimately prove it.
What did you think about a fixed firm belief? Because that's obviously what some of us have
and there's this cognitive dissonance when you show them that our perceptions are not really
always that accurate. Well, that's it. I mean, I would follow Carl
Friston here and say there's a sort of hierarchy. And at the bottom of the hierarchy, you have what
is the real color of this square. And you have priors and about what is being illuminated and
you could be persuaded that actually it's a different kind of illumination. But at the
top of the hierarchy, you have belief like perception is accurate. And that's very,
that could be very firmly fixed. And in the sense in schizophrenia, I think you have
something eventually goes wrong at the top. So the idea that everybody is trying to deceive me
because this high level prior that cannot really be changed. And it's very difficult to come up
with evidence against that idea that everybody is trying to deceive you, because of course,
you're one of the people who's trying to deceive them anyway. And it's funny because in those
schizophrenic patients, some of the psychotic patients, these optical, these perceptual illusions
don't work on them. Yes, that's right. Which shows that their priors have changed.
But that's very confusing. And I think that's more research is needed, as they say, because
in some cases, their priors are too strong. In other cases, their priors are too weak.
So there has to be some solution to this observation has to be made.
So Chris, tell me, what do you think then about because part of when I worked, I mean,
we did the philosophy and ethics of mental health, you see how we've had three biological sort of
revolutions in psychiatry, for example, when Prozac was invented. I mean, that was one of them.
People went crazy. This was the new craze. And it's functional MRIs, better neuroimaging.
When is psychiatry going to actually get a hold of you that they really want to do?
Is this going to happen in your opinion? Or do you think we're going to continuously fail at this?
Because I guess like what I was saying earlier, I think, for example, there's these very rare,
I can't remember what is it, 1% of people who get a diagnosis of schizophrenia actually have an
autoimmune disease. Okay, I didn't know that. There's a book. Someday there's a journalist who
this happened to. And she describes it very well. And I think what will happen is that there are
multiple causes of schizophrenia and psychosis. And they will gradually be discovered. But not all
of them. I was a bit like in the olden days, I think there used to be something called mental
deficiency. And currently, you know, every week, another 1% is explained by some unique genetic
alteration, which is gradually explaining all these things. And I think something analogous
might happen with schizophrenia, though, they'll be found, you know, there'll be a genetic version
and there'll be an autoimmune version and there'll be various other versions. And each time that will
then become part of the neurology and what's left will be unexplained and left to the psychiatry
so somehow. I want to try to figure out the sort of evolutionary basis for psychosis and
schizophrenia. And I remember, I think I was reading something in evolutionary psychiatry,
it was a journal, I can't remember the name, but we were talking about how a lot of foreigners,
people who move from one country to another, into develop schizophrenia at a higher rate
than those who stay in their own place. And if you have to think about the evolutionary advantage
of that, it would be trust people around you a little less, because you don't know them and
they might not have your best interest at heart. So it's fascinating to think that there might be a
lot of evolutionary basis behind some of these mental illnesses. That's right. I mean, I'm very
interested in this game, that's the Bayesian story. There's this idea of volatility. So if you, if
you're, so this is a new way of looking at learning. So you can have fast learning and have slow
learning. Normally we think of slow learning surely bad, but this is, it entirely depends on
the environment you're in. If you're in a stable environment, then it pays to learn slowly,
because what you've learned in the past probably still applies. So you don't need to change very
much. But if you're in a volatile environment, you have to learn quickly, because the situation
keeps changing. And I guess if you move to a foreign country, you're precisely in a more volatile
environment. And it's interesting that this does seem to have an effect on the dopamine system.
So that in the, yes, I think as you increase the amount of dopamine, the learning rate will
increase or learning faster, which is good for a volatile environment. And of course, if you have
a high level prior that says I'm an involuntary environment, when you're not, this could be
produced all sorts of peculiarities. While we're on the on neuro anatomy, I mean, when you talk
about how we might have emerged or evolved consciousness, and which parts of the brain
do you think are most responsible for this? This is very controversial, as you probably know.
I think there are two aspects to this. I think first of all, I think it's pretty well agreed
that consciousness requires long range connectivity between different brain regions.
And if this breaks down, you become unconscious. Now, certainly in the case of self conscious or
meta consciousness, I think the frontal cortex is critical. Because in a sense, it's at the top
of this hierarchy. And it is where we don't know much about it yet, where you're modeling how the
rest of the brain works. And I think that's necessary for this, say this high level of
consciousness for sentience, which is what I like to call this lower level of consciousness,
which we probably share with many, many animals. That probably doesn't involve the frontal cortex
to the same degree and is probably much more dependent on the long range connectivity.
So one of the things, if we think about sentience, for example, one of the things that has fascinated
me for a long time is what's it called corollary discharge and the reafference principle.
So when we move, and again, Helmholtz was involved in this as part of the reason, when we move our eyes,
obviously the image on our retina is jumping about all over the place.
But we don't see the world jumping about we perceive it stable. And this goes right back to the very
beginning of evolution, when organisms were able for the first time to move under their own power.
Almost immediately, they had to be a mechanism which enabled them to recognize the difference
between movement out there due to something else moving and movement out there due to them moving.
And this is where the reafference or corollary discharge comes in, because you basically,
when you move yourself, you have to say in the signal to the receptive parts of the brain to say,
this is not the world moving, this is me moving. And I think that's perhaps that sort of interaction
between brain areas is the start of something like sentience. And if that's the case,
and if that's the case, it's certainly present in fish and insects and
all sorts of much lower organisms and us. I was speaking to Ian McGillchrist, I'm not sure if
you're familiar with him. We were speaking just the other day, and we're talking about like
Kazanica's work, for example, his work, how important that copus callosum is in terms of
that long range connection you're talking about, because you split that and a lot can happen.
Well, what comes to your mind when you think about split brain patients?
How does it affect anything in terms of your view of consciousness?
Well, I'm a little bit dubious about this.
I mean, one problem is that they don't do the operation anymore.
So we can't sort of replicate the results. The other problem is that occasionally people
turn up who never had a copus callosum, and they seem to be remarkably normal,
compared to the late cases where they are split. So I mean, clearly,
so I guess I'm not really sure what I would predict ought to happen. I mean, a lot of the
brain imaging work, in a sense, went against this idea of distinct properties for the left
and the right brain. So for example, language was always used to be very much in the left brain,
but the brain imaging show there's all sorts of aspects of languages in the right brain as well.
There's this interesting phenomenon of left sided neglect, where there does seem to be some
lateralities of attention so that one side of the brain seems to attention to both fields
and the other side to any one, which is slightly odd. So I'm very confused about the role of
laterality. In terms of that, that it's sort of a hemispatial neglect, Professor Michael
Graziano at Princeton, he has ancient schema theory. So he sort of says that it's more about what
we're attending to, and then we build models to tell us what we're attending to, and that's what
we sort of call consciousness. It's more of a caricature. We're not really seeing reality as it
is. We're just everything we see. Yes, I mean, that's another version of what we were talking
about earlier. We have a model of the world, and that's what we see, not the world itself.
But I think, yes, his ideas are very interesting in relation to how attention works, and particularly
the idea that we, once we, you know, we can model our own attention, we can perhaps model
other people's attention, and I would even go as far as to say, maybe it's the other way around,
that we start off by having to note, it's very important to us to work out where other people
are attending to. I mean, this is not just for us. I mean, there's always nice work with Thomas
Sello on chimpanzee. So the low ranking chimpanzee has to make sure the high ranking chimpanzee
can't see the food, so they can then go and get it. So knowing where other people are attending to
is very important. And maybe once we have worked out how to do that, we suddenly realize we can
apply it to ourselves. There's a similar version in relation to theory of mind. So the sort of
standard idea was we first of all learn how to think about our own minds, our intentions,
our beliefs and desires, and then we apply it to other people. But some people have suggested
it's actually the other way around. We find it so useful to work out what other people are wanting
and knowing and desiring that there's a pressure to find that out. And then we find we can apply it
to ourselves as well. Fascinating. So what I'm going to do is, Chris, the podcast is obviously
called Mind Body Solutions. So we're trying to figure out the infamous mind body problem. So
I'm going to run through a couple theories with you or a couple of philosophical views. And I just
want to hear your thoughts on them. Let's start off with panpsychism. What are your thoughts on
panpsychism? Yes, I don't really understand this. I mean, as I said at the beginning, I think
consciousness is a biological thing. So I expect to find it in biological entities or
machines that are built to represent sort of copies of biological entities. So it could
be in silicon. And I don't really, I mean, the philosophers say that this doesn't solve the
hard problem of how you get subjected to experience out of a physical entity. And I guess I would say
I don't really worry about that at this stage. But the idea that spoons are conscious in some
sense doesn't really help me with what I'm trying to do. Do you think it's a problem with semantics
here? We're just all just saying the same word in a very different way? I think that's partly,
yes, I mean, what it depends on. I mean, does it make any sense to say that spoons are having
subjective experience? But if you then think about something like IIT integrated information theory,
do you think that's following a similar path? Or because they're also trying to search for a neural
basis of consciousness, of course. I mean, they're clearly searching for a neural basis of consciousness.
And I think I would agree that long range connectivity in the brain is very important.
What I don't quite get with integrated information theory is that they start from,
I can't remember five principles of how what consciousness is. And I don't agree with them.
I can't at this moment, because I don't agree with them, of course, I can't remember what they are.
But I think, for example, that it's integrated. And for example, semi-executive was always saying
that consciousness wasn't integrated at all. And it was very messy and so on. So I think their starting
point of what consciousness is, is not the same as mine. Do you think global workspace theory
does a better job at explaining it? Yes, I think that's one of the best ones around at the moment.
Why do you think that?
Why do I? I mean, lots of partly because I stand the heart of a friend of mine. But I think
but it also I think it fits the data very well. In my paper, I point that out so that
if you think it's to do with working, it goes back to the idea of working memory.
Working memory very much involves Prato and frontal cortex. You find that Prato and frontal cortex
are the bits of the brain that are less active and disconnected in coma and vegetative state and
things like that. In the experiments, I actually did when I was still doing brain imaging, where we
were showing looking at the difference between things that you were conscious of and things
that were affecting the brain that you were not conscious of. When you were not conscious of a
face, for example, the face area lit up. But when you were conscious of that face, then Prato
and frontal cortex lit up as well. So that sort of fits with this sort of story. I guess my
worry about global workspace theory is that I don't really quite understand the
ignition story. And of course, it doesn't bring in other people, which
is a question. And how the reporting works and all that sort of thing. But I think it's the best
one around at the moment. Though I also like, of course, Hakuenlau and David Rosenthal's
higher order theory. Can you give me some reasons for that one as well?
Well, that one, I think what is that may be talking about a different thing. So I think
higher order thought theory, I think, is actually talking about this metaconsciousness,
which is this higher level where you're aware that you're aware. And there's lots of evidence that,
for example, we talk about explicit metacognition, which metacognition being means thinking about
thinking. So I'm particularly interested in our ability. When we make decisions,
we can actually think about how likely is this decision to be right? How much confidence do I
have in this decision? And we have this feeling of confidence, we can actually describe how confident
we are to other people. This is actually useful in when we work with other people
to compare our levels of confidence. And again, there's lots of brain imaging work,
particularly from Stephen Fleming, showing that when people have to use confidence,
they're actually using a particular part of the frontal cortex, that is the frontal polar area,
BA10, which seems to have a special role in thinking about thinking. And it seems to be
thinking about thinking is very closely related to this higher order thought theory of consciousness.
So I like that idea. Yeah, I think it seems like a lot of these theories have so many good
ideas that somehow just going to accumulate and provide us with one at some point. It's almost
like they all kind of need each other a little bit. Yes, I think that's right. And then, of course,
there's an interesting paper recently, which looked at all these different theories of consciousness
and the way that they test themselves. I mean, the experiments they do to test them,
which quite nicely showed, as you might expect, that they test their own theory, but it has no
impact whatever on any of the other theories. So the tests that you use for global workspace
theories, Jolly Good for global workspace theory, but has no relevance for IIT or higher
order thought. So in a sense, they have to somehow come together, which is beginning to happen.
I remember when I was chatting to Michael Graziano, he was telling me how you can take
attention schema theory and actually plunk it onto global workspace theory. And then you have
a much better theory of consciousness as a global workspace theory is one of the better ones in
terms of explaining. I think that's right. But I'm reminded, I don't know whether you read these
novels by Sebastian folks. But one of them, I can't remember what it was called, but it's in fact,
it's a series of five different stories. And one of them is about this neuroscientist in Italy who
discovers the basis of neural basis of consciousness. And I was involved because he asked me to comment
on this before everyone knew whether it was plausible and so on. And the hippocampus had a
major role. But what I found quite nice about this story was that when she does define in the
story, she finds the neural basis of consciousness and everybody agrees it's neural basis of
consciousness. And then everybody loses interest. This podcast becomes completely relevant. Let's
hope no one can forget it. That's exactly what happened with the Yarn Vettel. I mean, going back
to what you said earlier. Once it's done, once we figure it out, it's like magic. Nicholas Humphrey
and I were chatting about it, because he calls it phenomenal surrealism. No longer considers it
an illusion. He thinks it's more real than real, like red, even redder than red, because we perceive
it as red. But yeah, he sees it as magic. That's a good point. Actually, it says consciousness is
more real. I think his paper is redder than red. I can't remember exactly the name.
Yes, but just on the same topic, though, once the magician tells you the trick, I mean, you're
done. The search is over this whole magical experience. It's finished. Yes, I think so. Some
people, I won't name names, like to keep their theories, has a little bit of magic. It has a
little bit that no one can quite understand. Do you think when people make these definitions,
let's say, like when we claim that it's a hard problem of consciousness, that we're adding the
element that we don't need? I mean, Daniel Dennis is trying to quine qualia, a quining qualia or
a way to make it easier for us to actually find a neural basis of consciousness. You think that's
a better approach? Not necessarily an illusion, but to at least make... I think it is a better
approach. Yes, I mean, the other extreme is, is it McGinn? Is it the people who call themselves
mysterious, who say we won't ever solve it? And I think that that's clearly a, what's the word,
a challenge. If you say it's impossible to solve, then it's like, right, we're going to do it.
You think this is a way for philosophers just to keep their jobs in certain...
Tell me, Chris, when it comes to theory of mind, I mean, you and I, if you've done such great work
in terms of working together, humans, why are we meant to work together? Over time, how do you think
that this has led to such crazy amounts of technological revolutions? I mean, in terms of
what we've done as a species, why do you think humans have done so much more than, let's say,
our cousins, chimpanzees, bonobos, etc.? Well, I think, yes, I think the basic reason is that,
as we were saying earlier, that we are able actually to share our subjective experiences.
We can, as a result of this, we can actually alter our subjective experiences and make them,
in some sense, more accurate, better models of what the world is like, because we can talk to
each other about what the world is like, and we can get better theories. I mean, this is what
science is all about. You have the better and better model of the world. It never gets there,
but it gets better each time. And we can... I mean, there's this lovely book by Celia Hayes,
which is all about cognitive gadgets, which is about cultural, has given us ways of...
new ways of thinking. And these may be more important than... these cognitive tools may
be more important than, say, stone tools or iron tools or whatever. I mean, mathematics is an example
of a tool which has been created by humans interacting together. So, I mean, and writing
is another example. So, I mean, universal literacy has only been around for the last
hundred years or so. So, these are the things that have made us...
given us all these advantages, which means that we're now dominating the world and probably
about to destroy it, but that's another matter. And the other thing, it's very frightening,
it could all be lost. Exactly. I mean, that's the... I mean, I often ask this, I mean,
I don't believe there is any sort of teleology. I don't... I'm very agnostic regarding anything
regarding the origins of the universe or why we hear what we are to do. But do you think,
for example, AI would be the next evolutionary step? And do you think it's meant to be? Do you
think that's what humans are actually here to do, in a sense? Well, in some sense, yes. I mean,
you could... Yes, we wouldn't want to say it was meant to happen, but we would say the way the
system works means it will happen. It's the next logical step. That's obviously something that will
survive, let's say something a bit more catastrophic on the planet. Should we send it into space or
whatever with it? I mean, that's very interesting. And I'm sad that I probably won't live to see this
happening. But I'm certainly very interested in, yes, what's happening in AI and DeepMind and all
this sort of thing. Sort of quantum computing. I mean, they're doing a lot of intriguing stuff,
but I also don't think I'll be alive, to be honest. But I still don't think most of us would be alive
at that point. Things are going down south very quickly. But I think even DeepMind, the amazing
things they're doing is all happening at this lowest level from a biological point of view.
I mean, in my paper, I show this diagram at three levels. And the bottom level, we have
model-free learning, as it's called, which depends on having huge amounts of evidence
and doing statistical learning. And I think that's what AI can do at the moment.
So, sorry, continue, Chris, what were you saying?
No, I was just going to say the next step up is to start making models and they're beginning
to do that. But I'm not sure whether that's how far that's gone yet.
Michael was telling me that they are applying that theory to certain AI. And it's starting to
work quite well. I mean, they're making some progress, but they're just very far away to
do it with obviously to the complexity that we've reached over billions of years. It takes a long
time. But I think we'll get there. I don't know. I mean, certainly, in relation to theory of mind,
there are, I mean, my worries about our ideas about how theory of mind works is we don't really
have a good computational account of how that works. And people are beginning to develop it
like, what's his name, 10 and down? But the, I think it's not quite there yet. And they typically
say, yes, we've solved this with that. Well, that's not what I meant by theory of mind.
Do you feel that, I mean, we're obviously following this computational approach right now, but
it's because this is the current framework we live in. I mean, people often have this argument
that when we understood the way pumps work, that's how we thought the brain worked when the train
station, we thought it works the same way. Do you feel that perhaps there might be something
we'll figure out in the future that we'll go beyond this computational model? Or you think
we got it this time that we're almost there? No, I was thinking that there were certainly
better things. I guess that's very interesting point, because that's absolutely right. I mean,
what was wrong with Freud's approach? Because he started off by having this model of the mind
that it was basically hydraulic. And he didn't know about information flow and such like, so I
think that was a big step forward is to go. So he was just talking about energy. And the switch
to be able to talk about information, I think was a crucial step in this direction. And there may
well be another crucial step, of course, because we haven't made it yet, we have absolutely no idea
what it is. But in some sense, I mean, this is a sort of Turing story that you can model anything
on a general computer. So you could model your hydraulic system, you could model your steam
engine type system. What we don't know is what we should be modeling, I guess. But I mean,
I agree entirely that we're always using the technology we currently have. But I think we're
beginning to get a sort of meta technology. So we have a technology of technology, which may be
the critical step to the next stage on idealism. Idealism. I guess I'm not quite sure what that
means. Do you mean in the sort of platonic sense? So basically that it's all mind, because there's
a lot of theories now. I mean, for example, Donald Hoffman, Bernardo Kerstrup, there's a lot of people
who are saying that it's all in the mind, everything is mind. And making some very good
physical theories like physics, using a lot of physics to actually prove that space time, for
example, isn't as real as we thought it was, according to the mathematics, and then trying
to figure out how consciousness could be fundamental to that. Yes, I haven't really thought about that.
Is this a bit solipsistic in the sense that say we are creating the world out there?
I think, yes, I'm not so happy with that. I mean, I'm very keen to believe that there is a real world
out there that we're trying to find out about. But I agree that the way what we impose upon it is
obviously must be, to some extent, created by our minds. I mean, this is almost a sort of Bayesian
thing that we, the priors come from within. So in that sense. A sort of naive realism. We know
that there's something there, but we're just not seeing it as accurately as we might. Yes, I'm a
naive realist, I think. So I think, yes, we're getting more accurate. But I believe that there is,
I mean, if we don't believe there's anything out there, there's no way we can improve our accuracy.
We have to be something, I mean, I'm very keen on prediction errors. I mean, that's a sort of
Bayesian story. Errors are a very good thing because they tell us about what we don't know.
So I'm keen on the idea that there are things that we don't know that we will be able to find out
a bit about. Tell me, Chris, when you started out with this, because there's a book by John
Hogan or Hogan or Hogan called Mind Body Problems. And what the author does is look at different
scientists, philosophers, Christoph Koch, for example, each one, and it almost goes into a
personal deep dive into their life and how their personal experiences might have led them to their
current belief in consciousness. So for example, if someone was very spiritual or very religious,
somehow things consciousness will be fundamental. Someone who's not, grows up very atheist,
tends to think consciousness is an illusion. So how do you think your spiritual views and beliefs
have shaped the way you think about consciousness today? Well, I was certainly brought up in a
very religious family, Anglican, of course. But I still get a great deal of pleasure from
services and singing psalms and peculiar rituals of this sort. So I quite like to be an Anglican
on the grounds that these are the Christians who don't actually believe in God. So that's
so from that, I mean, so there's that side of it. I guess my main interesting consciousness
probably was because I very early on trained as a clinical psychologist. And I actually
interacted with people with psychosis, who had hallucinations and delusions. And I became
completely fascinated by what an earth hallucination, what it meant to be having a hallucination.
And of course, I was also reading Philip K. Dick, which is a very strong experience.
And his theme, of course, is that, you know, reality is not what we think it is.
And what we, you know, we have been, it's an illusion that's been created by evil
capitalists of some kind to keep us down. So I mean, so those two sides may be extremely
interesting hallucinations. Why should my belief, my beliefs about the world be any better than
these patients that I was interacting with? And I guess that was my start in thinking about.
So I was thinking about hallucinations. And I realized very rapidly that this is actually
all about consciousness. So hallucination is the extreme subjective experience, because it
doesn't actually, it's not based on what's coming into the senses. So it's almost subjective
experience without reality. So that was, and I guess that was my main starting point.
And then at some point, I mean, in your book, Making at the Mind, I remember reading it a
long time ago, for the first time. And I mean, it blew my mind as well. I mean, you talk about
various different things in your papers, in your books, altered states of consciousness,
so one of them. How do you think altered states of consciousness give us a better idea of
understanding of consciousness in itself? Well, there's some very interesting, I mean,
I talk about this a bit in my paper. But I think the altered states of consciousness make us realize
that, you know, there's more to it than we typically experience. And I mean, that certainly
it's a very basis for studying levels of consciousness when you're talking about altered
states due to lack of various things. But also the use of psychedelic drugs reveal that you can
have states of consciousness that are not like what we are used to. And again, I think that's
very important. It's rather like the dress to realize that there's more to consciousness than
perhaps we realize. I'm not quite sure in what direction this is going to go in. But one of the
things it's maybe important is going right back to us why and how we started talking about how do
you study subjective experience. And there is always this problem of psychology that introspection
is difficult. And we need better tools for doing introspection. And I think studying altered
states is one of the ways of improving the tools because it in a sense, defines different dimensions
within which we might describe our conscious experience. So it's giving us a better sort of
framework for beginning to talk about our subjective experience, which is what we
desperately need. So that's
There are a lot of universities nowadays studying like the effects of psilocybin,
as the certain drugs on patients with depression, etc. And it seems to be very promising.
Yes, I'm still a little bit suspicious. But it's certainly worth looking at further.
I think the one I read, I remember there was a five or six month follow up on patients who
had taken a high dose psilocybin trip programs at very high dose. And most of the patients'
experiences seem to be back to normal at their baseline, which obviously needs to still be peer
reviewed a lot more and tested. But that does seem to be quite promising. Because currently,
if you look at our current approach, treating depression, I mean, anti-depressants are not
not up to standard. It's a point, actually, how effective they are.
Well, no, that's a big problem. I mean, also in the study of psychosis, because
basically, big pharma has stopped doing any research. Because there's no
there's no obvious direction to take. So we certainly need to somehow get back into that.
Although, I'm not quite sure where that would take us. But no, I think this is interesting. But
as I say, bigger trials are needed. And there's also the work on ketamine.
Yes, there's been a lot of studies on that as well.
I think it's Joanna Moncriff, who wrote a book on big pharma and how a lot of these drugs are
just completely controlled by the pharmaceutical industry. And now it's taken over, it's taken
a life on its own that the way the science no longer really matters at this point.
Do you feel the same way as a clinical psychologist that look in psychiatry? I mean,
these patients are all no longer sorting out the psychological elements and the social elements.
I mean, it's partly to do with a matter of expense. But I mean, the drugs,
they're still giving the same drugs that were discovered based in the 50s. And as I said,
the sum of useful companies are no longer interested in trying to develop better drugs,
because they don't know how to. There's a lot of work with what's it called cognitive
behavior therapy. Although this is not quite as good as we were hoping.
Sorry, that was something I was going to say. But it's partly,
when I was studying schizophrenia a long ago, there were these huge mental hospitals,
which were full of patients and they were all closed down. And it was believed that this would
help them and they would no longer be institutionalized. Now, this has not worked. It was effectively
a money saving enterprise. And they're now treated in the community, which is a euphemism for not
being treated at all. I'm sure that much better procedures could be applied if there was the money
to do so. But we still don't, I mean, whether this is not about cure, this is about management.
And apart from these odd things like the very rare cases that have autoimmune
problems, which can actually be cured, the rest of it, we still don't know.
When you look at autistic patients, I mean, mines are clearly better than one. I mean,
you speak about this, you've got a graphic novel, you've got, you've done a lot of lectures on it.
Yeah. How do you think that patients with on the autistic spectrum
differ from the average person in terms of how they perceive the world from a theory of mind
perspective? Well,
certainly at the more extreme ends of the spectrum, I think they generally have difficulty in
recognising that behaviour is driven by beliefs, rather than reality. And therefore,
the difficulty in understanding that people can have false beliefs, difficulty in understanding
that people can, I mean, this is the dangerous part, people can be deliberately deceiving you
by trying to impart a false belief in you. So they can be over trusting.
So there are these sorts of problems. They, the other area where they may have difficulty
is recognising, you know, which is part of the same thing. Things like white lies that you
can deceive people for good reasons. And you don't always have to obey the rules. So they
tend to be very ruled down because of not recognising these sort of grey areas, which
can make them difficult to work with because they object to people doing minor infringements,
which I'm sure our Prime Minister would suffer from. I think that's one of the things that I
do like most about the Bayesian brain approach is that you try and explain these with using
Bayes theorem and using these priors. I mean, it does explain quite a lot of psychiatric disorders.
I mean, too many incorrect priors fix more. Yes, I think the dangerous it may be explains too much.
And I mean, I think it explains things on a low level, but we need much more
testable predictions. So it's perhaps too good at explaining things, but we need to actually have
some new hypotheses that we can demonstrate. And if you okay, so we've done we've spoken about
panpsychism, idealism, so people just thinking all in the mind. What about those who believe in
quantum consciousness? I mean, this isn't the microtubules you've got to hammer off.
This is something more. I don't think we need it. I mean, I think the microtubules
is largely discounted as far as I understand it. But I'm not convinced that we need
a special as yet, we don't need to bring in these rather
abstruse physical mechanisms to explain
how the brain works. I had I'm what I had once had an interaction with Penfield about
I mean, and one of his arguments is that the brain cannot be a computer because
you know, people can solve non computable problems or some other details. And I was objecting to
this because I was saying was, I mean, in fact, when you look at the computation involved,
at an unconscious level, we do actually much better than we do at the conscious level. Our
conscious processing is actually much more primitive than the unconscious processing. So
if we really need quantum type explanations, it may apply at the unconscious level of how
well the brain works, but we don't really need it for the conscious level. It seems to me that's
a different problem. In a few weeks, I'm chatting to Mark Swalms. I'm not sure if you're familiar
with his work. Mark Swalms. Oh, yes, psychoanalysis. Yes. So he sort of thinks it's a bit more
a lot more primitive, actually, that it's not so much to do with the prefrontal cortex and that
sort of communication out downward, it's more from the bottom up that we consciousness sort of
evolves. Do you have thoughts on that? Yes, I mean, I think that goes back to this idea that the
frontal cortex is particularly involved with self consciousness and meta consciousness, and that
sentence may well be much more bottom up. I'm not myself too keen on psychoanalytic approaches
to this, because I don't quite know how they fit, or what it's all about. But I would certainly
agree that there's a lot of, I mean, the bottom end of sentence, which as I say, is probably
shared with fish and bumblebees and so on. The frontal cortex may not be so relevant, and this
is certainly, in that sense, very primitive. When you think of other species like, let's say dolphins,
what else, let's just octopi, I mean, is it octopuses or octopi? I'm not sure what the correct
term there is, but a lot of people have done studies now with octopuses, and they seem to think
that they're a lot more complicated than we thought. Yes, I think that's absolutely true.
I mean, one task, which I mean, there's this chapter on the virtues written a great deal about
consciousness is a philosopher about invertible consciousness, and I think makes a very good
case for octopuses, which I think, anyway, to the extent that the, it's now, I think the government
has recognized that octopuses and squids should be protected in certain ways. But there's a very
interesting task, which I talk about in my paper, which I, which is this reversal learning, you know
about this, this is, so it's a very simple task. For example, you can have two food wells, which
have, you know, one's red and one's blue, and food is hidden under one of them. And most creatures
can learn with trial and error that it's hidden under the red one. And so they do that for some
time, and then you switch without telling them you switch the reward to the blue one. And then
after a few trials, they realize they were wrong, and they realize it's down to the blue one, and
you can go on doing this, this is very boring, and a very simple model free learning device
can learn this. But every time you switch, it takes a certain number of trials until it gets
the right answer. But most creatures show something which is called learning to learn. So after a few
switches, they can switch much more quickly. And this involves actually a higher level,
you now have to go up to a level which recognizes that the world has two states, it's either the
the red's good or the blue's good. And you have to recognize when the state changes.
And this is also very interesting from a Bayesian point of view, because when it's in the,
this is all probabilistic. So even when it's, when it's usually under the red one,
it's only under the red one, say 80% of the time. So very occasionally you'll find it's
under the other one, you'll be wrong. But because you realize it's a state, you say this
I know this is just noise. So I ignore these prediction errors. This is very becoming very
sophisticated. You say prediction errors are not, not always important. I can, in some situations,
I ignore them. But you've also learned that after a certain amount of time, it's going to switch.
And therefore we start saying, well, I'm reaching the point where I suspect that these
prediction errors are becoming important. Because they may be telling me there's going to be a
switch in the state of the world. So I'll start attending to them. And that's how you can switch
very rapidly, because you roughly know where it's going to be. And as soon as their prediction
error, at this point, then you say, I'm going to switch to the other one. So this is highly
sophisticated and enables you to switch quickly. Now, what is interesting is that
most creatures can do this.
This is what Jonathan Birch points out, this rapid learning to learn this
reversal learning switch can be found in many animals, you know, go fish, probably I haven't
done bumble bees yet, but they probably will. And I think this is a marker of sentence. You
now have a model of the world that it can be in two different states, rather than just learning
this response is good, or this response is good. That's the difference between the model free learner
who just knows whether the response is good or not, and has to learn it. And the model
determined learner who realizes there are two different states of the world. And this is what
I have to learn about. And I think that's where sentence is. And if this really is a marker
of sentence, then many creatures have it. That's quite intriguing. So even goldfish are able to
do this. That's pretty cool. And let's see, that's fascinating. When you think about
virtual realities, I mean, we're reaching a point where meta, we're talking about things like meta
and metaverse, people are thinking about how we're all at some point going to be computerized,
we're going to plug ourselves in, become part of a virtual world. Do you think that it's possible
that this is actually a virtual? Do you ever have those sort of philosophical thoughts as a
very prominent figure in the neuroscience and psychology field?
No, I have to say, I mean, I've certainly been interested in the idea of a brain and a fat.
And this really goes right back to Descartes, who was worried about, you know,
there's an evil demon that's determining what I'm perceiving.
And I guess, but I've never really taken that on board. And I guess it's, again, it's to do with
interacting with other people who have slightly different views of the world, who have slightly,
you know, they have different past experiences. And it doesn't, if we were all brains in vats,
I just thought that similarity would be much greater. Or maybe it depends on how
sophisticated the programmer is. But I think, so I'm not really taken with that. I mean,
so I'm certainly very interested in the idea that, you know, with virtual reality, we do become
brains in vats. But interestingly, we can choose which that we're in, which is quite
interesting. But so far, I have not been very impressed with the virtual reality.
I have tried, but I'm not very good at it. I mean, who was once asked to be on the jury of the,
you know, every year they have some competition for the best new game or something. And so we got
lots of these games to play. And we found that we were completely incompetent at playing them.
So that was probably the reason why I'm not impressed by the
virtual world, because I'm just not very good at getting into them properly.
If you had to...
Trinity, Chris, to actually put your brain, download your consciousness and keep it alive
and keep it going, would you do that?
That's a very interesting question.
Probably not. Unless the virtual worlds are much better than they are now.
And I'm very, I'm very mystified about this idea that we'll soon be able to download our brain
into a computer or something, because I am becoming more and more complicated. I mean,
the recent work says that you would have to take into account, you know, every synapse,
not just every neuron.
Exactly.
And I think that's not enough.
And you lose a lot of competition in the sense that we are very much embodied beings functioning.
I mean, a lot of our perceptual experiences come from the fact that we have hands,
and we can't have 10s because we've got these 10 fingers.
Yeah.
So there's a lot that we'd lose out in terms of information.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I think that's very important. I mean, the other thing I've been very fascinated
by is that the people have started working on theirs. Occasionally, people have six fingers
instead of five. And it's to some extent genetic. And I think there's a family in Brazil where
they all have six fingers or something. And there's some very interesting work on what they do with
their mobile phones, and they're actually able to do more things.
I'm going to read up on that after this.
And that's another that's called augmented reality, I think. But I mean, we're going to get
things, I mean, machines or whatever, extra bits so that we can actually have more fingers or
more arms or whatever it is. So that would be quite, I mean, I guess I'm more interested in
that aspect of interacting with reality than the virtual reality.
It's fine because now David Chalmers has completely left consciousness. Well,
he hasn't left it, but he's now very much focused on virtual reality and the philosophy of virtual.
How do we behave? What are the moral, what are the ethical principles here, etc.
But I think that's interesting because I would be more interested in what he thinks about, you know,
having more hands on. And there's also work on having new senses. So for example, you can wear a
belt through which you can feel where Magnetic North is. Is that useful?
It's quite interesting because if you grow up learning how to use it, it definitely takes your
priors. Yeah. And that's again, goes back to consciousness because
and our subjective experience depends a great deal on what sensory inputs we have.
And presumably someone who is blind from birth has a very different
conscious experience from other people. And likewise, if we can have these extra senses,
what will that do to us? I mean, again, I've jumped around a bit, but you know,
this recent discovery that some women have four color receptors rather than three.
Does it make any difference? Can you make use of it? So I guess I'm more interested in these
developments. David Eagleman does a lot of work on sensory substitution. And how you like,
he can wear a you can wear a sort of vest that will vibrate in a certain way. If you are blind,
then you've got glasses and I need to like take in information via a camera and then
vibrate in a certain way on your vest and then you know what reality is. You paint a new picture
for yourself. But then that leads to the question, how much more could we augment this real experience?
I agree, which is a lot more intriguing to think about.
Do you believe in free will, Chris? Yes, I've been, I've took a long time. But again,
it's very social thing. I think the experience of having free will is to some extent a social
phenomenon. I mean, like I was talking about the ancient Greeks, perhaps didn't have,
didn't think they had free will because the gods were telling them what to do.
But if you then re-attribute that to me telling me yourself what to do, then
you do have free will. But I'm very interested in, I mean, there's this interesting relationship
between free will and responsibility. And we're all brought up to feel responsible for our actions.
And this is why I was said very early on, my grandson would, if he hits his twin sister will say,
I'm not responsible because it was an accident. So he's learned very early on to make the distinction
between things you do deliberately and things that you do by accident. And this has become very
important, at least in Western cultures, about, you know, it's a basis of legal things. You have to
be, you have to have the intention to do something, not just, that didn't just happen. And I think
this is something we learn on very early on. And we have this feeling that we're responsible for our
actions. We have particularly a strong feeling of regret. And the mere fact that we can feel
regret that I should have done something else implies that at the time we could have done
something else. Otherwise, this doesn't make any sense. So I think, again, the feeling of regret,
the feeling of being in control of our actions, these are very important aspects of our conscious
experience. And they are the basis of our belief in free will. And they're very important for
social cohesion and the rule of law, and understanding people, because we believe that people do
things for reasons. And in that sense, we expect people to have, to some extent, free will.
So I think that's very important. It's a cultural phenomena, but to some extent,
is created by culture. And it's also very important for making culture work.
So even though we have these experiments by Benjamin Libet, let's say, or
Uri Maus does certain work on it as well, you still believe just because it's because of
this fundamental link with moral responsibility, you have to take it into account.
Patrick Haggard has followed up the Libet experiments in many studies. And what he has
shown is that the experience of action is just like other perceptions. It's very Bayesian. So
you have a prior, and you have an outcome. So your experience of performing an act is you have a prior
intention, and you have the outcome, and they're bound together to give the experience of the action.
And I think what Libet, the reason that Libet finds that, you know, say when I had the decision
to do the action is later, is because of this binding phenomena. And you can move it around.
That's what Patrick Haggard has shown. You can move the timing around by what happens afterwards.
So in a sense, what happens afterwards is bound into your
subjective experience of the act. So I think the timing is not the fact that it happens after
the brain starts working, is not relevant to the problem of whether we have free will or not.
It's part of it. It's the way the experience is created.
To close, Chris, there's listeners they often love to when some of their favorite neuroscientists,
psychologists, philosophers tell us some book recommendations or author recommendations in
general with your favorite philosophers. If you had to give me five, at least.
Within the field with two, I mean, relevant books. I mean, the most the book on consciousness
that people should now read is Hacquan Lau's new book. In consciousness, we trust is that I think
it's called it. Who's it? Sorry, repeat the author's name. Hacquan Lau. I haven't read it.
Oh, I mean, he's worked with. Yes, it's very new. It only came out a month ago.
So that tells you great. It's tough. It's not like analysis. It goes into the nitty gritty of
how you do experiments and so on. Okay, so it's not like being you. I think Anil's is being you.
Yeah, yeah. I'm basically recommending all my friends. Nick Shea wrote a few years and what's
good about this Hacquan's book is it's I think it's often in the university press, but it's free.
You can download it for free. Nick Shea is the philosopher who wrote a couple of years ago a
book about representation, which is very important in neuroscience. And I can't remember what it's
called, but that's also you can download it for free. Of course, the best, best philosophy book,
if you're interested in Wittgenstein and people like that is Lodgy Comics.
Have you, you know that one, which is the graphic novel on the life of Bertrand Russell?
And obviously you have to read a Philip K. Dick book if you want to understand.
I've got a really cool Philip K. Dick box set from Folius.
But yes, do do androids dream of electric sheep is the sort of classic.
But there's another one which has the lovely title of the penultimate truth.
Gosh, it's very difficult stuff. I put you in the spot there. I know a lot of my guests
can't get caught in the spot at that moment when I asked them that question.
But I haven't, I'm not very good on books.
If you think about the philosophers who or psychologists who really influenced your view
and made made you the person you are today in terms of the thinker you are,
would you think played some big roles?
Well, I mean, there's Tim Shannis's book,
which is called Neuropsychology and Mental Structure. I mean, that's quite an old book,
but that that was very influential on my work. And obviously, I read, I mean,
I read all the old stuff like Donald Hibbs, what was it called?
Principles of behavior? I'm not sure.
And going by even further, because I had to give the
Bartlett Lecture recently, I read Frederick Bartlett's book called Remembering,
which is from 1932. But that has all this sort of Bayesian approach
that the memory is constructive and so on, and has a second section on social psychology,
even the effects of culture.
Probably anything on Helmholtz as well.
Oh, yes. Well, Helmholtz is very difficult. There is a little book on Helmholtz,
where I have to confess my German is not good enough to have read the original.
I mean, the book that very much influenced me in early stages was this one,
or his. Oh, nice. Okay.
And what is it? He has labyrinths, it's called. But he has, I mean, they're all very short stories,
but one of them is called Funes the Memorias, which is about someone who has some sort of brain
damage, which means they can, their memory is completely altered, and they can remember everything,
their episodic memory is perfect as a result of which they abandon concepts.
Because they don't need to simplify. That's fascinating.
Chris, thanks. I mean, everybody, when people look, read it, when people read your work,
when people read like people like Friston's work, I mean, they're always curious,
like, how do you guys get to the point where you are? Who are the thinkers who make you,
who you are? It's fascinating to see the journey you guys take to get, to get to that point.
Well, it's random, basically.
You guys are there for us. I mean, like one day, if somebody asks me these questions,
I'm going to say, like Chris, I mean, so it's great to know who influenced you and who played
that big role for you guys. Do you think so, Chris? I mean, of course, it's mind, body, solution.
Do you think we're going to find the mind, body, solution?
We're going to solve this mind, body, problem anytime soon?
I hope not.
Is it the magic is gone?
Where's the magic is gone?
Yeah.
But honestly, thanks to you at least listeners. I've taken one step closer to the mind, body,
solution. And I really appreciate you accommodating me, knowing that we're having some
horrible weather conditions here in South Africa.
I gather, yeah.
It's been crazy, like lots of flooding, lots of death. It's been quite intense.
Right. But you're getting, it's getting back to normal.
Guys, I appreciate your time and for rescheduling the meeting with me.
Yeah, that was fine. Yeah. No, thanks. I enjoyed this chat very much.
Thanks, Chris.
