Jaja, you have a great approach of addressing the problems of consciousness. You go through
the why, the how, the why not, the what, the where. So these are talking about the heart
problem, the binding problem. What is the difference between conscious and unconscious
brain processes? Where is the seat of consciousness? So I'd like you to start this conversation by
running us through these processes. And in doing so, I'd also appreciate if you could talk me
through your views on all of this prior to your quantum biology revolution, because it's always
interesting to see how someone's view changes over time as well, regarding your concepts.
Okay. So first, why are we interested in consciousness? Because if you look, if you
get to the butcher shop and you look at a brain from a cow, it just looks like meat. That's what
our brain would look like, a lump of meat. And the strangest thing in the universe, in my view,
is the fact that a lump of meat can know it's there. And that to me is profoundly puzzling. And
strange, because nothing else outside of that lump of meat inside our heads and presumably other
people's or other animal's head has this property of knowing itself, knowing that it is around,
that it is a thing. And that property is kind of mysterious, because it's outside of science.
Science does not talk about this. It's not an area that can ever look inside our heads. And this
describes our experience. It's only a first person account that we can have a go of our
experience. And yet, it's the most important part of us. It's what would life be like if we were
totally zombies, as the conscious community tends to call it. If we were zombies that have no
consciousness, what would be the purpose of life then? So it's profoundly important. It's something
that, in one way or another, I've always had an interest in. I've always been interested in the
history of ideas and history of ideas going back to the myths and stories and the religious basis
of where the religion comes from. It seems to come from the same question, really, that what is it
that's inside us that is the us that is important to us and makes us feel that we're worth
maintaining our life. So that, to me, is the most profound and interesting question of not only
science and the whole of the world. Of course, not only science deals with the puzzle of
consciousness, lots of literature and art also is around this strange understanding we have of
ourselves and our perceptions. So that's always been the puzzle. And I didn't really get interested
in trying to figure it out scientifically until over 20, 25 years ago, something like that, I guess,
when I was, I wrote a book called Quantum Evolution, it was published in 2000. I became
interested in the idea that quantum mechanics may be involved in life, in life more generally,
not consciousness at this stage, but I thought it might be involved in evolution and I grew in
touch with the, because I didn't know very much if anything at all about quantum mechanics, I got
in touch with Jim Alcalely, who is a famous broadcaster and physicist, who was at the same
university as me at the University of Surrey. And we, and it was then about evolution and mutation
and whether quantum mechanics may be involved in this. And, you know, we're still pursuing that
at the University of Surrey and unraveling that question of whether quantum mechanics is involved
in mutation. But it did get me profoundly interested in the role of quantum mechanics in life more
generally. And then I thought it's a book and I persuaded a publisher to give me an advance to
write it, which was called Quantum Evolution. Now, in the book proposal, I had chapter 13,
which was reserved for probably the most famous consciousness idea, the idea put forward by
Roger Penrose and Stuart Hammerhoff, that consciousness can be explained by quantum
mechanics and it's going to do gravity and gravitational collapse of wave functions.
That sounded kind of interesting. And I thought, well, that's a good thing for chapter 13. That was
the final chapter of the book, which otherwise looked at things like enzymes and DNA and that
kind of thing. So, but chapter 13, I thought, okay, it's consciousness. And then when I started
reading it, I knew enough about quantum mechanics at the time to kind of gave me pause and thought,
well, actually, what they're proposing, Hammerhoff and Penrose doesn't work.
They propose an interesting idea that structures called microtubules in the brain, which transport
neurotransmitters up and down neurons, that they could be in a quantum mechanical state.
And by this time, by the time I got to chapter 13, when writing the book, I'll get
new a lot about quantum mechanics, a lot more than I did before I put it down as a topic for
chapter 13. And I realized, no, that's not going to work. Microtubules are the busiest structures
in the brain and always doing stuff. There's no way they could be in a quantum mechanical state.
So I was convinced by their story, but reading Roger Penrose is, I then read Roger Penrose's
book, Emperor of the Mind. Emperor of the Mind, the Emperor of the New Clothes,
as I think of Roger Penrose, his book, On Consciousness, who come to me the title in a moment,
but he convinced me that consciousness is a kind of field. And that's the fundamental idea that
goes behind all of young field theories of consciousness and my own idea that when I look
at my window here in the UK, and I see trees, I see wall, I see people moving around,
I don't see them as independent things. They're all part of a single structure,
which is my conscious mind. And how do you account for that in science? When, if we encode
information, say, in a computer, it's all split down into binary digits. And one binary digit will
be there, another will be over there, and they're all distributed all over the place. And this
brings us to the binding problem, which is a famous problem in consciousness, that how is all
the information bound up in your brain, or the matter is divided up into lots of discrete units,
like atoms and neurons, et cetera, biomolecules or microtubules, they're all separate stuff.
And information is distributed amongst all of them. So for example, if I'm looking at the trees
across the road, facets of the trees such as the color of the leaves, the color of the bark,
the shape of the leaves, the texture, the movement of the branches as they're swaying in the wind,
all of those facets are encoded in different parts of our brains, in different neurons,
in different areas of the brain. But that's not what it feels like. It feels like our conscious
mind is stuck together. It's a single physical entity of which we are at the center of. And
how do you make that? And what Roger Penrose proposed in his Emperor of the Mind, or whatever the
book is called, something like that, is that it was a field. And what we mean by field is like
the gravitational field that holds us, holds me on my seat at the moment. If you're standing up,
it holds you to the ground. And the field is everywhere around, it's invisible, it's everywhere.
But the field that the soul of your feet, if you're standing on the ground is an integration
of the mass of your body and the mass of the entire planet. That's what's holding you at
the soles of your feet to the ground. And that's kind of remarkable. And that's feature of fields,
physical fields, that all of the information is distributed everywhere within the field. It is
indivisible. There's no place where the soles of your feet or the continent of Australia,
which is contributing to you being standing at that point, it's everywhere within the field. It's
not just in Australia, it's at the soles of your feet as well, that information which provides a
little bit of the gravitational force that holds you there. And that's really I thought what we
needed for consciousness. Penrose thought that many people before him have thought that. And
when I did more research, it goes back to guest out philosophers back in the early part of the
20th century, they also proposed that consciousness was some kind of field. But that kind of fell
out of favor when neuroscientists started studying the brain and seeing that when you see neurons,
you don't see fields, you see neurons and they communicate by these synapses and neuron firing
and all that kind of stuff. And that doesn't involve fields. So the idea that consciousness
was some kind of field fell into disuse, if you like. Penrose re-energized it with his proposal
that it was a quantum field. But the quantum mechanics, what quantum mechanics does is it
turns matter into a field. So if you have an atom of matter that's behaving quantum mechanically,
then it doesn't have a fixed position in space, just like the information of the
of the mass of Australia isn't a fixed position in the gravitational field of the earth, it's
everywhere. Well, an atom can be everywhere in quantum mechanics. So quantum mechanics is really
a science about fields. So if there was in the brain a quantum mechanical field, then it could
account for consciousness. But the problem is in making quantum mechanical fields out of matter
is hard. Normally, you have to have a very simple system, an atom or two in a box cooled down to
absolute zero as close as you can get to it in a vacuum on an optical table, which will remove any
vibrations or anything. And when you've got all this, you might retain a quantum mechanical state,
those two or three atoms can behave as a single entity for, you know,
in picoseconds or some very short length of time. But that's not going to happen in the brain.
So although I was convinced that quantum that consciousness is a field, I wasn't convinced
that it could be done by a matter field quantum mechanical matter field. So I looked around for
what is there any other field in the brain. And of course, there is the field that people have
been looking at for over a century, even then when I was first thinking about it,
people knew that was the brain generates its own electromagnetic field. And that electromagnetic
field is what physicians measure when they put the electrodes on your skull to do an EEG,
they've been measuring it for 100 years or more. And mostly they've thought it's just
there's just a consequence of the brain's activity, but doesn't impact on the brain's
activity in any way. It's often described as the steam whistle of a steam train generates
a whistle, we know about it, you can detect it with the EEG electrodes, but it doesn't function in
any way. But it occurred to me, well, if consciousness isn't in the matter of the brain,
in the electromagnetic field generated by brain, the brain's activity,
then it already has some very interesting properties. For example, it contains all of the
information in firing neurons. And that's kind of useful, because we've got an awful lot of
information on conscious mind, it's distributed all over the brain. But in the brain's ear and field
is everywhere within the brain's EM field. So that was kind of good. But it also has a very
interesting property. And that's to do with how fields interact. And this, to me, was the key
to thinking, wow, this could really be it. At that time, Francis Crick started to work on
consciousness and the Nobel Prize winners for discovering the structure of DNA. Before Francis
Crick worked on consciousness, working on consciousness as a scientist was like working
on fairies. I'm going to study fairies from now on. It was a career destroying move, if you said
you're going to work on consciousness. Nobody worked on consciousness. It was considered only
crackbots worked on consciousness. But then this mega brain, Francis Crick started to work on
consciousness and suddenly became respectable to think about consciousness. So he put a lot of
gave conscious the consciousness field a really big boost. What he said was the best way to get
into studying the brain is first of all, start with looking at the correlates of consciousness.
What that means is, when we, for example, I'm always losing my glasses on them.
When I take them off and I can't find them, and they're somewhere on a very messy desktop,
I'm looking at that desktop and I can't see my glasses, then suddenly I can see them.
Now, what happens between the millisecond before I saw them, when I was looking at them,
the image of them was on my retina, but I still wasn't seeing them. And then suddenly I can see
them. What happens in that few milliseconds between the image entering my retina, being in
my brain, being processed, but I'm not seeing them. And when you see, when you become consciously
aware of my glasses, in this case, and what a number of studies have demonstrated in the 1990s
mostly, and the early 2000s, is that the best correlates of consciousness is not the neuron
firing per se, but when neurons fire in sync. Though I'll be nearly there to the end of the
where we get to the next moment. But when they fire in sync, you become conscious. Now, that's a
bit of a puzzle, because neurons process information in independent, you know, the shape of my
glasses, the colors of my glasses, all of those features will be processed in independent neurons.
They're all firing, but not in sync. And then they get in sync, and suddenly I'm aware of them. Why?
Informate, they're going through the same neural pathways, as we know.
But there's a feature of electromagnetic waves, which explains it. When electromagnetic waves,
like any wave, if they're waving in sync, then they have what's called constructive interference.
The signal is amplified, because all of the waves peak some troughs, match up, and you get a bigger
signal. It's like two waves in the sea. If they're waving in sync, then you're going to get a bigger
wave. Whereas if they're waving out of sync, then the wave will be destroyed. So if consciousness
is the brain's electromagnetic field, then we would expect it to correlate with
synchronously firing neurons. And in the 1990s, that was demonstrated in monkeys and mice,
and later in humans. That is the best correlate of consciousness. So it just made sense to me that,
okay, all we need to do is switch from the matter of the brain to the electromagnetic field of the
brain, you solve the binding problem, all your information is stuck together, and it matches
up with the strongest correlates of consciousness, synchronous firing. And he explains why synchronous
firing is associated with consciousness. So that was a revelation to me. And then it all made sense,
and I thought, well, surely someone must have published about this idea before. I searched
around, and no one did. Well, I might as well put a paper or two in, and I did. I met and had published
a couple of papers on this idea. And that was more than 20 years ago now. And mostly it's been
not taken seriously for most of those two decades or so. But now it's beginning to gain some momentum
partly because of all the other theories of consciousness have kind of failed to really
make progress in understanding a phenomenon where people say, well, we need something else.
And I think that's what we need. The understanding the brains in field is where our conscious mind
sits. So a very long explanation that gets us to the beginning of the story.
I mean, this is just the very beginning for for all those who are not familiar. Let's let's let's
define it. I mean, you call it the consciousness electromagnetic information theory, field theory,
sorry, so the semi field theory. Do you want to define that for people? Yeah, so it's conscious
information because it's encodes information and information. I mean information about the outside
world. So this excludes EM fields that generated by toasters and stuff like this, which are not
really communicating anything useful about the outside world. So it's information that is from
our senses. And that gets from our memory and neurons, they get transmitted into the brains in
field. And what is interesting about the brains in field that was discovered more
after my first papers on consciousness is that it does influence neuron firing. Because if that's
all that happened, if it was transmitted, the information is transmitted into the brains in
field, then who cares? It's there. It's a reflection of the information in the brain, but it's not
doing anything. But if if the brains in field influences neuron firing, then it can have a
feedback that your conscious mind can start pulling on the levers of the neurons. And that's
exactly what it's done. It's it does lots of studies, including some more recently, my own lab
have looked at the effect of EM fields on neurons and neurons are both transmitters
of information into the brain's electromagnetic field. But they are also receivers of that
information. So it provides a loop of information from the neurons going into the brain's electromagnetic
field where it all gets joined up. And there you can start thinking because that's where your
thinking is happening in your conscious mind. And then your thoughts can influence your brain,
can pull on the levers of neurons to do the kind of actions that we call our free will.
That's the fascinating component of this is that you you've taken this complex subject of
consciousness and which is a very deep philosophical question in its own right. And then you've also
managed to now approach another topic that people often discuss in various different debates,
which is free will. You've managed to tie these two concepts together. And it's interesting because
when you first spoke about this, when I first read about it many years ago,
I thought about the fact that people think about electromagnetic fields and they talk about it,
particularly scientists, in a very mystical manner, you know, so like this is, and this is
especially true in medicine as a doctor, I see it when you talk to another biologist or a doctor
that when you start talking about anything regarding electromagnetic fields, they start to
think that you're going down some sort of spiritual mystical, non-physical realm. Has that been what's
been occurring to you as well? Do you feel like your theory is automatically placed in this group
of mysticism? And that's not the case. Is this not ultimately a physicalist theory, if I'm not
mistaken? Yeah, I think that that is a problem. That's one of the reasons why it's taken a while
for it to become at least partly accepted, because it is grouped along with the wacky stuff, if you
like. Yes, we have crystal therapists who are putting crystals on your body and claiming there's
some electromagnetic field coming in and helping to heal you, and people talk about trees having
these electromagnetic field auras around them, so it kind of plays into all of that, but it shouldn't.
Electromagnetism is fundamentally scientific, since the work of Max Waller who showed that light,
the light that we see is electromagnetism. It's a form of energy that comes from the sun. It's all
electromagnetism. In fact, all of the things that happen on our world pretty much apart from gravity
are all down to electromagnetism in one way or another. Chemistry is really all electromagnetism.
It's pretty much everything that happens that we see is about electromagnetic interactions.
It's not spooky at all, but it is not physical. Sorry, it's not material. It's not material,
and that's the key difference that makes people kind of hesitant about it, because it's invisible.
You can't see it. When you look at the brain, you see a big lump of matter and say, well,
that's it. That's the brain. That's all that's happening. The dead brain, it's not happening
well, but a live brain has an invisible electromagnetic field, which is just as rich in information
as the brain's neurons. But as I said, it has that extra property of all the information being
joined up as joined up as the information in a single photon or a single electron. It is completely
physically united within the brain's electromagnetic field, and thereby binds the information in our
conscious mind. So, yes, it's not materialist theory, but it is a figureless, physicalist
theory. And that, I think, is when people say they're materialist, after me, it shouldn't really be
saying that I have physicalists, because you can't explain our world with just material. You have to
pretty much everything that happens is an interaction between fields, our current understanding of what
matter is, what an atom is, and electron is. They are perturbations of fields, of electromagnetic
field, gravitational fields, nuclear forces. They are all perturbations of fields. So ultimately,
everything is fields. So this isn't a wacky idea at all. It's no more wacky than a materialist.
Just because we can see matter doesn't make it not a field. It really is fundamentally
another kind of field. It reminds me of one of the things you want. I mean, you mentioned this
earlier as well, but the way you describe meat, and just this lump of meat, I mean, when you talk
about that way, it sort of highlights this degree of absurdity. And it almost down and brings your
theory back into sort of a normal realm of debate and chat, which is an important way to approach
this. But I have noticed that other people also seem to have semi-field theories as well. And some
of those do tend to go into the spiritual realms. And I think that's also hindering your own process
and your own research. Yeah, I agree. I agree. There is a lovely story, actually, by a short story.
You can find it online. It's easily found by Terry Bison called They're Made of Meat. It's a story
of aliens who discover in some far distant galaxy an intelligence and sentience. And they're all
excited about this. And then one of the aliens says, but the strange thing about this sentience
is they're made of meat. And they're a gas. What? You mean that's stopped me by a butcher that we
eat and chop and make steaks out of? That can't be sentient. That's just nonsense. And then you
go on and on and on. And essentially, they decide to suppress the idea. It's so bizarre that
consciousness could be made of meat. But that is what everyone else thinks. And it is far more
bizarre to think that meat can be conscious than it is to think that electromagnetic field can be
conscious. The latter is much more sensible and realistic and less wacky than the idea of a lump
of meat is conscious. So, yeah. But yes, you're right. The spiritual stuff, I try to be very
rigorous and not get into those deeply philosophical questions about meaning of life and things like
this and panpsychism and all those kind of things and try to keep to the nuts and bolts of the,
because I think there is a danger in many fields that they can get corrupted by
sloppy thinking, sloppy kind of mystical thinking. And I'd like to keep it very scientific,
scientific and grounded.
John Jo, do you worry about the fact that even when people talk about materialist theories of
consciousness, so whether it's matter, some sort of neuronal firing, whether it's a global workspace,
whether it's integrated information, people are still going to be concerned that these
electromagnetic fields are still merely correlates. And do you think that that still satisfies,
satisfies the thirst that some people have for a theory that does not have this correlation
issue? Because as we all know, correlation does not equal causation. The information.
Yeah, absolutely. Essentially, we have to take a jump somewhere, but I think we have to make
the jump as small as possible. And ultimately, we have to come around to the idea that something
in our bodies is conscious. Okay, we know that we're conscious or something is conscious. And
that's usually bizarre. I mean, as we said, we just made them out of meat and blood and bones
and all the rest of it. And some part of it is gone. If I told you that your bones were conscious,
you'd say, no, crazy, but it's no more crazy than believing the meat of your brain is conscious.
So somewhere, because we have our own introspective experience of being aware,
that's got to be a property of something in our brain. So we've got to pin it down somewhere.
If we pin it on the matter of the brain, we're stuck with the binding problem. How does it get
stuck together to give us our experience? If we put it in the brain's electromagnetic field,
then that solves that fundamental problem of consciousness. And a lot more, it makes sense
in lots of different ways that we haven't gone into yet. But it's got to go somewhere. And somewhere
we've got to take the wacky leap and say that, okay, this thing that we thought was not aware,
not conscious, is conscious. Because otherwise, how are we talking at the moment? Why are we
arguing about it? Consciousness is a thing. Awareness is a thing. It's got to be pinned on
something. The unfilled is the best one.
Judge, some people have new theories of understanding the brain-body connection and sort of
there are these new concepts like embodied cognition. The fact that we have a brain-gut
axis, we've got relationships between our body and brain that are separate entities,
almost like having two brains in a sense. The fields you're talking about are consistent with
the brain. But what does that have to do with sort of serotonin receptors in the gut,
other areas of the body? Does this entwine into these?
I don't think it makes any difference from, if you believe consciousness is a matter of the brain
or consciousness is the field of the brain, then we still have, it doesn't differentiate
between the two theories in terms of whether there's a wider consciousness in, say, the gut
or anywhere else. I don't think you need to, I mean, I'm a donor, a kidney donor,
I gave my kidney. I don't think I passed any of my consciousness to her when I gave her a kidney.
She is not good. She still doesn't like the things I like to eat. She doesn't like the music.
So I don't think, yes, there is nothing about the body consciousness and things like that,
which convinces me that anything outside the brain needs to be conscious. Because all of those
areas that we think we are embodied in the rest of our body and in our gut axis and all the rest
of it, they're all connected by neurons to the brain. So the information is in the brain, you
don't need to have a consciousness elsewhere. And I think there's absolutely zero evidence for it.
There's not any kidneys, there's hearts and other organs that have been transferred from
one person to another. And there's no evidence at all that any consciousness is transferred in
that operation. Tell me, John, do you know if any sort of, are there any newspapers, aren't there,
that sort of describe EM fields anywhere else in the body?
Well, there's lots of them. Yeah, heart, for example, we use ECG to detect heart arrhythmias.
Sorry, I think I didn't ask the question correctly. What I wanted to know is,
do you know if there's any sort of relationship between the EM fields that we do have in the body
that link up to sort of the EM fields generated by the brain?
Yeah, I don't know if you've, I think you have, I think I looked on your podcast,
you've interviewed Mike Levine. Yes, yes, yes. Yeah, okay. We've actually chatted a few times, yes.
Yeah, fascinating work, him and Wendy Bean. Such amazing work.
I think it's the prehistory of consciousness, the kind of thing that he's looking at. It's that
he is already finding that the EM fields generated by the body have causal efficacy.
They are doing things to help in wound healing and development and some, and those kind of things.
That to me is a prehistory of what's happening in our brain, that the EM fields that were
generated by the brain started in evolutionary history to make a difference to how the brain
works. And instead of being, instead of having an influence on wound healing or development,
they had an influence on our actions. And that's just seems to me a natural consequence of the
kind of thing that Mike and Wendy and other people have found in the role of EM fields in other
parts of our body. Once you have EM fields in the brain, then they are in the powerhouse,
they are in the control room now. And they can start doing all sorts of things like making you
making you happy, sad, making you do actions, preventing you from do actions. Suddenly, the EM
fields are not just involved in development or wound healing, they're involved in everything,
every action that you do. Mike actually might watch this episode because he just sent me an
email the other day to say he watched a previous episode. I want to almost speak for him in the
sense by saying, I mean, what he's trying to show at some point is that this bio electricity,
I mean, this electricity, electrical signals can communicate messages, which is something
we never really thought was a thing. And this is amazing work. I mean, he's showing how information
can be transferred in ways that we could never imagine. And the impact this has, do you think
at some point all of those bio electrical signals could perhaps create an EM field for the entire
body that sort of communicates all together? Well, although the brain's EM field is everywhere,
obviously, we know that if you have a transmitter very far away from you, it is less likely to be
detected by your radio, you know, I can, I can detect the times when it was all radio signals,
you can detect, you know, London, say, but I couldn't detect Edinburgh. And very occasionally,
you might detect somewhere like Moscow or something like that on your radio, but very rarely. And
that's because the strength of the signal decreases with the cube or the distance, is it? I kind of
remember my physics, either the square of cube or the difference of distance. So the strength of
the signal drops. So yes, the information, there will be some bit of information that say comes
from your toe, that when it's injured, that will also impact the brain. But most of what the brain
is doing is going to be influenced by the nearby EM fields, which are generated by neurons, particularly
as neurons are the most electrically excitable, and are the biggest transmitters of, of signals,
and the, and the most effective antennae for signals as well. So I would say, yes, it's possible,
but I think the, the influences likely to go down the further and further away, the
organ is from the brain.
Yeah, and perhaps, and perhaps even the Mali nation might also control, because that's
yeah, much more common within the brain.
Yeah, but I'd be interested in Mike's view on this.
We're going to chat about it soon.
So when we have that other chat, I'm going to make a note to actually ask him about this.
You touched on something just now, and I have a note here, just let me just find it.
You said, at some point, I mean, when, when someone's alive, they can have this field.
And then you said, well, unless they did, I mean, but sometimes when someone dies,
you sort of still sort of see an electromagnetic field around them,
there's still some sort of information being carried.
So what happens when someone really dies?
Does the information store somewhere within the field?
Well, remember that the information is constantly changing in the brain.
It's not that it's not like a hard disk of a computer that would be laid down forever.
We do have memories that are in the Senate, or we believe memory is still one of my
mysterious things about how our brain works, and we don't fully understand it.
But most guesses are that it's, it's maintaining the synaptic connections of our brain.
Those will be there, still there when we die, but they will start to disintegrate.
So they won't last long.
There is another interesting way of thinking about it.
And I've not really, I've not really thought this,
this is now when, when I go into dangerous, wacky area, but it's fine.
This is an open space.
This podcast is exactly what it is.
But there is something that I think, I wonder what that means.
But okay, information, information, according to quantum mechanics,
information can't be created or destroyed.
It's just moved around.
So there's a conservation of information.
It's a theorem.
Or is that what they call it?
No one's proved it as far as I know, but it's fundamentally quantum mechanics
that information can't be destroyed.
Now the brain's information, what the CM semi-field theory says is the brain's
information has the quality of awareness.
Okay.
That's what is aware.
The information encoded in the brain's field is aware.
Okay.
So then I have to say, I have to go on, look at that more deeply.
You have to say, okay, well, is all electromagnetic field information aware?
I say, well, you know, what's the electric, what can the electromagnetic field of a
single electron know?
What it knows is itself.
It doesn't carry information about the outside world.
What is normal and interesting about the brain is that the brain's young field
carries this vast amount of information about the outside world and the inner world of the
person, their memories and everything else.
It's all encoded in the brain, so it's a much richer sourcing information.
But it is information and it's never going to be destroyed according to quantum mechanics.
So what happens?
I don't know.
I mean, every thought that we make is transmitted into the brain's field and some of that leaks
into the universe.
So what is that information?
It's not connected in the same way, but it's still there, as I said.
EM field is unified.
There's only a single EM field for the entire universe.
Universe has a single EM field of which our brains, our electromagnetic field is part of.
So when we stop thinking and our brain stops working, do we become part of the universe's
electromagnetic field?
Do we get any awareness of that state?
I don't know.
I will find out.
Not for a while, I hope.
I was just going to say, hopefully not too soon.
It is a kind of spooky, kind of interesting idea.
Conservation information is if information, electromagnetic field information has the
property of awareness and that's fundamental to semi-field theory.
That's the only way we can account for consciousness.
Then that information has gone off into the universe.
Every thought that we've had still has that property.
What does that mean?
I don't know.
It's crazy because I remember when I first, this was years ago, when I came across your work
and Jim Alcalilla, I watched one of his, I think it was his, was it a Ted talk, if I recall,
talking about quantum biology and then I went down this rabbit hole,
learning about it, reading about it, then came across your work.
I remember still back then being so fundamentally materialist that to me it sounded completely
absurd and since starting this podcast, the more I've learned about other theories and
understanding other people's perceptions, the way they work, it becomes a lot easier to empathize
and sort of see the other person's viewpoint a lot clearer and but then you also don't know
where to draw the line anymore because at this point, as we're discussing this, it's easy to
see how we can tread down territories that are non-scientific.
We can almost go into some sort of bizarre phenomenon that, I mean, it's not a bad thing
necessarily. This is still intriguing things and it's not clear that the work is wacky.
It still is quite cool that you can go down these routes, I think.
Yeah, I think to me, the line is when it's no longer science and when it becomes no longer,
when you can't actually prove what you're speculating about, it is no longer science.
So people ask me, well, how do we know that the radio isn't conscious and I would say,
how would you ever prove it was or wasn't conscious? And in turn, someone comes up with a way of
answering that question, then I don't think there's any, that is part of science. We just have to say,
well, as far as we know, the radio or my car or whatever isn't conscious,
you know, maybe someday it will start talking to me and I'll disprove that theory. But until then,
I'm going to take the default simplest way of accounting for the fact that my car doesn't talk
to me, that it is not conscious. And I think we have to take the ideas that I was just saying
about what happens to our consciousness after I don't think I'll ever be able to test that.
So I count that as non-scientific speculation, which is perfectly okay,
as long as we don't think it's science. We can speculate. Philosophers have been doing it for
centuries and they go away with it. Why shouldn't scientists occasionally get away with a bit of
speculation? I can just see the way someone could take this information and sort of a patient,
maybe in a psych ward, listening to this conversation, now realizing that actually no,
the radio really did say that to me. So I always have to put it in the podcast. I mean,
this is just weird informational purposes only. This is not, I guess a doctor or one patients
to really go around to think, yeah, okay, this is fine. This is purely educational. This is just
a disclaimer for everyone. But tell me, the skull access is almost a Faraday cage,
holds in all these signals, as much as possible, the fields at least. So it can't go too far. I
mean, you briefly touched on that fact. I mean, it's not like you and I could step together side
by side and sort of do almost a telepathic communication with each other. That's what
you're saying either. No, I have a lot of people who ask me, and whenever you've been talking this,
someone always pops up and says, does it explain telepathy? And I say, no. Because firstly,
is telepathy a thing that can be explained by science? No, because no scientific experiment
that's actually demonstrated telepathy. So it's like saying, does your theory explain aliens on
the moon? No, because there's no need to explain them. There's no evidence for telepathy and all
the scientific tests have shown nothing's there. But we want to expect it from my theory.
You can see the headlines now, Semifield and the Fermi paradox.
Yes. And no, I don't think telepathy can't be explained by Semifield theory. Because of that
problem of the information is diluted as it goes further and further away from you. And also,
your brain has developed, it's like going back to my Levine's work, your brain has developed
to both make its own fields, own EM fields and decode those fields. I doubt if any other brain
is capable of decoding it. It's probably only...
Oh, John, I think I've lost you there.
Ask in the brain, there's no fundamental code that all brains use. They're going to be using
all different codes. So I think only your brain can decode the EM field information inside your
head. Sorry, John, for a moment, I lost you, but you're back. Okay. As long as you're back, it's great.
Okay, it's in the EM field. I could switch to another, I can see, I should
to prevent it happening again, I could switch to another router.
We'll give it a go. If it fails again, we'll switch over.
Okay, we'll leave it as it is. While we're on that topic, though, I mean, what are the chances of
other sort of electromagnetic fields interacting with ours anyway, not causing sort of telepathic
communication, but actually affecting my own EM field? Yeah, people have concerns about this in
terms of whether electrical installations, telegraph wires and stuff like this could influence
how we think. It's feasible, I would say, if a very strong electromagnetic field can make a radio
talk as it can when we have a radio receiver, it could interfere with the brain. But it's working
on different frequencies, it's not going to be decodable. So by the brain, the brain is designed
by evolution and development to decode its own information, not to decode the stuff that comes
in the radio waves. And as far as I know, no one has ever managed to listen to a radio station
just with their head. So we can't decode that information, whether it can do any harm to us.
I think the evidence is very slight, if any, that there is any influence of power stations and
stuff like that near us doing any harm. So my guess is not, but because there's been a lot of
research and a lot of contradictory in this area of whether external EM fields can cause
ill effects in people, I prefer to stay agnostic about it as I don't really study the literature
enough to be very clear in my own mind about it. I think it's fascinating because you're
discussing a theory that is so quote unquote, wacky, but it's not. And yet you simultaneously
write a book that's like slightly simple and talk about Occam's Razor, I mean, William of Occam,
and you discuss how you approach science in a very scientific manner because of the fact that
you understand the difference between taking a leap of faith and then being agnostic when
agnosticism is needed. So I just want to put that out there for you to sort of.
Yeah, yeah, I think they, as you said, in my recent book Life is Simple, I make the case that
what differentiates science from other forms of ways of making sense of the world is the science
is committed to take the simplest solution to problems. To me, the simplest solution
to consciousness is the brain's electromagnetic field. It solves so many problems,
such as why synchronous firing should be correlated with consciousness. It gives us a way of
understanding one of the other big puzzles of the brain, why most of what the brain does is
actually non-conscious. And that's something we have to also explain. Because if the brain is
just neural activity, then why isn't most of what the brain does conscious? We do a lot of very
complicated stuff. A lot of people have argued, well, it's only the really difficult stuff that
we do that we're that we need our conscious mind. No, we could be trying solving a really difficult
equation and still on stand on our toe and become highly aware of a very simple stimulus of someone
standing on our toe. So very simple stimuli can overwhelm our conscious mind. So complexity
and consciousness aren't necessarily related. And yet we have to explain how some parts of
some of the things that we our brain does is we're not aware of, like me waving my hands around
when I talk, I'm not aware of that. And lots of things that we do blinking and all this kind of
stuff, that's all done non-consciously. So we have to explain how the brain can work in two
different ways. One a conscious way and one a non-conscious way. As far as I'm aware, the only
theory consciousness theory really sorts this out is the semi field theory, another a and field
theories of consciousness that says only the activity from synchronously firing neurons,
because the waves of the synchronously firing neurons fire together, only that gets transmitted
into the brain's electromagnetic field. If neurons fire asynchronously, and mostly they do,
that information doesn't get transmitted into the brain's electromagnetic field,
because the wave, the top of a wave of one neuron is cancelled out by the bottom of the wave of
the other neuron. So it explains why only some information is consciousness, it's only the
synchronously firing neurons, and that's exactly what we find. The rest of what the brain does
is going to be non-conscious, so you get a conscious and a non-conscious mind.
So all of those problems are just disappear once you just move consciousness from the
matter of the brain into the brain's EM field. And I think it's a much simpler theory than others
like IIT, which is integrated information theory, which has to propose this massively difficult
mathematical equation is what explains consciousness and, you know,
a level of consciousness can solve this equation for more than two or three neurons
at most, and I just can't see that it's needed. So it's a simplest theory,
and I admire that in science, and science has been driven by simplicity right from those early
days, as you mentioned, William Rockham was the first modern person to make that claim that
science is all about simplicity, and it has stood the test of time. The Higgs boson was predicted
on simplicity grounds that were more complex theories, but the simplest was the Higgs theory
that predicted the existence of the Higgs boson, and only one of them was the simplest of many
theories to predict. One of them, the only advantage of the one that predicted only a
single Higgs boson was simpler than the others, and that's the way it turned out. So science
looks for simple solutions. Semi-field theory is, in my view, far simpler than any other theory
that attempts to account for consciousness. As of mid 2024, are there any sort of labs, other
people's work that you're looking to that are sort of showing support for this theory? How's
the evidence looking for this theory, and any updates? Well, yeah, there was work in, I have to
my brain is, my brain is useless, digging out names and particular studies, but at least tell us about
the studies. I can send you the reference later if you want. There was a very fascinating study
done by a group at MIT, and what they did was look at the brain neurons in the brain of monkeys,
I think it was, that was recorded by multilateral recordings of the brain when they were keeping
something in memory. And there's a lot of studies have done this, and they found that
if the monkey is thinking banana safe, okay, when it recalls banana, different sets of neurons
were fire. And there's a name for this, and again, this has escaped me at the moment, it will come
to me sometime, it's that memories seem to not rely on particular neurons. A set of neurons will fire,
but it won't be the same set of neurons when a monkey thinks of the banana two or three times,
there'll be different neurons, there'll be five or six neurons say that will fire,
but there'll be a different set of neurons, and that's very hard to explain in terms of memory
when we think of memory in the synaptic idea of memory that I mentioned earlier, that it's to do
with just the connections between neurons via synapses. A temporal drift, I think it is called,
that the encoding of a memory drift between different neurons, but what this study at MIT
showed is that what was preserved wasn't the neurons, but the electromagnetic field generated
by those neurons. So although different patterns of electromagnetic fields just similar,
yet the electromagnetic field of the neurons was always similar. So whatever was the memory
of the banana was not encoded in neurons, it's encoded in the electromagnetic field
generated by neurons. And that was a very fascinating study that I think could
be very interesting. The other big area that I think, if anyone is listening who wants to try
to make, I think it would be fascinating to make, and I think someone's going to do it, and
I think it should be done despite people having fears about it. A conscious AI,
that's got to be the way that things are going. At the moment we know that chat GBT is fantastic,
does wonderful things, it's not conscious. We still haven't got, with conventional computing power,
we haven't got any closer to consciousness. There's no inkling, there's not even this,
there's kind of consciousness that a little baby will have as soon as it's bought,
that's not no little baby is starting to go, go, go, go, go, go, and be, oh, I'm pleased to see,
do spontaneous stuff like that. So despite the fact that modern computers are now competitive
with the power of the human brain, but there's no spark of consciousness there at all.
The reason for that, of course, according to the semi-fuel theory, is that all the
conventional computers do is simulate what the non-conscious brain is doing,
calculating and computing with the wires. That's what we've said that the neuron,
the non-conscious part of our brain does, but then the conscious stuff, the information that goes
through the brain's electromagnetic field, is where consciousness is, and that's where we do
our conscious thinking, and that's where our creative thinking, that's when we come out with
great ideas. We don't come up with them, oh, you rarely, sometimes we do, a non-conscious mind seems
to be able to generate good ideas, but mostly we use our conscious mind to think and to come
up with good ideas. That is lacking in computers because engineers, they call it electrical
interference, EMF interference. When they build computers, they engineer them to not
be influenced by their own electromagnetic fields. So they've engineered out consciousness in
computers. That's happened because that's the way all electrical devices work. They don't want
them to be interfered with by their own electrical activity. There's a fascinating
experiment that was done over two decades ago. When I was first writing, yes, over two decades ago,
by a chap called Andrew Thompson, a cobb's group, a cognitive science group at the University of
Sussex in Brighton. I think one of the most fascinating experiments I've ever done,
and no one's really picked it up and gone forward with it. I started to get funding to do work on
it, but not take me forward. So Andrew Thompson did an experiment of making an AI, this was a
long time ago, more than 20 years ago, but not designing it, evolving it. So it took something
called an FPGA chip, field programmable gate array. And what these are, are a chip that can be
reconfigured. The electrical connections can be reconfigured endlessly. So you can make lots of
different configurations. So we took a number of them, let's say a hundred of them, and randomly
set them to different configurations, and then tested each one for their ability to solve a task.
And he gave it a simple task, I think it was recognizing musical note. And they're all rubbish
at it, but maybe one or two were a little bit good at it, could do just slightly better than
what would be expected from a random guess. So he took those, the best one, and then cloned it
across the entire 100, and then mutated them all a bit. Okay. And then repeated the exercise,
and then did it again and again and again for I think about a hundred generations until he got
a chip that worked. It could now recognize musical note. So he had evolved in intelligence that could
do this task rather than designing it. But it was weird. There was one feature of it that was
particularly puzzling. It didn't work all the time. Sometimes it did, sometimes it didn't.
And they worked out eventually, what was the factor? It only worked when the radio was on in the lab.
Now, why would that be? Because this was an off-piste experiment that they weren't paid to
work on. It was something they thought would be fun to do. So they did it at the end of the day
when they finished the normal work as it goes into the evening and turned the radio on to keep
themselves company. And they evolved the chip with the radio being on. So it was picking up
radio waves and using them as part of its computation. And they needed those radio waves,
EM fields, to actually do the computation. And that was one weird thing. The other weird thing
about these chips were that there were some parts of the chip. It's a complex microchip,
it's got lots of little circuits and resistors and capacitors here and there. There were some
parts of it that were necessary for the computation. If they removed those completely,
it didn't work. But they weren't connected to either the inputs or the outputs.
But how do you explain that? The only way to explain it is that they're communicating through
EM fields. So EM fields are within the chip are communicating with each other with different
parts of the circuit. And also in that experience, they actually were picking up signals from the
radio as well for the computation. So the fascinating conclusion of that is if you evolve
an electrical circuit to do a task rather than design it, you involve an EM field, sensitive
computer, one that computes through fields as well as through standard electrical,
neural, and standard electrical connections. I think that has to be built on. And we have to
build an AI that does this. And that also makes an excellent question. At what point
were our EM fields generating this sort of potential in terms of our evolutionary journey?
A very interesting question. Certainly somewhere in my guess is that the brain went through the
same process that Andrew Thompson's experiment did. At some point, it started to, you know,
communicating, first of all, the neural communication was all non-conscious. All of the
information was set down the wires. But then as more and more neurons got packed into the brain,
then it started generating and many of them were often seamlessly firing. It started to generate
its own electromagnetic field. And then those electromagnetic fields, and this has been demonstrated
experimentally, EM fields of the strength and structure of the brain's EM field. If you, we've
done experiments in our lab, if you apply them to brain tissue, that brain tissue will twitch if
you'd like. There is a feedback onto neurons. Neurons are sensitive to the brain's electromagnetic
field. Now, once that happens, then the actions driven by that brain are going to be visible
to natural selection. So natural selection acting on our brain that's now got electrical
interference will do two things. If the electrical interference is bad, is bad for us, then it will
insulate it. It will insulate those things. It will dampen down those electromagnetic fields,
will make them fire asynchronously, whatever, get rid of that interference. So part of the brain
will evolve in the direction of being non-conscious because things you don't want to interfere with
with your conscious mind, like the heart beating or walking or breathing, all of that stuff needs
to be non-interferable. But if there was some capacity that was captured by electromagnetic
field interactions between neurons, then natural selection will kick in to develop that. And my
guess that has happened certainly by the time of primates, probably somewhere in Malamanian
evolution, maybe way back in vertebrate evolution, that that gradual takeover of electromagnetic
fields in terms of driving actions was selected by natural selection as being an efficient way
of dealing with complex situations by thinking rather than just automatically responding.
And certainly primates have it, my guess is higher mammals like dogs and cats also have it,
but those are all guesses. Until we really understand and can prove what consciousness is,
it will be speculative. But somewhere, somewhere less than humans, I'm sure, has awareness and
consciousness like us, but it's a very, like us, but probably not very much like us. Can you think
of how you would think without language? That's a tricky thing, isn't it? How you would think without
language? Certainly we do, we kind of feelings and stuff, and that's what I guess animals are
thinking, they don't have language. So they think in terms of feelings, those can't be very complex
calculations and ideas that they can have, I guess they've seen food and say, oh, I'd like to be over
there and eat our food. And that's a feeling rather than in our mind where we can encapsulate
the feelings in words as well and start to compute with them by starting to think through
problems that I don't think animals have that capability. I just today, I think earlier I was
reading a paper, I can't remember by who, but it was on Orcas and apparently there's this,
they're starting to figure out a communication system that seems to be very much structured.
I'm not too sure on the details, I just briefly came across this while I was at work reading,
and that seems fascinating to me because you're right, linguistics, language, this triumph in
evolution that sort of allows us to shape our views, shape our thoughts and sort of give
this synchronicity that's required to give attention to certain things, changed the game
for humans. This seems to be one of those game changes, I think. So it would be fascinating to
do these Orcas speak their specific type of language, because then this gives them a sort
of different EM field in that sense. Yeah, I think the experiments could be done once you
commit yourself to the idea that consciousness is the brain's EM field. The key question is,
does the EM field generated by a brain influence its own actions? And that's something that can
be answered. You can start to, you can imagine experiments that will then determine, you know,
what percentage of brain activity in a particular animal is influenced by the animal's brain's EM
field. That will be a measure of consciousness if we could do that kind of measurement. I don't
know how we'll do it at the moment, but I'm sure it will be possible to do that at some stage and
find out how much animals are thinking consciously. Would you say this would be taken further with
regards to free will? At what point are they making active decisions to either go left or right in
terms of... Yeah, well that does... The other thing that semi-field theory provides is a theory of
free will, which provides it for free, because it divides the brain's activity into those which
are non-conscious and those which are conscious. We call our conscious decision making those which
aren't made by the automatic part of our brain. We call it free will when we make conscious decisions
to raise my hand or not raise my hand. All of those are driven by our conscious mind. So I think
everyone gets into a muddle with free will because of the word free. I think we have to stick to what
the second word which is will. Will is when our conscious mind is willing our actions. It's not
necessarily free because it's all determinism ultimately in science. Jumping out of determinism
is very difficult. So it's still deterministic, but our conscious actions are those that are
driven by our conscious mind rather than our normal conscious mind. And that gives you a nice
simple explanation of free will. It doesn't require anything deep or philosophical. It's just
the stuff driven by our conscious mind, the free field rather than the neurons.
Yeah, so it's sort of just a byproduct of being conscious in itself. So it just jumps along for
the ride. Yeah, yeah. Once the brain becomes conscious by having an EM field, then those EM
fields influence actions. We call that free will. I mean, if people say, you know, as I said, the word
free causes a lot of confusion here. If you think about what we believe our minds are doing when we
make purposeful actions, we don't necessarily think that without a preceding thought,
when I think, okay, I'm going to phone my brother. It may be because I've seen him put
something on the TV that's reminded of him. I wouldn't think that that idea will just pop into
my head without any precedent. And I think most of what we do, if we think hard about
every action that we do, it's perceived by some other thought. So I don't think determinism is
the problem of consciousness. It's never been. And in the past, people didn't think of it as being
non-deterministic. They talked about fate, that your actions will be driven by fate, not by,
and fate was something you had no control over. So the idea of determinant of being free will
being something or will being free, something that isn't determined by anything that's happened before
comes out of later thought in philosophy and Christianity, really had to be punished for
your sins. So that's really the source of where the idea of free will comes from.
But if we just accept that there are some thoughts that we, there's some of our actions sort of
driven by our own automatic brain, and some are driven by conscious mind, and that makes a lot
of sense. And it's predicted by the semi-feel theory. And then you don't need to worry about the
philosophy. We touched on a species going from, from let's say, amoeba to humans, and obviously
maybe vertebras have this, perhaps mammals have this. What about humans? What about when we start
as embryos working our way upward into adulthood from childhood? When does this become active?
Your guess will be as good as mine. Don't really have any insight. The key thing is that when the
brains in field influences the activities that a person is performing. And I think that's when
they become less than, more than reactions. So, you know, blinking is a reaction. If a fly flies
into your eye, you blink and you've got no control over it. Then you can see a baby, you know, might
look this way and that way, and it will do the kind of pause and look at things. And, and,
you know, it can be pretty sure there's some thinking going on in that baby's brain.
Once they start toddling around, moving around, and they laugh and stuff like that. I mean, I've
hardly any animals laugh. People say that some monkeys laugh, but so they can laugh at themselves
and they can find things amusing. All of those things are conscious things. We couldn't, we
wouldn't find anything amusing, non-consciously, for example. So, I think you have to ask the
question, what do we need our conscious mind for? And what can we do without our conscious mind?
I can do all this moving around in my hands, non-consciously. I can drive a car pretty well,
non-consciously. I mean, we know that if we have an accident and everyone does that again, and you
think, what was I doing a moment before? You probably not be able to remember, because you have
all emotions that you're doing, I'm going on non-consciously. So, there's lots of things that
we do non-consciously. They're this stuff, like, you know, like a long division, we couldn't do
non-consciously. And there's another interesting feature of consciousness, that is, you can only
do one thing at once, really. And that's strange, because you can do lots of things
non-consciously, like me waving my hands around. I could be scratching my head and moving my arms
and I could be tapping a tune. All of those things are going on. But you can't say, do a crossword
and talk to someone at the same time, could you? So, your conscious mind is, this has been
established outside of the semi-field theory. But your conscious mind is what's called a serial
computer. It can only do one thing at a time. Whereas your non-conscious mind is a parallel
computer. It can solve lots of problems and be working on lots of problems simultaneously.
So, again, you've got to account for that in the brain. Semi-field theory does it,
like that. It's no problem. There's only a single brain-em-field. Unlike the neurons,
which are distributed and there's lots of different circuits, lots of different areas,
the brain-em-field from its perspective is singular. So, it's always going to be
only one thing at a time. Anything else will start to cause interference. So, it's identifying the
things that we do consciously. And certainly, we couldn't imagine talking non-consciously. You
couldn't have a conversation with someone non-consciously. You couldn't do anything creative
non-consciously. So, all of those things that we require our conscious mind for, when we see
those happening in, say, babies or in animals, then we've got to admit that they are very likely
also conscious. John, Joe, would you see the future of semi-field theory going? What would
you like to be done in terms of other people who watch this podcast, the thousands of people
listening? Where do you want some of these future scientists to take this and perhaps?
Yes. I think we have to take the brain's-em-field seriously and find out how it functions to,
as a conduit for information transfer in the brain. No one's really done that. I mean,
there's no one's even worked out how you can calculate how the-em-field generated by the
brain will influence neural firing patterns. All of those things need to be calculated.
We need to do a lot more experiments on how neurons can communicate through electromagnetic
fields. And we're doing some of those experiments in our lab by applying external electromagnetic
fields. But it's tiny, the amount of work that's going on in this kind of area compared to what's
going on in other areas of neurobiology. And I think we need to try to use these principles
to make a conscious AI. Ultimately, I think the only way that you'll prove a theory of consciousness
is by applying it to make a conscious AI. And the kind of work that I was describing earlier
gives you a route towards doing that. There are lots of other theories which will also give
you a route towards doing that, like IIT. According to IIT, commuters are already conscious.
So to me, that's already disproved IIT. Global workspace has also been disproved because
computers can have global workspaces in the global workspace sense. And none of them have
shown any signs of consciousness. So we've got to wake up and kind of say, okay, well, let's
try to design a conscious mind based on different principles on, say, IIT or global workspace
or semi-field theory and let's see which one talks back to us. So would the goal then be to
create this artificial intelligence to match our electromagnetic field?
I think it's more than artificial intelligence. There's a conscious artificial intelligence.
There are, of course, ethical issues there. And those have to be looked at as well.
But the ethical issues will make any conscious being a person. Either way, everyone's trying
to do this. I think it's an inevitability at this point.
Yeah, there is an inevitability there. And every time we have a baby, we make another
conscious being. So why not make one? And that would be a murderer and still go around and kill
people. So we can't predict what biological conscious beings will do. But I think the
advantage of it would be that we would be able to understand consciousness better
and, you know, going way into the future, we can think about the possibility of transferring
our minds to AI that's much more durable than these bodies are sadly going to decay in
not so many decades. So, you know, there are those kind of sci-fi ways of preserving humanity.
And I think we will need them in the future. That makes it quite exciting to know that,
I mean, because it's obviously throughout the universe. I mean, we could in some way be
completely at the side of the universe if the tech becomes absolutely, if we can transfer our minds
into AI, then we could travel a lot easier to travel at sub light speeds to really explore
the universe. And then the question, of course, you mentioned the Fermi Paradox, why hasn't it,
why haven't we already met the aliens who have gone through this stage and developed the very
durable forms of themselves? I mean, if a consciousness is an electromagnetic field,
could you transmit it? You wouldn't need a spaceship. You could send the big beam
of electromagnetic information across the universe. You know, there are all sorts of
sci-fi ideas that are so exciting and interesting, bizarre and speculative that we've got to go
and find out what there is there. And if you take the idea that consciousness is an electromagnetic
field, then all sorts of interesting stuff starts to emerge from that idea. It's completely
fascinating. And it's super exciting to see so many different theories of consciousness,
people taking leaps, people doing such great work. Thanks to you. Any final words, anything you want
to say or add? Do you think there's anything about semi-feel theory that people might have
misunderstood from this conversation or things you've always wanted to point out?
I just think that thinking that our mind is an electromagnetic field, an invisible form of
energy in our brain is, I think, interesting, fascinating, and it feels better to me than
to think my mind is a lump of meat. I think if everyone starts to think of themselves as this
entity of energy that is driving their brain, of electromagnetic energy, pulling the levers
of the brain, I think it just gives a different feel of what we think we are. And it makes so
much sense and it gives us lots of speculative ideas that we can take forward in terms of thinking
about what happens after death and all that kind of stuff. We're never going to know until we get
there, but we can speculate, nevertheless. And speculation is exactly what this podcast is about,
because although I call it mind-body solution, I don't claim to have the solution. Nor do I think
we'll find it, but hopefully one day it's possible. Absolutely. You've got to have an open mind,
but not so much your brain drops out. I'd say be passionately curious but reasonably
skipping at the same time. Absolutely. You've got to be rigorous. If you want to do science,
you've got to be rigorous. You can still speculate as long as you label it as speculation and this
is we can't prove this or that, but speculation is fine because it can inspire people to study
science and inspire people to do things that lots of speculations have turned out to be true. So
it's okay to speculate as long as we know that's what they are. Just look at how much science
fiction has become reality at this point. Exactly. It's phenomenal. Exactly. Indeed.
Any final words, John Joe? Thank you so much. This has been such a... Well, thank you for talking
to me, Tevin. And yeah, anyone who wants to get in touch with me and if you've got any great ideas
to test me, feel thoroughly. And certainly, if anyone wants to make an artificial AI and
as the resources to do it, get in touch.
