Hello. Hi, Jude. How are you? I'm fine, Terv. How are you doing? I'm great. I'm so excited
for this interview. I mean, I've been absorbing so much of your information over the past
couple of this past few days. And as last week, it's been, it's been amazing. Our husband
on your side? Yeah, no, it's, it's great here. I mean, during the summer, I'm sort of getting
to a point now with the end of this month, it's been so full on that I'm really looking forward
to taking an in-breath, hopefully for a couple of months, which means I, there's a lot I'm feeling
coming in. So I really want to be open and have the space to really, you know, appreciate that and
try and sort of have a sense of what it is all about. I mean, I can imagine your work is, is
absolutely fascinating. There's so many different topics we could discuss today. I can only imagine
the inundated emails you're probably receiving from so many people who are keen to hear about your
work. Bless you. Well, it's, well, it's very busy in a really good way, because I do feel
that we're so much flowing that, you know, now is the time. And people, you know, are really
needing to have some hope that's authentic, to have some sense of an underpinning and a framing
to a sort of a healed worldview, you know, not a fragmented perspective based on the old paradigm,
but the, but the evidence-based authenticity of something that can really, you know, empower us
to come together, you know, because that's the time, isn't it? And I know for sure. I mean, I'm
great. I'm grateful that you've started already, because I mean, I love to just get started. And
at this point, I think the question I want to ask you, you talk about this cosmic hologramdude
and governed by information. I think let's explore this idea. I mean, it's been around for many years.
It's been around for decades, millennia in fact. But only now do we see a growing body of evidence
that supports this idea. And I think it would be amazing for the listeners and viewers to
listen to this evidence and for you to express yourself in a nice open platform where the listeners
and viewers can appreciate it. And just by the way, the audience are generally very technical
for this podcast. So go into as much detail as you want. Don't shy away from the physics.
Yeah, just I'm curious, this cosmic hologram and everything about it. I'm looking forward to this.
Okay, well, there's probably a couple of convergent points to be making here. But let's
let's talk about the holographic principle to start with, because that really, as you say,
it's been around for a while now. And the sort of very early intimations of it really date back
to David Bohm. So we're talking about, you know, for if not five decades, as a sense of what this
might mean. But of course, the big move forward came when researchers were looking into the
thermodynamics of black holes, and people like Gerrata Hooft and Leonard Suskin and Jacob Beckenstein
and others. And the question really was what happens to the information that's actually,
you know, making up a massive star, when at the end of its life, its nuclear fuel runs out,
and it collapses. And of course, the collapse is so gravitationally powerful that it actually
collapses within an event horizon. And therefore not even light can escape. I know there's a
nuance with that with the with Stephen Stephen Hawkins work. But essentially, you know, you're
not even like an escape. And so at the event horizon, you suddenly get this blackness
that we term a black hole. And of course, was the star collapses, a spherical star
collapses as a spherical black hole. So the idea was, well, the is infant, first of all,
is the information lost? Because if it was lost, that would blow quantum physics out the water,
literally. So there's a huge debate about firewalling and what's happening all of that. But as time has
moved on, that has more and more evidence has suggested that actually no, the evidence, the
information is actually held at the event horizon. But then the big question was, well,
what is that information? And when calculations were done that related it to the thermodynamics
of the of the black hole, it was realized that the it was that the information was proportional,
not to the spherical volume of the black hole, but the surface area of the event horizon. And
then a few light bulbs went off. Because that is very, you know, you know, reflective of what
happens when on on Earth, we create technologically create a hologram, you know, take a beam of light,
we split it into part of the beam is is focused on an object, it's bounced off the object and it
collects information in that reflected light from the object. It then combines with the initial
beam to form a two dimensional pattern of information that actually looks like an oil
slick. If you actually look at one at that point in its process, it looks like an oil slick. But
it's basically a wonderful ability of our universe to be able to transform information into waveforms
and waveforms into information through Fourier transforms. And this is absolutely critical,
not just to our human made technological holograms, but also how the holographic principle works at
the universal level, which we can come on to. But so essentially, there was a realization,
you've got this two dimensional informational pattern. And when you throw another beam of light
through it, it projects what we call a hologram. And the point of the hologram that it projects is
that the whole is in every pixelation. So if we have a high definition, pixelation, then we,
you know, all the wholeness, if it's an apple, for example, you get minuscule apples throughout
the whole hologram. But taking this now to our universe, it was realized that from black holes,
we could extend this, what became known as the holographic principle to the whole universe.
And we could go back into the evidence for this, because there is compelling evidence now at,
you know, all scales of existence and many different fields of research. But the sense
is that the appearance of our universe, the energy matter and space time appearance of our
universe is not its more fundamental nature. But the appearance arises from this deeper realm
of causation as meaningful in formation. And I always hyphenize in formation to sort of really
emphasize its meaningful nature. But that meaningful information is actually accumulated
on the boundary of what we call space time, and then holographically manifested as the
appearance of our universe. So if we go back 13.8 billion years to the very first moment
of space time, not in a big bang, we know it wasn't big. I mean, that was Fred Hall being very
facetious. But you know that the implication of a bang, it wasn't, it was incredibly fine
tuned and ordered, it began in its lowest informational state. So as time has flowed forward
ever since because of that entropic flow began its lowest informational state.
As time has flowed forward and spaces expanded, that holographic principle
allied to other laws of physics that we can come on to has meant that our universe has been able to
undertake this evolutionary arc from simplicity to ever greater levels of complexity, experience,
evolutionary potential, individuation, self awareness at those levels. Yeah, that's the
story of our universe, because that first moment, not of a big bang, but the first moment of a big
breath, an ongoing big breath. And the reason that space has to expand is because that is where
the accumulation of the emergent evolutionary information is held. So space didn't expand.
There could not be more and more and more and more information able to be expressed in its
evolutionary arc. And of course, what happens is the pixelation of the holographic boundary of our
universe as Jacob Beckenstein understood is pixelated at Planck scale. So in that sense,
our universe is the reality of our universe comes into form at the Planck scale, which is a basic
measures of space and time and energy matter as a result and temperature. And so it all hangs
together. But that pixelation scale, that Planck scale pixelation at a spatial level
is as small as to a nucleus of a hydrogen atom as a hydrogen nuclei, nucleus is to the whole
universe is 10 to the minus 35 meters, it's trillions of trillions of times more minute than
our best high definition of human holograms. And the point is that so that is the way that is
what we call the boundary of what we call space, the holographic boundary
is able to encode more and more cosmic and universal information. But the point is also
that the flow of time itself at every Planck scale temporal pixelation, which is 10 to the minus
44 seconds, get your head around that, you know, it's like every that every Planck scale time is
like adding another, you know, another movement of the whole universe's emergence. Of course,
it is so minute that it's rather like us watching a television screen, you know,
the pixelation is small to us. So we see the whole image, we don't see the pixels. Well,
this is the pixelation of the universe, our universe's reality. So that's a start anyway.
I mean, it's a brilliant start. And I love the way you articulate this because it makes it a lot
easier for people to understand when you're talking about the fact that it's obviously
expanding in the terms of the way while in the way that we used to express it. But now you're
talking about it as information rather than matter in the same way we usually discuss it.
People that I've seen a lot of people sort of mistake that for new content arising, whereas
we know that, well, according to the laws of thermodynamics, matter is neither created nor
destroyed. So you talk about entropy rather than entropy. And I do, I do. And as a child,
this is really sad. When I was about seven or eight years old, I was always asking why are the,
at the time it was mainly two laws of thermodynamics. Yeah. But there's a third law,
which is relating to a closed system where the temperature of a closed system is inversely
proportional to its entropy. So my question for a long time was why are the two laws of
thermodynamics? Because, you know, I'm a great follower of one of my great heroes, Albert Einstein,
and to paraphrase Einstein, you know, the universe as simple as it can be, but no simpler. And I add
to fulfill its evolutionary purpose. And that add-on is really key. Because what I realized
when I was writing the Cosmic Hologram, and also more laterally, the story of Gaia,
is we can actually restate those three laws of thermodynamics to what I call three laws of
info dynamics. So the first law, if we go back to the initial, you know, the initial
first of thermodynamics, began, of course, essentially with Boltzmann, saying, as you say,
the energy of a closed system cannot be destroyed or created. It can change through time,
but it cannot be created or destroyed. So if we take the science going further than Boltzmann,
and bless him, I mean, Boltzmann was doing his work before even atoms had been validated. So
he was amazing, again, pioneer and great giant, for which I feel we should all be very, very
grateful. But taking that on, we now know that energy and matter are equivalent equals MC squared.
So that says that the energy matter of a closed system cannot be created or destroyed,
just changed through time. We also, for our laws of physics to work at all, and this is
something that really still some folks struggle with, but all the evidence is really showing us
that our entire universe is a, is a content, I call containered system, because closed system
has a very specific topological perspective, and it can be confusing. So as a containered system
with this sort of holographic perspective, yeah, it means that the energy matter of our universe
from its first moment to its last, and there is also now more and more evidence that it's a finite
life cycle can neither be created nor destroyed. It can change. Now that essentially is the first
law of thermodynamics applied to our universe. But when we also appreciate that in 2012 and since
there have been experiments that have shown that information is every bit as real as any
thermodynamic measurements, so work, heat, etc. So we also now know that we can start to expand that
first law of thermodynamics to a first law of infodynamics, where information expressed as
quantized energy matter can neither be destroyed or created, but just changed through the cycle of
our universe. Now that's fine. Because that in its essence, which is quantum physics, you know,
because of course, energy matter is the domain of quantum physics in description terms.
That's all great, but it has no notion of space or time. So it's the seed, it's the framing for
how our universe can exist. But this then, the second law begins to answer my seven-year-old's
question, why do you need more than one law of thermodynamics? Because the second law,
which you say quite rightly, is about originally the notion of entropy.
So the idea is that the entropy of a closed, I'm going to say containered now just for
consistency, a containered system in, you know, it has to increase over time. And there's been a
lot of misunderstanding about this, because a lot of folks think of entropy as order to disorder.
But what Boltzmann was really talking about was the micro, the energetic microstates of such a
system. And when you think about it, I sometimes use an analogy of a pack of cards, if you take a
pack of cards out of its sort of box, they're very ordered. Yeah, you throw them up in the air and
they land all over the place and you come together and they're not in that initial order. But rather
than order to disorder, you're just increasing the number of states through time. So every time
you throw them up and they land, more and more states are formed. So it's this it's this progress
through time of increasing micro energetic states. But of course, we now also know that we can see
information. And again, we can go into a lot more detail of the evidence for this, as also being
expressed, not just as energy matter in its quantized, its quantized form, but in a complementary
way of space time, that's where the holographic perspective comes in. So that second law then
when applied to our universe can be restated and in informational terms, that first of all,
the entropy, because I'm now talking about information, whereas entropy is about energetic
microstakes, I move from entropy to entropy. It just makes it easier. But the but the equation
that describes the informational content of a container system, and the entropy, the energetic
microstates of a container system is the same equation is originally defined by Boltzmann.
So we're onto something here. And so now if we look at the second law of info dynamics,
it says that the and of course, let me go back to the first law for a second, because I want to
bring in space and time here, because this is vital. So the second law of thermodynamics says
that the entropy of a container system can only increase through time. Okay, and we're talking
about container system here. So now we move into 20th century physics, and we now know the equivalence
of space and time. So relative space and relative time, lovely that they are, have to be conjoined
as invariant space time, if we're going to have a universe that hangs together. Yeah.
And we can actually talk about the universe that hangs together and the laws of physics and all
the rest of it. So we can then expand that first second law of thermodynamics from the entropy
of a container system only increasing through space time to the entropy of a container system
as its information content only increasing in our universe's case through space and time.
So literary space expands and time moves forward, the information content gets bigger and bigger
and bigger. And that's the entropy. Okay. Third law is this is cool. I love this because this
really came to me quite late on. Because I was thinking gosh, why is there a third law? Where
does temperature come into this? But the third law of thermodynamics, as I mentioned, says that the
temperature of a container system and its entropy now entropy are inversely proportionate. So we
now know that our universe began in its highest temperature form at the Planck temperature,
10 to the 32 degrees Kelvin, and its lowest entropy. So as time exploded and space has
expanded, the temperature has dropped. That drop in temperature is allied inversely to the increase
in informational content entropy. It is so simple to have. I mean, it all hangs together in this
glorious way. And then the final cherry on top of it is essentially that I talk about meaningful
information. Yeah. So the wholeness of our universe as meaningfully informed and holographically
manifested, it's framing can be can be done. It can be brought together with these three
laws of infodynamic. The first law is the most simple statement of quantum physics. The second
is simplest form of relativity physics. But together they combine within these three laws
of infodynamics, which with a hyphen, are three laws that bring together our universe that
meaningfully exists and purposefully evolves. I think it's incredible because this is what
we've been searching for for such a long time. People have been looking for a unifying theory
of this universe. I mean, it's been the goal when you think about Stephen Hawken and I know you guys
when you were the youngest participant and you won the award, I can't remember exactly where,
but you obviously met Stephen Hawken at that time many years ago. How old were you 19 at the time?
I was 19. And my my mental was Dennis Sharma, who was Stephen's doctoral supervisor when they're
at Cambridge. And then Dennis came over to Oxford. I was doing my physics at Oxford.
And Dennis, bless him, he just took me under his wing. And after Stephen and Roger Penrose,
who got the Nobel a couple of years ago, came together to present to the postgraduate
department. And Dennis invited me along, even though I was an undergraduate, I was the youngest
person in the room. I think I was the only woman in the room. And then afterwards, Dennis said,
why? Because it was all black holes. They were like, woof, this is coming forward.
And Dennis said, why don't you enter this essay competition? And I said, sure. And he said,
why don't you write about black holes? I went, sure. So I did. And I won the prize.
Was it 25 quid? It was 25 quid. In those days, this was the early 70s. That was beer money for a
term. The reason why I bring that up is, I mean, of course, we think of Stephen Orkin,
we think of theories of everything. I mean, there's unification of quantum mechanics and
spacetime general relativity. How do we combine these concepts? But also, when you think of
Stephen Orkin, you think of black holes, event horizons. I know it's coming forward. It's coming
full circle. It's quite extraordinary. And I want to go into that. I mean, unless you want to address
the evidence first, how would you like to approach it? Would you like to go into black holes now?
First, talk about the holographic principle and how we've gathered more evidence over time
and certain experiments that have helped to solidify this.
Yeah, I'd be happy to. And I think the other thing that's really key in all of this
is that our universe exists and evolves in this way, meaningfully exists, purposefully evolves
in manifested holographically and meaningful information. But the other key aspect of it is
our universe does so as a non-locally unified entity. And this, of course, if we can take a
couple of minutes just to nail this one down, I think, this is something that came out right in
the early days of quantum physics. And many of the quantum physicists were, of course,
scientists mystics, you know, and some of them went to India and started really appreciating
that the Vedic tradition of ancient India, the Rishis, the Bhagavad Gita, the Upanishads,
were basically telling the same story that they were realising. And what became clear
is that for quantum physics, quantum mechanics to work at all, essentially our universe had to be
non-locally unified in its entirety. And of course, you know, Bell came out with his, you know,
sometimes called a theory, sometimes called an inequality. But nonetheless, it was a test bed
for this. And at the time, it was a theoretical perspective. And it was only many, many decades
afterwards, you know, we're talking 70s, 80s onwards, that researchers were able to start
to experimentally test this at greater than quantum scales, because it was clear it was happening at
a quantum scale, but was it able to be expanded to a universal level? So you had researchers
coming along and progressively increasing the scale well beyond any quantum levels to show
entanglement. And in 2017, then 2018, a group of, I think, it might have been four or five
universities, one of which I think the lead was MIT. And what they were able to do was
non-locally entangle photons of light in their laboratory, with starlight from 600 light years
away, but also triggered by light from a quasar, a very active galactic center,
two quasars actually, one I think was 7.8 billion, the other was 12.2 billion light years away.
And that was a triggering that actually created a level of entanglement that exceeded the inequality
test, you know, the thresholds of Bell. But beyond that, in late last year, the Nobel Prize for
Physics were given to three researchers who've been working on this for decades. Anton Zellinga,
who was also part of that MIT collaboration, Alan Aspect and John Clouser. And the Nobel Prize is
only given for settled physics. I often say Einstein didn't get it for relativity, because it was seen
as being quite contentious. He got it for the photoelectric effect. So the fact that we have now
the Nobel, we've got this experimentation at cosmological scales.
You know, we have all of the theoretical framing now to support this and the evidence across many
fields of research that also play into this. You know, it's an amazing and exciting time,
not just for scientists, because as we'll go on, I'm sure, to explore, this is important, this is
vital for everyone. A lot of implications. There's so many practical implications.
Exactly. I mean, when you think about it, as you said, Nobel Prizes are only given to settled
science. And I mean, he got it for the photoelectric effect. He didn't get it for what he's best known
for. And that's pretty incredible, because at the time, of course, I mean, he called it spooky
action at a distance. And we know that he wasn't comfortable with this concept. I mean,
he would have been now because I'm convinced he would have been now because, of course,
you know, he was he and the quantum physicists were working decades before the neutron
was discovered. I mean, let alone the hologram, let alone the cosmological understanding we have,
let alone, you know, the sort of leaps and bounds we've had to understand
the significance, the fundamental significance of information and meaningful information,
which means, of course, the slippery slope. Yes, please, of consciousness. You know,
we have to bring this front and center. Of course, what he did feel very uncomfortable about,
as did Planck and others, is that whereas quantum physics and what they're all come
really gave us the clues that mind and consciousness aren't something we have,
they're literally what we in the whole world are, that was literally pushed to the side.
And so it's taken almost another century and an inability with the old framing to reconcile
quantum physics and relativity physics, because they're at the appearance level of our universe
of energy matter space time, we've needed to understand this deeper level of causation,
which is meaningfully informationally driven, and then being able to show how information
expresses itself in these complementary ways, as the appearance of energy matter quantized energy
matter and entropic space time brought in the holographic principle, you know, I think he'd
be jumping up and down and going, yeah, because he was one of the folks who was saying, you know,
mind and consciousness are what we are, what the whole world is.
I mean, so Jude, I mean, for the listeners and the viewers, I mean,
I was introduced to work by Don Hoffman, and he told me it would be a very fascinating
conversation, and I clearly already is. But I remember when Don and I were talking about it,
he was telling me about your work, and I find it very intriguing, because I mean, Don has such
amazing work being done. They're currently doing the new test to experiment whether physics arises
from consciousness, and I think they just released it yesterday, I think it was, yeah, 26th of June.
So when you talk about consciousness, from an idealism perspective, because this is fundamentally
what the view entails from a philosophical perspective, it's an idealist view of consciousness.
Consciousness is what we are, and everything that there is technically in a sense. How do you work
around this concept of consciousness? How do you define it? How do you explain it to people?
Because obviously, this podcast is called Mind Body Problem, I mean, Mind Body Solution for a reason.
Absolutely. Well, you know, the very terminology, what's consciousness, you know, you'll get
five answers from four people. And I have a very broad church of consciousness. And, you know,
a friend of mine, Professor Max Velmans, differentiates mind and consciousness and
talks about consciousness as a level of awareness. Whereas mind is fundamental, you know, we can
talk about mind as being cosmic mind as Einstein would have called it, the ground of all being,
you know, and so in that regard, our universe is mindful. And, you know, the way I'm working with
this, and my next book will dive deeper into the, you know, the ground of all being and the rest of
it. But both for the cosmic hologram and for the story of Gaia, I really wanted to show how
what I would also refer to as cosmic mind, an eternal and infinite mind, has thoughts,
a thought, thoughts, that, you know, we turn our universe, which is very much,
you know, pervading universal wisdom teachings. And in my own explorations, you know, as a
noetic experiencer all my life is very much the way I've experienced realities. But by
being able to articulate it is as cosmic consciousness, cosmic mind,
expressing itself as the appearance of our universe through the articulation and digitized
meaningful information. You know, I mean, we're almost predisposed to this now because our
communications technologies, you know, take the image of me, gather all the information,
the meaningful information about me, translate it into digitized ones and zeros,
squirt it down a cable of a satellite to your computer, you know, recombine it as an image,
does the same vice versa. You know, this goes back to the incredible attributes of Fourier
transforms, the way our universe can, you know, make this beautiful play of information,
waveforms, it all hangs together. But it hangs together with the evidence showing that it has
innate meaning. This is the key, I think is this is not random data, just as our conversation. Well,
I don't know, some people may say it's random data, but hopefully our conversation is meaningful.
But of course, the meaningful nature of our universe is not dependent in any way on human
sentience. It's a universe that is itself living in that sense, mindful, informational,
where everything in it from, you know, atoms and molecules to planets and plants and people
have a part of that meaning and essential purpose. So it's a broad church,
but it's it's it's innately the same fundamental stuff, the nature of reality.
Jude, how what are your thoughts on Don's work?
I well, when I first got it, it was so lovely because Don and I met at the Science and Nonduality
Conference in in California before the pandemic, and had lunch together and really enjoyed being
together and have had a number of conversations since and I love his work. He's coming I'm coming
from this primarily as a cosmologist, and as an evolutionary biologist and a systems person,
and you could argue a philosopher, but many, many different hats. And because I'm so curious,
I like to join the dots and see where they lead. Don comes from it more from human consciousness
and how our human consciousness relates to this wider consciousness. And his book is very provocative
because of course, from the human consciousness perspective, our senses are not direct in direct
touch points with universal consciousness. We moderate, we mitigate.
Yeah, our sense of self through a number of ways of forming meaning. But when we met,
I realized that he wasn't in any way, decrying or not acknowledging universal
reality. He was only really exploring the ways in which we relate to that larger
understanding of reality. So, you know, as microcosmic co creators, as I call us,
of our universal living intelligence, he and I are very close. So, you know, I mean, we agree
very much. What I really love as well is he's working with a number of quantum physicists
in a sort of more specified way of how this works. But what I would say is the work that I've done
offers us the underpinning and framing through these three laws of infodynamics.
And I'm happy to sort of say to Don and the other guys, I'm really excited about what you're going
to come forward in this, because it's going to come, I just feel it's all convergent. It's all
the same direction of travel. I'm glad you brought up quite a quantum physicist, because I mean,
another theory of consciousness that circulates is that of penrose. When you think of Stuart
Hammerhoff and penrose, they talk about quantum consciousness and the microcubules of cells.
Your thoughts on that? Well, I'll write about this a little bit in,
well, I'll write about quantum biology in the story of Gaia, because whereas the cosmic hologram
was bringing the evidence and this underpinning and framing of these laws of infodynamics and the
cosmology and all the rest of it, that was back in 2017 in last year with the story of Gaia.
I wanted to tell the evolutionary story, not just of our planetary home, but our entire universe,
because the story of our universe, as my friend Brian Schwimm and I both talk about, is a story of
us. The hydrogen in our bodies is as old as the universe. We're not just stardust, even though we
are. We go back way back. We're all 13.8 billion years old. We're all 13.8 billion years old.
So in that sense, the evolutionary story is extraordinary. And what you see throughout
it and really came to me ever more strongly as I wrote the book or the book wrote me, I feel,
is a sense of evolutionary purpose. Because what you have all the way through is this almost
preparatory processes that things were in place that could then be assembled when the
conditions were right. If we go back before that our planetary home came into being about
five billion years ago, around five and a half billion years ago, the harbingers and the nutrients
that would create our sun and our planetary system, were all there gestating in interstellar
clouds of gas and dust, including complex molecules. And we start to get the sense of that quantized
nature of potential playing out there. Well, even within those complex molecules, we were starting
to get enzymes coming into being. And enzymes are vital to the speed in which proteins come
together and build biological organisms. Because the enzyme speed, those processes are
dramatically without in themselves changing. And the view very much is that that involves
quantum tunneling. And so when Stuart and Roger have been bringing these ideas of microtubules
forward, I don't think it's the most fundamental aspect of how this is playing out. But I think
it's an important contribution to the conversation. And other people such as Jim and Khalili has also
written on quantum biology. There is a view that some of them have expressed that photosynthesis
is quantized in nature. I personally haven't seen the evidence that's convinced me of that.
I think there are other processes that are at play that don't actually need that aspect.
But there are others where, as I say, in zomatic action and others, there are other ways in which
the DNA, double helix is formed and molecules such as posna molecules, and the way that that works,
that can really hold memory for a very long time, likely because of quantum resonance.
So I write about all of this in the story of Guy because it's very important. And it's very much
an emergent field of study. I'll definitely be putting links to your books below and to the
website, of course. I remember while reading, I was thinking to myself, there were two specific
experiments I wanted to ask you about while reading. It came to my mind immediately and I
thought of the observer effect and the double slit experiment. And I wanted to just know
your general thoughts on that. So I have one more question. But I think before I get to the second
one, just what are your general views on that? Because when I interviewed Don, I remember talking
about when we talk about consciousness being fundamental and the entirety of our reality.
And I labelled at the podcast a new experiment to test whether consciousness,
whether physics arises from consciousness, and someone commented saying,
have you ever heard of the observer effect as a joke? So I think with you, let's address that,
how that supports this. I really want to, though, expand this perception that the universe is the
universe, whether we're here or not. Yes. Yes, I think that's really important because so much
perspectives about consciousness is human centred. And I'm not suggesting that's problematic. I'm
saying it's both and. Yes. And the way that we as microcosms of our universe as macrocosmic
consciousness, sentience, livingness, mind, you know, because I think we can get caught up in
the languaging a little bit. And I want to sort of get a more so generic sense of this.
But yes, so going back to remind me, I think I'm losing the thread here. So with when we serve
observer effect, yeah, okay. The point is, we're embedded within a conscious universe.
There cannot not be an observer effect, because we're both observer and observed,
we are naturally embodied, we're inseparable. We are literally inseparable. But I think the
important point there is that the unity and unified nature of non locally unified nature
of our universe has two aspects. First of all, it means that although our universe exists and
evolves as a non locally unified entity, within space time, light is the cosmic speed cop signals
cannot go fast on the speed of light within space time, which means that we can have this journey
of 13.8 billion years, we can have a flow of time, we can have a causality. And this is important
when we start to explore super normal phenomena. Because although this both and
enable super, you know, naturalize a super normal phenomena naturalizes our intuitive
insights naturalize the synchronicities. It's a both and so there is this causality playing
through. So, you know, I was in a panel with Dean Raiden and the ions folks a couple of days ago.
And Don was being given a prize there, which is wonderful for his work. But essentially,
because it's it's it's a both and we are both observer and observed, we are inseparable,
but that unity is differentiated. It's unity and diversity, it's unit in radical diversity.
So yes, we're always we're informational beings within an informational universe,
whether we know it or not, we're in continuous dialogue, multi log. Yes, with all around us,
where we are, you know, we talk a whole world view of act local feel global think cosmic,
because we are all and we are uniquely our universe is breathing through us.
Each of us uniquely. So let's apply this this law of infodynamics, let's apply
infodynamics to different systems so people can get a better understanding of this. So let's
think of it from maybe let's take into account a biological scale or something like DNA, and apply
to something like human civilization, take it to economics, and maybe continue from there,
just maybe start off from a from an atomic scale, perhaps, and then let's work our way up.
Okay, let's do that, because what we're finding is that the informational patterns,
the relational dynamic informational patterns, many of whom we call fractals, not all the
relationships are a fractal per se, we have other relationships that we can come to,
for example, power laws, but we find the fractal relationships which are essentially geometric.
When Beckenstein was doing the the holographic work on information, and the pixelation at the
boundary of what we call space time, that plank scale pixelation on that two dimensional
boundary of space time is triangular. Okay, because then it can tile without a break.
It's the ideal geometry that doesn't overlap. So within each plank scale. Yes, pixelation
there is essentially one bit of information, and it's at such a minute level that when we scale
it up to atoms or quarks or neutrinos or and beyond, it has a lot of information already
at that accumulated scale. But what we find is that, for example, when an element is going
through a phase transition, for example, between an insulator and a metal, it's electrons cluster
fractally. Yeah, so from that scale, we start into because of course, the plank scale is much
tiny, that pixelation scale is much tiny. So we're out of atomic scale. We also find fractals
running through from that scale upwards. So for example, on a planetary scale, clouds are fractal,
in that sense, weather patterns are fractally based, river systems are fractal. But the key
thing here, and let me just go up to cosmic scale, and then I want to come back, because there's a
key point here, we find that at a planetary and a planetary scale, but also when we look at a solar
system scale, the solar wind is fractal. Some of the ways in which the resonances of planetary orbits
and planetary the planetary system as a whole have fractal relationships. We go into the galaxy,
we see fractal patterns here, we go to cluster galaxies, we see fractal patterns.
And in 2017, Afshadi and Skanderis and a group of folks looked at the cosmic microwave background,
which is, as you know, is the relic radiation left over from what's often called the recombination
era, around 380,000 years after the beginning of the big breath, where space had expanded enough
and temperature cooled down enough to become transparent, because before that,
space was transparent to acoustic signaling, but not to light. When that happened, again,
there was like a phase transition, where space became transparent, and therefore there was a
relic radiation that filled the whole of space at that time. And because the temperature that was
that was in play at that time, we think that it would have had an orange glow,
which I quite like the idea of really. Anyway, that filled the whole of space. As space has
continued to expand ever since, that those wavelengths have sort of lengthened to microwave
microwaves now. And so we call it the cosmic microwave background, and it fills the whole of
space. In 2017, an analysis from the W map, the Wilkinson microwave anisotropy probe map,
was able to show fractal patterns in the minute temperature differences throughout the whole
of the cosmic microwave background. So we have fractals all the way up and all the way back.
But going back to us, we find that the same fractal patterns that underpin, for example,
complex systems such as ecosystems, is the same fractal patterns that underpin the nodes
and the networking points of the internet. Yeah, we find, for example, moving beyond fractals.
So let's look at power laws. Let's look at the incidence, for example, of earthquakes.
We know that when we plot the incidence of earthquakes against the destructive power
on a logarithmic scale, the Richter scale, that they form a straight line. So in other
words, there's no such thing as an average earthquake. If you apply all the earthquakes big
to small on that, you know, that frequency, and then logarithmic destruction, they form a straight
line. It's called a power law, which says there's only one relationship for all of them, that an
earthquake that is twice as powerful logarithmically is four times less frequent. That's it. So there's
no such thing as an average, no Gaussian curve there. But at the end of the Second World War,
a researcher called Lewis Richardson, and then subsequently to that, a researcher at Miami
University, a gentleman whose surname is Johnson, but whose first name eludes me,
looked at human conflicts at all scales and measured them in terms of their frequency against
their destructive power in terms of human fatalities, and found the same relationship.
Slightly different pitch, but nonetheless the same relationship as for earthquakes.
Because what we're realizing, going back to what we're saying throughout this,
is the appearance of our universe emerges from deeper levels of meaningfully information, and
that applies to our human behaviors, our human consciousness, as well as universal consciousness
and planetary sentience, that brings forward these same relationships at all scales. But the
key here is if we have the collective awareness to make choices of conflict, then we can evolve
our collective awareness to make choices of peace. And this is, I think, one of the most
fundamental conversations of our time, because this is what this new understanding and this,
you know, this unitive narrative that can, you know, there's an underpin and framed by the evidence,
but also can underpin and frame our choices and their behaviors.
Exactly. And that's why, I mean, when I labeled this podcast, I said that this podcast
explores the nature of reality, consciousness, free will, but morality is a big part of it,
because whatever belief you have regarding the nature of reality or consciousness will determine
how you perceive your ethics, your morals, your values. And with your view, I see such a deep,
caring, healing nature towards it all. And I am definitely going to touch on these
practical implications. But before we do, I just want to definitely make sure that we
touch on as much of this, the science behind what you're talking about, because it's so amazing,
it's so intriguing. One thing I did want to touch on before that was, I mean, there was the big breath,
it all started, slow outbreath, you often talk about Vedic traditions and the Brahman and how
they started this concept. What happens as we go along all the way to the end?
Well, the evidence we've got now is suggesting that it's a continued outbreath.
For a long time, there was, is it going to be, is it going to do that? Or is it going to bounce
back? Or what's going to happen? And we find that the acceleration, very surprisingly for a lot of
people, that the expansion of our universe began to accelerate again, about five billion years ago.
So it started with an acceleration, the first time, you know, the first epoch of the big breath,
it then slowed down because the balance of gravity and dark energy and all the rest of it,
one out, one in. But then a space that expanded to the point of about five billion years ago,
the acceleration began again. And it looks as though that there's nothing to, there's no
way in which that that is likely to stop. And when I bring the third law of infodynamics
into the piece, of course, the temperature continues to drop, as the information continues
to increase, you can see that there's a sort of a cycle here. Because the temperature of our
universe, I said, began at the Planck scale at the first moment of the big breath, 10 to the 32 k,
it's now down at just over 2.7 k. So we're looking to see that this, this life cycle,
rather like a bubble, yeah, comes to a completion at some point. The other thing is there was some
really good work done by I think Dennis Sabral, a few years ago that I referenced in the Cosmic
Hologram, showing that the sort of the, the, the, the, the epochs of stellar formation,
and a big, big acceleration about nine billion years ago, then another, but progressively less
and less fewer and fewer, because the hydrogen to create new stars is being used up. So the view
is that probably something like 98% of all stars that could form have already formed. Many of them
have come to the end of their lives. And again, you know, as I write in the story of Guy, there's
this incredible evolutionary arc, you know, of massive stars at the beginning that formed black
holes and supermassive black holes and galaxies. And then, you know, it's just a beautiful, beautiful
journey, journey forward. So my perspective, again, with the evidence, you know, I'll follow,
I hopefully follow the evidence wherever it leads, but this is where it seems to be leading us,
that our universe is finite in form. It's a, it's a great thought form, but a finite thought form,
in that sense, in the mind of the cosmos. And we're probably closer to the end
than we are to the beginning in that regard. And I mean, it does work. So a lot of people seem to,
well, from what I've gathered, seem to think that you're not, you're talking about something
completely different, but you're not, you're actually taking the current work we have, and
you're framing it in a different perspective. And I think that's important to note is that it's not
that you're making new claims in a sense. You're more just changing it and adjusting it in a way
that completely shifts mindsets altogether. How do you feel this has impacted the scientific
community? Because you know how scientists can be. I'm pretty sure you've been, because anytime
someone talks about anything that goes outside of the status quo in science, you complete,
you're labeled as so many different things that how has it been on your receiving end?
It's been extraordinary, actually. It's been rather wonderful because in a way, because as you
say, I'm actually working with the evidence and I'm working with the evidence of tens of thousands
of researchers. I guess what I can bring is an ability to see patterns and an ability to join
up the dots, because so many scientists are working in this incredibly depth of work, but
they're not seeing what so-and-so is doing or so-and-so is doing in a different field of study.
And what I can do because of my breadth of interests is I can see the bigger picture
of what it's all coming with and the direction of travel. And also as a cosmologist,
we're getting folks like Professor Brian Cox, who wrote a book with Jeff Forshaw last autumn,
last fall, basically on black holes, but coming at the end of that book to say more and more it's
looking that the appearance of our universe is not its deeper reality. I don't know what that means,
he says. But that's the point that cosmologists are coming to, because that is where the evidence
is leading us. Now, you're right, I think, you know, I'm also a student of the history of science.
And I can see how certainly over the last, certainly until the 20th century, there was a
perspective very much of this separation of science and spirituality. And I can absolutely,
you know, I've studied all the reasons for this and get it. But we're coming full circle or full
spiral now, because the leading edge discoveries, and they really are only in the last few years,
the holographic principle, the understanding of information, you know, my, my redefinition of
the laws of thermodynamics to infodynamics, it's simple. Anybody could have come up with that.
The reason I did it is because I saw it with new eyes, as you say, and I wasn't caught with the old
perspective. And so in that sense, and that's what Marcel Proust of course said,
the journey of discovery is not discovering new lands, it's seeing with new eyes. And so I think
it almost is a situation where once somebody is willing to see with new eyes, it all fits into
place. And it's not in any way dishonoring everything that's come before. We've needed to
take every step it seems to me. So I'm not into blame and shame on any way. But we do have a paradigm
that's actually not even 20th century science. It's 19th century science of a mechanical,
mechanistic, materialistic, separatist universe. And that has been turned on its head. And when
we bring consciousness in, it's not, it's, it's, how can I put it, it's for all faiths and non,
it's human. It's who are we, it's remembering who are we, and not sort of making any labels
or anything else. But this is where the evidence is inviting us to remember.
Jude, before I go on to the next portion, where I'm going to talk about the practical
implications as well as the Eastern philosophical aspects of how you came to your views at some
point. The last thing I want to ask you is, is there anything you want to clarify in terms of
the way you approach infodynamics, cosmic hologram, all of this, anything that you feel has always been
misunderstood, that you've been itching to kind of just get out there and let people know this is
actually what I meant? Not misunderstood. But I feel that there's still a misperception of people
who work with entropy. And seeing it as this order to disorder I was mentioning earlier,
rather than as initially an increase in energetic microstates and now an increase in
informational content and now an information, an increase in meaningful informational content
is this perspective that came through with people like David Bowman, Prigga Joan, and others,
realizing that in what's called a dissipative system, such as our planet and a person, that
there seems to be a sort of a switch around of entropy. So entropy, it's not order to disorder,
it's somehow disorders become order. And so what I've been able to share and more and more people
are now getting it, is it's the old concept or the misperceived concept of entropy as order to
disorder, rather than from increased energetic states and now information. Because then what you
realize in dissipative systems, let's talk about our planetary home, a dissipative system,
actually, energy comes in, energy flows through, what's not needed to support the homeostasis of
that system is then dissipated. If you think of that as information coming in expresses energy,
information therefore used as a coherence to, you know, to support the coherence of that system
and what is not utilized gets dissipated. So again, that then correlates with this perception,
both of, both of the meaningful information, not just as underpinning, but the very stuff
of that system, that that throughput enables its coherence through its lifetime, whether it's a
human lifetime or a planetary lifetime. But also it shows that then going back to that third law,
that temperature difference is a measure of the entropic potential.
Yeah. So that so that in a planetary, you know, if we have a planet where that
dissipative process stops, the temperature difference between that planet and ambient space will
will will reduce, reduce, reduce, reduce. Yeah. When we come to the end of our life cycle,
our temperature when we die, when our physical bodies die, our temperature then correlates with
our ambience. So the ability by maintaining a temperature difference in a dissipative system
is a measure of its continuing entropic potential. I see. Yeah. Yeah, I get that.
That's the that's the one thing that I think people have quite a lot of because, you know,
terms like neg entropy and syntropy and all sorts of stuff's come in, they're not needed.
When you understand it in these terms, you can appreciate rather like the epicycles
of medieval astronomy, pre Copernican astronomy, you don't need it. And what you get is a much
simpler understanding when you're seeing it with new eyes. So you know, the Copernican,
putting soul in the middle of our solar system, suddenly you don't need epicycles and all that
complications. And you don't need the complications of neg entropy and syntropy, which of themselves,
you know, violate this universal continuing increase in entropy.
I think I think it's very apparent. I mean, if you if you have a hammer, you look for nails
and science, I mean, it's very objective. So you're constantly looking from an objective
standpoint. I mean, it's very difficult to get a step out of that. And I know I'm the same in
that regard, because when I started this podcast, my views and consciousness were very fixed and
firm. And the more it's gone on, the more it's continuously changed and non stop. I mean,
at this point, I question reality all the time. But it's something I've always done.
But I mean, that fixed belief is no longer there. It's something that's open to
exploring these new ideas. I don't think that the child in me would have explored concepts
like this with so much just openness. I love it. I love it. I mean, I love it.
Yeah, me too. I mean, it's all it's all a work in progress. It's all a work in progress. I mean,
for me, what's exciting is having had my first direct experience of, of, you know,
multi dimensional realities, you know, no ethic experiences from the edge of fall.
I've, I've also it's both and I've also really, really, really valued, you know, science as a
process, as long as this Francis Bacon, who is the father of the empirical method, you know,
follow the evidence wherever it leads. And I do feel he's been given a quite a bad rap,
which I would disagree with. Because as a friend of mine, another friend of mine,
Peter Dawkins, who's a wonderful Baconian scholar, you really has guided, you know,
like you, you've been my guidance with this is that, you know, 400 years ago,
when Bacon in 1623, when they published Day Augmentum Sientarium, which was the beginning
of the empirical method, you know, Bacon's philosophical, deeply philosophical perspectives,
it seems to me, were that it wasn't going to peripheralize the divine as he would have called
it, but to reveal the divine through its empiricism. Because of course, he was living in a time of
Queen Elizabeth II, and then James, the first of England, Sixth of Scotland, where superstition,
you know, ruled the, ruled the waves in that sense, and the church's authority. So it's almost
come this full journey now, where leading edge science is, is revealing that universality and
those wisdom teachings and the wholeness and the divinity within everything. Exactly. And I think
just to put it all together, because now, as we reached the end, well, the end of this podcast,
at least for now, maybe we'll do around too. But let's talk about, I mean, unity and non-locality
is the basis of all of this. And at some point, it all comes together for us to understand and
realize that everything is interconnected. There is no separation. This is the sort of
separating things needs to slowly dissipate. And this does have practical implications.
I think as we get into that, let's start from your East, the Eastern philosophy that's inspired
this and taken because we've spoken a lot about Western science at this point. And I'm curious
for you to apply the Eastern philosophy into how we should approach the practical and ethical
implications moving forward with this theory. Yeah, absolutely. Well, first of all, as you
said, I mean, you know, our worldview is our mindset, our narrative, our underpinning narrative
is the way we see the world and therefore the choices we make. And we've had a Western secular
worldview of, as I say, based on 19th century science. And all the structures that came from
that, because in the 19th century, with that mechanistic, separatist, materialistic perspective,
you know, our structures became hierarchical. You know, whether it's our education, whether it's
our organizations, our governance or whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever. And now that's
completely been turned on its head and converging much more with universal wisdom teachings and
very much those of the Eastern traditions and the indigenous traditions. And so, you know,
for example, the Chinese, Yi Qing talks about in the beginning is the one not was is the one
becomes to the two becomes three and from the three 10,000 things are born, you know, the yin yang
symbol. And we haven't even touched on the feminine masculine and all of that. But that's so important.
But you know, the yin yang symbol has, you know, the yang with the yin coming out and the yin with
the yang coming out. But the wave in that symbol is often not mentioned. But the wave is that
creativity of what this all means. And yeah, I talk a lot about trinities, philosophically
trinities, you know, the masculine, the feminine and the child. And in that resolution, and that's
again seen through many, many traditions. We talk about the Vedic tradition, as we have before,
Indra's net. You know, the tradition talks of Indra's net as a analogy of the reality where every
reality made up of beautiful gems of many, many different colors and all different facets and
each facet reflecting others and linked by golden threads. Well, that is a millennial old description
in my perspective of the cosmic holograms. In South Africa, we, because I'm Indian of Hindu
origin and descent. And but I was born and raised in South Africa. And the South African culture,
there's this word, it's called Ubuntu. I love that word. I love that. I am because you are.
And that's exactly what she's saying. Yeah, it's exactly that. And Ubuntu is so beautifully
inviting in. Because the other thing is that I love about Ubuntu, many things I love about Ubuntu.
But I talk about, you know, often we're now describing unity and diversity. But for a number
of years now, I've said, let's take that a step further, beyond even unity in inclusion to unity
in belonging. Because this is showing us that we all belong. And that is the very heart of Ubuntu.
Ubuntu is so fundamental because you don't have to be invited into that relationship.
You are inherently fundamentally part of that relationship. And this is what we're discovering.
And so altogether, I mean, this unification, this, tell me about the overall goal for us as a society.
How would you like this infodynamics and everything you've spoken about today to be applied somehow
into it all? Well, again, these things, have you ever heard of somebody called Mr. Magoo?
He's very much in America. Yeah. And he always backs into things and then looks around and goes,
oh, that's the story of my life, I think. So a couple of years ago, with all of this and writing
the Cosmic Hologram at the time, and then the story of Gary, sorry, writing the story of Gary
at the time Cosmic Hologram would come out. I came together with a number of change makers
and folks who'd been involved with the United Nations for decades, and involved with the
Sustainable Development Goals and what's called Agenda 2030. And we're getting more and more
frustrated because this realization that they were coming not necessarily from the people who were
trying to negotiate them, but certainly the way they were articulated and then
led out very much from this siloed perspective, 17 goals and lots of measurements, but the goals
themselves and the realization from these 150 or so change makers that they could never be
implemented with that sort of mindset. I mean, Einstein said, you can't solve a problem from
the same mindset that created it. Well, we have a problem because of an illusion of separation,
a dis-ease of separation, we cannot solve it from that same mindset. So all that I'm sharing and all
the evidence is pointing to is overturning that perspective and bringing in this realization
and understanding of wholeness. So what these folks were really wanting to say is how can,
because they were coming from this perspective, how can we bring this perspective of wholeness
into the SDGs and Agenda 2030? And one of the things that came forward was the need for a narrative
that could share this, because we're a narrative species, we're storytelling species, you know,
we sat round from the very beginning sharing stories and sharing perspectives, who we are
and what are we? Who are we in the world? Where do we come from? Who are we? Where are we going?
And in that sense, making meaning of our existence. So we now have the evidence
that is converging, the scientific evidence that's converging with universal wisdom teachings
to offer us a unitive narrative, to underpin and frame us to be able to come together and serve
potentiality for transformational change. So I got involved with this group of folks and I put my
hand up and volunteered. That's my mum. My mum always said, volunteer, volunteer. You may not
know what you're volunteering for, but volunteer. So I did and I was one of the co-authors of a
unitive narrative, that these folks took on board and adopted and the evolutionary leader
circle of whom I remember also adopted and others. But what that's now doing that came forward
just over a year ago, what that's done in the meantime, is that late last year, the United
Nations for the first time in its 70 year history, adopted a group of NGOs and organizations founded
on the unitive narrative, this unitive narrative. And so this unitive cluster now has a voice, has
voices in all of the things that United Nations are doing. But that's just one thing, because the
other thing it's now underpinning is bringing together folks who are really wanting to transform
economics and finance system from a unitive perspective. Folks who will look at regenerative
economics, doughnut economics, living systems economics, but all of it underpinned and framed
by unitive narrative that then deepens it still further into unitive principles that serves
the health, the whole being of our planetary home and our people.
Unitive education. How do we share this story with folks of all ages and in so many different ways?
And how do we share this in ways through arts and culture? Because this is what this is about.
This is the many, many stories that can arise and be shared from this underpinning of a unitive
narrative. So that's what I'm doing pretty much most of my time now and sharing this
understanding, but it's vital that it moves beyond understanding. It has to be experienced
to be embodied. Well, I hope this podcast helps to get that message out, Jude. I know you're
time-sensitive and we've sort of reached the end of this conversation, but I just want to say thank
you so much. And to quote, I mean, your work and obviously Ubuntu, I am a Cosmic Co-creator because
you are a Cosmic Co-creator and thank you so much for being part of this creation with me and part
of this experience. Bless you, Tev. And it's folks like you. I mean, I've done so many podcasts now
and I'm in awe of each and every one of you as hosts because your passion, your clarity, your
service is so, so important because the folks you will reach in their own way will share this
in their own way. We don't know where this ripples, but we know it does because as you say,
Ubuntu, we are inseparable. We are each unique and we are inseparable. You know,
this offers us authentic hope. This, I hope, empowers us and inspires us. And this for me seems
that this is the invitation of the universe and our planetary home guy. You know, they're saying,
come on, items to this adventure. This has to be one of the most inspirational. Well,
I'm feeling well-inspired. One of the most inspirational talks I've had so far.
I'm liking it so far because there may be others who are even more inspirational to come.
Yeah, I've enjoyed it tremendously. Thank you so much, Jude. I wish you all the best and yeah,
I'm looking forward to chatting to you again sometime. I'd love that, Tev. Anytime. I'd love
that so much. Take care, Jude. And yeah, we'll keep you in touch. I'm looking forward to this
hearing. Cheers. Thanks.
