No, if I had to ask you to give me a philosophical history of the mind-body problem, what story
would you tell me?
This has a long history back to the classical era, but in the modern period, the basic mind-body
problem that has entered and persisted in modern philosophy is basically the Cartesian
formula.
The Cartesian formula was based on the fundamental principle that initiated modern science, so
called mechanical philosophy, philosophy of course, meant science.
So Galileo and his contemporaries sharply reacted against the neo-scholastic reigning
doctrine's version of Aristotelianism, which were based on what they called occult properties.
So two things, two material bodies attract each other because they have sympathies, an
object move because of its internal energy agency, it moves to the place where it belongs.
It's a natural place.
The natural place of a material object is the earth, and so it falls, and other occult
properties of this kind.
They wanted actual explanations, and the explanations had to be, assume, had to show that the world
was intelligible, and there was a criterion for intelligibility, namely, could what you
describe be constructed by a skilled artisan, that's the mechanical philosophy.
I have to remember that at this time, Europe was flooded with complex intricate artifacts
made by skilled artisans, which model humans, played puppeteers, Gordon's inversa, you
know, seemed semi-human.
In fact, it was kind of like today, mostly misleading.
The idea was a true explanation would be a mechanical model, that's the mechanical philosophy.
Descartes, it was believed by essentially everyone, Galileo, Descartes, Isaac Newton,
Leibniz, Christian Huygens, it was simply the reigning doctrine of modern science.
Descartes tried to work it out.
He thought he had shown that there is a mechanical explanation for all phenomena of the world,
with one exception, the human mind.
He said the human mind has properties that cannot be accommodated by a mechanical object.
One of them, properties incidentally was language, said the capacity of humans to create new
expressions, indefinitely expressing new thoughts, and to do so in ways that are appropriate
to situations, but not caused by them, is a property that goes beyond the capacity of
mechanism.
Well, that was the, so therefore, serious scientist, he established a new principle,
race cogitance, and his metaphysics, a substance, thinking substance, and that's in addition
to race extensa, matter.
So there are two substances, matter and mind, and then of course he seek to link them and
he argued that there's maybe a connection through the pineal gland, which is not duplicated
in the brain, just one place.
So that's basically the classical mind-body problem, didn't last very long.
Newton showed much to his distress that there are no bodies.
One of the two elements of the picture disappeared, contrary to what's claimed by many modern
philosophers, Gilbert Ryle and others, that Newton didn't exercise the ghost in the machine.
He exercised the machine, the ghost was left intact.
He showed there are no bodies in the sense of the mechanical philosophy.
And Newton regarded this as a total absurdity, so that it's so absurd that no person with
any scientific understanding can possibly believe it, and in fact his main work is called,
not called physics, or in those days philosophy, it's called mathematics, because as he said,
he has only a mathematical account.
He cannot give a physical explanation because what he's postulating makes no sense in physical
terms.
For the rest of his life, in fact, he showed in fact that Descartes' model didn't work,
and in fact no model would work.
That's Newton's great discovery.
He thought it was ridiculous.
His contemporaries thought it was ridiculous.
For the rest of his life, Newton tried to find some kind of answer to this.
But total equipment, I do not make hypotheses, was in the context of explaining that he has
no physical explanation, so he can only give a mathematical model.
Well, there were various reactions to this.
One reaction, connection with the mind-body problem, was John Locke's.
This is not in his major work, but in a letter to Stilling Fleet.
He discussed this, and his conclusion was basically, quote him, that the judicious Mr.
Newton has demonstrated that God attributed to matter properties that we cannot conceive
that are inconceivable to us.
And similar, he said, God may have super-added to matter the property of thought, meaning
some organized form of matter yields thought.
That idea was picked up through the 18th century by just about every major figure who tried
to show how, as some put it, the brain secretes thought the way the liver secretes vile.
This reached its abagy with Pristly, the chemist philosopher, in the late 18th century, developed
these ideas extensively.
In the 19th century, they were pursued, but not intensively, then they were forgotten.
When the revolution took place in the 20th century, all of this was totally forgotten.
In fact, it's still mostly unknown to philosophers and cognitive scientists and others.
It was rediscovered in the 20th century.
The last decade, it was by mid-20th century, essentially rediscovered in the study of language.
That's what generative grammar is.
But in the world of philosophy, cognitive science, it was not rediscovered until the
last decade of the 20th century.
It was called the decade of the brain, a decade devoted to the brain.
At the conclusion of it, the neuroscientists, too, gave the concluding summary of it, Vernon
Mount Gossel, described what he called the thesis of the new biology, that the thought
is simply a property of the brain.
This was considered what Francis Krip called an astonishing hypothesis, a radical new idea
and philosophy of mind, very exciting.
It's repeated in almost the same words, what was commonplace in the 18th century as a result
of block suggestion.
And that's basically where it stands, I think.
There was another consequence of Newton's demolition of the mechanical philosophy.
Science changed its course.
The early modern science, Galileo through Newton, sought to discover an intelligible
world that was given up.
Scientists recognized tacitly, nobody actually said it, that you can't find an intelligible
world.
As John Locke said in his theological framework, God has added to matter properties that are
inconceivable to us, but it's just a fact.
And in fact, science proceeded with that fact, not forgetting the theological framework.
It just sought intelligible theories.
That's very different.
So Newton's theories were intelligible.
Leibniz, Huygens could understand Newton's theories.
It was the world that they described that was unintelligible, and Newton agreed.
But over time, science just lowered its aspirations to developing theories that were intelligible,
however inconceivable of the world that they described.
Just abandoned that hope.
By the time you get to 20th century Bertrand Russell, the science is very well, he simply
said it's ridiculous to seek intelligibility.
Who cares?
We just want theories that work.
That's a big difference from the early modern science, which had much higher aspirations.
This is often not understood.
I should say there's more to it than that.
Newton recognized that the world seemed to have inconceivable properties, and he speculated
that as far as we know, all matter might be alive, all matter, including the coffee
cup in front of it.
We know so little of matter that we can't show that it's not alive.
In the 20th century, this was picked up independently.
Sir Arthur Eddington, great astrophysicist, said we know so little of matter that for
all, we know all matter is conscious, can't show that atoms aren't conscious, because
we just don't know anything about matter.
Bertrand Russell had similar position.
In fact, it's kind of interesting if you look at today's philosophy, what's exciting
topic in philosophy today is what's called the hard problem of consciousness.
The 17th century also had a hard problem.
The hard problem was motion.
How can you account for motion?
Answer, you can't.
But the hard problem of the 17th century was quite different from today's hard problem.
If you look at the hard problem of motion, the problem was formulated.
You could state properties of motion.
Say here are the properties of motion.
How can we find an explanation for them?
That was the hard problem in the 17th century.
And Newton's discovery was there's no explanation in what we consider physical.
It's quite different.
It's not formulated.
The problem is what is it like to see the sunrise in the morning?
Well, nobody can say what it's like to see the sunrise in the morning.
You can write a poem about it, maybe, but you can't say here are the properties of it.
And what does it like to be a bet?
Nobody can say, what does it like to be me?
I could write a book about it, maybe, but I can't say here are the properties.
Well, this is an elementary thing, unless you state what you want an explanation for.
So the hard problem of today's philosophy is formulated in a way which is unanswerable.
So it's not a problem at all.
It's just I'm confused.
It's not a problem.
It's quite different from the 17th, 18th century, when the problem was quite real
and explicit and not answered.
So I think we should be very cautious about paying attention to what's the hot topic
in the philosophical literature.
It's not a formulated problem.
It's just an expression of confusion.
And as far as the radical new idea in philosophy, that's luck.
And I think we should recognize the antecedents, the history, the context,
and what is not conceivable to us, though apparently true.
So, no, there are so many different takes on consciousness at this point.
So many people have different theories of consciousness.
There's panpsychism, there's illusionism, there's idealism,
reductive physicalism, materialism.
Where do you think we stand today?
What do you think is the most prominent thought process behind theories of consciousness?
Would you say it is reductive materialism?
There is no such thing as materialism.
Materialism, if it exists, has to give some account of what matter is.
You can't have a theory of materialism if you don't tell us what matter is.
And nobody knows what matter is.
So there's no materialism.
That's why, as Arthur Eddington, Russell, actually Newton pointed out,
we have no concept of matter.
So if you look at the problem of what's so-called the problem of consciousness,
we know a great deal about consciousness.
In fact, we know more about consciousness than anything else.
It's something that both Russell and most more recently,
Gell and Strossen have emphasized.
I can tell you a ton of things about my current consciousness.
I could describe in detail everything I'm seeing and so on.
What we don't know is what matter is.
Consciousness and matter, because we're ignorant of matter.
That's why Eddington said, for all we know, all matter is conscious,
because we know nothing about matter.
As Newton said, maybe all matter is alive, because we don't know anything about matter.
So these questions are not formulated in a coherent fashion.
As far as panpsychism is concerned, it's basically Eddington's speculation.
But actually Gell and Strossen is one who has argued for it.
Interesting arguments, I'm personally not convinced, but coherent arguments, at least.
But until what we can try to do is what was done by science,
after Newton showed that we cannot find an intelligible universe,
try to find intelligible theories.
So let's construct the best theories we can to account for the properties of consciousness.
That's all we can do.
Can't reduce it to matter, because we don't know what matter is.
Can't say, I don't think you can say anything about panpsychism,
that we cannot show that all matter is not conscious,
but that's because we don't understand anything about matter.
In fact, if you think about it, what is matter?
I mean, there's a great physicist at the Institute for Advanced Study, John Wheeler,
who suggested that maybe all there is in the universe is answers to the questions we pose.
It's a theory called it from bit, all that exists as bits.
We pose a question, get an answer, that's the universe.
There's nothing else.
I mean, I'm not confident to say whether this is a plausible theory or not,
but suppose it is, then that's matter, answers to your questions.
Right now, physicists are in the strange position of not being able to find,
I think it's the universe.
Okay, that's where we are.
You can read articles in quantum theory journals.
Someone sent me one recently, or a group of leading quantum theorists debate,
what is a particle, most fundamental question.
I can't reach any conclusion.
Well, that's where we are with regard to matter.
I'm not sure, Naomi, if you're familiar with Donald Hoffman's work
and his theory of consciousness.
Whose theory?
Donald Hoffman.
It's a description of properties of consciousness.
I don't see a theory in the sense of explanation of anything.
Because he's basically one of those physicists who have concluded that
space and time, in essence, don't really exist.
So what he's trying to do is build a theory where conscious agents
are the fundamental entity of reality, and then he moves on from there.
But where do you think the problem lies with starting from there?
What is explained?
A theory provides explanations.
That's what a theory is.
What is explained?
Yeah, that's a good question.
What about that?
And sorry, did you want to add to that?
I just want to express my own ignorance.
With respect to the conclusions about space and time, I'm not competent to comment.
I know physicists are exercised about this and have no real answers.
I don't.
There seems to be a shift in physics at the moment where a lot of the theories
are starting to expose that space and time, the way we think about space-time,
does not seem to be what even Einstein and physics has shown us.
So Newtonian physics, both Einstein and Newton,
it all seems to be being thrown out the window at this point,
which is making some physicists question the fundamental edge of reality completely.
And because of that, it's opening up the doors to a new form of idealism
where now consciousness is fundamental, and then we move on from there.
What do you think about that approach of the idealistic view of seeing consciousness?
I don't think any of these discussions in physics, which I'm not competent to have a judgment about,
I don't think any of them bear unconsciousness in the least.
They don't tell us about the fact that I see a red spot, what I feel like when I see the red spot.
I don't see anything about that.
That's consciousness.
Furthermore, I don't really understand the preoccupation with consciousness.
It's a pretty new preoccupation.
It's not true in the history of philosophy.
One of the probably the major scholarly study of this is by Uru Thiel,
who points out that consciousness became an issue in philosophy
pretty much with the Neoplatonist 17th century Cartesian's Ralph Cudworth.
He says it was the first to discuss consciousness seriously.
But they were talking about self-consciousness, awareness of ourselves.
And that was the topic of consciousness right up to the 20th century.
20th century, for some reason, there was a sudden great concern with consciousness in recent years.
It's been, as I said, the problem, the hard problem.
Only trouble is it's not formulated, so it's not a problem.
But why consciousness?
I mean, it turns out, to the extent that we understand anything, limited, take language,
almost everything that's going on in our minds when you and I are conversing
is completely beyond the reach of consciousness.
There are mental processes taking place.
We have a fair grasp about what many of them are, but we have no more awareness of them
than we have of what's going on in our second nervous system.
We have another huge nervous system called the enteric nervous system.
Sometimes called the gut brain.
It's a huge nervous system, controls everything that's going on in the body.
Mid-billions of neurons can have all the properties of simers, Parkinson's, and a huge nervous system.
We know nothing.
We know a lot about it, but from the outside, the way we study the planetary motion,
you have no introspection into it.
And the same is true of this nervous system.
We have almost no introspective evidence about it.
Very superficial phenomenon.
But we can learn a lot about it the way you learn other things in science.
And the mental acts that are taking place beyond the level of consciousness
interact indissolubly from the few fragments that we're conscious of.
So you're not going to fonts that happen to be conscious.
You want a real theory of what's going on.
You're going to have to integrate whatever we know about or can discover about the internal unconscious,
not in a Freudian sense, inaccessible to consciousness,
operations that are more important than the fragments that reach consciousness.
I think it's more important.
So it seems to me the emphasis is misplaced, plus the fact that the problem is not formulated
till the problem is formulated, you're not going to have an answer to it.
So I think philosophy is going off into a very dubious directions.
I should say that Galen Strauss and one of the best young philosophers
has put this a little more strongly than I have.
He more strongly than I would, in fact.
What he said is that 20th century philosophy is the silliest period in the history of philosophy.
That's too strong, I think.
But I do think there are real questions about including the unwillingness
to understand the history of the topic, which is revealing I think.
It's worth understanding how these problems developed kind of thing we were talking about.
Sheds a lot of light on what we should be doing, I think.
But the crucial issue is that the hard problem in the 20th century is not formulated
as distinct from the hard problem in the 17th century, which was formulated
and led to very interesting results.
So until today's hard problem is formulated, it will just be wandering in the wilderness.
Hmm. Do you think we have focused so much energy into this hard problem of consciousness?
Because science has exposed so much about reality in terms of spirituality.
God Copernicus taking us out of the center of the universe.
You've got Darwin taking us off the top of the food chain.
And now we have this last that allows us to at least maintain some sort of spirituality
and maybe meaning value purpose.
Do you think that's why we're so obsessed with this topic right now?
This frankly just seems to me empty talk.
Yes, we have consciousness.
I have a dog at my feet.
She have consciousness, I assume.
So can't prove it or disprove it as the microphone in front of me have consciousness.
Well, as Arthur Eddington pointed out, we know so little about matter
that we can't say that it doesn't have consciousness because we don't know anything about matter.
So there's nothing to do with idealism, nothing to do with spirituality,
nothing to do with our place in the universe.
These are just things that we're confused about.
And my own view is a much more interesting question is what's inaccessible to consciousness?
I don't try to convince other people of what's interesting.
I'm just saying to me that looks much more interesting.
We can learn a lot about it.
We can discover how it is closely integrated with the tiny fragments that reach consciousness.
Our brain is doing all kinds of things.
Occasionally it's throwing off little bits and pieces that we're conscious of.
Well, those fragments are some interest, but I don't think they're the main interest
in finding out what our mental processes are.
As far as the distinctiveness of human beings, we don't have to worry about
the kinds of questions you raise.
First of all, we don't have to worry about a role.
But there are distinctive properties of humans, totally distinct.
And that's interesting.
One distinctive property of humans is what you and I are now doing.
There's no other organisms that can have discussions about these or any other questions.
That means language and thought in any sense we understand thought appear to be unique human
characteristics.
There's no analog to them anywhere in the world, maybe universe.
And they seem to be common to all humans.
So it looks like a species property.
We don't know of any differences among humans in these capacities.
So we can speak and grow up in any community and pick up easily the language and its thought system.
So it seems to be just common human.
It's a pretty good reason to suspect that these capacities emerged along with modern humans.
So if you look at the archaeological record, skimpy, but there's something,
there's no evidence for any meaningful symbolic activity before humans appear.
You may get a scratch on a bone or something.
But there's essentially nothing before humans appear.
Not long after humans appear in evolutionary time,
you start getting very rich and complex symbolic activity.
All of which suggests that along with modern humans came these capacities.
Language, thought, which are probably the same thing as was assumed incidentally by
Aristotle, classical Indian philosophy and so on.
Didn't really distinguish language and thought that runs through pretty much until the modern period.
But I think it's a plausible assumption.
I think we're coming back to it.
The language is just the system for generating thought.
Thought is what's generated by language, internal thought, internal language,
not the noises that we speak, which is superficial.
If that's anywhere near true, then the interesting questions are what are the
properties of this internal thought language system?
I think that's much more interesting than the fragments that reach consciousness,
which are fragments, so we're probably not going to learn much about them.
I mean, a good example, an illustration of this is what's called inner speech.
When you think to yourself in language, if you pay attention to it, it's not language.
It's the sounds.
So when you think about a sentence, you can ask, how long is it?
Does it rhyme with another one?
That's not language.
That's the externalization of language in one or another sensory motor medium.
And the sensory motor systems have nothing to do with language.
They were there millions of years before language emerged.
They've never changed.
So they're non-linguistic systems that we use to externalize what's
like you could use gesture sign just the same.
It doesn't even have to do sound.
So we don't want to be misled by that.
What we call inner speech is not inner.
It's outer.
What's inner, we have no access to.
Do you think the fact that we speak English, for example?
I mean, as someone who's obviously a master of linguistics, and I mean,
you're pretty much known as the father of cognitive science,
do you think that our limitations in terms of the language we use most often,
which is English, well, for the most part in this case,
limits our ability to discuss certain philosophical questions,
like this mind-body problem?
Do you think if we had a different language that portrayed more meaning,
perhaps ancient Chinese Sanskrit, that we'd be better off today?
There is a hypothesis.
It's called the superior wharf hypothesis.
Edward Superior, Benjamin Lee Wharf, about a century ago,
arguing that the way we think is shaped in some significant way by the language that we speak.
This hypothesis has been investigated empirically for about 75 years,
almost nothing, and a few superficial things.
So, for example, the first person to study it, Eric Leneberg,
who went on to found the biology of language, great scientist.
He studied it.
He was a friend of mine at graduate school.
He studied this back in the early 50s, and he found a few things.
So he found that there are some languages that have,
languages differ in where they put the boundaries of the color words.
Like some languages don't have color words, just black and white.
Other languages like us have distinguished, say, red and orange.
Other languages don't distinguish red and orange.
Hopi, for example.
And you get some effects of that, but they're meaningless.
So if you take a language which doesn't distinguish red and orange,
and you ask people, you give them a patch of color,
and then you show that patch of color.
Again, if it's on the red-orange border, if you speak English,
you'll remember that I called it red.
So you say it's red.
If you have a language read, you don't have a label for that.
You won't remember.
So you won't call it.
You won't remember what it was.
I mean, very superficial things like that have been discovered,
but nothing of any significance.
It's still widely debated, but I think the pickings are very thin.
So it looks as if every language has ways of talking about everything.
Of course, you may not have the words.
Like 100 years ago, you didn't have the word computer.
So you couldn't talk about them.
You could, but not in our sense.
You didn't have the word elementary.
Talk about quarks.
But that's any language.
You can pick them up the same way.
You mentioned these unconscious processes.
And I mean, the more intriguing question is,
how do those unconscious processes sort of come into these conscious ones?
What do you then think about people like Daniel Dennett,
Keith Frankish, who sort of used the argument that because most of what we
experience happens unconsciously, we merely, via introspection,
tend to make a conclusion that we have some sort of ethereal entity.
So in essence, there is no such thing as qualia.
Rather, there is a memory of an experience that felt qualitative.
But in essence, everything is in fact quantitative.
What do you think about that?
We draw that conclusion about the enteric nervous system, the gut brain.
It's all unconscious.
Do we assume there's some ethereal spiritual thing going on in our gut?
Not as far as I know.
So why should we do it for this brain?
Why do we have to be?
It's interesting that traditional dualism, Cartesian dualism,
metaphysical dualism, was a real, serious scientific theory.
Descartes had serious scientific arguments for postulating two substances.
Metaphysical dualism was shown to be incorrect,
but lots of scientific theories are shown science.
It's been replaced by something else, what I sometimes called methodological dualism.
A methodological dual, nobody will say I'm a methodological dualist,
but a lot of people act that way, including the ones you're describing.
They say, when we discuss something sort of below the neck, metaphorically speaking,
we're allowed to be rational.
When we discuss things up here, we have to become totally irrational.
That's methodological dualism.
As I say, nobody says, professes it, but you just said,
why should we treat the unconscious processes here differently than the unconscious processes
down here?
I don't see any reason.
I think Locke-John Locke was basically correct for getting the theological framework.
However, the world works.
There are facts about motion that are inconceivable to us,
and there are facts about thought that are inconceivable to us,
but they're there, and we can study them and learn about them
and assume that whatever thought is some property of organized forms of matter,
where matter is just whatever there is.
When Locke used the word matter or body, he didn't mean anything specific.
He said, whatever the world is constituted of, we don't know.
Newton showed that we don't know.
I think that's a sense of latitude, and I don't think we've progressed beyond it.
No, when you think about, I mentioned earlier that a lot of people
are pretty much obsessed with this mind-body problem because
it's a replacement for sort of agnosticism and atheism today.
What advice do you give these people growing up today in a world
where science has proven so much and taken away so much in terms of their spirituality
and their purpose in life?
What can you tell them in order to keep going, keep moving forward and keep focusing?
Just as some sort of inspirational advice from your side.
I can't speak for others, but I find inspiration enough in what Galileo, for example,
regarded as one of the most awesome features of the universe.
For Galileo and his contemporaries, one of the most amazing things in the universe
awe-inspiring was what you and I are now doing.
How can humans be capable of constructing from a finite number of symbols,
constructing an infinite number of thoughts, and even using these thoughts to convey to others
who have no access to our minds, the innermost workings of our minds.
So you have no access to my mind, but I can convey to you with a finite number of symbols
the innermost workings of my mind.
Galileo thought this is the most amazing phenomenon in the universe.
Galileo himself regarded the alphabet as the most spectacular of human inventions
because it was able to implement this comparable to Michelangelo or Titian.
Well, to me, that seems inspiring enough.
I've sometimes called it the Galilean challenge.
How is this conceivable?
It's Cartier-Cartes problem, which led him to postulate a second substance.
Well, as Newton showed, we're left with only one substance, mind, the other one, disappeared body.
But I don't see why we need...
I find it inspiring enough that physicists cannot discover 95%.
I think that's the number of what constitutes the universe.
It seems to me exciting enough.
The more we discover, the more we realize how much we don't know.
For example, I mean, the Liberty experiments, a lot of the experiments on free will.
A lot of people believe now that we have no free will.
What are your thoughts on the relationship between mind and free will?
That's an interesting question.
Every one of us acts as though we believe in freedom of will.
100% of us, including those who deny that there is free will.
They all act as if they believe in free will.
Point number one.
Point number two.
The science tells us anything about it.
Answer, no.
Science tells us.
Can't determine it.
