In past videos in this series, we've talked about emergence as a process within a system
that creates new levels of organization, where we get synergies between the parts that adds
value and creates a new pattern of organization, leading to a hierarchical structure called
integrative levels and a complex dynamic between the micro and macro levels.
In this module though, we'll be talking about emergence as it plays out over time within
some process.
An emergent process is a process of change that involves non-linear, abrupt phase transitions
as the system's overall structure and function is transformed into new regimes of behavior
exhibiting new properties that could not have been predicted to arise prior to the transformation.
Emergent processes may be contrasted to linear developments of change.
With linear systems, the overall behavior of the system is a direct consequence of the
interaction between the parts at all times.
The macro level features and behavior can be directly computed from the micro level
elementary parts.
Changes in the micro level create corresponding changes in the macro level.
For example, micro level changes in the mechanical parts to a car create the macro level changes
in its position.
Any future or past states to the system can be understood as some combination of changes
within the elementary components.
We can, for example, predict far out into the future the occurrence of eclipses because
the future state of our solar system is governed by the changes of its elementary parts.
We can predict into the future where the planets will be and this will be similar in quality
to previously experienced states in the past, that is to say nothing qualitatively different
would occur.
Many of our modeling techniques are based upon this assumption of an absence of emergence
with the whole process of change being the sum of its micro interactions.
For example, within economics, dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models attempt to explain
aggregate economic phenomena such as economic growth, business cycles and the effects of
monetary policy as derived from microeconomic phenomena.
Linear systems equally show proportionality between input and output meaning that change
typically happens in an incremental fashion.
Emergent processes are fundamentally different from these linear processes of change.
Systems that involve emergence, that is to say two different levels of organization may
undergo changes on both different levels where changes in the macro level are not directly
correlated to changes on the micro level.
The macro level undergoes its own processes of change that have their own internal structure
whereas with simpler systems the macro level states are directly correlated to the micro
level with emergence the macro level states may become disassociated from the micro level
to a greater or lesser extent.
For example, ecosystems, societies and economies go through macro level processes of change
such as succession and industrialization that have their own internal dynamics on the macro
level.
Often all the parts have to move together into a new macro level regime and this places
a downward course on the parts.
New macro level regimes within the system emerge when the system converges upon a new
set of rules or protocols that drive all of the parts to adopt that new macro pattern.
For example, now that we've converged upon digital as the basic format for information
encoding there are strong positive externalities for everyone to use digital as analog becomes
increasingly less compatible.
Thus we get a rapid change from analog to digital and a macro level regime shift.
This shift can happen very fast because of positive externalities creating positive feedback
that drives rapid change across the system.
In this way new macro regimes can rapidly emerge within whole economies, societies or
technology infrastructure shifting to a new pattern of organization that would have been
difficult to predict beforehand.
This period of major rapid macro level change may be called a phase transition.
A phase transition is an emergent process of change between different overall states
of organization in a system.
Phase transitions may be understood as rapid abrupt transformations in the overall macro
state to the system that is triggered by some small change within an input variable.
Thus whereas with linear change the macro level changes somewhat proportionately in
accordance with the changes in the input values.
With emergent processes this is not so.
During this process development there are critical stages either side of which its macro structure
takes a very different overall makeup given only a small change in the controlling variables.
The simplest example of this is the different phases that water takes as it goes from gas
to liquid to solid ice.
In the case of the transition from liquid to steam as temperature increases this transition
happens abruptly when the system approaches the critical value of 100 degrees centigrade.
In phase transitions such as the spontaneous magnetization in ferromagnetism relations
of long range order emerge in a system under special conditions.
Unlike linear changes which are largely accountable by statistical averages over the micro properties
these phase transitions are the results of the parts working synergistically in a synchronized
fashion where unique properties emerge for the whole system that are not such simple averages.
The nature of the phase of the system cannot be related to the microscopic nature of the
basic elements composing the system.
Thus phase transition processes typically do not require that we understand the micro mechanisms
upon which they rest.
It is sufficed to take the system as a whole and from this we can infer the general phase
transition behavior as a similar macro level dynamic to that which occurs in all emergent processes.
As such system properties do not require derivation from micro level dynamics they can be said
to be emergent.
When a system undergoes a phase transition its micro components get rapidly reconfigured
into a qualitatively different macro structure.
However the properties of the components themselves remain relatively unchanged.
Prior and post macro states correspond to roughly the same configuration of micro states
that is to say phase transitions involve a restructuring of the system on the macro level
with only a limited change in the properties of the parts and other local conditions.
This emergent process that engenders phase transitions can be seen in a wide range of
systems including physical, biological and social systems.
One example of this might be the outbreak of ethnic violence.
The phenomenon of ethnic violence can be seen as a phase transition from a mixed but non-aggressive
population of individuals to occasional abrupt outbursts of widespread conflict.
The underlying level of racism and hostility within the members of a society may remain
relatively similar before widespread violence outbreaks and when the system flips into a
violent outbreak.
Thus it is not that the members have necessarily become more racist and hostile.
It is instead that the system was near a phase transition and a small event triggered it
to flip from one macro regime to another while the components parts properties changed only
slightly.
Because emergent phase transitions are discontinuous, meaning they go from one overall state to
another with limited overlap between them, they thus involve critical points of change.
These critical points are discrete changes on the macro level.
Importantly, critical points occur due to the system having mutually exclusive macro
level regimes, thus instead of one regime gradually giving way to another, which would
be a continuous change without critical points.
What actually happens though when the regimes are mutually exclusive is a discrete and rapid
flipping from one into the other and this is the critical point.
We can see this in the change in a dictatorial political regime.
Because they are autocratic, meaning there can only be one stable macro level regime
at any given time, a change between regimes has to involve a critical phase transition
point, which is often what we see empirically as typically when a regime falls there is
positive feedback driving a rapid move towards a new political regime, a new macro level stability.
Emergent processes of change create qualitatively new systems, whereas with linear processes
of change, the change is within the properties of the parts which can be quantified, however
macro level regime shifts change the structure and functioning of the whole which results
in qualitatively new behavior and features.
For example, this can be seen in learning some new practical skill.
When one starts learning or practicing something new, one accumulates isolated rules.
Do it like this, if that happens do this, don't forget to etc.
These are incremental quantitative changes to behavior because one is essentially just
gathering a list of instructions and working through them in an iterative fashion.
However, at some point, if successful, these isolated rules will start to become coherent
as they coalesce into a new way of acting.
At this point, one will start seeing them as integrated into some overarching framework.
One begins to act from within that framework rather than merely executing on isolated rules.
This is a qualitative change as it induces new emergent macro level behavior and functionality
within the whole system.
