So, welcome everybody.
This let me put up, let me share the screen.
That's okay.
And I will show the schedule for today.
That's good.
Under the multidisciplinary section where we are entertaining a number of interesting
topics here in this session and in the following session.
On behalf of everyone, welcome and let me acknowledge the unceded territories of the
indigenous peoples that we are all tuning in from.
My source.
Yeah, sounds good.
Just get my presentation up here.
Just confirming that you're seeing that and hearing me okay.
Yeah, thanks for introducing the session.
Rationale for this work happened because of significant wildfires that we had in the
central interior of British Columbia in 2017 and 2018 where it was noticed something called
wildfire skips where there was juvenile forest that were burned less verily or not at all
as shown in that satellite image.
You're probably easy to pick up that nice dark green locations in the middle.
That's juvenile pine plantations that were not burned.
And then on the outskirts, you can see a lot of fire scars and burn trees in older mature
forests.
This was counter to the understanding that generally older forests are less susceptible
to high intensity wildfires and that sparked several research projects to investigate.
This work is part of a larger research project led by the University of Northern British
Columbia on estimating fuel moisture content in different stand types.
My portion of the project is to understand are there microclimate differences that would
affect the fire weather variables to cause the juvenile pine plantations to be less risky
than the older stands?
So we have six field-based sites to look at this problem.
Three of the sites are around the community of Smithers, which is in the northwest central
part of the province, and then also three around Prince George, which is pretty close
to the middle of the province of British Columbia.
So showing the sites here on these satellite images, as well as the nearest British Columbia
wildfire service weather station that we use to compare our field data to.
So here's what the study design looks like.
I'll move from left to right in terms of the pictures.
So we have an approach where we're directly comparing weather and microclimate conditions
in an open stand.
The open stand is a real difference.
So the forest types are very similar.
So the next picture is an example of some of the in-stand monitoring, where we have these
smaller onset hobo microstamps centimeters above the ground that we use to measure surface
temperature.
The third picture is UNBC supplied weather stations, Campbell Scientific-based weather
stations based on a Sierra 300 logger, and using an all-weather sensor for two of the
six stations.
That fourth picture is another in-stand picture of our rain bucket, as well as some of the
30 centimeter temperature and relative humidity measurements.
And then lastly, the direction smart sensor, coupled with an onset microdata logger.
The wind speed and direction measurements in-stand are also made at three meters, just like
in our open locations.
We're not measuring snow.
In this study, snow is really quite difficult to measure directly with sensors.
However, we do run the equipment year round, and we can tell things like the start of the
snow season, the end of the snow season, and the timing of melts with the data that we
leave running.
And that's really important for starting the fire weather index codes.
Here's just an example of what the stands look like overhead.
These are fisheye photos, or some folks call them canopy photos.
Obviously, the open cells that we've measured directly, we started the measurements.
And go temperature than the mature stand.
Wind speed is an important fire weather index variable, so that peaks above 100 millimeters
in April, where we can see the timing of the snow melt.
Surface temperature, we only have two years of data because our cables there, which we
hope to improve our measurements for upcoming years.
Codes on the right, fine-fuel moisture code on the top, duff moisture code in the middle,
and drought code on the bottom, which kind of follow.
We end up generating a much higher drought code throughout the season, kind of as expected.
But this was a lot more reflective of the severe wildfire season that we did experience
in BC in 2020.
I had about the maturity of the...
I think the way the fire weather variables are calculated is they take the wind speeds
that are occurring at 12 o'clock, so...
Extreme events in that area.
So, Victor, can you share your screen?
Right.
Okay.
My agenda for going along with Dr. Mandelbrock, the nature of precipitation patterns on the
scale.
So, scaling properties of precipitation help us to understand properties of this probability
space.
Options.
The...
