So, now I'm going to introduce
the next speaker. I encourage Jonas and George to come on to the stage. So, our next two speakers,
as I just said, are Jonas, who is a Jonas Magel, who is a PhD student in Muir Sciences at McKell
University, and George Dean, which is a PhD student in the School of Philosophy at the University of
Edinburgh. So, without further ado, I'll let them start their talk. Yeah, thank you for those great
talks up to this point, and thank you for having us at this conference, both George and me. George,
in fact, just finished his PhD, so congrats on that, George. That's been a while now.
And let's dive right into our talk. So, before we start, maybe we're saying that this is work with
a bit of a bigger team. Last Sunday, Smith, Christopher Timmerman, Robin Carteris, Maxwell
Ramsted, and Michael Liftschitz are all on the team and have all inspired this work with us.
So, shout out to all of them. All right, so in our talk, we will talk a bit about the phenomenology
of self and agency and think about how active inference can allow us to model these things,
though we will push it a bit into the spiritual domain of things. So, so far we've talked a lot
about self and agency and active inference model for like kind of individuals and social dynamics,
but under certain, in certain kind of spiritual or paranormal states, people report things of
feeling somewhat of connection to the universe or the world, or more interestingly, feel the
presence of something like a god who's speaking through people or the presence of elves or ended
like other entities or spirits. And most particularly, this phenomena are prevalent when
people take rather high doses of psychedelic substances, but also under meditation and other
kind of collective rituals and charismatic Christian prayer, these things are also prevalent.
And so, what we try to do is to take the active inference framework to get a bit of a grip of
how these phenomenologies can come about and to kind of be able to give a bit more of a kind of
theoretical footing, we will focus on psychedelics as the cause of these experiences in particular.
All right, just to give it a bit of a sense, what we talk about when we say that there are these
entity encounters, these things are strikingly human-like and have all the qualities that humans
have. So, when people report this data, I think people reporting entity encounters under the,
or induced by DMT, these entities that are encountered are often conscious, intelligent,
benevolent and sacred. Furthermore, the qualities by which these entities are encountered,
that's by kind of vision, hearing, touch, taste, smell. So, all these things that are kind of common
for human interaction, but there's also an extra sense, the extra sensory kind of level by which
we interact with these agents. And the last thing is these encounters are incredibly meaningful
and some have argued that a big therapeutic effect lays in the phenomenology of the psychedelic
experiences, including these entity encounters. So, therefore, we deem it valuable to understand
what is happening in these moments. We've given this talk before, and this is an ongoing project,
and the novel thing for the talk today is that we have a rich computational framework to express
our thoughts. And the way how we kind of go through this talk is that we have these entity
encounters that you want to explain, and we kind of build it up from the bottom. So, we start talking
about allostatic control and kind of some minimal itself. So, how do we usually model and monitor
our own physiological kind of a system to then think about how do we model kind of interpersonal
dynamics, and that's the first and first in paper, it's mentioned in many talks so far,
and building up from personal self to kind of interpersonal selfhood.
Up to the Rebus model, and the Rebus model basically outlines a breakdown of this hierarchical
structure. And once we have the Rebus model established, we will look into a computational
model to think about if the computational structure fails in certain dynamics, what will
be the implications for the larger system at all. And our goal is then to say that that can
wrap up and kind of link back to these entity experiences. We assume quite a lot of background
knowledge for this because we don't have time to go through all the modeling, but here's a very
quick summary based on a paper by Lars Sondred-Smith, and now talking about metacognition. And this
basically is a summary of much of the progress that this community has done on active inference,
especially on discrete time-space modeling. First is the idea that systems use some form of
inference to understand the world. Then we kind of build it up and say that this inference process
can be guided by a precision parameter. And then we build it up once more to say this inference
is embedded in an action framework where kind of the agent can act to change its own in the world
states and from moment to moment to moment. And at that stage kind of we have this first
active inference because like active as like comes from the action part in this model.
So this is kind of the basics of the model that allows us to kind of interact with the world
while still doing inference. There's a whole lot to understand in these diagrams and I'm
quite sad that we don't have the time to go into those, but I can highly recommend the
Sandwich method out paper to kind of get an introduction to these things. Where we start is
we start on this last panel, on this very panel, which is basically the hidden states or the
multimodal percents, which is about what am I perceiving? And that includes different levels
of perception, the introceptive, the proprioceptive, and the extraceptive sense. And then
we have the actions which are across time with pi here, which is the question what shall I do
given these percents across time. And now the cool thing that Maxwell has done a lot of work on
is that these things can be nested in one another. So we can just put another level on top that
basically monitors the performance on the slower level. So while we have these multimodal percents
on a very rudimentary level, we can have a next higher level which is the
some form of minimal self, some form of tracking of what kind of sense we have, what kind of sense
we percepts are going on, and how well am I as a system doing in kind of monitoring these different
sense parameters. And that's what we then call the deep generative model of mental action or
hidden mental states. And that's where Lars has done a lot of work to say this can answer
question of what am I paying attention to, what am I trying to pay attention to.
And then justice on the lower level, on this higher level that can kind of unfold over time.
So that basically means that I'm able to kind of monitor my performance on the sense level across
time. And so why this is pretty interesting is that this gives us like a first complete model
of a system to control itself. And that basically is what in the cognitive sciences often referred
to as allostatic control. And because this is the foundation of what our more complex model will
build on, we will spend the next few slides on diving in depth into allostasis really. And yeah,
over to you, George. Great. Yeah, thank you, Jonas. So I'm going to kind of give a
kind of conceptual overview or way of thinking about how to understand the
pre-reflective or minimal sense of self. And I've described it as an allostatic control model,
allostasis being defined as, it's not to work by Peter Sterling on this concept, but basically
predictive regulation. So rather than allostasis being confined to closed loop control in the
present, allostasis is anticipating this allostatic outcomes and acting to avoid them before they
arise. So yeah, we can think about active inference as a formalization of this idea,
so with action being a process of inference and organisms inferring actions, which
have the least expected free energy or the most self evidencing. So basically those actions,
which are conducive to remaining in a species specific window of viability or
phenotype congruence states are given the kind of organism you are, you have kind of
phylogenetically endowed expectations of the kind of states you should be in.
Yes, expected free energy can be decomposed into epistemic and pragmatic value.
So this is the idea of learning about the environment while realizing prior preferences,
which could be either genetically endowed, or could be honestly genetically endowed, or
like Natalie's talk earlier, could start thinking about how does culture shape prior preferences.
So yeah, the starting point here is that the notion of self is implicit in the active inference
framework. In one sense, because action itself involves systematic misrepresentation, so representing
being in another state than to what you're currently in. So attenuating, so you can think of
physiological attenuation, so you're attenuating evidence that my arm isn't moving in order to
bring about a desired movement where the higher precision is afforded to expected consequences
of the action. So to kind of unpack this a little bit conceptually, yeah, Yanis, could you flip the
slide? So this is kind of, it draws upon lots of different areas of literature and kind of past
accounts, but on the one hand, you've got this notion of control, or the system inferring itself
as an endogenous cause. So that's the story that Jacob Hoey and John Michael have told,
this was anybody should have a self. And then also these stories about sense of agency,
the sort of correspondence of the expected consequences of actions and the actual consequences,
the actual outcomes, that being associated with a sense of agency. I'll talk more about that in
a second. And then on the other side, these grounding sense of self in the body, so this stuff,
Anno Seth's done a lot on, and other people, these are fellow members relating self-modeling
on the sense of self to interception. So the central claim here about the, yeah,
my central claim is the sense of self originates from inference about endogenous control of
self-evidencing outcomes, where self-evidencing can be understood in terms of staying within a
species specific window of viability. Yeah, can you go on? So yeah, so just to kind of unpack
this notion of control. So this is an example taken from Hoey and Michael, but if you imagine a very
simple creature, I mean, probably much more simple than this sea slug. So this creature
knows this, the world periodically goes back, and it doesn't know why. And it's kind of,
you know, really basic question is like, is this due to exogenous causes? Is this something in the
world, or am I causing this? And the idea is that once it knows it's the correspondence between,
oh, the world goes back, black periodically, when, you know, this certain motor command occurs,
then the system starts to then, okay, so this motor command is correlated with
what's going black, it's probably due to an endogenous rather than exogenous cause.
And so it's attributed to self rather than others. It's kind of really basic,
yeah, basic distinction of self being related to endogenous causes, and other being related to
exogenous causes, and the predictability of the sensory consequences of actions being the key thing
there. Yeah, do you want to, can you flip? Yeah, so one way of illustrating this, imagining being in a
wearing a virtual reality headset, if the, you know, if your virtual hands, the movement of your
virtual hands corresponds to the actual movements that your arms are doing, you'll have a feeling of
agency and authorship over the, over the outcomes of the action, over what you're seeing. But if
they're, you know, behaving randomly, or they don't correspond, it doesn't feel like you and it lacks
this feeling of agency and authorship. So this is the idea here that the system is constantly
tracking its control of sensations. And, you know, this dates back to
the literature on corollary discharges and efference copies, and thinking about like refining motor
commands. Yeah, and so we're already used to start thinking about how this is related to
sensory attenuation. So the physiological sensory attenuation being attenuating where my arm currently
is, in favor of where I'm expecting it to be, and also perceptual sensory attenuation. So
canceling out the self-generated consequences of actions.
And yeah, as we'll see, failure of sensory attenuation
is, underlies quite a lot of the phenomena we're going to talk about.
Yeah. So yeah, this is where it connects to the body. So the idea is that the system's not kind
of dispassionately just inferring, you know, what's, how can I control sensation via action, but it's
really, you know, there are particular things that needs to control. And that is kind of most
fundamentally perhaps keeping essential variables or states of the body within certain bounds. So
perhaps like staying a certain body temperature, because these are the things which are most
fundamental to continued existence and survival. So they're the things that in terms of prior
preferences, they're going to be further genetically endowed, high precision on prior
preferences for certain intercepted states. And we can also think about, you know, so
how this extends over time. So with a deeper temporal model with, you know, increasingly
abstract outcomes on longer time scales. Yeah, the richer and deeper the model, the more the
system's going to have prior preferences subtending longer time scales. And we could also think about
how those are acquired over ontogeny or something like social status or
things like that. More abstract things going further away from the kind of states of the body,
but are also important for continued existence. So yeah, so the essential idea there is that the
this inference about our static control, so this permeates like
the perception of the world such that things appear salient according to, you know, your
inference about static control. And this also relates to, so if you're hungry, you know, food
appears salient, but it can be also controlling prior preferences on longer time scales. This
also relates to tracking, so tracking prediction error reduction over longer time scales. So
thinking about affect and
yeah, kind of realizing prior preferences on those longer time scales. The system also wants
to keep track of that. So think about kind of most invariant aspects of the self model.
Yeah, do you want to move on with this?
So this is the story about
inferring states of oneself, but the moment we don't have any kind of story about inferring
states of other people. So at the moment, we've just talked about the minimal self and you might
imagine that, you know, quite simple creatures have this kind of minimal self model, but they lack
representing the self as a self and they lack in representing other agents as other agents.
So the idea here is that, you know, well, and that's how static control model allows
the system to infer states of itself. You can also use this self model in order to,
you know, the goal here being to better predict the sensor on
various time scales. You can use the same self model to predict the behavior of others. So
you can think about, so kind of the essential story here is what state would I be in in order
to perform that behavior? So if you see someone going to the fridge, what state would I be in to
perform that behavior? And then you infer that the state is, you know, perhaps they're hungry,
but then you can think about more complex things or have something like facial expressions being
quite an interesting example. So in inferring someone else's effective state, my way of doing
that is to simulate their face expression. So yeah, if you want to do slide, Eunice.
So yeah, this goes back to like simulation theory connects to early literature. The idea is
using your own self model, but kind of environmental action, bending it into states of
the agent you're observing. So if you take, if you're seeing someone putting a disgusted facial
expression, micro muscle movements to mimic that facial expression to then infer what state would
I have to be in in order to display this behavior, the idea being you'd have to be in, you know,
and then on that basis infer, okay, this other agent is experiencing disgust.
Yeah, so this connects to what we heard a little bit about earlier. So this do it for one idea. So
using your own generative model and either attenuating your kind of self model when attending to
others. So another speaker, for instance, and then
or attenuating the sensory evidence in order to speak. So then focusing back on the cells.
So flipping between modeling yourself and others by kind of changing the
precision on the, on the self model. So this is like what the other static control or minimal
self model idea, you know, some talk about the, this in terms of a computational model in a second,
and then getting this extra kind of matter cognitive layer, which is attributing is this
self or other. Yeah, do you want to do slightly on us?
Yeah, I'll hand it over to Janis now.
I need to unmute myself. All right. Thank you, George. So what I will try to do now in the last bit of
this presentation, I will talk all the rich work that George has just presented and in fact, George
has been working on for many years by now, and try to put it in this in a computational language.
And I'll pick up again where I left off last time. So I introduced this basic kind of generative
model of this active influence scheme. And then we said that we can embed this
in the next higher level that represents this minimal self and that that extends over time.
And now the last point that George made is to say, if we model other agents using the same
generative model, we need a higher level that is able to distinguish what of those states that
we infer belong to ourself, which of those belong to other agents that we interact with.
And that's why you have to kind of zoom out once more and add another layer on top.
And that's the reflective self. And also, this is very close to the work by Lars Sandwitsmith
and where he calls this level the metacognitive level or the kind of reflective level.
And this hidden meta-awareness state, we contextualize or disambigrate mental states.
So we can say whether the mental states we infer here, whether they belong to self or other.
And as a consequence of that, that allows us to do a representation or reflection of the self.
Because if we say that here self-inferential processes happen, then this level cannot yet
allow us to make reflections about these inferences. That's why we need the next higher level in order
to be able to model them. And as I've already mentioned before, the whole idea is that the same
thing expands over time, just like any level does. And that we need such a level has already been
argued for in this Lars Sandwitsmith work. But what we are now doing in our talk here is to
kind of use that model and think about how would that change in the case of the psychedelic
experiences and what would be the consequences. Here this attention and attenuation, which is
the top layer, regulate how the deep temporal model are updated by the multimodal percepts.
So basically this inference process. And one thing that I want to focus on in particular
is this parameter here, the precision parameter, because that's where most of our forthcoming
work lies. In this precision parameter, the precision parameter determines how much an agent
updates his beliefs based on some observation. And the idea is that optimal precision control
requires a mixture of volatility and rigidity. And down here, this is just an image. And you've
all seen this. I guess everyone here is somewhat of an expert in Bayesian, kind of Bayesian
brain hypothesis, Bayesian modeling, that we have a prior and a posterior and then make an
inference which lays somewhere in between and how far we are close to the prior or the posterior
depends upon the precision of those two. And this has been kind of explained in great detail in
terms of mathematical expressions. I won't go into that too much. There's great literature on this
already. But the point to get home here is to say, if we have this inference from some
observation to some hidden state, this is guided through a mapping A. The mapping is
influenced by this precision parameter. So the core is this precision parameter determines
how our states S are changed depending on some observations. And now we can think about the
breakdown of this model. And therefore, I refer to Rebus. And Rebus is something that became quite
popular in the past few years. So chances are that most of you have heard it before. It's a
collaborative work between Robin Carteris and Carl Friston. And it's the first big paper on using
active inference to describe the psychedelic state. And the analogy that is used is one of
metal. The idea is that if people take psychedelic substances, this is for the case of no LSD
acid, I think, if people take high doses of psychedelics, then their brain becomes a bit
more flexible, just like metal, the annealing of metal. In that state, you can kind of bend the
brain in new shapes and then kind of hardens again, just like with cognitive mechanisms,
that the top most highest layer kind of weakens a little bit, and that allows the whole structure
to be a bit more malleable. And if you look at these two diagrams in the brain, the idea is that
this is the topmost layer, and this is kind of the sense input. And usually we have strong priors
that determine perception. So we have strong priors, they're strongest on the topmost layer,
and they kind of determine perception all the way through. And if these priors kind of
have reduced precision, the effect isn't that strong. So there's less constraint for perception
based on these priors, and the sensory inputs have a stronger effect on the overall updating
of the perceptual system. And the effects or the consequences that this reduction of precision
in the brain has, is incredibly wide. And especially George throughout his PhD has published on
various of such things, on kind of the ego dissolution state, the solving of the self,
and depersonalization, and basically states where we consider the self or the
agentic experience as the highest inference that we make about sensations in our body.
But if these topmost layers, if they are reduced in precision, and there's a neurophysiological
story about this, of how the five HD2 receptors are kind of blocked, if that's kind of, if
we do some noise, then this inference process doesn't work. And these are just some examples
of applications showing the phenomenological consequences of this sense. And now, and this
is probably the most important slide of this presentation. So if after almost half an hour,
you got a bit kind of drowsy, this is the moment to kind of watch out and kind of
get the gist of this presentation. So this again, and I just say it again, this is the graph that's
already incredibly widely used in the active inference kind of community. And now the idea
is what we possess. We possess this, the function of higher order cognition is disrupted. And the
result reduced accuracy in deployment of precision estimates. So if this highest level, if that
doesn't function accurately, then its role cannot be executed properly. And its role is to deploy
precision on the next lower level. And the reason why the precision deployment is important is
that is the mechanism by which the higher level can kind of constrain
the inference process on the next lower level. So this is one technique array of how
priors can constrain perception. So if we say that the precision control doesn't work well in
this level, then the accuracy of the functioning of this level will of course also break down.
That means that reduced precision deployment on the mid-layer is downstream effects,
meaning that the precision estimates on this next lower level also fails. And if precision
guidance is inaccurate on this next lower level, that means that we don't constrain
the interpretation of sensory data as we usually do, or in the way how we usually train to,
but that now the observation that we have may have a much stronger effect in updating,
and because we're not sticking so much to our prize at this moment. And now we kind of go upstream
and think about the effects that this has. So lower precision on this lowest level leads to
failure in sensory attenuation. Otherwise, attenuated sensations are now attendant. That means
we are now at sense data that we usually ignore has now a strong effect on updating our priors.
The now attended observations lead to a rapid updating of posterior on all levels. And what
that is the case is if they update our hidden states more strongly, then that kind of moves up
all the way. Introceptive, proprioceptive, and exoceptive sensations are less stable and more
volatile. They change more quickly because they are less constrained by priors. The next higher
level, mental states that are inferred based on these volatile sensations are A, also more volatile,
and B, less accurate in inferring mental states of self and other. And that implies that many in
that this may infer agentic qualities in animate things and alterations in representing agents.
So in the story that we told before, this mid-level layer is the level where the first few kind of
hidden mental states and models are built. And if now the data we get is inaccurate, we're not able
to build any accurate models. And may they be models of our self? That's why the perception
of kind of bodily sensations may change. The people may have an experience where they don't feel
certain body parts or feel they can flip into the air or the body expands or construct contracts.
But the same applies when we look out into the world and how world objects, how they are different.
And then on the next level, because the inferred mental states are surprising and unexpected,
the attribution or contextualization mechanism fails to accurately infer boundaries or distinctions
between self and other. And this point is very similar to the conversation we had in the break,
in the lunch break, where we said that on the most highest level, we have models of the world
that are finally attuned and finally interplaying with a certain milieu of a brain structure of
information that we expect to receive. And if we introduce noise in this entire system,
then the data that this highest level model has to interpret or has as an input just doesn't make
sense to that model. And that makes it just hard to accurately kind of then infer states of self or
other or entity or not. And so with this hierarchical structure, the idea is that this middle layer
we infer agentic qualities, that being agentic qualities of ourselves or other people,
like the dread for one, and this next higher level is very then distinguished,
whether these agentic qualities belong to self or to other.
And the idea is that then that allows us to kind of quantify a bunch of different experiences.
And depending on which of these, whether it's the mid layer, the agentic non-agentic layer,
or the highest level that distinguishes endogenous and extogenous causes. So depending on where we
introduce noise into the system, different phenomenologies may emerge.
So that is the model as it stands so far. And this may have a bunch of implications that can be
kind of further explored that we just want to hint at, which is the cultural context that psychedelics
are experienced very differently depending on where they are taking it, the kind of cultural
social environment. And there is something to be explored about the valence and the
insightful character of entity encounters that people often experience these moments as almost
enlightening experiences. There's something about how entity experiences induced by different
psychedelics compare. They're most prominent under DMT, but they're also common on other
psychedelics. And they have different neuropharmacological kind of mechanisms,
so it's worth exploring those. Then it's interesting to compare these models that we have
with entity encounters that are experienced in a religious context, that from the description
sometimes are very similar to what's experienced under DMT and other psychedelics.
There's a bit more comparative work to be done comparing these entity encounters with
other altered self-experiences like the work I hinted at that George has published.
There's something about entity encounters and their link to well-being,
and in particular this idea that I hinted at the beginning that it's the phenomenology of these
psychedelic experiences that may have the, of course, the therapeutic context,
the therapeutic results. And finally, a bit of like a metaphysical question of entity encounters,
are they altered or normal in states? Are there hallucinations or more true perceptions?
And all these points are cool points that discuss further,
feel thoughts on them, feel free to reach out. And that is our little circle,
hopefully making it back to give some intuition for entity encounters. Thank you everyone.
Thank you, Jonas. Thank you, George. That was a wonderful talk.
Does anyone have any questions? You can move now to the Q&A podium.
And if there's no question, then you could also just elaborate on these discussion points a
little bit, maybe George has something to add. Well, I have a quick question if nobody else does.
So how are you thinking of, you know, setting up, because I heard you, you know,
you and Michael are going to be doing EGSA pretty soon. So I was thinking, what's your
experimental setup? How are, I mean, are these things related? And, you know, if what you were
telling me about isn't related to this, how would you, you know, design an interesting task
that might elucidate, you know, the entity experience at least?
One of the things that I'm currently looking into, it's not too much, I guess it's a bit of an
experiment, is that we work with, we have this catamount trial, but that we also have some work
with this charismatic Christian prayers that experience, have an experience where they kind
of are taken up by the Holy Spirit and kind of are moved by the Holy Spirit. And the idea is to
basically do some correlations of their kind of phenomenology or their experience of such
kind of encounters, and in states of entropy in the brain, with the idea that kind of measures
of entropy allow us to piece apart a little bit where this hierarchical structure might be
might be disrupted. And for that, I think the interesting part would be to look into
different measures of entropy. There's, I can mention it in the break, there's
a bunch of different mathematical definitions of entropy. There's various local and global
measures of it. So I think the interesting first step would be to check how could we find brain
measures that are associated to breakdown in hierarchical structure. The next step is using
that and correlating that with phenomenology. That makes a lot of sense to me. Thanks.
Yeah, thanks, Max. Thanks for the input on this work so far. It's been greatly appreciated.
Well, it's been my pleasure. This is a really exciting work to be working on.
I think Marco has a question. Otherwise, I'll go. Go ahead, Marco.
I'm a little on my last legs of her brain. So that was interesting. It's just a small question.
Could you just go back to the slide where you had the nice phenomenological space thing?
Yeah, that was great. So I'm wondering if ego inflation is actually the should be the focus,
because at least anecdotally, sharing in this discussion, so I find it interesting that when
it comes to the agentic endogenous agentic part, the more fascinating thing is the exploration
of the self in different lenses. And I think I wouldn't say it's inflation, but it is more
focused in a particular lens of self. And I think that is simply the analog of the variability of
sensory signals. So the variation of the self model, I would guess, that is simply more
decorated by whatever state one might be in. And I think that is nothing else than, I mean,
I guess I should also share some other assumptions. I mean, I would say that that that synesthesia,
which is also, of course, you know, facilitated in these experiences, is just one particular example
of this cross chat that you see in your energy. And so maybe these egoic hallucinations or experiences
are also a kind of cross chat, cross contamination between the self model and other models. And I
think that might be an interesting lens to also explain the various, so you see in the chats,
like some people see G, like Christian characters, even though I grew up in Holland, went to Christian
schools, I saw a Buddhist characters. And so the cultural, how do you say this, not tainting, but
the cultural coloring of the entities, I think is fascinating. And I think it would be a small
step to incorporate this in the model. I'm not sure what you think of that. But yeah, sorry,
I'm afraid it's dying. So whatever thought you have.
George, if you have something, otherwise I would say a word about the cultural kind of
considerations. Maybe just to address the first point or thinking about like,
yeah, well, maybe this isn't your point exactly. But I guess within this framework,
you could start thinking about conceptualizing like experience and like psychedelic experience of like
experiencing God. So kind of phenomenologically, it seems, you know, people report,
under psychedelics, there's kind of less and less causes. So I understand the kind of sensory
blending to be this kind of story. So, you know, the music and the plants are moving in time together
because there's some underlying common cause causing all these sensations and the more the kind
of pattern matching machine kind of widens his aperture, the more is swallowed up by that. So
once everything is under a common cause and it's all agentic, then you've got something that's like
an experience of God, or if everything's under a common cause and it's like agentic and it's
endogenous, then you've got kind of selfish God or ego expansion kind of story.
Just to clarify, I'm talking about the other side of the graph, the endogenous agentic part,
right? So I agree with everything I'm saying because I think that's a nice explanation for
experiencing God or the complete wholeness or the oneness of the universe. But I think in terms
of, I guess, system neuroscience or inference, it's maybe more interesting to explore the
colorful diversity that occurs in the more endogenous and agentic parts.
Because I think that's also something as underappreciated and in often description of phenomenology
and maybe more practically relevant or significant when talking about the therapeutic effects,
because it seems to me that the effects of the self-muggle might have interesting
relations to the therapeutic effects. Yes, one more point. Yes.
Sorry, maybe the oneness was saying more about this in a second, but I guess then you'll start
thinking about like, you know, people have these extraordinary experiences and they will bring
whatever conceptual frameworks they have in order to understand them. So, you know, DMT in
different cultures can be Santo Daime in Brazil. It's, you know, it's within a Christian framework
or if it's shamanic context, it could be very different or these entities are part of nature.
So I would think that's kind of, you know, just bringing, and that can also be after the fact
or it can permanently experience itself, but it can also be after the fact trying to explain
what must have happened there. I must have, you know, encountered angels or something like that.
Anyway, yeah, sorry, Eunice. One thing just to add, because it has been on me for a long time,
and I keep it like 10 seconds now, is that what we say is that precision on the priors is reduced,
and that is kind of countering this idea that there's a cultural influence, because priors
are a kind of cultural problem needs are stored. But the important thing to take is,
because the sense of information that's upcoming is so unknown, is that because we have nothing to
really rely on, we have to rely on the best thing we have. And in that thing, even even kind of
priors that are kind of very imprecise might still be more precise and have a stronger influence
than the even less precise sense we input that's incoming. I think it's very important to distinguish
the variation as something that is completely unrecognizable
and something that seems simply surprising in the variation within a certain state space or
dimension. And then I think that these kinds of nuances are important to make a difference for,
and I think the second question, because it should not be too long, but the second thing
that I want to point out is not everyone and not everything in the models would be equally
sensitive to the injected noise from psychedelic substances. And I think that is also an important
question, like what is differentially sensitive to the particular noise of the injected system?
But I see Mo already kind of... Yes, absolutely. Go ahead. I want to give Professor Marta Garido
her spot now as she is one of the keynote speakers of our conference. So thank you so much.
Jonas and George just was an amazing talk and very stimulating. If you want to continue the
discussion again, the chat is available and you can continue after the presentation outside the
conference room.
