Thank you so much to Nash and to all the organizers.
This has been a fabulous weekend and a great conference.
So I am really excited to be here and to be part of this.
So I'm going to be talking to you today about acoustic social worlds and I'm going to tell
a story from Mark of Blankets to interpersonal synergies.
And before I get started, I want to lay out a little bit of a roadmap of my talk.
Hats off to the Active Inference Lab for always having great roadmaps for your presentation
that's where I'm getting this name from.
So the first thing we're going to visit today is this notion of acoustic social worlds.
And what is the relevance of acoustic social worlds for studying coordination in multi-agent
human interaction?
Then I'm going to walk through some of the ways that Active Inference and the notion
of nested Mark of Blankets might be used to describe the boundaries of multi-agent systems.
We're going to run into a little bit of a roadblock at this point, though, because there
are questions that I'm not sure Active Inference and Mark of Blanket Formalisms provide the
right answers to.
So that's going to take us on a little bit of a turn towards dynamical systems theory,
the notion of interpersonal synergies, and the analysis tools that come along with these
concepts.
And we're going to end our journey today with a look at some empirical data from two different
types of multi-agent systems, which interact through their own acoustic social worlds.
So I hope to justify to you today the strength of dynamical systems theories and nonlinear
analyses tools, such as face-to-face reconstruction and recurrence quantification analysis, while
also probing what kind of questions can be answered by appeal to these dynamical systems
analyses versus mathematical formalizations like the Free Energy Principle, Active Inference,
and Mark of Blanket Formalism.
So I just want you to start by imagining the sounds of a crowded coffee shop.
Consider how individuals in that coffee shop might be interacting with each other.
There might be some small groups or pairs, and maybe many individuals engaging in small
temporary interactions.
But these individuals are not coordinating with every other individual in a cohesive
coffee shop group, they're just a jumble of individuals cohabiting a shared space.
Now imagine an audience on the floor of a rock concert, their cheering or singing along
with the artists on the stage.
Or alternatively, imagine the fan section at your favorite sporting event, emerging
into synchronous chant or a chorus of resounding booze.
Imagine how individuals in those large crowds might be interacting with each other.
As they cheer or sing, chant, or boo, they're sharing similar behavioral states, engaging
in similar actions.
They're likely sharing similar physiological and neural states as well.
These crowds are changing together in time.
They're behaving, they're coordinating, like one large interdependent group.
These shared acoustic spaces, I'm calling them, include various levels of interaction
between dyads or larger and larger groups.
And the acoustic signal that's generated by these crowds carries some information about
the behavioral dynamics employed in creating that signal.
The sound the crowd makes carries some information about the status of that crowd as either an
incidental collection of coffee goers or an integrated coordinated crowd, like a group
of contact goers.
So active inference here, we have heard a lot about over the past few days.
It's the process by which an organism actively changes the world so as to reduce prediction
error.
Active inference is also the process that organisms use to resist the second law of
thermodynamics, to stay alive and not to dissipate into the environment.
Living systems use active inference in order to enforce a boundary between the organism
and the environment.
And we call this statistical boundary between internal states of an organism and external
states in the environment, a Markov blanket.
I want to discuss now a few papers that got me really excited about the potential for
applying this Markov blanket formalism to the dynamics of multi-agent behavior in crowds,
to this transition from something like an uncoordinated incidental crowd into an integrated
and coordinated interdependent group.
So we're going to have another imagination session real quick.
If you just consider the initiation of a slow clap by one person, then two, then four people
before breaking into a full audience of flaws.
Or if you consider the first musician in a flash mob who's initiating a flow of musicians
and audience members towards engaging in shared music making.
In these instances, as the first members of the audience start clapping or the first two
musicians begin playing, you can begin to define a Markov blanket around their interaction.
The others who aren't yet playing, who aren't yet clapping, aren't participating in this
interaction yet.
They are not yet part of this multi-agent organism.
Their functions are still statistically independent from those who are operating currently under
the shared Markov blanket.
As you add more individuals clapping or more musicians playing, that small Markov blanket
expands.
Individuals who were previously part of the environment are now a part of this larger
Markov blanket of system.
But perhaps if we're thinking of our flash mob, the first two musicians who started this
flash mob, maybe they both played the violin.
And the next two musicians who joined, their cellists, they play the cello.
The local movement patterns and musical lines of the violinists are much quicker paced than
the larger and slower movements and musical lines of the cellists.
So the Markov blankets around each diet remain and they're each nested in this larger Markov
blanket around this quartet of musicians.
This larger Markov blanket that's constraining the behavior of the entire group.
So that notion here of nested Markov blankets is spelled out in Kerchoff et al. 2018.
And what you see here in this diagram is a system that is separated from its environment
via a Markov blanket.
This blanket consists of sensory states that are affected by but do not influence the environment
and active states that are affected by but do not influence the internal states of the organism.
And that system is made up of a multi-scale hierarchical assembly of Markov blankets,
which constrained dynamics at slower global timescales and at faster local timescales.
OK, cool.
So so far I've just conceptually described a system and I've identified some interesting
parallels with the description of Markov blankets of Markov blankets.
But there are still a few issues that bug me.
Can we really call an audience or a musical ensemble, a multigent group of people, a living system?
Their Markov boundaries are much more transient, say, than the Markov blanket around the skin
of my body.
And I was thrown by a statement that Kate Nave mentioned in her talk from Friston's 2013
Life As We Know It paper that a candle flame cannot possess a Markov blanket because any
pattern of molecular interactions is destroyed almost instantaneously by the flux of gas
molecules from its surface.
And this makes me wonder, do the temporary dynamics of agents in a crowd, an audience,
a musical ensemble, do they make the crowd a little bit more like a candle flame?
Additionally, is it an issue that each of the individuals inside of this Markov blanket
system are still biological and agential individuals?
I'm still wondering about the candle issue.
However, Matt Sims and his 2020 paper on how to count biological minds has alleviated some
of my worries about each individual intaining some of their individualness within a superordinate
crowd.
So in this paper, Matt Sims has adapted the model you see on the left and the notion of
multi-scale integration to accommodate symbiotic individuals using an example case of the bobtail
squid and Vibrio fissure bacteria.
This new diagram of nested Markov blankets on the right has collapsed these yellow and
orange active incensury states, insuring them, at least in this picture, into a single layer.
And the idea is that while there is a superordinate Markov blanket around the entire squid plus
Vibrio fissure system, at the same time, there are Markov blankets around the squid, around
the Vfissure bacteria, which each individually play a role as sensory or active states with
respect to each other.
So maintaining a little bit of their individuality and functioning as part of this larger symbiotic
system.
So maybe a crowd can consist of Markov blankets in this way, and each member of the crowd
or each dyad might play the role of an active or sensory state coordinating internal and
external dynamics relative to the superordinate group, while at the same time coordinating
their own active sensory states with respect to their own internal and external dynamics.
And this concept of a nested Markov blanket might seem a little more tractable if we oppose
it on a musical ensemble, where even the spatial organization on stage is somewhat
mirroring the temporal organization of their musical output, where the drummers are going
to have similar movements to the other drummers, and they're going to have similar movements
to the other folks in the percussion section.
And then over here, the flutes and clarinets are going to have similar movements, similar
acoustic outputs that's slightly different from the trombonists and the tubas, maybe
in the back.
So they each have their Markov blankets surrounding their physical physiological states, and the
similar shared acoustic output between each of these individual groups.
But everyone's participating in the same global acoustic signal, so the same constraining
dynamics created by the musical ensemble as a whole is affecting the behavior in each
of these smaller Markov blanket systems and then each of the individuals there inside.
Now, of course, in looking at people, looking at a crowd, there are other important factors
at play when determining whether we can draw a Markov blanket around a crowd, or if we
decide that a crowd is acting as one integrated multi-agent system, rather than a collection
of just independent agents.
These include social contexts, the development of patterned cultural practices in these different
contexts, the script surrounding what events happen and when they happen, and the regimes
of shared attention between each of these agents in these different social contexts.
So I've just suggested that Markov blankets might be an interesting place to start in
describing the dynamics and the emergence of integrated interactive multi-agent groups
like a crowd.
But I don't work with the mass of the free energy principle, and I don't have the tools
to test the hypothesis that I've just put forth.
Additionally, there is more to describe than just the existence or not of a Markov blanket
and the emergence or not of a crowd-level individual.
So I have questions.
Can we measure the behavior or the emergence of Markov blankets as they expand and contract
over time?
Also, how does a group of people move between novel and habitual patterns of coordination?
How does a multi-agent system navigate and transitions between chaos and stability?
So here's when we take a slight turn, and for these questions I have found tools under
dynamical systems theory and with the concept of interpersonal synergies.
So the concept of synergies first, it arises from the literature on motor control as a
solution to the degrees of freedom problem.
So essentially Bernstein noted that fine and precise control of every degree of freedom
in a motor movement would be computationally intractable for the nervous system to solve.
So instead, muscles self-organized into coupled and locally constrained degrees of freedom,
they form temporary soft assemblies of motor function that can enable flexible movement
in coordination.
So this definition of a synergy I thought was pretty great and kind of easy to digest
from Fusarelli at Allen 2014.
And this definition, I'll read it for you.
Synergies are defined by three things, their functional specificity, dimensional compression,
and reciprocal compensation.
So the need to perform a function or functional specificity temporarily shapes the coordination
of several components into one system, this is dimensional compression, in which external
and internal perturbations are flexibly dealt with by compensatory adjustments of the components.
This is reciprocal compensation.
In order to preserve the functionality of the whole system for as long as is needed.
We can differentiate mere coordination as a result of engaging with the same stimulus
and then similar action patterns from a true interpersonal synergy, which results as micro-scale
structures of a system interact to give rise to macro-scale dynamics.
So when a synergy develops, we no longer need to describe the independent dynamics of each
micro-scale structure.
We can instead describe the behavior of a single interaction dominant system, which consists
of complimentary actions from each person's motor activity as it pertains to their role
in the softly assembled complex system.
You might even notice by looking at these graphics that there's a certain similarity
between the notion of a Markov blanket and of a synergy.
These might very well be two sides of the same coins, two perspectives on a very similar
conceptual landscape.
So let's come back to some of my questions from earlier.
Can we measure the behavior or emergence of Markov blankets around a small group of people
extending up to a large crowd as they expand and contract over time?
Similarly, can we measure the interpersonal synergies that develop, that emerge in Dyed's
large groups and entire crowds?
Again, how does a group of people move between novel and habitual forms of coordination?
How does a multi-agent system navigate transitions between chaos and stability?
And let's make it a little bit trickier.
The real world is messy and measurement is difficult.
In a naturalistic social interaction in a very large crowd, I probably can't measure
the behavior of every single individual person.
I probably can't give everyone an individual microphone.
I probably can't track each person's brain states in a large crowd.
And I might not even have access to a camera, let alone good motion capture cameras that
can track everyone's head and limb movements.
But come back now to the crowd to imagine at the start of this discussion.
So the difference between the coffee shop crowd and the rock concert audience or the
sporting event crowd, they're truly easy for you or I to identify.
An uncoordinated group of independent individuals happening to coexist in a shared space versus
a coordinated, interdependent group of members of a crowd.
We can simply hear that these two groups of people sound different.
Similar, we can simply hear when we are engaged in participating as a collective sort of agent
or whether we're just interacting in a large, independent group of people or even a very
large musical ensemble.
So with a well-placed microphone or maybe a few microphones, we can generate a single
audio recording of the sound that an interacting group makes over time.
A human can make inferences about the interaction and acoustic social world of these crowds
just by listening to the sounds they've created.
Similarly, tools from dynamical systems and theories allows us to make inferences about
the behavior of an entire complex system based on this one measurement that we have access
to.
So for the next little while, I'm going to walk you through a little bit of theory and
a toy example, and then I'm going to end this talk with data from two different real-life
multi-aging groups analyzed with tools from dynamical systems theory.
So the first item in our toolkit here we have is phase-based reconstruction.
So we can reconstruct the behavior of a system as a whole by measuring only one of its parts,
and this is called Taken's theorem.
This is accomplished by embedding delayed copies of a single time series into multiple
dimensions.
And what you have on the right here is a single time series extracted from the Lorenz system.
Delayed to make another time series and delayed once more to make a third time series.
So the Lorenz system, if you know, it's describable by three differential equations.
And using the one time series we have we can reconstruct a projection of the Lorenz system.
And this phase-based reconstruction maintains the same topography as the original Lorenz
system.
And in the case of our acoustic crowd data what we can take is a time series of the acoustic
signal and we can embed that into further dimensions just like we did with the Lorenz
systems.
And we can follow this exact same steps to reconstruct that system's behavior over time.
And once we've completed this phase-based reconstruction we can visualize the behavior
of the reconstructed system by generating what's called recurrence plots.
So this is done by plotting recurrent points from the reconstructed phase space that's
within some radius that we set.
We can evaluate the structures in this recurrence plot via recurrence quantification analysis.
So on the right here you see a few examples of some time series.
You see their reconstructed phase spaces in the middle and on the bottom you see the recurrence
plots.
So one of the simplest measures we can glean from recurrence plots are the rate that states
reoccur and this is called simply recurrence rate.
So in these diagrams on the left here you see a time series of a simple sine wave and
of course if you reconstruct the phase space of a sine wave you're going to get something
like a circle.
We then plot a point on our recurrence plot every time our system revisits a portion of
the phase space within that certain radius that we've set.
Within the sine waves recurrence plot we can see a lot of these diagonal lines.
Diagonal lines reflect deterministic behavior and they track how similar sequences of values
change over time.
As our sine wave is reliably deterministic we see these long diagonals.
The recurrence value we extract here is as expected called determinism.
In the middle we see uncorrelated white noise.
The time series is random, the reconstructed phase space is similarly random and as a result
we see little to no diagonal or any other structures in the recurrence plot.
And finally on the right we see a time series extracted from speech.
It's a little bit deterministic like our sine waves so there are some diagonal structures
in the recurrence plot but the length of these diagonals varies and we report this variation
in a value called entropy.
Finally recurrence plots can also contain certain vertical structures in addition to
the diagonals.
You don't see any here but vertical structures occur when states do not change for some period
of time.
So these are indications of periods of stability and we measure these with a value called liminarity.
Liminarity in contrast with determinism measures how a signal is organized in terms of similar
absolute values that are stable over time.
And that was a lot to throw at you so just to summarize and provide a slightly different
visual the recurrence quantification analysis measures that we take from our system are
recurrence rate which is the percentage of recurrence points on the recurrence plot.
It represents patterns of behavior that repeat over time.
And then determinism the percentage of points that fall on a diagonal in the recurrence
plot and determinism represents behaviors that belong to a longer sequence of behavior.
So entropy the variability in the lengths of these diagonal lines represents the amount
of disorder that there is in the sequence.
And finally at liminarity this is the percentage of all points that fall on a vertical line
in the recurrence plot and this represents clusters of behavior for some length of time
such as when a system visits a behavior for a period of time leaves and then returns that
behavioral state.
Okay great thank you for going with me on that theoretical journey.
And now that you know how recurrence spots are generated and how to interpret them we're
going to take a look at two types of crowds.
So the first crowd I'm looking at the first multi-agent system is a model system for us.
So this is a group of musicians that performing a piece called Welcome to the Imagination
World.
This piece was composed to do something really interesting.
So the composer wrote the first few minutes of the piece to be completely random.
In music theory terms we call this a leotoric when some element of the music is left up
to chance or left up to whatever the performers decide to play in the moment.
So assuming the sounds work the start of this video sounds a little bit like this.
Alright so that's not the musicians warming up on stage it's the actual music and here
the musicians themselves are instructed not to interact with each other.
After a few minutes the musical score directs the musicians to coordinate and they begin
to sound more like one interacting ensemble and I'll play you a little bit of what that
sounds like.
Alright.
So what we're seeing here is we have sort of a ground truth knowledge of what the system
is doing.
In the beginning they're uncoordinated independent individual musicians and then the musical
interaction when they start interacting with each other this serves as a coupling mechanism
and as this coordination between the musicians arises they begin to sound like one musical
ensemble.
So what we aren't seeing here we're not seeing emergent or spontaneous interaction in this
particular musical composition and performance since the musicians are told what to do a
little bit by the musical score and they're told precisely when to begin coordinating
the behavior.
So in this particular performance the divide between uncoordinated and coordinated joint
music making it's made even more apparent by the fact that the lights turn on and the
conductor arrives on stage just as the musicians begin to play together as one ensemble.
But it provides a really good test bed since we have the ground truth of what the dynamics
are of this two stage of coordination patterns.
We can use these recurrence quantification analysis tools from dynamical systems and
we can ask are there any differences in the nonlinear recurrence dynamics that we measure
with RQA between the uncoordinated and coordinated acoustic behavior of this musical ensemble.
And yes, yes there are so at the top here you're seeing 30 seconds from the beginning
of that uncoordinated jumble of sounds, the end of that uncoordinated jumble of sounds
and at the bottom are the first and last 30 seconds of the coordinated part of the piece
where they sound like a musical ensemble.
And we can see that the acoustic behavior for musicians in the coordinated section of the
music is much more structured with these vertical bursts of collected stretches of sound.
We can even look closer at five second samples.
So if I look at five seconds out of each of these 30 second sections we see the same
sort of vertical structures emerging in the coordinated sections but not the uncoordinated
sections.
And we can perhaps learn even a little bit more by looking at the distributions of those
measures that we extract from these plots.
So in this plot here what you're seeing is the coordinated section of the piece in blue
and uncoordinated sections in red.
So what we're seeing for each of these RQA metrics is that when the musicians began interacting
with each other as a coordinated musical ensemble, recurrence and stability measures increased
overall.
In addition, the interacting ensemble also exhibited further variability in these recurrence
measures.
This indicates that the interacting ensemble of musicians were able to explore a greater
variety of behavior than when they performed as a stage full of individual musicians.
We can see this even more clearly if we plot those same recurrence measures over time.
So the blue and purple lines here represent the uncoordinated initial sections of the
piece and orange and greens are from the coordinated sections of the piece.
And you can see when they're coordinated these values are much more...
I've said this backward, orange and green are from the uncoordinated section of the
piece, blue and purple are from the coordinated section of the piece, and you can see a lot
more variability when they're allowed to coordinate with each other.
All right, so that's cool.
That's a musical ensemble.
But what about an even messiered data?
Well I have some data from the cheering section, the student section of a basketball game.
And we can ask, is there a relationship between these nonlinear recurrence dynamics measured
by RQA and different categories of acoustic behavior of this crowded basketball game?
And this data, it was labeled by undergraduates, it's from colleagues at BYU.
And it was labeled into a few different kinds of behavior.
There was positive, chanting, distraction noise, angry noise, a few other categories
of behavior.
And I'm just going to show you recurrence plots from two of these.
So the first you see here is a recurrence plot of distraction noise.
And you could think of this as booing or, I don't know, jangling keys or something at
someone throwing a free throw, trying to distract them.
And you can see there's not a lot of features in this recurrence plot.
It looks a lot like our uncoordinated section of that musical piece.
In contrast, the second recurrence plot here is from a section where the fans were positively
chanting, you know, go, team, go, whatever you chant at a basketball game.
And you see here clearly these vertical bursts of laminar activity.
You see periods of stability in this crowd as they're interacting together as they're
making this chant.
And I can plot this out in distributions as well.
So these are our four different RQA metrics.
You can see a difference between these are six kinds of sounds that our basketball crowd
was making.
Positive chant at the top, negative chanting, distraction noise, cheer, applause, and anger.
And you can see differences in these.
You can also see similarities.
So maybe positive and negative chant are pretty similar to each other.
They seem to revisit states frequently, which is that recurrence measure, which makes sense
if you think of the periodicity of a chant.
They're also both following a fairly stable variety of long trajectories of states.
And they're tending to revisit states in a similar way.
And positive and negative chant are also quite different from the other categories of crowd
sound.
Distraction noise, cheer, and applause, they all look pretty similar here to me.
A bit lower on these RQA metrics.
Well angry noise seems to be off by itself with low RQA metrics across the board.
And then if we sort of test this question, this is just a plot of estimated marginal
means where I've done pairwise comparisons between these different RQA metrics.
And you're seeing a graphical representation here of how similar those pairwise comparisons
say each of these sounds are to each other.
And you can see positive and negative chant are pretty consistently over here.
They don't quite overlap, but distraction noise, cheer, and applause, especially here
in this determinism category.
They have similar deterministic states, deterministic measurements.
And we can talk more about this, but I think I've run out of time.
So I'll just conclude here by saying that markup blankets might be interesting.
They might be an interesting way to categorize or to describe how nested behavior within
crowds can expand and contract to have different boundaries around a crowd.
But the tools from dynamical systems analyses, such as face-based reconstruction, RQA, really
do have a lot to tell us about the information, about the difference in these two kinds of
dynamics.
And I would love to have a conversation after this in the Q&A about how well you think we
could apply this markup blanket formalism to crowds if maybe looking at interpersonal
synergies is the better way to go.
And before we end, I just want to thank my collaborators who work with me on this project.
Emily Reeves is a PhD candidate in the applied mathematics department at UC Merced.
Chris Kellow and Michael Spivey have worked on each of these projects with us, and my
advisor, Ramesh Bell Superminium.
So thank you all for attending my talk.
You can find me on email, Twitter, if you want to know anything about UC Merced or my
lab at UC Merced, there are links.
And I look forward to chatting in the Q&A.
Thanks so much, Shannon, for the wonderful talk.
We will take questions now.
If anybody would like to come to the Q&A.
Mao.
Hey, Shannon.
It was really quite a brilliant talk.
I guess my question is...
It's interesting that you went through this from a sound perspective because in effect
that's what we believe, that's what we consider sound to be, right?
It's the main way through which we are capable of coordinating because that's how information
travels.
How would you see this sort of pattern being extended towards elements which don't necessarily
produce sound?
How would you see these patterns being analyzed outside the sound system?
Yeah, thanks.
That's a great question.
There's actually been a lot of research using recurrence quantification analysis and this
development of interpersonal synergies using motion and capture data.
So other things that coordinate...
The sound coordinates, and it's great because we can hear that result of our coordination
in a certain way.
But if we're in conversation with someone and we're chatting whether we can see them
or not, there are subtle patterns and postural fluctuations.
So these postural mechanisms that we're not aware of that keep us balanced, they'll start
maybe mirroring each other or coordinating in certain structured ways just through conversation.
You can analyze that through this motion capture data in quite a similar way that I did with
the sound.
Yeah, I mean, that's exactly what we're positing with the scripts, right?
It's that you're sending a series of signals that are codified to enable this coordination
should you desire it or, in fact, because it makes it smoother for society to just continue
existing within a set of states.
So then the next...
I mean, unless someone else has a question.
My next question would be jazz.
I mean, the reason the jazz doesn't make everybody happy, I believe, like a lot of people are
kind of ambivalent about it is because of the difficulty for people to coordinate with
the music.
Right?
Like you, as a person listening to it, are having a hard time predicting where it's going.
And thus it doesn't create this sort of flowy pleasure for a lot of people.
However, the whole point of jazz is that the musicians together are coordinating and they
literally do not even need a sheet in order to be able to coordinate because they understand
the patterns that are going on.
And so this here is maybe where I'm having a hard time understanding how some effects
of really accurate coordination create such a boundary that becomes practically impenetrable
by people, practically because some people do like jazz, but impenetrable by others who
are witnessing this and trying to coordinate.
Yeah.
So I think this goes into...
I think it fits very well with your notion of scripts and the idea that we learn these
scripts for different situations.
So it could be jazz for some people.
It could be heavy metal music for some other people.
Maybe this just sounds awful.
I don't like dancing to it.
I don't like coordinating to it.
How can you listen to this?
But after you start, maybe you join a jazz band to learn more about it and you start
learning the patterns, learning what kind of interactions are appropriate, where they're
appropriate.
You start learning the history, so you start learning which of the jazz grates someone is
calling when they're improvising on a certain line, or you start to actually recognize the
different harmonies that are actually present in this loud heavy metal music, and you start
to befriend people who are knowledgeable about these two musical systems.
You start to learn more about these musical systems.
You engage more in listening or in performing or in dancing.
What have you to these systems, and the more you engage, the more you learn, the scripts
start to help organize your participation in this greater sort of social system and
allow you to be able to integrate with that music or with people making that music.
Hi, Shannon.
Thanks very much.
I was just really curious.
This use of recurrence plots, I think it's really interesting and it seems that obviously
gives you options to open into other dynamical systems approaches and stuff.
So yeah, I wonder what your thoughts are on how these, how you really came to expand into
that and how much potential you think recurrence plots and the use of this can have for others
in their work.
Yeah, well, none of this is particularly new.
So that first look at Bernstein was in 1970 something when he was looking at people hammering
and how they didn't move to exactly the same point.
They didn't move through exactly the same trajectory.
And the use of recurrence quantification analysis has been applied to more than just
systems of motor control and it doesn't just apply to living systems either.
So you can look at the trajectory of any complex system.
I'm thinking of a hurricane over time and you can identify different trajectories in
that underlying behavior and pretty much anything that you can turn into a time series.
You can analyze using these recurrence quantification analysis tools and plot and recurrence plots.
So I think it has a similar usefulness to this notion of the free energy principle being
this like multi scale principle where you can talk about the dynamics of cells all the
way to the dynamics of city states.
Similarly, you can use this as an empirical measurement tool to compare the trajectories
of a slime mold through space or the trajectories of a crowd navigating through a city or something
like that.
I think they're equally broad and applicable and for me personally I think these dynamical
systems tools are a little bit more transparent and accessible than the mathematics that underlies
a lot of the free energy principle and the mark of blanket formalism in the sense that
in the sense and it could just be because I'm coming from sort of an experimental background
so if anything that can help me analyze my experimental data, I love it, it helps me
model my data, I need someone else to help me do the modeling.
And do you think that there's a bit like are you looking for like some mathematical way
to track correlation or can you sort of eyeball it so to speak you know like you could see
the patterns.
So there's a sort of qualitative potential I suppose but are you looking for other quantitative
ways to say I mean suppose you can clearly see something's different so it's fairly
clear there's a different pattern but I just wondered like how to say you've got a correlation
or say you've got a difference that's meaningful.
Yeah so you've touched on something there so the recurrence plots they give us that sort
of qualitative the gist of what the data looks like because I can see that these two plots
look different and then the metrics that we get through recurrence quantification analysis
are giving that numerical description of what we're seeing in the plots.
And what was the next part of your question are you looking for yeah like is there like
a quantitative way or some sort of like I don't know some sort of way that you could
get a measure that would say how much it's like this or like that.
Oh maybe like how you mean how much like crowd A is like crowd B.
Yeah or a correlation between laminatory or entropy patterns or something.
Yeah so you can look at the way these time series are generated when I'm looking at a
musical output or at a crowd output is you're looking at like windowed time slices and that's
how you're getting these different recurrence measures over time and then when I'm plotting
those distributions it's how recurrent that system was throughout this long section of
time that I've put into little windows here.
And I can look at kind of your regular you know statistical analyses whether you're using
Bayesian methods or whether you're using null hypothesis significance testing and you know
just comparing just like you would with any other yeah.
Oh thank you take it.
I don't know if there's time for my question because I think the next talk is at 10.45
then can I ask or I can also.
If the organizers don't object I can try to answer real quick.
Okay so thank you for your talk it was really interesting and really useful for me.
I was wondering the kind of examples that you studied were examples of interpersonal coordination
where there's kind of rhythms that are common to the people interacting so there is kind
of a similarity in behavior that is entrained in the interaction and I was wondering if
you wanted to study and add idea on how to study interactions where there is a coordination
around complementary behavior which is organized in function of the goals of a joint action.
So I don't know if you have ideas about that and how you could measure the kind of coordination
that emerges when people are trying to do something together and they don't add up similar
behavior that is for instance in the same rhythm but that they interact with each other
in ways that are complementary and help us reach common goals.
I don't know if you have ideas on this topic.
Yeah so that one quote that I gave you from Ricardo Fusilieri is from a paper called
Dialogue as interpersonal synergy and so dialogue it's kind of I say an easy case not the dialogue
is easy but it's a point where I'm not speaking exactly the same time that you're speaking I'm
not I might not even be using the same rhythms in my speech patterns as you are but together
this turn taking dynamic is forming this complementary process like you say and we're using that
that's forming this this functional interpersonal synergy with each other and I think that's a
great place to start it's called Dialogue as interpersonal synergy from Fusilieri et al in
2014 and there's a lot more you can look at the dynamics of sports teams so soccer players aren't
doing the same thing as other people on their team but they're coordinating literally towards
the shared goal and you can look at that in terms of functional synergies in the same way.
Thank you. Thanks so much.
