The next talk is by two researchers, the first of which is Nellie Kastel, who just finished
her Masters in Brain and Cognitive Science at the University of Amsterdam, and Kasper
Huss, who is a PhD student in social neuroscience at the University of Amsterdam in the Netherlands.
Their presentation is entitled, Ideas worth Spreading, a Free Energy Proposal for Cumulative
Cultural Dynamics, and I will let her take it away from here.
Okay, so if everybody can hear me and everything is good, then I'll just start.
Hopefully you can see my screen. So let me just reset something. Okay, so my name is Nellie Kastel.
Like she said, I finished my Masters in Brain and Cognitive Neuroscience at Amsterdam,
and actually the work that I'm going to be presenting to you today is my Masters thesis,
which was supervised by Kasper called Ideas worth Spreading, a Free Energy Proposal for Cumulative
Cultural Dynamics, and in short, our project provides an active inference formalization and also
some simulations of how a certain idea, or what we would refer to as a particular belief state,
spreads in a population. All right, so during this talk, I'm going to be following a standard
paper structure. So I'll start off by going over some of the current literature on cultural dynamics
and evolution, as well as motivating the appeal to active inference for modeling this dynamic.
And in the methods section, I'm going to elaborate on the specific modeling framework
we're going to be using to include current frameworks that we build on. I'll also be going
over the parameters of the generative model applied in our cultural simulations, followed by the
results of these simulations. So for the discussion section, what I really hope I'm going to have time
to do is open for discussion of possible theory that I had in mind, which was inspired by the
results that I'm going to talk about. And hopefully you're going to be willing and interested to give
me some feedback or talk about it. So finally, I'm going to finish with concluding thoughts.
So first, for a little bit of background on what I mean by cultural dynamics and what dynamics
exactly we're going to be focusing on for our agent-based simulations. So when I talk about
cultural dynamics, what I'm referring to specifically is the diffusion and the evolution dynamics of
cultural information and how it affects a population, but from a systems perspective. So this process
is typically divided into three components that usually they're studied separately, but here
we sort of put them together. So first, novel cultural information is introduced into a population
in a process that we know of as innovation. And secondly, a novel piece of cultural information
then spreads in the population in a process that is known in the literature as cultural
transmission. So I just want to mention though quickly that an emerging conclusion from this
talk is going to be that this term is kind of impoverished because it leaves out the retention
of cultural information, which I'll argue later on is crucial for a complete understanding of
the way information evolves in a population. So for this talk, I'll be referring to this process as
the local dynamics or the communication dynamics of culture. Finally, cultural information spreads
within a society, thereby shaping it to the degree to which the idea is prevalent. And
this is going to be referred to as the global dynamics. So now I want to talk a little just a
second. Sorry for that.
Okay, so I want to talk a little bit about our focus in this project, which has been theorizing
about and simulating the local and the global dynamics of cultural information spread.
And we focus specifically on these two for two reasons. So first, we decided not to deal with
the emergence of innovation or novel cultural information, because there really aren't any
enough theoretical models to build on. And most of the literature focuses on the spread of
cultural information. But you can note that the emergence of innovation from a collective cultural
brain is exactly what I want to be talking about when I theorize in the discussion. Another reason
for our focus on the local dynamics of communication and global dynamics is that while there's a
really fast growing body of theoretical and empirical research that's being done in this field,
there's just not really enough mathematical models that are able to integrate these different
approaches and this different information from multiple disciplines into a unified and a
quantifiable interpretation. So this is why we chose to focus on offering a quantitative model
of cultural dynamics, which we hope is going to achieve exactly that. So the purpose of this
slide is to show that even those quantitative models that currently exist, even those are
kind of insufficient because they don't quite capture the genuine complexities of cultural
evolution. And a prominent stream where I think this occurs is inspired by epidemiology, where
accounts convert models used for predicting the spread of a virus to describe the spread of an
idea. You probably know this as memetics. And these models developed from earlier theories,
which compared a cultural belief to a virus of the mind that propagates by
infecting the minds of individuals within a society in much the same way that a biological
virus infects immune systems. So this is all very cool, but there's one critical problem with this
comparison and that is that it implies that a cultural idea is just simply copied during transmission
just like viruses are copied. So we thought of this notion as just being
kind of intuitively insufficient for any realistic portrayal of communication. But we also show in
the paper that it also conflicts with many existing theoretical ideas on cultural transmission.
And these theories that conflict with epidemiology models for cultural spread
suggest that transmission actually involves the active interpretation of the person receiving
the information so that information can't just be merely copied during transmission.
Mainly problematic however, and this is the very point, is that epidemiology models are
inconsistent with models of cumulative culture. Now models of cumulative culture portray culture
as the result of a process by which cultural traits are gradually modified and improved upon
over many generations. And they conflict with epidemiology models because they suggest that
culture is just the accumulation of changes to traits that occur with every transmission,
such that information can't be thought of as just being merely copied under a cumulative framework.
And theories on dynamic cumulative culture are extremely prominent in the literature
and are perhaps like the most representative I think of the genuine complexities of cultural
evolution. But this, the problem is that this makes them also very challenging to to formalize under
like a mathematical account and which is why this account is very useful and why active inference
specifically is useful. So how did we deal with formalizing these complexities of cumulative
culture? Historically speaking, a particularly challenging element of modeling this cumulative
culture is formalizing what kind of seems like an almost limitless appearance of cultural traits,
because if every transmission of information does involve changes to a trait, then there are countless
ways in which these traits can be modified and then ultimately represented. So a useful way
to tackle this problem has been conceptually thinking about cultural information as discrete units
that start out simple but over generations continuously rearrange and reshuffle and in
this process they create a potentially boundless display of new and increasingly complex cultural
bits of information. So this led us to the appeal to current models of cultural evolution that apply
exactly this thinking and these are known as a population memetics models.
Memetics models make this explicit analogy to genetic inheritance where the fundamental unit
of cultural inheritance is known as a cultural unit or a trait. So our model leaves this concept
of a cultural trait abstract. But if we put it in a cultural context, it can take on the form of any
relevant belief, fashion, ideology, preference, language, behavior. So this analogy to genes is
useful from a modeling perspective because it highlights the importance of recombination for
a complex representation of cultural information that much like genetic information is constantly
evolving. But the problem is that memetics models, even though they offer an elegant solution
to modeling problems, they're pretty notorious, you maybe know, for having their own conceptual and
methodological difficulty. So mostly these we've realized these have to do with kind of legitimate
real differences between genetic and cultural inheritance that have been so far overlooked
in models. So this our intermediate aim really is has been to tackle these problems using an
active inference formulation. And we focus on two prominent ones.
The first unaccounted for difference is between genetics and memetics is that genetic inheritance
naturally offers a distinction between a genotype and a phenotype. So there is like a clear cut
division between the site carrying inherited cultural information and the site of the specific
appearance of that information. But the problem is that current literature on cultural inheritance
doesn't really offer this equivalent distinction between these two sites. And so this makes every
attempt to formalize models of cultural evolution very prone to error. So this is the case because
variation, which is represented in genetics as the genotype and in culture as the cultural unit.
So variation and selection, which has no cultural equivalent, they have to be somehow
distinguished in their state spaces to allow for the selection and further reproduction of culture.
So the problem is that so far population memetics model models neglected this issue and left the
question of the space of cultural selection untreated such that cultural traits in these models
occupy a kind of abstract and like a vague capacity. Another unaccounted for difference
between memes and genes is that genes can be easily modeled as a recombination of
sufficiently similar genotypes because they're based on a shared genome. But cultural ideas
are subjective and they can be represented differently from person to person. And this
difference hasn't been accounted for in other models between genes and memes, but active inference
is actually kind of useful for solving this. In previous active inference work, this problem
of discrete representations of meaning has actually been articulated as the problem of
hermeneutics. For those of you who don't know, hermeneutics is the non-trivial notion that
when we communicate, when we share and when we transform information, we don't actually have
any direct access to each other's internal representation of meaning. So even if we try
really, really hard to interpret someone's true meaning with some convincing narrative that we
have, we still don't have, we still wouldn't have any objective criteria with which we could verify
this, our account. And the problem of hermeneutics, and this is detailed in Friston and Fritz
2015, Duet for One, which is a crucial paper for this project, is solving for how, despite all I
just said, we still see that we're able to understand each other and even relatively precisely.
The solution for hermeneutics in active inference comes from the basic assumption that both
communicating parties employ sufficiently similar generative model, even if their internal states
can be very different. So when this is the case, and you should bear in mind that this is not always
the case, interlocutors refer to their own internal generative model in order to infer the state of
another from their behavior. And in our case, we use a speech. So put more simply,
shared generative model structures are used as a kind of frame of reference or a mental anchor for
inferring the internal states of others. And importantly, active inference communication
also provides us with a clue of how to solve the problem of the site of cultural selection.
So still in Friston and Fritz 2015, Duet for One, they simulate active inference communication in
birdsong, and they show that when two agents or birds engage in communication, they become
coupled in a cycle of action and perception, which ultimately brings about a generalized
synchrony between their internal states. And this mutual attunement of agents to each other's
states allows for a shared representations to emerge. And in this project, we want to build on
this idea of shared representations as generalized synchrony. And we formulate an active inference
consistent theory for the site of cultural selection. Under our model, when we simulate
the belief updating dynamics between agents that are communicating, this
recombination of two separate internal beliefs into one takes the form of a specific convergence
between the respective generative model. So a byproduct of this thesis, of this
convergence of belief states, which is the thesis basically, a byproduct of this
is that a reproduced cultural belief resides in the minds of both interlocutors
as the site of cultural selection, where it can be further reproduced through the same process,
basically. So what we see is that active inference allows us to formulate a consistent
account of cultural information spread through communication by building on and improving
population mimetic existing ideas. And we provide a proof of principle for this
by simulating a dialogue between active inference agents, which hold distinct belief states,
and they try to convince each other of their own belief. And the main agenda for these simulations
is to provide a proof of principle for the idea that generalized synchrony between
communicating agents can be operationalized as a particular convergence between the respective
generative models. And this operationalization helps us build the necessary methodological
and conceptual building blocks for a full-blown model of cumulative culture.
And again, as a reminder, cumulative culture is just the idea that culture is the accumulation
of modifications to belief states. So in order to simulate this, we basically multiplied the
local dynamics from the previous static simulation to 50 agents, such that instead of one couple
in dialogue, there are 25 couples engaged in dialogue at each given time step. So I hope that
was kind of clear. Basically, I'm supposed to be going over the generative model, but I really,
I've seen that I just don't have enough time at all. So this is it. And no, I'm not going to,
I can't go over it because then I just won't be able to finish. But basically parameters are in
squares, concentration parameters are in dark blue circles. And the way to understand it spatially
is that from left to right is how states evolve in time. And bottom to top is how components
of the generative model are hierarchically structured in alignment with cognitive functions.
On the left, I describe all the parameters. And on the right, I describe the states that
are relevant for each level. So we have the level of perception, the level of anticipation,
where models and where agents anticipate how the belief state of the other might change over time.
We have two actions, two sets of actions. One is meeting selection and one is belief expression.
And we have a level of learning where crucially, actually,
the core belief states map on to either positive or to negative emotional valence states
through a likelihood mapping A2. So that's all I'm going to say for now. If you have questions
about this, I'd be happy to answer later. These, I also just go over the parameters one by one.
And here you see the belief state. We have the red belief state, which is the status quo belief,
and the blue belief state, which is the new or the novel belief state. But yeah,
but I can't really go over that either. And let me just see if there's anything. And yeah,
these sites hold all the action parameters, either responsible for habitual control or
voluntary actions. And I do go over expected free energy and conformity bias, but maybe I'll just
mention it. No, I think I will go over it later. Okay, so let's talk about the results of our local
simulated dynamics of communication between active inference agents. Another quick reminder
is that when two agents engage in communication, they are coupled in a bi-directional action
and perception cycle. And they can be described basically as two coupled dynamic dynamical
systems. And specifically, our model defines two groups of parameters that couple these internal
states of agents. And one is explicit and one is more implicit. So the implicit one is the
perceptual learning. But I'm also going to jump over that for a second, because it's not as important.
The model convergence is more important. And this is the perceptual inference. It works on
fast time scales. And it's responsible for agents convergence of internal belief states
during conversation. And this is regulated by agents' sensitivity to model evidence,
which is the parameter A1. And this is direct and it's explicit to them during dialogue. And this
is opposed to perceptual learning, which takes a lot of time. So this is the parameter A1. It's
the parameter that we're going to focus on for the simulation of model convergence, because
without sufficient high precision here, agents, we're going to show, they're insensitive to
evidence regarding the belief state of the other, so that this model convergence that we're talking
about, it can't really occur. So that's exactly what we show here. Belief here is expressed on the
y-axis, on the range of 0 to 1. And on the x-axis, we have time steps during agents' conversation.
On the left, sensitivity to model evidence, or the A1 parameter, is low for both agents.
And what we see is that this results in each agent sticking to their guns, so to speak,
and not adhering or tuning to the belief expression of their partner. On the right, sensitivity to
model evidence is sufficiently high. And we see that this results in the attunement of agents to
each other's representations of a belief. And their beliefs really nicely convert
into a shared representation of an idea. So note that I said that it needs to be sufficiently
high. That is, it can't really be too high, because when we do that, then actually agents
start to listen more to the other agent, which is weird and doesn't make any sense. So
it's also important to understand that these simulations should be understood as taking
generalized synchrony already for granted, because that's what Friston and Frith actually did in 2015.
But our simulations build on that by providing evidence for the premise that the level to which
agents' beliefs converge, or the level of synchrony between their internal states,
is modulated by their sensitivity to model evidence.
This is, I kind of show a cool sort of characteristic of our model compared to other models, and that
is that I show that it's kind of more flexible. So epidemiology models, for instance, they give away
all the influence, all the dominance, let's say, the power to convince to the transmitting agent,
to the transmitting agent, because this agent just simply copies its belief to the other agent.
So, and on the other hand, population memetic models, for instance, they give both agents
this convincing power, but only exactly half, because they assume the cultural transmission
is exactly comparable with the way genetics work, which doesn't leave room for a lot of flexibility.
And here I show that our converged belief, like the end here, can take on any value between zero
and one. So this makes them way more, yeah, it makes them way more flexible, and this is due to
the fact that they have, that there's a lot of parameters that are controlling who gets to sort
of get the upper hand, let's say. Here on the left, you see that on the right, sorry,
you see that the agent holding a blue belief is dominant, and on the left, the agent holding the
pink is more dominant, and the ratio here is 80-20, but it can be really any ratio, and that's what's
cool about this model. Okay, so summing up very quickly our results by conceptually thinking about
transmission as a bi-directional process, as opposed to a one-directional transmission, we
conceptually improve on models like epidemiology that imply a view of the spread of cultural
information that's not really consistent with theories. And by deriving inspiration from
population memetics models in the way cultural elements recombine, or in our model they converge,
we can, in theory, capture the seemingly infinite display of modifications to beliefs during multiple
transmissions. But our active inference model doesn't just derive inspiration from memetics,
it also improves on memetics models by offering solutions for one to the hermeneutic problem
and to the problem of the side of cultural selection. And finally, we provide a proof of
principle for the feasibility of modeling local cultural dynamics of communication
with active inference, and we provide a measurable outcome from communication as the convergence
between these belief states. And what our results indicate is that agent's ability to listen and
to attune to the belief expression of their communicating partner is just limited to basically
the extent that they are responsive to sensory evidence from their environment.
And now, for our simulations of the global dynamics of accumulative culture,
there were a few changes that we had to make in the model when we moved from the local to these
global dynamics, obviously. But a prominent one is that we added a new action which is
meeting selection as opposed to just the belief expression that we also have in the dyadic
simulations. So this is why only in the multi-agent simulations do agents get to choose the agents
that they want to meet at each given time point. And this is kind of a tricky, this is probably
like the trickiest part of our simulations, so this is why I have a whole slide just to explain
that. And this is a notion that it's been talked about a lot in this conference from the talks
that I've heard, this notion of exploitation versus exploration. So specifically, what we've done is
we thought about agents meeting selection as a preferred location on a grid, where each cell
here represents a possible agent to meet. I make a comparison here between what an agent with
confirmation bias might look like compared to an agent with novelty bias. And what we see here is
that agents have the same exact set of options. First, they have the same amount of possible agents
to meet, which is represented as just the cells in the grid. They also have the same amount of
agents they have already met. This is represented as the squares that have all that have the numbers
on them. And the same, they also have like the same level of similarity that they have with other
agents on the grid. And this is represented in the specific values that are shown in the numbers,
so one to 10. And high values here represent the fact that an agent in this location has high
similarity of a belief state with the original agent, and low values represent the opposite. So
all these things are the same. But crucially, what agents do different is the strategy that they
employ for choosing an agent to meet. And this results in different choices over three time
steps. Each choice they make is highlighted in dark gray, and you see that we have three gray spots
here. So what are these different strategies and how did we incorporate those into an active
inference framework? So in active inference, action selection is guided by the expected free
energy. And like we already mentioned, this entails maximizing the expected benefit or
utility of an action. And this is known as pragmatic value in literature. But it also entails
maximizing the potential information gain of future action. This is known as epistemic value.
And I think these constraints to free energy minimization would be best understood
as formalizing, like I said, the exploration and the exploitation tradeoff that we see often in
different learning systems. So epistemic value can be compared with exploration, that is
referring to the benefit that is related to searching over a whole sample space in order to
get a better estimation of promising areas that will then be able to be maximized with pragmatic
value, pragmatic value being compared with exploitation. And a crucial point to understand
is that agents with different preferences here, so novelty bias or confirmation bias,
they don't differ in their ultimate goal, which is their ultimate shared goal is to meet
similar agents to them. And with this, to reduce uncertainty about the agents that they're going
to meet about their behavior. So our agents just differ in the strategy that they employ for reaching
this goal. And when agents have confirmation bias, they're biased towards maximizing this
expected utility and increasing the chances of properly synchronizing with this agent.
And this is why this type of agent will choose to go and meet agents he has already met,
that he knows have high similarity values. On the other hand, agents with high novelty bias would
prefer to maximize information gain by exploring the state space. And what this gives them is the
chance to reduce ambiguity about their future decisions. So this type of agent would all would
want to go to agents that are extremely similar, but he would be willing to sacrifice a little bit
of temporary discomfort of exploring the field, so to speak, to see if perhaps there are other
agents more suited than those you already met. And this is why the novelty bias agent here will
still go and meet again an agent with extreme similarity value 10. But as opposed to the confirmation
agent, he would sacrifice the pragmatic utility or the comfort, so to speak, of seeing another agent
again, a different agent in order to gain more information on the state space, which might
improve the situation in the long run. So finally, these are the simulations that we made for the
global dynamics of cumulative culture. On the y-axis, there's a level of certainty towards the
belief state and on the x is how these beliefs change over time. What we did in the simulation is
we introduced a divergent belief state into the population in time step one to see how it spreads
and how it changes in a population. And what we see is a few cool behaviors. First of all, we see
how these results capture cumulative cultural dynamics. So for our first simulations, we had
these dyadic simulations and basically here they're just multiplied. So when they're
in communication with another agent, when they converge on a shared narrative and these simulations,
what we show here, they represent this accumulation of the modifications to beliefs within a population
of 50 communicating agents. And another cool behavior that we see is that these simulations
show how a divergent belief state spreads within a population and also the effect this spread has
on the population. And what we see here, namely, is that the population here is split into two.
Finally, in the bottom of the slide, we show how novelty bias and confirmation bias modulate the
density of agents in each of these groups. So when novelty bias is high in the population,
by the end of the simulation, more agents hold the new belief, which is the blue belief, than
agents that hold the old or status quo belief, which is in red. But the opposite is true when
conformity bias is high in the population. So we explain this result by suggesting that
agents with novelty bias are basically the ones that push the population towards accepting to
meet an agent with a novel belief. And so without these agents, individuals would be closed to new
beliefs and the status quo would just be perpetuated, which is kind of, I think, a cool thing to think
about when you think about collective behavior. So this is the conclusion, basically, what I
just talked about, that there is a nut so we successfully capture the global cumulative culture
and the spread of cultural information and what it does to a population. But I do, even though
I'm kind of like out of time, I want to share some thoughts that I've had on a possible theory
of innovation that I've been thinking of in relation to the results of our cumulative
culture simulations. So in a recent paper from 2016, which, by the way, it was talked about
quite heavily and yesterday is taught by Aval, Daniel, and Virginia. I'm not sure if they're here,
but anyway. So in this paper, a connection between cumulative culture and innovation
is made. The proposal is that under cumulative cultural network, innovation is interpreted as
the emerging property of a complexity of agents, as opposed to the result of the mental effort of
one exceptionally skillful individual, like we're kind of used to think about this.
So I was thinking a bit about this and I was wondering how it might be possible to think
of an even model innovation in this way. So what I want to do now is share these thoughts with you.
So once again, I'm going to make an appeal to biology because I was thinking about how it might
be possible to learn something from the emergence of new species in genetic evolution and use that
in our understanding of how novel ideas may emerge through cultural evolution. So genetic
speciation in biology occurs in three steps. The first is there is the existence of some
population of a species. Secondly, groups of the same species get somehow isolated from one
another and there's multiple ways where this can happen, but yeah, we'll leave that abstract for
now. And lastly, this isolation encourages the development of each group's own unique characteristic
depending on the constraint of the niche they occupy. So these new characteristics
differentiate the two population groups and these differences then grow larger and larger
as the two groups reproduce separately due to their separate environments. Ultimately,
across generation, genetic differences between the old and the new group become so large that
they're no longer able to create offspring, which is when they are considered to be separate species.
So a classic example is that of the Galapagos Finch where over time there's like
different species of this bird inhabit different locations, different islands in the Galapagos
and over time they developed these different groups, developed different beaks. So one group,
they were very thin and long because those were ideal for probing cactuses and other finches developed
large and blunt beaks which were good for nut cracking. And due to this reproductive isolation
of being on different islands, they developed into separate species with their own unique
genetic features. Sorry. And consequently, they were unable to create offspring. So my point here
in this slide is that a model of speciation could be applied to the way new beliefs emerge in culture
and to make this a bit easier to grasp, I'll give a specific example from the world of religion
to show what I mean and hopefully I'm not going to offend anybody. In the case of Christianity,
for instance, early Christians were separated from other members of their original Jewish group
on the basis of a unique interpretation of Jewish scripture. So according to Jewish scripture,
the concept of the Messiah refers to a Jewish king who will rule the Jewish people and save them
from their enemies. And according to the interpretation of early Christians for the idea of a Messiah,
Jesus was this Messiah and was declared to be the Son of God. But the problem was that the Messiah,
according to Jewish beliefs, is not considered to be a God but merely like a very charismatic leader
of Jewish people. So these two divergent representations of what exactly is denoted
in the concept of the Messiah isolated the different groups within the Jewish population.
So across generations, these differences became so large that the separate streams developed their
own unique set of characteristics, traditions, beliefs and followers, and a new religion,
which is Christianity, emerged. So what I was wondering about is if we wanted to simulate this
process of innovation as cultural speciation under active inference, what would be the conditions
for its emergence? So I thought about it and the first one would be isolation. We would have to
quantify the divergence that occurs in the population due to the introduction of a divergent belief
state. Secondly, speciation. We would have to quantify this convergence of individuals within
the groups. And we would explain that, I think, as a collective free energy minimization under
the active inference framework. But lastly, and this is the most important point, you would need
a novel belief state that naturally emerges from these dynamics. So as I've mentioned in the beginning
that the process underlying cultural dynamics is a circular one where each process naturally
emerges from the last. So to capture those circular dynamics, we would need to think of a new paradigm
for simulating the natural emergence of a sufficiently divergent belief state. So for,
I say sufficiently divergent because it needs to be dissimilar to the status quo belief
to a degree that is large enough that it creates a certain level of isolation
between the different belief groups. Or in other words, it needs to make sure that each group
maintains its integrity. But the difference between the novel belief state and the status quo
also can't be too large because then communication with the first agent holding this belief
becomes completely impossible. And note that this latter condition
is simply the assumption in active inference for the mere possibility of communication, namely
that for agents to arrive at a hermeneutics resolution and to be able to understand each
other, they must employ sufficiently similar generative models. So it would be cool if you
could find a way to create the Goldilocks conditions for a belief state to emerge naturally from the
dynamics of the cumulative culture that we have shown here. If this is computationally possible,
then we might be able to close the circular process of cultural dynamics and show that the
spread of information brings about actual changes to cultural information that with time and with
multiple generations of transmission create divergent traits that create new culture cultures
and beliefs which spread through a population again in a way that perpetuates this evolution
of culture. And yeah, that's it. So thank you very much and I hope you enjoyed it.
