The PhD student in philosophy at the Université du Québec à Montréal and his presentation
is entitled Active Influence, Mindshaping and the Fensiest Swords of Intentionality.
The floor is yours, Hemi.
Thank you very much.
Can everybody hear me correctly?
Cool.
Okay.
So, yeah, I'm Rémi Tsizon, a doctoral student at RECAM, and today I'll talk to you about
linguistic meaning and how we should conceive linguistic meaning in the Active Influence
framework.
So, the title of my presentation is Active Influence, Mindshaping and the Fensiest Swords
of Intentionality, and I think the title will become clearer with the presentation.
Okay, so I'll start by explaining a particular approach to the problem of meaning, the problem
of linguistic meaning.
This approach takes meaning to depend on a particular kind of normative practices, and
so I'll explain what that means, what is the normativity of meaning, and in the second
part of the talk, I explain how we should, I think, understand social normativity in
general in the framework of Active Influence.
And finally, in the last section of the talk, I'll explain how we can get from this basic
account of social normativity to an account of the specific kind of linguistic normativity
which yields linguistic content or meaning.
Okay, so a bit of context.
In recent work with Pierre Poirier, which is one of the organizers of the event here,
they've developed an ecological account of communication, which is based on the ecological
inactive interpretation of the Active Influence framework, developed primarily by Brindberg,
Riedfeld and Kieferstein, among others.
According to this account of communication, communicative behavior is a behavior by which
participants in a joint action will construct and restructure a shared field of affordances,
so they will transform the patterns of salience of the affordances in their shared landscape
of affordance, and this will allow them to configure the dynamics of their interactions
so as to lead them to the local goals of the joint action they're engaged in together.
So this basic account of cooperative communication was developed with the explicit aim of avoiding
the notion of content.
We believe that we have to understand what communication is without reliance on the notion
of content in traditional account of communication.
Communication is often defined as a process by which a sender has a certain mental representation
with the content and will encode this content in a medium that it will then transmit to
a receiver which will then have access to this content.
So we wished to reject this traditional account of communication and the notion of content
that comes with it.
But I believe that the notion of content nevertheless has an important role to play in the way we
shape and regulate our linguistic interaction, and what I want to do today is explain what
I think is this social role that the notion of content plays in our linguistic practices.
That's what I would try to do here.
So what do I mean when I talk about content or meaning?
So these terms I will use them interchangeably.
So what is the type of content which I'm interested in in this talk?
So content is the kind of thing that we attribute to others when we say, for instance, that
someone believes that p or intends that p or desires that p, where p can be replaced
by any proposition whatsoever.
So when we attribute these kinds of propositional attitudes, we are attributing content to the
states of the individual that we're interpreting.
We also attribute content or meaning to the linguistic performances of individuals.
For instance, when we say that the words or expressions of somebody mean something, we
are ascribing a content to its linguistic performances.
So in the presentation here, I will really focus on the particular kind of content, which
is propositional linguistic content, because I'm interested in communication, and that
is what Brandon calls the fanciest sort of intentionality.
So there you have the reason for the title of the paper.
OK, if we want to explain what content is first and foremost, I think that we have to
recognize that content is something that is normative.
That's an important property of meaning that's often been neglected, but that was recognized
early by Wittgenstein and Sellers in the 50s.
And this idea, the idea that meaning is normative, has really been at the forefront of philosophical
discussions on meaning since 1982 around where Sol Kripti, which is here in the picture
above with the nice hat on the beach, so Sol Kripti in 1982, in his book Wittgenstein
on Rules and Private Language, argued that meaning and content is not a matter of the
properties or dispositions of a speaker, it's rather a matter of the normative status of
the speaker.
Not a matter of what the speaker does, in fact, but rather a matter of what the speaker
should do.
And arguing and speaking about the conceptual content of the concept of addition, Kripti
said in this work, for instance, that the point is not that if I meant addition by plus,
I will answer 125, speaking about an equation that has 125 for an answer, but that I should
answer 125.
So in this work, Kripti argued for the normativity of content.
And more recently, there's been a really influential and important interpretation of these thesis
developed by Robert Brandon, which is the theory of normative inferentialism.
And so below Kripti, you have Robert Brandon, which is nice beard.
So yeah, now we get to normative inferentialism.
What is that?
It's the idea that the content of an utterance will be determined by the correct circumstances
and consequences of its application.
And so the content, the meaning of an expression is to be identified with the set of things
that this expression can be inferred from and the set of things that can be inferred
from it.
And these sets will form what is called the inferential role of the expression.
So for instance, if I utter the sentence, Cognitial 2021 is a huge success.
And by that, I mean that Cognitial 2021 is a huge success.
So I'm expressing the proposition that Cognitial 2021 is a huge success.
Well that means that I ought to produce this utterance only if Cognitial 2021 is indeed
a huge success.
So that will be an appropriate circumstance of application of this utterance.
There's also a variety of intra-linguistic relationships.
For example, I ought to reject the utterance Cognitial 2021 is a failure, which is incompatible
with the content that I'm expressing.
And I ought, for instance, to congratulate the organizers if I have the chance in the
appropriate circumstances.
So there's this set of inferential relationships that an utterance has.
And this is the inferential role of the expression.
In Brandem's version of normative inferentialism, the inferential role of an expression will
be defined in terms of the set of commitments and entitlements that the speaker undertakes
in producing this utterance.
So there will be a set of things that the speaker is allowed to do and a set of things
that the speaker has to do or should do.
And these commitments, these entitlements, would form the inferential role.
So the meaning of the utterance that the speaker is producing.
And this normative status, so the commitments and entitlements that are undertaken by the
speaker, it's an important idea here, will be determined, will come from the normative
attitudes of the members of its community.
And that's because normative status does not just appear out of thin air like that.
It must depend on attitudes of ascribing this normative status.
In the terms of Brandem, and it's the classic work in 1994, it says...
Yes, what I'm telling you.
Sorry.
Okay.
Can I go ahead?
Okay.
Sorry.
I heard something.
Okay.
So Brandem says there were no commitments before people starting treating each other as committed.
So that's where we have the idea that normative status, so the commitments and entitlements
of a speaker depend on the attitudes of attributing these commitments and entitlements.
And so we come to the idea that content derives from normative attitudes concerning what
a speaker is committed and entitled to.
Okay.
I think this idea, this traditional idea in analytical philosophy of mind and language,
can be linked to a more recent development, which is the mind-shipping hypothesis and
the broader normative turn in which it is embedded in social cognition research.
According to the mind-shipping hypothesis, the primary function of social cognition
is not the discovery and the tracking of the mental states of others in order to accurately
predict their behavior, as it is usually conceived.
But rather, the primary function of social cognition is to regulate behavior according
to sets of shared social norms, scripts, and narratives, which in turn make the behavior
more regular and so more easily predictable.
And so the function of social cognition is more mind-shipping than mind-reading.
And so if we apply this to the idea of content-meaning description, we can say that ascribing
the content, a certain content to the utterance of a speaker is not a way of describing the
cognitive state of the speaker.
Which rather more a way of regulating its communicative behavior.
And so this will become clearer in the later parts of the talk.
So now we finally get to active inference.
I will spare you, I think, and yet another introduction to active inference.
Probably my introduction would not be as good as a lot of those that already been presented
in the event.
I just said that active inference is a theory which states that living systems manage to
maintain their organization by embodying a generative model, which issues predictions
of sensory input.
And in order to survive to maintain their organization, the attempt to minimize the
discrepancy between the prediction of sensory input that their generative model is issuing
and the sensory input that's coming from the world.
And so there's two ways for an organism to minimize its free energy.
It can either perform perceptual inference, which minimizes free energy by the adjustment,
the modification of the generative model so that it corresponds to the sensory input.
Or it can also actively intervene in the environment so as to make the sensory input
correspond to the sensory predictions that are issued by the generative model.
So that's a really basic introduction to active inference for you.
Okay, an important implication of active inference is the idea that organisms that attempt to
minimize free energy will in time transform their ecological niche so as to make it as
predictable as possible.
So they will alter their ecological niche.
There will be a process of niche construction by which there will be an attunement between
the agent and its niche.
And so we can extrapolate this idea through cases where the organism is a social organism
and so its ecological niche is primarily a social niche.
So it is importantly composed of the behavior of other organisms.
And so this control, this niche construction will entail the control or the regulation
of the behavior of others in the niche.
And I think that gives us kind of the basic tools that we have to devise an understanding
of social normativity in active inference.
There's been a lot of work recently on the notion of regimes of expectations.
I think that is a useful notion to understand various social phenomena.
Regimes of expectations are sets of expectations about states of the world that are characteristic
of a given cultural group.
And these sets of expectations are embedded in an ecological niche and are transmitted
to members of the cultural community.
And they allow the members of the community to share expectations concerning what behavior
is appropriate in various social settings and circumstances.
And this allows everybody to behave in a way that is easily predictable.
I think that there's an emphasis that must be put on the active participation in regimes
of expectations.
I think that regimes of expectations are not just things that are acquired and then
lead us to expect certain things in our environment.
I think that it's something that is actively enforced.
And when you learn a regime of expectations, you also obtain naturally a motivation to
enforce the regime of expectations that you're learning.
And that's an important point, I think, that we have to recognize.
OK, so why is that?
It's because, as I've said earlier, systems that minimize free energy and attempt to
have as little prediction error as possible will prefer stimuli that is regular and so
easily predictable.
And they will actively sample their niche, actively structure their niche so as to sample
this kind of regular stimuli.
And so when we have social context, hyper-social context, for instance, human societies, when
the niche is importantly composed of the behavior of others, well, this will lead to the generation
of normative expectations concerning what others should do.
And there will be normative attitudes and eventually normative sanctions in order to
make the behavior of other predictable.
So there will be a mind-shaping to make the behavior correspond to normative expectations.
And so the idea is that we have kind of a direct link from regularity, so social regularity,
to social normativity under the active inference principle, I think, in social contexts.
OK, this idea is consistent with research on promiscuous normativity by Schmidt and others,
which has discovered that young children, when they perceive a behavior that is regular
or presented as regular, they will automatically assume that it's a behavior that is normatively
guided and so they will sanction the behavior that deviates from the norm that they project
on this regular behavior.
So they will over-generalize normativity, so they will suppose that any behavior that
is regular has to be that way and must be enforced so as to maintain the norms that
they project on this behavior.
I think that's an idea that supports the understanding of social normativity as emerging
from active inference as I've described it earlier.
There's an important point that must be recognized.
I think is that the regimes of expectations that constitute these basic normative practices
must not be constituted themselves by contentful mental states.
Even in research on normativity and social normativity, people try to explain the kind
of normative attitudes that constitute normative practices in terms of contentful mental states.
For instance, the theory of social expectations defines social expectations in terms of beliefs.
But as I said earlier, beliefs are the kind of thing that has content.
And so if we want to follow the strategy that I am advocating here and in which we try to
explain content and meaning in terms of normative practices, well, we cannot explain in turn
normative practices in terms of contentful mental states because we would obviously have
a circular explanation which goes nowhere.
So we have to produce an understanding of regimes of expectations as implicit attitudes,
implicit embodied expectations that do not rely on the explicit representation of a rule.
And I think that there's a lot of interesting work in the inactivist circles on such notions
of situated and embodied normativity, which are more akin to a skilled practice than to
the representation of a rule that can then be enforced.
For example, you can think of the kind of implicit normativity which is present when
we implicitly know at which distance we should stand from another speaker when we're talking
together.
We know that we cannot be too close, we cannot be too far, but this is not a kind of normativity
that relies on the explicit representation of a distance, for instance, in our cognitive
system.
It's more something like a skill that we acquire and that we practice together implicitly.
So I think that that's an important point.
Okay, so now we have this kind of basic understanding of social normativity and how it emerges
in active inference in communities composed of agents attempting to minimize each other's
free energy.
Okay, how do we get from this social normativity to the kind of linguistic normativity, which
I've argued, not argued, but I've suggested can constitute linguistic contents.
So now we come back to the idea in introduction, which I've briefly explained that we have
provided an ecological account of cooperative communication and this account, which we have
developed, explicitly does not rely on content.
So we didn't want to have content to be an important conceptual part of this account
of communication.
And I think that we can get linguistic normativity if we take this account of cooperative communication
and we insert social normativity to the communicative practices.
And if we do that, we will get a kind of linguistic normativity, which will eventually get us
linguistic content.
So I'll quickly explain how we can do that.
So I've said quickly earlier that communication in our view is the process by which participants
in a joint action will alter the shared field of affordances that they're navigating together
in order to more optimally reach the goals of their joint action.
And by doing that, the interlocutors manage to functionally constrain the dynamics of
their interaction.
They will create interpersonal synergies such as those described by Shannon in an earlier
talk.
And by doing that, they will more easily reach the goals of their joint action.
And so for example, if we're doing something together in a shared context, an act of pointing,
something in a shared context would allow me to highlight or activate an affordance
in our shared space.
And that would, for instance, lead me to make you do a certain behavior which would help
our interaction, the joint goals, which we're pursuing together, for instance.
So that would be an example of an act of communication in our account of communication.
So now we have this basic account of cooperative communication which does not rely on the notion
of content and communities of agents which use these acts of communication to coordinate
their behavior.
Well, these communities, they will be comprised of agents that attempt to minimize their free
energy, as I said in section two, by making each other as predictable as possible.
So there will be normative attitudes concerning the behavior of others so as to make others
as predictable as possible.
But because there are communicative practices in these communities, these normative attitudes
will also eventually concern the communicative practices of these communities.
So there will be normative attitudes that emerge concerning the relations between the
acts of communication that are used in this community.
And what I want to show is that these normative attitudes will institute normative statuses
of commitments and entitlements concerning the communicative behavior.
And as stated in normative infantialism, this gives us linguistic content.
Okay, so we can define very summarily the notions of commitment and entitlement.
For instance, a commitment is an agent will be committed to a behavior when there is
a regime of expectation in its community, according to which not performing this behavior
will generate prediction errors.
So the agent in this case is obligated, is committed to this behavior.
And we can also define entitlement in a similar way, differently, obviously.
So an agent will be entitled to a certain behavior when there's a regime of expectation
in its community, according to which performing this behavior does not generate prediction
error.
And so this behavior is allowed for this agent.
So we have these basic definitions of commitment and entitlement.
And these kinds of normative statuses will emerge from the communicative practices in
communicative communities.
For instance, suppose that an act of communication, A, is regularly accompanied by an act of communication
between these orders.
There are sets of statistical relationships between the acts of communication that are
used in the cooperative community.
But as I said earlier, these statistical relationships will be abstracted by the generative models
of the member of the community.
But because the members of the community attempt to mind shape each other so as to be as regular
as possible, they will not just learn the statistical regularity, but they will also
actively enforce them on the communicative behavior of others.
So they will form normative expectations concerning these relationships.
So an agent who produces A, which is regularly accompanied by B, and is expected in the regime's
expectations of its community, will thereby undertake a commitment to be.
So an agent who produces A has also eventually to produce B. Otherwise, this agent will
be open to social sanctions, for instance.
And so by this kind of process, there will be sets of commitments and entitlements that
will emerge from the normative attitudes concerning the behavior of the members of
the linguistic, the communicative community.
And these sets of commitments and entitlements associated with particular acts of communication
will constitute the inferential role, and so the meaning, the contents of these acts
of communication, according to normative inferentialism.
Okay, so we can now come back to our earlier example.
For instance, if I mean that Cognitio 2021 is a huge success by uttering the sentence
Cognitio 2021 is a huge success, then that means that I am committed to Cognitio 2021
being a huge success.
So that would be a language, what is called by sellers, a language entry transition.
So Cognitio 2021 being a huge success would be an appropriate circumstance of application
that would entitle me to utter the sentence Cognitio 2021 is a huge success.
And after uttering this sentence, I will commit myself to Cognitio 2021 being a huge success.
And if it's not, I'm open to social sanctions.
There will also be intra-linguistic transitions, which are relationships between acts of communication.
For instance, by meaning that Cognitio 2021 is a huge success, I am closing the possibility
for me to accept the sentence Cognitio 2021 is a failure, for instance.
Because there's a relationship of incompatibility between the two.
So there will be sets of influential relationships, relations of commitments and entitlements
to certain kinds of utterances that are allowed or not allowed, depending on the normative
expectations of my community.
And there will be also practical commitments or commitments to perform certain non-communicative
behavior, for instance, by meaning that I'm committing myself to congratulate the organizers
in the appropriate social context, if I have the chance, that's something that I'm committing
myself to by meaning that Cognitio 2021 is a huge success.
And so we arrive to the idea that the linguistic content of an utterance, for instance, Cognitio
2021 is a huge success, will be determined by the normative, inferential role of this
expression.
There's a set of commitments and entitlements that I'm undertaking by producing this utterance.
And these normative statuses, these commitments and entitlements will depend on the normative
expectations of the members of my community who attempt to regulate my linguistic behavior
so as to make it more predictable.
Okay, so now we get to the conclusion.
I've argued that I think active inference can show us how normative attitudes can emerge
in communities in social context by saying that agents that attempt to minimize their
free energy in social context will attempt to regular each other's behavior so as to
make it more regular and so more predictable.
So there will be normative attitudes that emerge in social context naturally from the
active inference perspective.
But if we have a community where there are cooperative, communicative practices already
developed, such as suggested by our ecological account of communication, well, there will
be normative expectations concerning the communicative behavior of the members of the community.
And these normative expectations will institute normative statuses concerning what a speaker
is committed and entitled to.
So what are the kind of linguistic moves that are allowed and not allowed for a given speaker?
And the idea is that according to normative inferentialism, these normative statuses,
so these commitments, these entitlements that we undertake by our linguistic behavior
just are what is the linguistic meaning of our expressions is.
So we have to identify the normative statuses with the meaning of the expression that we
are using.
And so finally, what I'm trying to show is that if we have the active inference framework
and the account of social normativity that I think we can derive from it, if we combine
this with an account of cooperative communication, such as the one developed by Dr. Poirier and
me in our ecological account, then if we do that, we can have the basic tools to account
for what random calls the fanciest sort of intentionality.
So that's my talk.
Thank you very much for listening to me.
And I hope that you will have a lot of questions and commentaries that we can discuss.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Remy.
Marco.
Thank you.
I'm glad you asked for lots of questions and commentary because I, well, partly because
I'm not a philosopher, so I find it very difficult to follow, but also have some general questions,
which I would love to hear from Mo and others.
So first of all, I think it's important to know that beliefs in this literature, it's
not necessarily content, right?
It's the most general deflationary notion of beliefs.
So it doesn't really stand in tension when you made a point about that these beliefs
about social norms aren't contentful, they are already not contentful, right?
Also I have some issues with the discrete strict nature of normativity, like odds or
odd not, right?
And I think that is something that is just strictly incompatible with active inputs.
And I think one thing that might be useful is just to see normativity as a kind of fitness
landscape to the degree to which it is shaped by socially relevant factors.
And I think there you can have a more relaxed but still non-trivial notion of normativity
that connects language and social practice because then communication as such becomes
a way to shape your own and each other's landscapes with respect to social weights of normativity
or fitness.
So one other thing that I would love to hear from you and others is, it connects to the
whole problem with odd and odd not, is the room for opens.
Because social normativity is that you should do this, you should not, I think that it's
just not ecologically realistic given the actual nature of social interaction, right?
And I think we should take into account a certain expectation of where is there a freedom
from the social norms, right?
Because when you have this belief that literally every single aspect of your behavior should
be subject to these evaluations of social normativity, I think that's just undueable and that's what
creates anxiety and an experience of oppression.
And so rather we should also consider, it's kind of interesting to connect it to Shannon
because the kind of notion of improvisation where behavior is not simply to enforce or
predict these social norms, but it's actually also an exploration.
So when one behaves in any formal way, what is the experience of that behavior as perceived?
And that can help shape one's personal sense of normativity, which is I guess not social
normativity, but personal valence, and that in turn can be communicated.
And then you get what in psychology or group psychology is called norm setting, right?
So I think norm setting is something that must be included in this kind of work.
If you want to talk about normativity in a more free and open sense that I think is
necessary to make compatible with active influence, especially because there's these
metanorms, right?
So for example, in this community, I would say that one metanorm is we're here to help
each other learn and be ourselves and be authentic and be included.
And that is something that connects not to a belief about particular behaviors, but a
belief about authentic being or modes of being, right?
And I think that is why communication should be seen as not normative in itself, but acting
upon the normativity as such.
And finally, again, because you want a lot of things, and I will give time for other
people as well, luckily it's the last call, but so I have a lot of issue when people
say that it's all about making each other more predictable, because I think there's
different degrees of weight to things being predictable, but I don't care about the predictability
of whether you use your left hand or right hand for such and such, right?
And so it's rather about a meta predictability about like what I said earlier, like what
is the domain in which things need to be predictable.
And so you could see that the behaviors and the communication are not simply about making
each other predictable, but more general, as I think is noted in some of the literature
that you also referenced, is simply about joint active inference.
And it's very dynamic, right?
So you communicate and you behave such that your personal reduction of expected free energy
and each other's reduction is calibrated or synergistic or compatible with each other.
And it's that dynamic interplay of getting that equilibration, which I think is exactly
the core of social normativity, rather than simply making each other predictable.
So yeah, so those are my random thoughts, and I would love to hear you and other people's
thoughts.
Thank you for your interesting thoughts.
Thank you very much for your question, that those are really good questions.
I think I start with your last point.
So you said that, yeah, communicative interaction is more about, for instance, coordinating
interaction, joint activity than normativity itself.
And I could not agree more.
I think that communication first and foremost is for coordinating joint activity.
But I think that there's a layer of normativity that comes over that and that regulates this
linguistic behavior.
And you said some behavior, it will be relevant to normatively constrain it, and some not,
for instance, using your left or right, and there's not a norm, important norm, relevant
to that.
And even with that, it's not clear because there's here a norm to use more your right
and in traditional societies.
But yeah, I think that linguistic behavior is the kind of thing that is really useful
to regulate normatively because it allows really a better coordination in the joint
action that we're performing.
If we know what some people are committed to, what we can expect from this person, it's
more really easily allowed the coordination, I think, in the interaction.
But OK, so that's the last point.
For your first point, Visavi, the notion of belief, I think you're right.
Beliefs in active inference must not be interpreted as being psychologically contentful.
And I agree.
And I think that would be a mistake to think that active inference entails the kind of
content that is, for instance, the content of our psychological states.
And that's exactly what I'm trying to say is that beliefs are not the kind of beliefs
that correspond to our folk psychological concepts of beliefs, intentions, and such.
And so that's really, I'm really with you on that.
And I think that, yeah, the belief, the psychological beliefs, such as the propositional attitudes,
emerge from the normative practices that I've tried to describe in this paper.
And the last point, I think, that you might wish was in the middle of intervention,
was a really good point, was the notion that there's an appearance of really discreteness
in the account of normativity that I'm giving, which does not seem to be compatible with
active inference.
I think that you're right.
And that's something I'm kind of struggling with, because what I'm trying to do is to connect
literatures which do not easily talk to each other.
So there's the traditional literature on linguistic normativity in philosophy of language, which
I'm trying to translate in active inference terms, and that's not really easy to do.
So I think that the appearance of discreteness is really an artifact of the philosophical
literature, that I must do a better work of translating it in continuous terms of active
inference.
So that's a great point.
That's something I'm working on.
So that's not a property of how I conceive of normativity.
That's more of a property of the way the questions are framed in the philosophical discussion.
And I think I must do a better work of transcribing it in a way that is more non-discreet, as
you said.
But to be normative here, to even say that you want to translate the discreteness, isn't
that also a thing that should be normatively evaluated?
The question is, do you agree with that discreet nature as it is in the traditional philosophical
literature?
Because if you do not agree, why would you translate it as such?
Because according to that slide, which I find a bit difficult to understand, but it implies
that if you would translate it, you must be committed to the truth of that translation.
Yeah, I think that there are really important insights in the physical literature on meaning
which are not understood or recognized in the active inference literature.
And that's what I'm trying to do.
I'm trying to build kind of a bridge to recognize these kinds of insights.
And yeah, that's the idea I'm going for.
And I think that I could do a better job of translating these thesis on the normativity
of meaning in ways that are more compatible with the spirit of the active inference framework,
maybe.
Okay.
Bob, this is interesting.
Thank you very much for engaging with me.
Thank you.
Hello, Amy.
Can you hear me well?
Yes.
Okay.
So, actually, you have already answered my first question, so it was on why is normativity
before a pragmatic purpose, which apparently it is not?
The second question is more of a question.
Sorry.
I didn't quite understand your first question.
Sorry.
Never mind.
It's...
I was puzzled that you put normativity before a pragmatic purpose.
And when Marco asked a question, it was clear that you do not, in fact, you just are interested
in the normative dimension of language.
Is that correct?
Yes.
Okay.
The pragmatic function of language, for me, is really primary.
And so the account of communication that we've developed with Pierre Poirier is quintessentially,
so to say, a pragmatic account of communication.
And the idea is that the normativity is kind of...
Line with the district.
Yes.
Yes.
The normative dimension is kind of something that adds up on the top of these pragmatic
practices.
Yeah.
So now is the second question.
Do you think that normativity exists in virtue of structural constraints in the sociocultural
field to the agents' activity that are norms that will be causally efficient?
Or do you think that's only specific agents' expectation and the way they're organized
with regard to each other is causally efficient?
Yeah.
That's a good question.
Do you do allism, or do you do individually complex methodologies called individualism?
Yeah.
That's the question.
Does the norm are individually instantiated in the individual, or is it something more
like distributed on the community?
That's your question, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
I'm not sure.
Yeah.
Can you repeat?
Your question is, are the norms individually instantiated in the individuals, or is it
something more that supervins on a community and cannot be reduced to individual psychological
states of the members of the community?
Is that your question?
I'm not sure.
I understand the term subven as you do, so I will rephrase.
The question is, do norms exist as causally efficient things?
I think norms, yeah, that's a good question.
I think norms, I'm not really, I don't have a set position on the ontology of social facts
and that kind of thing, so can we say that norms exist, emerge, and do not, how do they
relate to the individual attitudes of the members of the community?
I'm not exactly sure what position I want to take on this, and I think that what is
causally efficient is the expectations of the members of the community, and these expectations
as has been described by Maxwell and others can be conceived as distributed in the environment,
in the structure of the ecological niche.
So I don't think that we have to say that they depend, for instance, on the individual
attitudes of individual members, so they can be in a way distributed, but I'm not exactly
sure on how I want to describe the ontological status of these distributed expectations, but
I don't know if that answers your question.
Well, that does not, but that's clear that you do not, so it's good.
Sorry.
I know it's good that you explain what are your commitments, even if they are known in
the specific case.
So I don't think anyone else will ask questions, so we just went out a special case, which
is the case of laws, where you have kind of a book in which the normativity is written,
and you have to refer to the book wherever you are, and this will be a case where you,
that kind of commits you to a holistic understanding, and I'm not sure how other kinds of norms
will stand in this holistic versus new holistic.
I'm not quite sure to understand, can you rephrase your question, sorry, again?
If you have a book that says what the norms are, and you have to refer to the book and
you have to follow the rules that are in the book, then with regard to a given set of norms,
structure, and linguistic expectations that define that, in which the book is embedded,
this book is specifically causally efficient.
So if you look at the big religions, like monophysic religions, or all of the bookaries
are actually, or even any policy that is not religious, but has a clear state of laws that
are state-enacted, and that are enacted in virtue of all of the jurists and military
people and whoever enforce norms, reading the fucking book and trying to apply it, then
you have a causal power that is embedded in the specific internal structure of the book,
and then you have allism, you are committed to consider a book a causally efficient thing.
In all of the other cases, I don't know.
This is my time to say.
Okay, but norms can be causally, if you see that norms are embedded in normative expectations,
and that, for instance, a norm can lead to the sanction of somebody that deviates from
the norm, and that leads to the person learning to follow the norm, in that way the norm is
causally, the norm is causally efficacious, if we see that the norm is, depends on the normative
expectations which leads to the enforcement of a behavior.
So would that count as something that you would call causally efficacious?
So everyone agrees on the fact that collective behavior is a very personal individual behavior.
This is not an issue.
The question is, can we accept a collective level of causation, holism, to be self-standing
explanations?
What I'm pointing out is that in the specific case where you have a book that says what is
normatively accepted, then you have this that is verified, because any change in the
properties of a book itself, you're notwithstanding whoever reads it, will have consequences where
if you have, I don't know, more informal patriarchal norms, you have to change individual
agents' mental states to affect how the norm is enacted.
I would still commit to a holist, I'm saying this in the case, but it's contentious.
In the first case, it cannot meaningfully be.
I hope no one was willing to ask a question, because I've been a while at it.
I think there's nobody behind you, so that's okay, I think.
Okay.
Thank you for your question.
I don't think that I don't know that I have a definite position on this issue.
I'm not sure that there's, I don't at the moment have a knockdown argument against or
for either of these positions, so I think either of those would be okay for me.
Maybe that's an answer.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for your question.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
