Lecture 7 – Hearing, Stimulus and Supporting Structures
Hi, welcome to lecture 7.
In lecture 6 we had our last discussion on the basics of the visual system talking about
age-related changes going from the cornea to the optic nerve.
Lecture 7 represents the first of several lectures dealing with the auditory system.
Now like the visual system, the auditory system permits us to be aware of and respond to objects
at a distance from us.
However, unlike the visual system, the auditory system is only sensitive to things at a distance
that move.
The auditory system requires that things move because that produces disturbances in the
air molecules, compressions and expansions, sometimes called condensations and rare factions.
And these compressions and expansions of the air molecules travel through the air, one
molecule influencing the one beside it, until they reach the ear.
But something must move for us to experience sound.
While we don't often think of it this way, the auditory system is actually an exquisitely
sensitive touch system.
When we hear something, what we are actually responding to is a series of very faint but
rapid touches of air molecules against the eardrum.
As a matter of fact, in a healthy young human listener, an auditory experience can be felt
heard if the eardrum is moved 10 to the minus 9 centimeters.
Now for those of you who don't have a feel for what 10 to the minus 9 centimeters is,
it's less than the diameter of a hydrogen atom.
So we are dealing with an exquisitely sensitive system.
Now two assumptions follow from this.
The auditory system is so sensitive, this suggests one assumption that the auditory system must
have found some clever ways to amplify very faint stimuli.
And indeed that assumption is correct and we'll see some of these ingenious ways that
the auditory system amplifies faint stimuli.
The other assumption is that since the auditory system is so sensitive, it must be vulnerable
to damage from overstimulation.
This assumption would also be true.
People can lose their hearing from one, for instance being close to one explosion.
That degree of acoustic trauma can cause permanent deafness in one instant.
You'd have to really be exposed to a loud sound but it has been known to happen.
Now what exactly is the stimulus for hearing?
Well let me share an experiment with you that was done 71 years ago.
A researcher by the name of Wilska somehow talked a human subject into agreeing to have
a thin wooden rod glued to his eardrum.
And then Wilska hooked up the other end of this wooden rod to an instrument that could
produce very faint but rapid vibrations.
And the eardrum was stimulated by this wooden rod moving in and out 1,000 times per second
and the subject reported the sensation of a 1,000 cycle per second tone.
So basically the stimulus for hearing is rapid in and out, very small excursions of course,
and in and out movement of the eardrum.
Ordinarily the medium through which sound waves travel is air, remember air molecules
that are set into motion by some moving object in the environment.
So air is the usual medium through which sound waves travel but of course sound can travel
through other media in addition to air.
Sound can travel through other gases.
Sound can travel under water, I'm sure you've all heard things under water.
Sound can travel in steel.
I remember as a kid watching a Lone Ranger movie and the Lone Ranger wondered if the
train was anywhere near.
So Tonto got down off his horse and put his ear to the steel rail.
That seemed very odd to me at the time but as a matter of fact that's a much better way
to estimate the distance of the train or if it's coming than listening with your ear because
in a steel rail sound is traveling at something like 16,500 feet per second whereas sound traveling
through air travels at only 1110 feet per second.
So Tonto was acting very cleverly, I didn't know it at the time.
Of course there is no sound in a vacuum, there must be some medium to transmit the sound waves.
I remember a high school science experiment where we had a wind up alarm clock and we
could actually see the little clapper hitting the bell and this was put in a bell jar and
we could all hear it very clearly but then the science professor began to evacuate the
air out of the bell jar and when the air was all evacuated out of the bell jar the little
clapper was still clapping but we heard no more sound.
You need air or some medium because some medium has to transmit the sound waves to the ear
and in a vacuum there is no such medium.
There are three attributes of the physical stimulus that the ear is able to analyze.
These three attributes are the frequency of the auditory stimulus and that of course corresponds
to the number of times per second that the eardrum is moved in and out.
The amplitude of the auditory stimulus which corresponds to the extent of in and out movement.
How far does the eardrum move in and out?
A weak high frequency sound will move the eardrum, just a small excursion in and out
whereas a loud sound will move the eardrum in and out a larger distance.
So the two attributes then are frequency and amplitude and the third attribute of the auditory
stimulus that the ear can analyze is the location in space, the source of a sound.
Let's talk about these three attributes separately beginning with frequency.
A healthy young human listener can be sensitive to sound frequencies between 20 cycles per
second and 20,000 cycles per second.
Now it's only young children that can hear 20,000 cycles per second.
By the time you're even an adolescent you've lost a little bit of your high frequency hearing.
That's one of the prices we pay for living in an industrialized society where we are
constantly being bombarded by noise pollution.
I will at this time indicate that the designation for cycles per second some time ago was changed
to Hertz.
So if I say a thousand Hertz that's the same thing as saying a thousand cycles per second.
You may remember from an earlier discussion that the designation Hertz is actually named
after the German physicist Heinrich Hertz who was the first one to measure electromagnetic
radiation.
Turns out that Professor Hertz who is honored by having cycles per second designated as Hertz
was also an accomplished linguist before he died at an early age in 1894.
He had mastered Arabic and Sanskrit.
So the human ear when it's optimally functioning can hear between 20 and 20,000 cycles per
second or Hertz.
Now frequency is actually a physical measure that corresponds approximately to the psychological
dimension of pitch.
I say corresponds approximately because there is not a perfect correspondence and that is
because the human ear is not equally sensitive to all pitches, to all frequencies.
For instance the human ear is relatively insensitive down at the 20 cycle per second end and relatively
insensitive at the high frequency end, the 20,000 cycle per second end.
We are maximally sensitive between 2,000 and 4,000 Hertz.
2,000 to 4,000 Hertz is the range of maximal sensitivity of the human ear.
This turns out to be a wonderful range for humans to be maximally sensitive to because
many, many important speech sounds occur in the 2,000 to 4,000 Hertz range.
We'll talk more about this in a few minutes actually.
Okay, so the psychological dimension of pitch corresponds approximately to the physical
dimension of frequency.
Let's talk a bit about amplitude.
Amplitude is the physical dimension that corresponds to the psychological dimension
of loudness.
Again the correspondence is only approximate because there are some frequencies that we
can't hear no matter how loud you make it.
So the correspondence is not perfect between amplitude and loudness.
Just as the designation Hertz is used to express frequency, so loudness is expressed in decibels.
The notation is little D, big B, decibel.
It turns out that the original notation for loudness was the bell, named in honor of Alexander
Graham Bell, but the bell was found to be too large and unwieldy a unit, so it was divided
into tenths, and so a decibel is actually a tenth of a bell.
Now because the decibel notation is actually a logarithmic notation, zero decibels is not
silence as you might expect.
Rather, zero decibels is the threshold for hearing for an average, healthy, young human
listener.
The reason I specify human is because many animals have auditory qualities that are much
different from ours, frequently much better than ours.
For example, very few humans can actually hear 20,000 cycles per second.
You can pick any alley cat at random and it can hear 60,000 cycles per second.
So I specify humans because other animals have other hearing dimensions that we can't
even imagine.
Okay, so zero decibels in any event is not the absence of sound, but the threshold for
sound.
It would correspond to, if you're familiar with this term, in dimes, the threshold for
hearing for a healthy, young listener would be about .0002 dimes per square centimeter.
We abbreviate that, we say .0002 dimes per square centimeter is enough pressure to produce
an auditory experience in a healthy, young listener.
Now to give you some comparison, if you took a one gram weight and put it in the palm of
your hand, that would be creating a pressure of about a thousand dimes, a one gram weight
in the palm of the hand, a thousand dimes, and the eardrum needs only .0002 dimes per
square centimeter to experience an auditory sensation.
The other end of our loudness continuum is where sound becomes so loud that it is painful.
This is usually thought to occur at around 120 decibels.
That is loud enough that if you spend any time in the presence of 120 decibel sound,
you will come away with at least temporary hearing loss, and if you stay there long enough,
permanent hearing loss.
The reason that sound can become painful is because the eardrum is loaded with pain receptors.
We'll talk more about this when we discuss pain as a focal topic, but the eardrum is
loaded with pain receptors, so moving the eardrum too much actually stretches these
pain receptors and a loud sound will move the eardrum too much, and we experience pain.
The other point about the eardrum and pain that I will mention is that a ruptured eardrum
can be an extremely painful thing.
Sometimes kids have middle ear infections that result in a ruptured eardrum, and it's
very, very painful because of the high percentage of pain receptors in the eardrum.
As a matter of fact, talking about pain and overstimulation of the ear, I guess I should
alert you that prolonged exposure even to a loudness level of 80 decibels will eventually
cause permanent hearing loss.
Now, what reference can I give you so that you have a sense of what 80 decibels is?
It's about the loudness level of heavy traffic.
This is one of the reasons why people in industrialized societies lose their hearing faster than
people who live in what we call non-industrialized societies.
Okay, so two attributes of the auditory system that the auditory system extracts from the
auditory message are frequency and amplitude corresponding to pitch and loudness.
The third attribute is the ability to localize the source of an auditory stimulus in space.
This requires two functioning ears.
You can't localize sound very well with only one ear, but with two ears you can, and the
reason that two ears permits us to localize the source of a sound in space is because
of the relatively slow rate at which sound travels.
Remember, it's about 1110 feet per second in air.
Now, that's only a ballpark estimate in air because it will also depend on atmospheric
temperature and the elevation, but 110 feet per second is a ballpark estimate.
Okay, so if a sound is located to my right, traveling at 1110 feet per second, it's
going to hit my right ear fractions of a second before it hits my left ear.
It's also going to be slightly louder in the right ear than it is in the left ear because
the head acts as an acoustic baffle.
It actually serves to weaken a sound by the time it reaches the other ear.
Now there are specialized cells in a subcortical auditory area known as the superior olivary
complex that can actually compare loudness differences and time of arrival differences
at the two ears and help us to localize where in space a sound is.
Now what this means, of course, is that the easiest sound sources to localize are those
that are lateral to us.
As a sound source moves toward the midline, it becomes harder and harder to localize,
and some of you may have had the experience, for instance, of being in traffic, and you
hear the siren of an emergency vehicle, and you're looking up ahead because it sounds
like it's coming, and it turns out that it's directly behind you.
When we are experiencing a sound source in the midline, it becomes very difficult to
localize.
Peripheral sounds are much more easy to localize than midline sounds.
As a matter of fact, our ability to localize sound in space is much better than most of
us realize because ordinarily, if you want to know where something is, you don't listen
for it.
You look for it.
If, for instance, we were blinded, we would find that we could use our hearing to localize
things in our environment.
A quick example, before my psychology department moved to a new building, we used to be in
an older building, and our first floor had marble floors, and so when the building was
not in use, we used to let the school for the blind use our marble hallway to train newly
blinded people in the use of their canes.
And I have seen what these people can do with training.
They can walk, blind people can walk down the hall, not veering left or right, but staying
right in the middle of the hall, and stopping before they walk into the wall at the end
of the hall based on tapping their canes.
Tap, tap, tap, because what happens is if they veer too close to one wall, the echo
of the tapping on the marble floor hits one ear sooner than the other, and it's slightly
louder in one ear than it is in the other, and they move back to the center of the hall.
And when they reach the end wall, they hear an echo coming back off the wall, and they
can stop before bumping into it.
Now, you may say, well, blind people get more sensitive to sound, not true.
They just learn to use sounds, and it turns out sighted people can do the same thing,
because this same marble floor was used to train individuals who were then going to teach
blind people to do this.
So the trainers would be blindfolded and given a cane, and they would then learn to locomote,
to walk down this hall, stay right in the middle, not veering left or right, and stop
before they bump into the wall.
And then they were better able, having been through this process, to teach blind people
to do this.
Now, that's not really true echo locating, like bats do, because, of course, the bat
is not tapping a cane.
And that is emitting a high-frequency sound that then reflects back from objects in its
environment in a remarkable ability to echo locate, and that's how they catch insects
in the dark and do remarkable things.
Turns out I'm almost reluctant to get into this, because I'm probably going to have to
embarrass myself here.
It turns out that there are documented instances of humans who have learned to do true echo
location.
I'll share with you a story from my graduate school days.
There are pieces of psychoacoustic apparatus known as anechoic chambers, and that anechoic
chamber is a special room.
It's built on a layer of cement, and then a layer of sand, and then a layer of cork,
and the building, the room is not touching any other structures in the main building,
so that it's perfectly immune from any vibrations.
It uses a DC power source for the light, so there's no electric buzz from AC current or
anything like this.
Inside the anechoic chamber is a grid floor, so there's no flat surface for the sound,
even if you're breathing to reflect back off the floor.
The walls are made out of fiberglass, and they have big odd-shaped fiberglass wedges
at odd locations and angles, so there are no flat surfaces.
You sit in this anechoic chamber, and you are in total silence.
The longer you sit there, the more you realize you're not in total silence, because in total
silence, a healthy young listener can actually hear the collision of air molecules in his
or her own ear canal, and in total silence you begin to hear your own blood coursing
through the basilar artery, and you begin to hear all these internal gurgling in your
own body.
So our hearing is so sensitive that in total silence, we hear ourselves.
Anyway, in an anechoic chamber, a psychoacoustician offered a prize to anybody who could walk
into this chamber blindfolded and, using echolocation, point to some stimuli that he
had suspended from the ceiling.
Now most people, when they heard the terms of this deal, you can win a cash prize if
you can point to things blindfolded.
They said, there's no way, but some people tried, and one person actually succeeded.
This is the part that's a little bit embarrassing, but since we're all friends, I'll do this
anyway.
This blindfolded fellow walks into the anechoic chamber, and he must have known how bats did
it, because he would aim in different directions, and he would go, and he did this over and
over, and eventually he was able to tell when he was aimed at one of these targets hanging
from the ceiling, and he pointed to it, and he won the monetary prize.
So we could do that if we had to, and if we didn't care about public embarrassment.
We could walk around echolocating.
Okay, enough about the physical stimulus and the three attributes that the ear deals with.
Let's talk now about the structures that comprise what we call the ear.
Actually there are three anatomical divisions to the ear.
We have the outer ear, we have the middle ear, and we have the inner ear.
The outer ear actually starts with this flap of skin that we have on the side of our heads
that we call the ear.
The technical term for this flap of skin is the pinna.
It is, of course, a supporting structure in that it does not generate electrical impulses
or release neurotransmitters, it serves to trap sound waves.
Now the human pinna is less adept at this than, for instance, rabbits and deer, which
actually have muscles that can change the orientation of the pinna to help trap sound
waves in the ear.
What we have to do is turn our whole heads or cup our hands behind our ears, but this
does aid in trapping sound waves.
Okay, so the pinna serves the function of trapping sound waves and directing them into
what we call the ear canal, which is technically called the external auditory meatus.
We can continue to call it the ear canal for convenience.
Now the external auditory meatus, oh, I just said we would call it the ear canal.
The ear canal is also an auditory supporting structure, how in the world can a canal be
a supporting structure?
Well, it turns out that the ear canal in humans is about 28 millimeters in length, and it
has pretty much the same diameter in normal humans.
So it represents a closed column of air, and it turns out that closed columns of air have
what we call resonance frequencies.
They actually amplify certain sounds.
You've experienced this without even knowing it.
The shorter a closed column of air gets, the higher its resonance frequency.
The more it will amplify loud sounds, the longer a closed column of air gets, the lower
the frequency that it will amplify.
If you can't remember ever having done this, make sure you do it in the near future.
Take an empty soda pop bottle or something and fill it with water at the sink, and listen
to the gurgling sound that the water makes as it fills this bottle.
What you will hear is that the dominant frequency will increase as the closed column of air
in the bottle, as the water fills it, the closed column of air gets shorter.
I'm now going to again embarrass myself and imitate a bottle being filled with water.
See if you remember this sound.
You turn on the tap, and you listen, and you hear gurgling.
In fact, if you chose to do so, you could actually learn to turn off the water before
the bottle overflowed without looking.
So the miatus represents a closed column of air, and wonder of wonders, a closed column
of air with the diameter of the ear canal and the length of the ear canal amplifies sounds
between 2,000 and 4,000 hertz.
Wonderful.
Just the important speech sounds, the frequencies that important speech sounds end in.
So that speech sounds a curian.
Okay, so let's continue with our discussion of the outer ear.
We have the pinna, we have the ear canal, and at the end of the ear canal we have the tympanic
membrane, which is the critical structure for air molecules to produce vibrations in,
and the tympanic membrane can follow vibrations between approximately 20,000 and 20,000 cycles
per second.
So much for the outer ear.
Now let's discuss briefly the middle ear.
The middle ear goes from the back of the eardrum through about a 1.5 cubic centimeter open
space that is actually filled with air.
There's got to be the same atmospheric pressure on both sides of the eardrum, or it would
be bent and we would experience pain.
So the middle ear actually connects to the outside world by means of the eustachian tube,
which goes from the back of the throat to the middle ear.
In the middle ear we find three tiny bones that are collectively called the ossicles.
Individually they are known as the malleus, incus, and stapes, or if you're not fluent
in Latin you can call them the hammer, the anvil, and the stirrup.
It is the job of these three tiny bones to take vibrations from the eardrum and transmit
them across the interior of the middle ear and deliver them to the inner ear, which we
will talk about at a later time.
So the ossicles then also represent supporting structures.
They also do not generate electrical activity and they also do not result in the release
of neurotransmitters.
It is the job of the ossicles to transmit vibrations from the eardrum across the inner
ear, the middle ear.
Now in addition to the three ossicles there are also two tiny muscles in the middle ear.
Collectively they are called the intraoral muscles.
Individually they are known as the stapedius muscle and the tensor tympani muscle.
Again to give you some metric to get a sense of the size, these two muscles are about the
size of grains of rice.
Now it is the job of the stapedius and the tensor tympani muscles to protect as best
they can the delicate receptors in the inner ear from overstimulation.
So they exhibit a reflex known as the acoustic reflex.
They contract reflexly to loud sounds.
And this, when the stapedius and tensor tympani muscles contract they actually pull against
the direction of vibration of the ossicles and reduce the intensity with which the ossicles
are vibrating.
So loud sounds contract the inner ear muscles in this acoustic reflex and attempt to save
our hearing by preventing loud sounds from causing acoustic trauma.
The problem is their reflex is too slow to keep the first instant of a loud sound from
getting through.
They serve some protective function but it is not perfect.
The acoustic reflex was actually used by the navy in World War II because so many navy
men that were on these battleships were going deaf from the noise of those incredible cannons.
They would shoot those cannons and if they were in this line of work for any length of
time they would start showing hearing loss, permanent hearing loss.
So a project was tried where they would fit these men with earphones and the circuitry
was devised such that when they fired the cannon, however you do that, pull the trigger
or pull a lanyard or whatever, a click would occur over the earphones loud enough to activate
the acoustic reflex, desensitize the ears just at the same time the cannons would roar.
So an attempt was made to make practical use of the acoustic reflex.
You've probably all experienced this.
Sometimes when you yawn or chew gum or swallow you will hear a crackling sound in your, it's
coming from the middle ear.
It's actually the stapedius and tensor tympani muscles contracting, they don't remain contracted,
they give a brief contraction and then they go back to their relaxed state.
So sometimes when you swallow or yawn or just make a, I don't even know how to describe
it to you but you can experience this crackling sound.
Alright, then the middle ear is made up of the three tiny bones, the ossicles.
They're about the size of a kernel of barley and the two tiny muscles, the stapedius and
tensor tympani, about as big as grains of rice.
They transmit these vibrations to the inner ear and the structure of note in the inner
ear at least for hearing is called the cochlea which is a bony snail shell looking structure
that houses the auditory receptors known as hair cells which we'll talk about next time.
There are also some other structures in the inner ear that are unrelated to audition.
It turns out that the receptors for the vestibular system share space with the cochlea in the
inner ear.
These are the three semicircular canals and the utricle and saccule which we will talk
about at a later lecture when we talk about the vestibular system.
I will say that there are commonalities between the auditory system and the vestibular system.
First of all, they actually share a cranial nerve.
We've been talking about the auditory nerve as if it were a separate nerve that has no
other function.
The eighth cranial nerve which we call for convenience the auditory nerve, only half
of it is for hearing and the other half is for balance, the vestibular system.
Anything that affects the auditory nerve, the eighth cranial nerve can affect both hearing
and balance.
It also turns out that the receptors for hearing which are called hair cells are very similar
to the receptors for balance, the hair cells in the vestibular system.
It also turns out that both hearing and the vestibular system require the presence of
the same incompressible fluid known as endolymph.
It also turns out that diseases and medical conditions that affect hearing frequently
also affect balance.
We will discuss these issues in more depth when we get to the vestibular system and we
will talk more about the cochlea at our next meeting when we talk about the contribution
of the inner ear to the phenomenon of hearing.
Thank you.
