Lecture 12, The Cutaneous System, Age-Related Changes
Hello and welcome to Lecture 12.
Just to recap, in Lecture 11 we talked about cutaneous sensitivity and how important cutaneous
stimulation is during the early developmental stages in animals ranging all the way from
rats to humans and how the absence of tactile stimulation during this period could have long
term harmful consequences.
In this lecture we're going to continue our coverage of the cutaneous system with special
emphasis on age-related changes in cutaneous sensitivity.
I need to alert you that when sensory processes became a content area in psychology and researchers
began to scramble around for grant funds so that they could pursue their interests, it
was much easier to get money to study things like the visual system and the auditory system.
The skin senses were considered less glamorous and fewer researchers opted to study cutaneous
sensitivity.
However, there are sufficient studies that included subjects of a wide range of ages
that I can make some general statements about changes in cutaneous sensitivity as a function
of age.
First of all, the punchline is that touch and pressure and vibration and warmth and cold
sensitivity do tend to get less acute with age, and there are several reasons for this.
With age, the skin loses collagen, and this causes the skin to lose its elasticity, and
that means it's harder to mechanically deform the skin because it'll take more pressure,
for instance, to elicit a touch response.
It's also the case that with age we lose not all but some of the encapsulated end organs.
If you do an anatomical study of a patch of skin from a young person and an old person,
the microscopic examination will show fewer encapsulated end organs in the skin of an
older person.
This being the case, it's also been shown that older people are less sensitive with
their skin to vibrations.
In this particular situation, the culprit is the Pacinian corpuscle, which we mentioned
briefly in a previous lecture.
Early studies labeled the Pacinian corpuscle as the receptor for deep pressure.
It was only later when instrumentation became more sophisticated that researchers discovered
the Pacinian corpuscle is also a very excellent vibration detector.
Pacinian corpuscles, which look like a tiny onion on the end of a nerve fiber, are ideally
suited to follow vibrations of up to 70 vibrations per second.
As a matter of fact, when you're standing in front of a big bass loudspeaker that's
presenting tones of between, well, 40 to 70 or 80 cycles per second, you will hear them
with the ear, but you will also feel them with the skin.
You can feel these vibrations, and the vibration detectors are our old friends of the Pacinian
corpuscles.
They happen to be the largest encapsulated end organs in the body.
A Pacinian corpuscle is easily as big as the head of a pin.
They can be seen with the naked eye.
My former colleague from decades ago at the University of Pittsburgh who used to cut the
skin off his fingertips was actually harvesting Pacinian corpuscles for microscopic evaluation.
In addition to reduced touch sensitivity and vibration sensitivity and warmth and cold
sensitivity, there have been other experiments that included subjects ranging from young
to old.
For example, in one study, subjects between the ages of 20 and 80 were blindfolded and
then lightly touched on the nose to measure touch sensitivity.
What was determined was that touch sensitivity to a light touch on the nose really does not
fall off much until the age of 50.
Until the age of 50, there might be a very minimal decline compared with 20-year-olds.
But after the age of 50, the ability to detect a light touch on the nose begins to drop off
sharply, until by the time you're 80, you're as likely to miss such a touch, misperceive
such a touch as to be aware of it.
Another study that involved a wide range of ages dealt with what we call reaction time.
In a reaction time study, the subject is blindfolded and one hand has the index finger over a telegraph
key and the other hand is touched lightly and the subject's instructions are when you
perceive the touch, press the telegraph key as quickly as possible.
Well, two age groups did rather poorly on this task, young children and elderly people.
In both cases, it has to do with the state of development of the nervous system.
And young children, you remember, the myelin sheath is still in the process of developing
and so there may be a little short circuiting in their sensory nerves and in the older people,
the nervous system unfortunately is beginning to undergo degenerative changes.
So very young and very old are kind of slow at this reaction time task and healthy young
adults, they feel the tap and they make that press and their reaction times are quite impressive.
Let me mention another type of test that has been applied to subjects of different ages.
This is actually a test used by neurologists in an attempt to identify brain dysfunction.
It involves looking for what we call sensory suppressions.
Now, a sensory suppression is noted when an individual is touched lightly at two different
body sites and is only able to perceive the stimulation at a single site.
Let me give you a simple example of a sensory suppression test.
Again, the subject would be blindfolded, the hands would be out in front like so and the
instructions would be you are going to be touched either on the hand, the left hand,
the right hand, the left cheek or the right cheek.
On some occasions you will be touched at more than one locus simultaneously and if you touch
the left hand the subject is supposed to say left hand, right hand, left cheek, right cheek.
On a series of trials, the subject will be touched simultaneously on the hand and cheek.
The subject's instructions are when he or she detects this simultaneous stimulation,
they're supposed to say both, both the hand and the cheek.
Well, it turns out that when you test subjects between the ages of 3 to 96, which is the age
range that was tested in one such study, children up to the age of 6 are very bad at this and
again that's probably because their nervous systems are still in the process of acquiring
a myelin sheath.
The other group that's not so good at it is people between the ages of 70 and 90 or 90
and above and this is because we're undergoing those degenerative changes in the sensory
nerves where they're becoming thinner and they're conducting more slowly.
So in young children and in older people, a sensory suppression is not considered a
source of alarm to a neurologist but if a healthy young adult or if an older child or
a young adult exhibits even a single sensory suppression, it is listed as what we call
a pathenomonic sign, which means that some kind of brain dysfunction in the anterior
portion of the parietal lobe is likely to be happening.
Okay, now, I've given you some bad news, that sensory abilities in the skin decline
with age.
Let me give you a little bit of good news.
These effects that we've been talking about so far are relatively mild in that they require
some kind of laboratory test to demonstrate their existence.
I mean, how often do you go around in your everyday life needing to be aware that somebody
is touching you on the nose or the cheek and the hand simultaneously?
So the good news is that yes, these decreases in cutaneous sensitivity exist but in the
case of normal aging, they really don't have much effect on daily life.
In the absence of pathological conditions such as multiple sclerosis, I'm saying for
normal aging, these cutaneous deficits are not going to present a major impediment to
getting on with everyday life.
Another benefit of the fact that the cutaneous sensitivity is still good enough to get by
in everyday life is because if you'll think back to the Touch Research Institute study
that we discussed in lecture 11, where these premature babies were given daily stimulation
by in the way of massage and arm and back rubs, I need to share with you some information
that was collected from the volunteer senior citizens who did the back rubbing and the
arm and leg rubbing.
It turns out that being involved in this project was a blessing for them too.
Many of these volunteers who had paired up to practice massaging on each other before
they were turned loose on the babies continued to meet and give each other massages.
They were asked to fill out questionnaires periodically after finishing their participation
in the project and they reported that they were less lonely, that they were more socially
active, that they were experiencing less stress.
Let me just digress here, when somebody talks to you about less stress, you need to be an
intelligent consumer and say, how do you measure stress?
Do you take somebody's word for it?
Which is problematic because people may have different definitions of what they mean by
stress and something that one person might think is stressful, somebody else might think
is amusing and somebody else might not even notice.
So we need to be aware of the fact that until fairly recently there has been no objective
way to measure stress, there is now.
Stress hormones have been discovered such as cortisol and cortisol can be measured in
human saliva.
So if we want to know whether somebody is stressed or not, we don't have to depend on
their verbal report, we can measure the cortisol levels in their saliva.
So these older people who reported less stress, this was confirmed by the fact that when you
measure their saliva cortisol levels, they did not show much in the way of stress hormones.
They also made less visits to the doctor.
Many of them continued to volunteer and work with those babies at the Jackson Memorial Hospital.
So being in this project turned out to be a boon for these people.
And so I'm suggesting that the elderly can also benefit from continued cutaneous stimulation,
tactile stimulation.
As a matter of fact, this should come as no surprise.
If we look at the way that cutaneous stimulation has been routinized and ritualized in our
everyday relations, we shake hands when we meet somebody, we hold hands with somebody,
we hug, we kiss, in some cultures we rub noses.
Stimulation is an important part of our social relations and interactions with other people.
And this information is now filtering down to the general public.
I'm mildly amused when I think of this example.
For the past few years I've noticed a phenomenon.
I would go out for dinner and I would ask for the check and the waitress would bring the
check and when she brings the check, she would put her hand on my shoulder and she would
say, I hope you enjoyed your meal and when she returns the change, she would put her
hand on my arm and say, have a nice day and I would think to myself, boy, you haven't
lost it.
You're still a handsome devil.
And then one day I read about a study that demonstrates when waitresses touch a patron
bringing the bill or bringing the change, they get bigger tips.
This is an unconscious phenomenon, but waitresses know that if they touch a guy, they're going
to get a bigger tip or they're more likely to get a bigger tip.
So there's some interesting things going on with tactile stimulation that are reaching
the awareness of the general public.
Let me tell you some other perhaps more serious consequences of touch or the absence of touch
stimulation.
It's been demonstrated, it has been verified experimentally that if someone is in an anxious
state, for instance, a father in the maternity ward waiting for his wife to give birth, you
know that's a very anxiety-producing situation.
Or somebody waiting in the waiting room of the emergency room at a hospital where a friend
or relative is being seen by a physician, you're anxious, you're waiting for your results.
It turns out that if someone comes over and puts their hand on your hand or puts their
hand on your shoulder, your blood pressure goes down, your blood pressure goes down.
Now I'm not sure what the mechanism is, but that seems like a pretty interesting thing.
Similarly, think about the case, and this has been verified experimentally too, of somebody
in a deep coma who is unresponsive to shining lights in his or her eyes and unresponsive
to sounds.
If you hold that person's hand, their heart rate goes down.
Their heart rate goes down.
I don't know if they're aware of this or whatever, but that's been demonstrated.
That's a real phenomenon.
The importance of touch, tactile stimulation, et cetera, continues to be recognized by the
general population.
Take the case of massage.
Some decades ago, if somebody talked about getting a massage, people would snicker.
It had kind of a connotation of dirty massage parlors, the hanky-panky stuff.
Massage is now legitimate.
Massage therapists are respected.
If it's in the context of rehabilitation from some accident or injury, insurance companies
will pay for massages now.
The last statistic that I'm aware of indicated that Americans had made over 8 million visits
to massage therapists to about 150,000 massage therapists.
Massage has certainly achieved at least respectability and maybe more than that.
Let me tell you some of the experiments that have suggested medical benefits of massage.
Massage has been shown to increase the efficiency of the immune system.
There again, if you're on your toes, you'll say, well, how do you measure the efficiency
of the immune system?
You can measure circulating T-cell levels, but T-cells are the soldiers of the immune
system.
They're the ones that track down and kill opportunistic organisms and antigens and things
of that nature.
So yes, your T-cell levels go up after a massage.
Massage has been shown to reduce stress, again by measuring cortisol levels.
Massage has been shown to speed up the healing of a surgical incision.
Now, the mechanism here is probably pretty straightforward.
If you gently massage around an area, you increase blood flow to that area, and this
will promote healing.
Massage has been shown to reduce the severity of asthma attacks.
I don't know the mechanism there.
It's been shown to be helpful for diabetics, and it's been shown to be helpful for people
who suffer from migraine headaches.
The cutaneous language has found its way into the language of emotion.
For example, we say, I was touched by so-and-so's kindness.
This is a very warm individual, or boy, did I have a hot date last night.
So we're using cutaneous language in an emotional context.
Cultural anthropologists tell us that touch is critically important in all cultures.
All cultures have a ritualized and routinized touch in one way or another.
As a matter of fact, cultural anthropologists label the US of A as a non-tactile society
because on the continuum of touch frequency, we're pretty low.
In some cultures, same-sex male friends will walk down the street with their arms around
each other.
That's perfectly fine and perfectly acceptable.
They will walk down the street holding hands, perfectly fine and perfectly acceptable.
We're a little bit shaky about that in this country.
Studies have been done, not experiments, but observations have been made in different countries
in settings where people get together.
For example, in one that occurs to me, in Puerto Rico and in Florida, observers watched
couples in cafes, and the amount of touching among Puerto Rican couples was way off the
charts compared to the amount of casual touching seen in couples in Florida.
Cultural anthropologists also report that French parents touch their children approximately
three times more than American parents touch their children.
The same is true for French teachers.
They touch their children far more often than American teachers touch their students.
Now, how do they do these kinds of observations?
Is it valid?
Can we trust these data?
I think so.
Let me tell you how you would do it.
On a voyage that I was fortunate enough to take on the Semester at Sea program, I taught
a course in the sensation of perception, and one of my students actually proposed doing
a project where she would observe instances of interpersonal touching in several different
cities and several different countries, and she would keep a little note chart here.
Now, the important thing to do here is you don't want to be obvious that you're observing
people because then you can alter their behavior.
She had to pretend she was reading a paper or drinking coffee or what have you.
What this young woman did was she observed people in cafes in Beijing, China, in Mombasa,
Kenya, in Salvador, Bahia, Brazil, and in Havana, Cuba, and she spent two hours in
a cafe in each of these countries.
Now, two hours is probably not enough to obtain enough observations for doing statistical analysis
or anything like that, but she was certainly able to report trends.
This is how these kinds of projects are done.
Somebody takes the time to go out and sit there, and they are unobtrusive, they don't
make themselves obvious, but they record what they're seeing.
If they make enough observations and recordings, then it can be subjected to statistical analysis
and we can test for reliability and validity and what have you.
Just in passing, let me tell you what this young lady found with just her two-hour observations.
She found that the rates of interpersonal touching were the highest in Salvador, Brazil, and the
lowest in Beijing, China, with Mombasa and Havana being in between somewhere.
You can do that, and I believe that it can be demonstrated to be scientifically meaningful.
Okay, recall when we were talking about rats that were handled and gentle, that rats that
are handled and gentle are less reactive and cope better with stress.
The flip side is that rats that are not handled and gentle are more reactive and have a harder
time coping with stress.
Now you're always on thin ground when you extrapolate from rats to humans, but some
scientists, some behavioral scientists are in fact concerned that American children are
getting too little touch and that we're going to end up with a situation where we have aggressive
kids.
Now I don't know how much of an issue to make of that because they are pretty much extrapolating
from rats, but there are some people who are concerned that our kids don't get enough
touch during early developmental growth, and they see this as a potential problem.
Okay, I'd also like to make a distinction that I have not made up until this time, and
that is the distinction between what scientists call active touch and passive touch.
Everything we've been talking about so far comes under the heading of passive touch,
where somebody sits passively and someone rubs their shoulders, or you're sitting passively
and the waitress touches your shoulder, or you're in the waiting room and somebody puts
their hand on your hand.
That's passive, or the babies lie in their incubators and the senior citizen volunteers
massage them.
That's passive touch.
What is active touch?
Active touch is when, rather than sitting passively, you are using your hands to explore
your environment.
You are learning how the environment works by using your hands, and this is a learning
process.
Let me give you an example.
A psychologist by the name of Richard Held did an experiment where he raised monkeys
in the laboratory room, but these monkeys were raised in big tin cans with a rubber
collar so that just their heads stuck out.
They were free to use their limbs.
They could flex their arms and wiggle their fingers, but they weren't allowed to use their
arms to explore the environment.
What the technicians in Dr. Held's lab used to do, because they felt kind of sorry for
the monkeys, was they discovered that the monkeys loved peppermint candy canes.
So whenever they were in the vicinity of the monkeys, they would hold a candy cane up and
let the monkey lick it and bite it and what have you.
At the termination of the experiment, when the monkeys were let out of the cans and they
were able to see their hands and see the world, somebody walked up to one of these monkeys
and they were going to give it a peppermint candy cane to hold for itself.
They hold the candy cane in front of the monkey, and the monkey is all happy because he recognizes
but he goes to reach out to grab it and he doesn't understand how the connection between
events in space and our movements work and he's waving his arm around until he hits
the candy cane by accident.
So we need physical interaction.
We need active touch with our environment.
When I was a kid, I used to love if a toaster broke, my mother would let me take this toaster
apart and I love to take things apart and feel them and see how they worked and how they
fit together and that's how we learn how the world works.
An example of active touch.
There are some elite divisions of the military where part of the training involves in a dark
room or blindfolded, totally disassembling your weapon and putting it together in the
dark just by touch, active touch.
So let me see, another example of active touch.
Perhaps you've heard enough examples of active touch, but let me point out that as we age,
not only does this decrease in Meissner corpuscles and Pachydian corpuscles and the decrease
in collagen in the skin, not only does that reduce our ability to perceive passive touch,
but it also has implications for active touch, for exploring your environment and for gaining
information from the environment and it is important.
Let me, I'm reminded of an interaction with the environment that I had as a child that
I think stuck with me.
I was probably two or three years old because I remember where we were living at the time
and my grandmother was trimming the Christmas tree and she had put a string of lights up
and she plugged it in to see which bulbs were burned out and she unscrewed a burned out
bulb and went to get a replacement for it and I still remember walking over to the Christmas
tree and carefully sticking my finger in the socket where the bulb was missing and I of
course got a nasty, nasty surprise, but I learned.
So not only do we learn how the world works, but we learn what parts of the world can be
painful if we come into physical contact with them and we stay away from them.
Okay, now what happens to active touch as we become older?
Our touch discrimination begins to show declines, we're less able to just by feel to figure
out how things work and how things fit together.
Now this has been formally tested in a test called the tactile form discrimination test
and the way this works and this is also a test that would be used by neurologists or
neuropsychologists most likely.
There is a box with a curtain over it, a small box with a curtain and you are asked to stick
your hand into the box and there are little plastic discs that are cut into different
shapes.
You're supposed to reach in, pick up a disc and by feel describe its geometric shape.
Well this feels like a cross or this feels like a circle or this is a triangle or this
is a square, this is a rectangle and young people are very, very good at this but with
age we begin to show confusions.
Is this, now there are degrees of severity, for example if you can no longer feel the
points on the square and you mistake it for a circle that's pretty serious and that may
be more than just the lack of Petitian corpuscles and Meissner corpuscles.
If you make a mistake between say a rectangle and a triangle that's kind of trivial, if
you make a mistake between a star and a triangle that's kind of trivial but if you mistake
a triangle for a circle that has what they call pathonomonic significance.
In any event even normal elderly people begin to show misperceptions on this tactile form
recognition test suggesting that their active touch, their accuracy in gaining information
from tactile exploration of the outside world has been negatively affected.
You know it occurs to me that I've spent so much time talking about active touch and
its importance in adults and older people and decline in older people that I neglected
to address the importance of active touch in infants.
It is critically important.
A baby must learn visually guided grasping responses as we saw from Professor Held's
monkeys it doesn't happen automatically.
A baby must learn by reaching out and actually succeeding and touching things in the environment.
Baby must also learn shape discrimination so what is good for a baby is to have access
to toys with different shapes, round, square, triangular, etc. so that they can feel these
things and learn the difference even before they have language to code these things.
It's also good for babies to have wind up toys that move, maybe that will be a mobile
that circles over the baby's head.
So they learn how to control visual tracking movements and if something is moving on the
floor they learn to gauge how in fact to time a grasp to reach out and trap this thing
to capture this toy.
So active touch is important throughout our entire lives and I would be remiss if I didn't
include early infant and childhood development as a critical time for active touch to be
teaching us things about the world and how it works.
To summarize we've been talking about the aging process and tactile sensitivity and
the punch line is that most of our tactile capabilities do show measurable declines with
age but it usually takes laboratory tests to detect these changes because they are not
significant enough to have a major impact on everyday life.
We also talked about the fact that we never outgrow our need to touch and be touched by
our fellow human beings because basically we are a social species.
I shared with you the concerns of some cultural anthropologists that perhaps American children
are not getting enough touch which has the possibility of leading to increased aggressiveness.
We noted some studies suggesting that interpersonal touching is far less frequent in the United
States than it is in some other countries.
The next lecture that we will be sharing together will be one devoted to another aspect of the
skin senses, pain.
Recall that we're treating pain separately because in many ways it is different from
anything we've talked about so far and you will see that shortly.
The first lecture on pain will be dealing with the early history of pain, some of our
conceptions and misconceptions about pain and where the research has come from, where it
currently is and where it appears to be going in the future.
Thank you very much.
