Lecture 16 – Taste – Factors Influencing Preferences
Hello and welcome to Lecture 16. As you recall in Lecture 15, we went over some of the basics
of our gustatory sense, the sense of taste. We talked about the taste primaries, sweet,
sour, salty, and bitter, and about the recommendations of Japanese researchers that we include a fifth
taste primary, umami. We also dealt with some vocabulary issues, looking at the difference
between a taste papilla, a taste bud, and a taste receptor. We also talked about the
fact that the middle of the tongue is taste blind and that most taste substances will
adapt to nothingness in between one and a half and three minutes. In the present lecture,
we're going to extend our discussion of taste and talk about some of the factors that contribute
to individual differences in taste preferences. When you think about it, we all start life
as infants with a preference for sweet. We have a sweet tooth that we're born with.
We have less of a preference for salt, but it's still a mild innate preference, and
we need salt too. And most of us, in fact all of us, are born with an aversion to bitter
and sour. Starting with that in common, look at how we end up as adults with the wide range
of taste preferences that people experience all over the planet. It's absolutely amazing.
We're going to look at some of the factors that contribute to differences in taste preferences.
One thing that contributes to differences in taste preferences is the aging process,
starting from the young age and going to an old age. In the previous lecture, I mentioned
to you that a normal, healthy, young adult human has about 10,000 taste buds, which means
effectively 10,000 taste receptors because each taste bud contains one taste receptor.
Now the reason I specified young adults is because the number of taste buds and receptors
is different as we age. In children, for example, children have taste buds not only on the tip
of the tongue and the edges of the tongue and the back of the tongue, but children have
taste buds on the size of the cheeks, the back of the throat, the soft palate. A baby's
oral cavity is just crammed with taste buds and taste receptors, which means that they
are getting much more stimulation from taste substances than we do. This may be a strategy
on the part of mother nature to make sure that children don't neglect to eat and get
malnutrition because they get a lot of sensory stimulation from their food. As we age, the
number of taste receptors that are located in places other than the tongue begin to die
off, and by the time we are adults, taste receptors remain simply on the tongue.
Now we understand why children have more taste buds and receptors than young adults. How
about the opposite end of the continuum? Why do the elderly have fewer functioning taste
receptors than young adults or than children? Well, you may recall that taste receptors
have a very short lifespan, 7 to 10 days, and then they die. The way that the replacement
process works is that in the taste bud, the 20 to 24 supporting cells, the most mature,
the oldest of the supporting cells, moves to the center of the bud, grows the little
hair-like projections, the trapped molecules of the substance to be tasted, and forms a
synaptic connection with a taste nerve fiber going to the brain. When you are a healthy
young adult, the replacement process can keep up with the dying off process, so a taste
receptor will die every 7 days and a supporting cell will move in and replace it in relatively
short time. As we age, however, the replacement process begins to fall behind the dying off
process, and this should come as no surprise. As you age, cuts heal slower, broken bones
heal slower, and taste supporting structures become taste receptors at a slower rate.
So as we age, we end up having a net loss in the number of functioning taste receptors
at any time. Now, there are no exact figures I can give you on this because there's a
great deal of variability. There are certain environmental experiences that are going to
reduce the turnover of taste receptors in anybody. For instance, certain illnesses slow
down the replacement process. Exposure to X-rays can slow down the replacement process. Smoking
can slow down the replacement process. I knew of one individual who claims to have totally
lost his sense of taste from years of drinking very strong moonshine whiskey. So if these
things can slow down the replacement process in a young person, they can do it in spades
for an older person. So all we can say for certain is that in our 80s, we have significantly
fewer taste buds and taste receptors functioning than we did when we were young adults and
certainly fewer than we had when we were children. Now, one stratagem that some older folks
used to try and keep from finding mealtime bland and boring is to experiment with new
seasonings and new spices and try different ethnic cuisines to get that different taste.
I think this is a highly valuable and positive thing to do and I'm moving in that direction
myself. So age is one factor that determines taste preferences. Young people, for example,
except for this craving for sweets that sometimes will explode in an orgy of candy eating, prefer
bland food because spicy food would overwhelm them with all those taste receptors that young
people have. So yes, taste differences certainly show up in different age groups. Another factor
that can contribute to individual differences in taste sensitivity is a phenomenon called
the learned taste aversion phenomenon. And this is somewhat complicated. So what I'll
do is first share with you the reference experiment, the first laboratory demonstration
of the learned taste aversion phenomenon, and then I will attempt to make it more clear
what point I'm trying to make. The demonstration I'm talking about was done by a professor
named John Garcia back in 1966. Garcia gave rats exposure to what he called bright, noisy
saccharine tasting water. Now, that sounds like a bizarre combination, but it's actually
quite simple. He put these rats in an enclosure with a dish of saccharine flavored water. Now
rats have a sweet tooth just as people do and just as most animals do with the exception
of cats. And so the rats, of course, began to drink this water. While they're drinking
the water, they are also exposed to a flashing light right in front of the water container
and a pulsating tone right over the rat's head. Thus, Garcia used the explanatory label
bright, the flashing light, noisy, the pulsating tone, saccharine tasting water. While the rats
are drinking the bright, noisy saccharine tasting water, Dr. Garcia is exposing them
to x-rays. He's giving them a sufficient dosage to produce radiation sickness. Now he doesn't
want to kill them, but he wants to make them good and sick. So now radiation sickness does
not come upon you immediately and you can't feel the radiation while you're being exposed
to it. So what happens is the rats drink the bright, noisy saccharine tasting water, they
get bombarded with x-rays, they're put back in their home cages, 90 minutes later they
begin to show symptoms of radiation sickness. They get dizzy and show nausea and they just
don't feel so good. What Garcia then does is when the rats are recovered enough to be
retested, he puts them back in the environment. They go over, they take one taste of the saccharine
solution and they turn their noses up at it. They're not going to drink that stuff. He
tests them with the flashing light, they show no fear or aversion. He tests them with the
pulsating tone, again no fear or aversion. Dr. Garcia proposed that this was a special
case of classical conditioning, that the taste of the saccharine somehow bridged a 90 minute
time lag and got paired with these feelings of illness. So he wrote this article up and
submitted it for publication to what was then the most prestigious journal in the biological
end of psychology. The editor rejected that manuscript on the part of Dr. Garcia and actually
wrote Dr. Garcia a rather, what, snotty rejection letter. A partial quote from that letter was
Dr. Garcia, your results are no more likely than finding bird droppings in a cuckoo clock,
except the editor did not use the word droppings. He used a four letter word that maybe means
the same thing as dropping. So the thing is Garcia's conclusions were revolutionary at
the time. To say that this is an example of classical conditioning, where a taste occurs
and then an hour and a half later the sickness occurs and somehow the brain bridges that
gap. And people were thinking in terms of Pavlovian condition, when Pavlov rang a bell
or a tone, he would give the dog's meat powder 500 milliseconds later, half a second. People
said well what do you think would happen if Pavlov presented the tone and gave the dog's
meat powder an hour and a half later? Would they ever learn to salivate to that tone?
So how can Garcia call this classical conditioning? Well the point that Garcia was making was that
not all stimuli are equally associated with all responses and there's some special relationship
between taste and illness. The learned taste aversion phenomenon. It turns out that follow-up
research demonstrated Garcia was absolutely correct. You can demonstrate the same phenomenon
in any number of ways. And I guess he finally received the recognition and appreciation he
deserved when years later the editor of that journal and the journal will remain nameless
and the editor will remain nameless. Upon his stepping down as editor he wrote a farewell
editorial on the first page of the journal and he said you know in all my years of being
editor of this journal the one thing I regret is the way I handled Dr. Garcia's finding
of learned taste aversion. It is for real. So this is the learned taste aversion effect
that was demonstrated in the laboratory and my point is that it can be operating in people
every day. Let me give you some practical examples of this. Take a woman who is pregnant
and is experiencing bouts of morning sickness. Now she's eating her breakfast, she's eating
oatmeal or something like this and she gets a wave of nausea. That woman may very well
develop an aversion to the taste of oatmeal. Another woman I know that actually happened
to somebody I know as did this. She's eating scrambled eggs for breakfast and she has a
wave of nausea and she ends up developing an aversion to the taste of scrambled eggs.
So these are examples of the learned taste aversion phenomenon. Now you see this is another
one of mother nature's survival mechanisms like mother nature programming animals to
approach sugar and avoid bitter. That's to increase the likelihood that we will eat
things that have sugar in them which has energy and we will avoid things that are poisonous
because most bitter things in the woods well most poisons in the woods are bitter. Here
we see the learned taste aversion phenomenon as another prewired mechanism that has survival
value. An animal eats something that is poisonous. There are two outcomes that can occur. One
the animal will die in which case its troubles are over but if the animal survives it better
not go back and eat that substance again. So occasionally a substance is inappropriately
blamed because it was the thing that the animal tasted before it got sick as in the case of
Garcia's rats. The taste didn't make the rats sick, the radiation did. In the case of morning
sickness it was not the eggs or the oatmeal that made the woman sick. We see other examples
of the learned taste aversion phenomenon in the real world if you will. For example some
time ago sheep farmers in the west were having a problem with coyotes preying on their sheep
and killing them and eating them. So the farmers used to take a rather direct approach they
would just go out and shoot the coyotes. Well animal rights people and wildlife people said
let's try something else. Let's try when a sheep dies of natural causes. Let's lace
the body of the sheep, the carcass of the sheep with lithium chloride which in sufficient
quantities can cause considerable nausea. And then we'll leave it out there for a coyote
to eat. The coyote will eat the sheep carcass, it'll get sick from the lithium chloride
but the taste of the sheep will be associated with the illness and then this coyote won't
bother your sheep anymore. Turns out that's very labor intensive. You have to wait for
a sheep to die of old age and then put lithium in it and then wait for a coyote. They went
back to shooting them. But in fact the learned taste of origin phenomenon did work in coyotes.
We also see another example from the real world in the case of cancer patients who are
undergoing chemotherapy. Now chemo can produce considerable nausea and discomfort and it's
not unusual to find a patient undergoing chemo developing an aversion to the last taste he
or she experienced before they had the therapy and experienced the nausea. In the interest
of conveying information I'm going to share two learned taste aversions that I have. I'm
using myself as an example for every person. We can all probably count on having had a taste
associated with illness in some time in our lives. The first story involves the fact that
I have an aversion to pickles. This goes back to when I was nine or ten years old. I was
coming down with the mumps. I had swollen glands. I was feeling terrible and my mother
had the next door neighbor Mrs. Voss over who always scared me. She was a big gruff woman
that she just frightened me. So I'm trying to get a drink of water because I'm feeling
very bad and my mother says are you feeling any better? And I said no I need a drink of
water and Mrs. Voss says what's wrong with him? And my mother says we think he's coming
down with mumps. Mrs. Voss says I know how to tell get me a pickle. And my mother said
we don't have any pickles. She says hold the boy I'll go next door and get a pickle.
And she runs over to her house and gets a pickle and comes back and she says come here
boy take a bite of this pickle. I was scared. She's coming at me with this pickle. I started
running. I'm running around the dining room table. She's chasing me. I head for the back
door. It's locked. Mrs. Voss catches me. She grabs me. She crams that pickle in my mouth
and she triggered a gag reflex and I was violently ill. I can still recall the taste of pickle
juice. Well I have a learned taste of version to pickles. I haven't had a pickle in over
half a century. The other learned taste of version. I'll go ahead and tell you the story
because we know each other so well. I had to be three years old because we were still
living in the space over my grandparents house. My mother had to take my little brother
to the doctor. And my grandmother said leave the boy. I'll come up and check on him every
now and then. He can't get into any trouble. Well I could get into a little trouble. My
mother used to be a secret chocolate addict and she would never let us have any. She would
tell us it's bad for us. But I knew the drawer where she kept her chocolate. So she's out.
My grandmother's downstairs. I go over to my mother's chocolate drawer and I open it
and there's two boxes. A big red one and a little blue one. For some reason I thought
maybe she wouldn't notice if I ate some from the little blue box. So I get the little blue
box out and I take a bite of chocolate. It's my first bite of chocolate. It was wonderful.
I ate the whole box. Now because I was three I couldn't read that what it really was was
chocolate flavored X-lax. Okay so I ate a strong laxative. I had the appropriate result which
ruined the rest of my day. I have to tell you. And I have not. I have a strong aversion
to chocolate. It's not that I can take it or leave it. I leave it. And many people find
that unusual and I don't typically tell them the story. But I thought that because chocolate
is such a favorite of so many people that you need to know that individual differences
and taste preference can even go so far as to include a perennial favorite like chocolate.
Now the robustness of the learned taste aversion phenomenon is just amazing. I had to be three
that's like 64 years ago. I had a learned taste aversion experience with chocolate. Now
see it wasn't the taste of the chocolate. It was whatever ingredient they put in it.
But what do I know? I know that people think they're doing me a favor. They offer me a
bite of chocolate and I politely refuse. Okay well it doesn't matter. Okay so this my point
here is that everybody can have a learned taste aversion story. Okay another factor
that can bring about incredible differences in taste preferences is cultural training.
You're the conditioning that you undergo as a function of being a member of this culture
as opposed to that culture. Now cultural conditioning starts so young and as I said it's so pervasive
that you don't even know you've been conditioned. You think everybody should eat what you eat
and not eat what you or don't eat but that's not the way it works. Our likes, our dislikes,
our preferences, attitudes, opinions, prejudices all of that is based on cultural conditioning
and yet it seems so natural we feel that we were born that way and that's also the case
with our taste preferences. Now those early taste preferences for the sweet and salt can
be easily overcome by cultural conditioning and in fact frequently is. Now I've been very
fortunate in my academic career to have been able to travel to 26 different countries where
I've seen firsthand the cultural differences in taste preferences. I've been to a Maasai
village in Kenya where they were drinking cow's blood out of a bowl and my biggest fear was
that they would offer me some cow's blood because I saw two choices either drink it
and be ill probably or not drink it and hurt their feelings. Luckily they didn't offer
it to me. I've been to parts of the world where they regularly dine on a variety of
species of rodents, on fungus, songbirds, grasshoppers and other insects, snakes, snails and dogs
and cats. I remember being at an upscale restaurant in Beijing that sort of reminded me of an upscale
seafood restaurant in this country in that you go over to a tank in the seafood restaurant
and you point to your lobster. I'll take that one and they fish it out and they prepare
it for you. In this restaurant in Beijing you go over to the tank and you pick out your
snake. That took a little getting used to. So what we have is a situation where the food
items, the taste items that are acceptable in one country not only acceptable but considered
a delicacy might be viewed with repulsion and be viewed as unacceptable in another culture.
In India for example they have 1.2 billion people. Now this doesn't hold of course for
every individual Indian but in general there is a need for protein in that country. There
is a shortage of protein and yet they have millions and millions of cows roaming the
streets while some people go to bed hungry. Such a thing would be unthinkable for instance
in Argentina or in some other countries. In many other countries they have their own
sacred cows if you will for example whereas in India because of cultural conditioning
and the role that the cow plays in Hinduism they wouldn't consider thinking of the cow
as an item to dine on. In the United States our sacred cows take the form of horses and
dogs. There are people in the United States who would much rather go hungry than eat a
dog or a horse. This probably has to do with our tradition in this country of the cowboy
and the cowboy's reliance on his horse and the old cowboy movies where we knew the horse's
names and what have you. And the dog of course is considered man's best friend in this country.
And so in fact there is a cultural taboo against dog meat and horse meat in this country. You
can imagine some kids coming home from school and saying what's for dinner mommy and she
says well tonight we're having lassi and trigger that wouldn't go over too well. As a matter
of fact I can remember an experience when I was teaching an undergraduate class and
one of my students was a deer hunter and it was winter so the stuff didn't thaw but he
brought me a couple of deer steaks and I didn't want to say let's construe it as a bribe
you know blah blah blah. So I took the deer steaks and I took them home and I asked the
kids do you guys want to try deer meat? Oh eat bambi? No way. So there are emotional factors
that influence what people will and will not eat and horse and dog are examples. Now in
addition to cultural factors there are also genetic factors that contribute to individual
differences in taste preferences. I will give you an example. A laboratory worker some years
ago synthesized a synthetic liquid a synthetic liquid called phenol thio carbamide actually
it wasn't a liquid it can be put in a liquid phenol thio carbamide. So he has this stuff
which is abbreviated PTC and he takes a little taste of PTC and it is so incredibly bitter
that he can hardly stand it and it's such a curiosity that he asks the worker at the
adjoining bench he says hey taste this stuff what do you think about it and so the co-worker
tastes it and he says what about it and he says didn't you find that incredibly bitter
and the co-worker said I couldn't taste anything. Now this shocked the first person so bad because
it was such an intensely bitter taste it was highly aversive that he went ahead and
tested PTC on a large number of people and what he discovered that was that two thirds
of the people who taste phenol thio carbamide identify it as bitter and one third of the
people who taste phenol thio carbamide can't taste it at all so the general population
is divided into tasters which is two thirds of us and non-tasters which is one third of
us and it turns out that people who are tasters have near relatives who are also tasters it
turns out that the sensitivity to PTC has a genetic basis and that people who are sensitive
to PTC are highly sensitive to the taste of bitter and people who don't taste PTC are
less sensitive to the taste of bitter but they can still experience bitter. It turns
out that PTC tasters some of them are so sensitive to the taste of bitter that they cannot use
saccharine the artificial sweetener which to them tastes very bitter and they cannot
drink coffee which to them is uncomfortably and aversively bitter. Researchers currently
underway in various laboratories interested in genetic factors in human behavior to investigate
the possibility that genetic factors are also involved in other taste preferences and taste
sensitivities. Okay in addition to genetic factors influencing individual differences
in taste sensitivity there are also some factors that are based on a specific taste having some
kind of special property that initially attracts somebody to try it for its special property and
then they end up liking the taste and continuing to eat that. One such example of a taste with
special properties is chocolate. Okay if you question a large number of people and ask them to
write down a food that they occasionally get great cravings for many of these people will indicate
that chocolate is a food that they occasionally get cravings for. Now the fact is that this is not
meant to be sexist but the majority of these people who get cravings for chocolate are women.
There are some men not me as you may well be able to guess but some men have these cravings too.
I've heard women say to each other do you want to do some chocolate after work
sounding like druggies talking about doing drugs you want to do some chocolate. It's clear that
chocolate is an emotional food. Women seem to have greater cravings for it when they are sad,
when they are lonely, when they've been jilted, when they're experiencing PMS the cravings seem
to go up. As a matter of fact I never thought of it before but my mother we were not we were
kind of poor actually and yet that was the only luxury she allowed herself and she was all of
the above. She was lonely and jilted and sad. She was raising two little boys alone and our life
was not a bowl of cherries and she ate chocolate and I never understood that until late in my own
life. All right so anyway here's the theory of why people develop these cravings for chocolate.
There is a chemical known as phenolethylamine abbreviated PEA and apparently phenolethylamine
is produced in the brain when we are in love. In fact it is PEA that is supposed to be responsible
for that heady feeling of walking on clouds and so on when you're in love. Now when the love stops
the PEA production in the brain stops and the theory is that there are special
times in a woman's life or I guess it could be anybody's life but it seems to happen more
frequently in women when you miss those good feelings produced by the PEA when you were in love
and that chocolate contains PEA and that by eating chocolate you can kill two birds with one stone.
You can taste something sweet and delicious and you can also increase your PEA levels and get a good
emotional feeling. The truth of the matter is that there are other tastes that also contain PEA
but apparently none of them taste as good as chocolate so that's one theory for the chocolate
cravings. Another taste with a special property that is supposed to contribute to why people
end up liking it is ginger. Ginger is kind of a functional vegetable. Ginger is used between
courses to clean your palate in restaurants. Some people swear by ginger as a precaution against
motion sickness and sea sickness. Ginger is supposed to have the properties of being a cough
suppressant and a fever reducer and a booster of the immune system and an antioxidant. I have
taken with my wife two round the world sea voyages and when people heard we were going to be at sea
for months and months many people said take caramelized ginger with you it's a guaranteed
way to minimize sea sickness and so we did in fact take caramelized ginger with us and a number of
our fellow passengers apparently had gotten the same advice because they brought caramelized ginger
with them and it turns out that the people who use caramelized ginger experienced far less sea
sickness. Just recently I read a scientific study where one gram of powdered ginger root was compared
with Dramamine to effectiveness in minimizing or eliminating sea sickness. It's for real. I
know of people who started out eating ginger for one of its other medicinal properties and ended
up liking it and now they eat caramelized ginger regularly. One more example of a food with a
special property. Here we're going to be focusing on something that is more or less peculiar to
Japan. The taste is the taste of puffer fish or fugu. It turns out that fugu has the special
property if it's not prepared exquisitely carefully of killing you. That's the special property.
Fugu it turns out or puffer fish contains a deadly toxin that if the fugu chef who must
be licensed in Japan doesn't prepare it properly you run the risk of dying and apparently this
is the enticement for young Japanese males who are the primary purchasers of fugu.
It turns out that fugu contains a toxin hundreds of times more powerful than
Stricknein or arsenic or any of the poisons that we're familiar with and an expert fugu chef
can actually leave just a taste of the toxin in it so that when you eat it you can feel it
tingling in your lips and you know that you've just looked the grim reaper in the eye and you're
still there to chew your next piece of fugu. So people start out with this stuff which tastes
just like pompano but as many times more expensive they start out with it because of the I guess
the rush of almost dying of having a near-death experience and they end up liking the taste.
Some cities in Japan have a law that if you die of fugu poisoning they can't bury you for three
days because in three days the toxin wears off and some people come back to life. Okay so we have
spent our lecture talking about the some of the factors that contribute to individual differences
in taste preference. In our next lecture we will talk about the sense of smell which I call the
unappreciated sense because people don't realize just how important smell is. Thank you.
