Lecture 18, Smell, Consequences of Enosmia
Hi, in lecture 17 I referred to smell as the unappreciated sense.
In lecture 18 I'm going to continue that theme by sharing with you some of the data
suggesting the consequences of either losing your sense of smell entirely or having your
sense of smell diminished significantly.
One way to learn to appreciate something is to see how it changes your life when you
lose it.
There are documented instances of humans who have been unfortunate enough to be rendered
anosmic by some kind of accident that shears off the olfactory bulbs or some kind of a
metabolic problem or a bad infection that wipes out the olfactory epithelium.
Some of these people turn out to have been gifted writers and they write very poignant
accounts of how their lives have been changed by becoming anosmic.
You can only imagine what it must be like not to be able to smell your baby or your spouse
or the different foliage as the seasons change or the odor of roast turkey at Thanksgiving.
We just can't imagine it, but some of these writings make it more real for us.
Another way to appreciate the consequences of anosmia is to see what it does to experimental
animals who have been rendered anosmic through surgical means.
The typical subject in such an experiment is some kind of a rodent, a rat, a hamster,
a guinea pig or something of that nature.
What we see is if we produce anosmia in an animal who is territorial by nature, some
important changes take place.
This animal no longer marks its own territory and no longer respects the territorial markings
of another animal.
Now this puts the poor anosmic creature at risk because she is going to blunder into
some other animal's territory and be attacked because animals become especially aggressive
if their territory is infringed on.
This animal is not going to mark his or her own territory, so other animals will be unaware
and wander into this territory.
This creature is going to get into more fights than it needs to get into.
Another finding from the animal literature is that when you render an experimental animal
anosmic through surgical means, it totally abolishes their sexual behavior.
This is the case in rodents.
Non-human primates rendering a monkey anosmic will significantly reduce but not abolish
a monkey's sexual behavior.
It turns out that in the animal kingdom there are odorous stimuli called pheromones and
one pheromone is to stimulate sexual behavior in conspecifics, other animals of that species
who might smell that pheromone.
Pheromones were first discovered in bugs and of course this was put to a commercial use.
Once people discovered pheromones in bugs they would synthesize that particular chemical
pheromone and put it in a bug bag along with some bug killer and then they would put these
bug bags, sell them to people to put in their gardens and a male bug smells the pheromone
and he flies into this bag thinking he's going to have a good time and instead he gets poisoned.
So pheromones were first discovered in insects but they have also been shown to contribute
to the sexual behavior of rodents.
Well in everything up to and including non-human primates, however the more intelligent the
creature is the less totally dependent on pheromones it is and the more important social
factors become.
So even female monkeys in heat, the male will smell the female monkey and he'll be interested
but if he's in the zoo for example and there are people watching he will not engage in
sexual behavior.
By the time we get to humans social factors become so important that even if there were
such a thing as human pheromones it would play a minimal role in human sexual behavior.
As a matter of fact at the present time there is no, absolutely no evidence for a human
sex pheromone in spite of what the perfume manufacturers would have us believe.
The pheromone discovered by Martha McClintock was not a sex pheromone, none has been discovered
as I said.
In spite of the fact that there is no evidence for a human sex pheromone there does appear
to be some kind of a connection between smell and sexual behavior.
There are statistical records suggesting that of humans who are made anosmic by one sort
of accident or infection or illness or another 25% of them lose their sex drive, 25% of humans
who become anosmic are at risk for total loss of their libido.
As I said the mechanism is not understood it's still under investigation.
This reminds me that when I was in college there was a story in a local newspaper about
a construction worker who on the job accident got hit in the head by a 2x10 or something
like that and his lawyer was suing the company for safety violations and they were claiming
damages for of course for the time he was off from work and also they were claiming
damages because he no longer was interested in having sex with his wife.
Now at the time I remember that those of us who were discussing this article felt that
this was another sleazy example of a lawyer trying to up the size of the settlement by
claiming that getting hit in the head can abolish sexual behavior.
It turns out that it was probably a legitimate claim and if I could remember that lawyer's
name I might write him a letter of apology, probably not.
But anyway there does seem to be a relationship between olfactory trouble, anosmia and loss
of sexual behavior in some humans.
Another very important smell related issue these days is the connection between smell
and memory.
This seems to be a growing area of interest for smell researchers.
Let me share with you some of the literature and some of the findings.
First of all, it's been known for some time that some people possess incredibly powerful
olfactory imagery.
By this I mean sometimes you can be minding your own business and all of a sudden you
will smell something and that smell will elicit in you a vivid memory from some previous
episode in your life that you weren't thinking about at all.
This phenomenon actually has a name.
It's called the Proust Effect.
Now the French writer Marcel Proust has had his name attached to this effect, this vivid
olfactory memory because of a very accurate and well written description of such an effect
in one of his novels, a novel entitled Swan's Way.
In that novel Proust described the feeling that came over a person when he smelled an
odor, how it reestablished a memory from long ago that this person had not thought of for
quite a while.
Now not everybody has experienced the Proust Effect because olfactory imagery is what we
psychologists call normally distributed in the population.
That is some people have incredibly vivid olfactory imagery, some people have little
or none and most of us are somewhere in between.
I have had one Proust Effect experience myself and I'll share it with you to see if it resonates
with any smell related memory experiences you have had.
In 1964 I had just obtained my doctoral degree and a good friend of mine had just obtained
his law degree and we decided to take a road trip together.
So we borrowed the new lawyer's father's Cadillac which had air conditioning, I'd never been
in an air conditioned car before and off we took to go across the country.
It was a wonderful time, a freeing time, we saw some beautiful sights and the smell of
auto air conditioning occasionally re-elicits that feeling and that memory of driving across
the country in this air conditioned car.
Now the thing is in those days the coolant in auto air conditioning was freon, that has
now been determined to be harmful to the ozone layer and auto air conditioning is now based
on some other coolant other than freon and whatever this new stuff is the smell of it
doesn't do anything for me so I may never have that Proust Effect memory again.
Unless I go find some black market freon and sniff it or something like that.
That might not even work either because the Proust Effect is unconscious and involuntary.
You cannot actively seek out the smell and then take a whiff of it with the intention
of creating that memory, it comes by itself when it wants to.
It's really quite interesting.
By the way it's not just olfactory imagery that is normally distributed, visual imagery
shows the same phenomenon.
Some of us have wonderfully vivid visual imagery where we can see things in living color.
Some of us see things, can imagine visual experiences but they're kind of washed out.
Some of us see visual experiences in black and white and some people have absolutely
no visual imagery.
So humans differ on these dimensions.
I don't mean to let you think that everybody is the same.
I never even knew that some people had no visual imagery until a young couple in one
of my classes had a minor spat.
He was going away to summer camp.
He was in some military program and she said, the young lady said, before you go to sleep
every night I want you to imagine my face.
He started laughing and she got angry because she thought he was making fun of her.
Turns out he was laughing because he had never been able to imagine anything visually.
When they explained this to each other then the spat was patched up.
I discovered by listening in on this conversation that this young man had no visual imagery.
I guess that means there are some people with no olfactory imagery.
I don't know.
Okay, another interesting connection between smell and memory is seen in some of the recent
literature linking various senile dementias, including Alzheimer's, to smell deficits.
The interesting point here is that if in fact there is some kind of a correlation between
decreases in smell sensitivity and the onset of senile dementia, then by measuring smell
sensitivity it might be possible to identify people who are at risk for senile dementia
or who are just starting to show signs of senile dementia.
Here I will allude briefly to the work of a gentleman by the name of DP Devonand who
is co-director of the Memory Disorders Center in the New York State Psychiatric Institution.
Dr. Devonand has been following 223 subjects for the past five years and what he does is
at intervals he tests these people with a scratch and sniff test and every time they
are tested it is the same 10 odors and it is not that they can't smell them.
What he is concerned about is when they can smell them but they don't remember what they
are.
So when we talk about failure of odor memory we don't mean an inability to smell it but
an inability to remember it.
The odors that Professor Devonand gives these people when they are due for a regular testing
include lemon, strawberry, smoke, soap, menthol, clove, pineapple, natural gas, lilac and leather.
So they are fairly common odors.
What he finds is when it is time to test these people some of them begin to show confusions
and inabilities to identify certain odors and it is his finding that these are the people
who are in the very near future likely to start showing the symptoms of Alzheimer's
disease.
Now why is this an important thing to do?
Why should Professor Devonand and others in the field be working on scratch and sniff
tests to predict who is going to get Alzheimer's when there is no cure for it anyway?
As a matter of fact Professor Devonand's test is about 80% accurate at detecting who is
at risk for symptoms of senile dementia.
Now is that good enough?
Well not necessarily but it is as good as any tests are at the present time.
At the present time the tests that are used to try and identify people at risk for Alzheimer's
disease are what are called neuropsychological test batteries.
These sometimes take 5 or more hours to administer and they are only 80% accurate themselves.
So here is a scratch and sniff test which can be administered in minutes and its predictive
validity is as good as tests that are currently in use that may take 5 or more hours to administer.
So the thing about the early recognition of such people is with Alzheimer's since there
is no cure what they do is work on reducing and minimizing the symptoms and the sooner
you start working on these symptoms the more you can slow the progress of the disorder.
Also early identification of people who are likely to become symptomatic for Alzheimer's
gives the family a chance to do some long term planning and care and things of that nature.
The other thing is at the current time research is going on there are promising drugs in the
pipeline that may actually prevent or slow down the course of Alzheimer's disease.
So it is good to find out who is at risk in case these drugs suddenly become available
they can immediately start the course of treatment.
There are other areas of research suggesting the relationship between smell and memory.
One of these is of a neurophysiological nature.
Just let me share with you that for hundreds of years the belief has been that at birth
we have every brain cell we are ever going to get which is one of the reasons why a baby's
head is so big that it makes the birth process as uncomfortable as it is because the baby's
head contains 100 billion brain cells and that is the same number that we carry well
it is not really the same number we carry through the rest of our lives because over
the course of our lives we lose brain cells but we start out with 100 billion brain cells.
The wisdom has been for a couple of hundred years that we never get any more brain cells
that when we start losing cells from our starting pot of 100 billion of these things that's
it.
It's all downhill.
More recent evidence that has been acquired over the past decade suggests that there are
two parts of the human brain where it is possible to produce new brain cells.
This was revolutionary finding and many people I'm sure some people still don't believe it.
It's not the cerebral cortex unfortunately the smart part of the brain the part that controls
the higher mental processes and so on but the two parts of the brain where evidence
suggests now first this evidence was discovered in rat brains but it has now been identified
in human brains too.
This evidence suggests that we can in fact produce new brain cells in the olfactory
bulbs smell and the hippocampus which is the part of the brain that is critically important
for memory consolidation and memory retrieval so in terms of the two parts of the brain
that can elaborate new brain cells smell and memory very interesting to me.
The next part of this discussion that I'm going to share with you is actually based
on a student question that I got some time ago the student came up after class and said
is it true that as we lose our sense of smell we are at greater risk for illness and failure
of health and I guess I misinterpreted the student's question because I said well yes
as we lose our sense of smell we're less able to smell smoke and we're less able to
smell electrical fires and we're less able and the student said no no that's not what
I mean and she showed me a little pamphlet that she had on aromatherapy a little twenty
page pamphlet she says this booklet suggests that if you smell this it'll cure this and
if you smell this it'll fix this and if you smell this it'll make you more healthy here
and here and I realized that she wasn't asking a question about anosmia and smelling acids
or smoke or spoiled food she was asking a question about aromatherapy and it occurs
to me that perhaps many people have questions about aromatherapy and perhaps some people
have never even heard of it this woman's the young woman that showed me the booklet the
booklet contained a total of ninety ailments that the publishers of the booklet claimed
could be cured by either rubbing on a certain plant extract oil or smelling it or putting
it in your bathwater or something like that just on the first page I remember the ailments
included things like depression constipation diminished libido meaning no sex trap bronchitis
memory impairments pain and I'm thinking this is going way beyond the data as I understand
it so let me talk a little bit about the current status of our of our understanding of aromatherapy
first of all let me define aromatherapy for you it is defined as the therapeutic use of
the essential oils of plants to affect mood or health now when they say essential oils
I may have mentioned this previously but they don't mean essential in the sense of you need
it to stay healthy or to have a nutritional diet they're talking about the essence of
the plant essential they're talking about the essential oil as the volatile aromatic
component of this plants oil a brief history of aromatherapy aromatherapy is thought to
have started in France in the 1930s and the gentleman credited with coining the term aromatherapy
although he said it in French of course was a gentleman by the name of Rene Maurice Gattafoss
G-A-T-T-E-F-O-S-S-C Rene Maurice Gattafoss now this gentleman was actually a chemist working
in the perfume business run by his family and the story goes and I have no reason to doubt
it that he was working in the laboratory one day and he accidentally burned his forearm
very very badly and he was in pain as people who burn themselves are and he's looking
for some source of relief for this pain burn and he sees a vat of lavender oil that was
used in the elaboration of some perfumes or something so he runs and he sticks his burned
arm in this vat of lavender oil and the story is that the pain was immediately diminished
and that the arm healed faster than he had expected with no scar he was so impressed
with this with this a turn of events how how the lavender oil had helped him that he discontinued
his interest in the perfume business and he spent the rest of his professional career
studying plant oils and their healing and curative properties now what can we say about
the merits of aromatherapy well that depends on who you ask if you ask a staunch proponent
of aromatherapy they say that what you're actually doing is you are when you extract
this essential oil from the plant is you're getting a distillate of the plants vital force
and that when you use this yourself the essential oils from the plant are purging negative vibrations
from your body's energy field now that whole thing leaves me cold because I'm not sure
what the definition of any of those words are the plants vital force and our negative
vibes from our energy field on the at the other extreme from from people that have this
highly positive view of aromatherapy there are scientists who have signed a statement
that in a sense said we are incensed that legitimately sick now what do they mean by
legitimately sick they mean as opposed to hypochondriacs who are not hurting anybody
if they buy this stuff we are incensed that that legitimately sick people may be putting
off seeking scientific treatment thereby endangering their health and life by participating in
this quackery now there are intermediate views on aromatherapy some people say well I can
trigger pleasant memories and it can promote a state of general relaxation the truth of
the matter is that for the most part the scientific community believes that the claims of aromatherapists
and aromatherapy are exaggerated that there may be some minor benefits but that they blow
them all out of proportion for their own aims let me share with you the only two well constructed
well run well interpreted experiments on aromatherapy that I know of these were done in legitimate
laboratories that know about science and know how to design an experiment one reported
the finding that of all the things tested the odor of green apples seemed to produce
a lowering of blood pressure and the people who smell the odor of green apples the other
experiment well constructed experiment there are many that are either anecdotal or equivocal
and interpreted in ways that perhaps a scientist would have a problem with the other experiment
that suggested that the odor of lavender increases alertness when you are doing a sorting task
that requires concentration so from that if you're going by the rules of science there
is not a whole lot of evidence for major major health benefits from aromatherapy but you
know what if it smells good and you like it it's certainly not going to do you any harm
let's now change our focus a bit and talk about what happens to smell not when you have
senile dementia or Alzheimer's or what have you but smell in the individual undergoing
normal aging in the case of men and this it turns out that men and women are affected
differently like this in the case of men our smell sensitivity sort of remains relatively
constant there may be a modest decline in smell sensitivity until the age of 55 then
the decline becomes more precipitous but till age 55 there's not a whole lot going on in
terms of smell sensitivity in men the thing is men have poorer olfactory sensitivity than
women probably over their entire lives in the case of women smell sensitivity stays relatively
good again there are modest declines until the age of 75 women retain much of their smell
capability much of their olfactory sensitivity and for a good 20 years longer than men do
as matter of fact at the age when men are beginning to show serious declines and smell sensitivity
women are still able to do something that men never could do and that is detect the scent
of fear on another woman let me tell you how this experiment was done women were asked to wear
underarm pads and then they were divided into two groups one group watched a normal movie
and the other group watched a scary movie Freddy Kruger or something like that at the conclusion
of the movie another group of women was asked on the basis of smell to try and figure out which
women saw the scary movie and which women saw the nondescript movie and they were able to do it
with a high degree of accuracy men couldn't begin to do that I indicated that the smell
sensitivity begins to decline in men after 55 and in women I mean precipitously and in women
after 75 I also need you to know that that's a general statement and that there are great
individual differences in smell sensitivity and in the rate with which smell sensitivity diminishes
as a consequence of age some people in their 70s still have the smell sensitivity of of a person
in their in middle age all right now what happens to our sense of smell to cause this decrease in
smell sensitivity with age well one thing that happens is the olfactory epithelium begins to
get thinner now there's there's a way to tell just by visual examination when smell sensitivity
is beginning to decline in a healthy young person whose smell sensitivity is within normal limits
the olfactory epithelium has a yellowish appearance as we begin to lose our sense of smell the color
of the olfactory epithelium begins to fade so this this nice yellowish color begins to fade
and that's a visual clue that that physiological changes are taking place
and that smell sensitivity is being affected the other change in addition to the olfactory
epithelium changing color and getting thinner is that we begin to lose individual receptors
now we start with 10 million so we can afford to lose a few but this does in fact precipitate a
decline in smell sensitivity okay now there are certain environmental events that are known
to be harmful to smell and smell sensitivity repeated blows to the head for example so boxers
you would expect or would be having trouble with smell sensitivity infections of the olfactory
epithelium exposure or overexposure to x-rays sometimes people are forced by one medical
condition or another to to use steroids these can hurt smell sensitivity and smoking is also
harmful to our smell sensitivity now i've just listed for you some situations that are harmful
not only to smell sensitivity in the elderly but in anybody the problem is our sensory systems
become more vulnerable with age so those things like blows to the head and x-rays and smoking and
infections and steroids they're going to have a worse effect on an older person's smell sensitivity
than on a younger but we should all avoid that stuff as much as possible now what are the consequences
that before an older person who through living long enough has in fact experienced a decline
in their smell sensitivity by the way you don't become an osmic simply as a consequence of getting
older it just means you will need a stronger concentration of the odorant to to experience it
some older people who used to be able to smell a substance at a very weak concentration now may
need a concentration nine times that strong but they can still smell it so it's not like you totally
lose your sense of smell well some of the consequences of having partial anosmia are that you are now
much less likely to be aware of your own body odor i am sad to report that my mother-in-law lived
to be 92 and she was in a personal care home for the last few years of her life and i guess she or
whoever her caretakers were were not careful with her personal hygiene and sometimes we would go to
visit her and she would smell really bad and we would say nana you know don't smell so good and
she would say but i took a bath the thing is she was much too incapacitated to get in a tub and
take a bath so she was she didn't smell herself and so i guess she thought that was good enough
the other problem with the elderly having a diminished sense of smell is they take less
pleasure in eating because they don't get the the full flavor and i make the same suggestion
there that i did in talking about the smell that people experiment with different seasonings and
spices and ethnic cuisines and and so on rather than just right eating off as a source of pleasure
general a loss of smell can also diminish your overall joy in life because let's face it there
is great pleasure in smelling a freshly washed baby or in smelling flowers or smelling pizza maybe
not everybody loves that but i love the smell of pizza or freshly baked bread and so the absence of
those smells does take take away something from your overall joy of life and last but not least
when your smell sensitivity declines it does put you at risk the answer that i gave to that young
woman in class who was asking about aromatherapy and i misinterpreted and thought she was asking
about anosmia the answer to the the question i thought she was asking was we are at greater risk
for not detecting the smoke of a fire for not detecting a natural gas leak for not detecting
this this food is bad or spoiled and for not detecting that we are in the presence of toxic
hazardous chemicals so there are there there are legitimate concerns safety concerns about
our diminishing sense of smell in our later years in our next lecture we will begin talking about a
new sensory system the vestibular system thank you
