Lecture 19, The Vestibular System, Body Orientation
Welcome back.
Lecture 18 marked the conclusion of our coverage of the chemical senses, smell and taste.
In lecture 18 we talked about some of the consequences of anosmia and the consequences
not only for experimental animals but for humans.
In lecture 19, actually 19 and 20, we're going to be discussing two senses that many
people have never even heard of.
These are the vestibular sense and the kinesthetic sense.
The vestibular and kinesthetic senses represent the last two of four human senses that are
concerned with some aspect of movement.
Remember the auditory system is actually concerned with movement, movement of objects
at a distance from us that create pressure variations that signal the ear in this form
of sound waves.
The cutaneous system is also concerned with movement, movement of objects on the skin.
The vestibular system is going to be concerned with movement of the whole body in space
and when we get to the kinesthetic sense you'll see that it's concerned not with the whole
body but with the individual body parts, the limbs.
So let's begin our discussion of the vestibular system.
Actually there are two divisions to the vestibular system.
One is concerned with detecting changes in velocity, acceleration and deceleration.
And the part of the vestibular system concerned with detecting changes in velocity is called
the semicircular canals.
Now these are rather difficult to describe.
People get the picture best when they look at a three-dimensional model but I will try
as hard as I can to explain them and I need you to try as hard as you can to understand
what I'm talking about.
There are three semicircular canals in each ear.
These semicircular canals are only about a centimeter in height.
They are semicircles.
One of them is called the superior canal and it is a semicircle that goes from front to
back.
It's a little canal going from front to back.
Another canal is called the posterior canal and instead of going from front to back it
goes from left to right.
So we have the superior, the posterior and then a third canal is called the lateral canal
and it is of course located going sideways.
So we have a superior, posterior and lateral in the right ear and a superior, posterior
and lateral in the left ear.
Just to give you the dimensions of these canals.
Most of the semicircular canal is about .28 millimeters in width, a little bigger than
a quarter of a millimeter.
However at the base of each canal there is a swelling known as the ampule.
At the ampule the canal swells from .28 millimeters in diameter to .9 millimeters in diameter,
a significant increase in size.
Now these canals are attached at both ends to fluid filled reservoirs and the canals
themselves are fluid filled and the fluid that they are filled with is known as endo-lymph
and incompressible fluid.
So the picture now is that we have a canal that is attached at both ends to a reservoir
and filled with endo-lymph.
Let me call your attention to the ampule, that swelling, the .9 millimeter in diameter
swelling.
Inside the swelling is a gelatinous structure known as the cupula.
The cupula actually blocks the canal so that fluid cannot move through it.
The cupula is fixed at one end and able to move at another end.
I can't think of a better analogy so think of the cupula as when I was a kid I remember
we used to have these bozo punching dolls.
They had sand in the base and you could punch the doll in the nose and it would fall over
and then spring right back up again.
This is what we mean by the cupula being spring loaded.
It can move but it will then regain its original position.
So think of the cupula as sort of an obstruction in the canal that under certain circumstances
will move out of the way and permit the endo-lymph to move.
Now here is another picture to imagine.
Hold a glass of water that is filled right to the brim and everything is in equilibrium
and the water is flat and nothing is spilling and what have you but then you decide to move
forward and you move forward and because of inertia you and the glass move forward but
the water doesn't so it splashes backwards perhaps splashing on your hand or your sleeve.
This is sort of what happens in the case of the semicircular canals.
They are filled with incompressible endo-lymph, the system is at equilibrium, the gelatinous
cupula is closed, now you move the body forward.
Again inertia causes the endo-lymph to be a little slow so the endo-lymph is actually
going to slosh backwards like the water in the glass and it's going to bend open the
gelatinous cupula and permit the flow of endo-lymph in this closed system.
In the base of the cupula where it is attached to the wall of the ampula the vestibular hair
cells are embedded.
So when the cupula bends the hair cells bend and the hair cells send signals to the vestibular
part of the eighth nerve, the vestibular cochlear nerve and the brain is made aware of the fact
that you just moved forward.
Now as I said the semicircular canals are concerned with changes in velocity not steady
state and that's because of the spring loaded nature of the cupula.
A better example might be to think of a freshly planted sapling, a little skinny baby tree
there in an open field and a gust of wind comes and blows the sapling over.
Now if the wind does not increase in velocity the sapling will show this spring loaded feature
and it will spring back up to its erect position.
The only way to keep the sapling bent over is to continually increase the velocity of
the wind.
That's the way the semicircular canal and the spring loaded cupula operate.
The only way to keep it open and to keep the fluid moving and to keep the hair cells bent
is to continue to accelerate.
So for example let's say you won the lottery and so you buy a Bentley and you get a chauffeur
and you are blindfolded in the back of your Bentley on a perfectly smooth road and you
tell the chauffeur accelerate up to 60 miles an hour.
The car is at a stationary position so the vestibular system is at equilibrium.
You begin moving.
The endo lymph bends the cupula, the cupula bends the hair cells and you are aware even
being blindfolded of movement.
The car accelerates up to 50 miles an hour.
You continue to experience the sensation of movement, moving.
You reach the pre-agreed on speed of 60 and the car begins going at 60 miles an hour.
The spring loaded cupula closes, you are no longer aware of the sensation of movement.
Now you tell the driver slow down and the driver slows down and the process happens
in reverse.
Now inertia causes the fluid to lag behind and again the cupula will be bent the other
way and you experience the sensation of a reduction in velocity.
The physical operation of the semicircular canals was first explained by two researchers
named Steinhaus and Andolman in 1875 if you can believe it.
What Steinhaus and Andolman did was they got a fish, a pike as a matter of fact, and they
dissected the head of the pike until they had exposed the semicircular canals, the three
canals, the superior, posterior and lateral canal.
Now the bony walls of the semicircular canals in the pike were so thin that they were translucent
they could essentially see what was going on in the canals and so Steinhaus and Andolman
injected India ink droplets into the semicircular canals of these fish and then they put the
fish on, well think of a lazy Susan, one of those devices that you spin around to get
food from one person to another without having to get up and walk around.
So they could see the India ink droplets and they watched and they saw that when they spun
the fish in a forward direction the India ink droplets moved backwards and opened up
the cupula just as we know today happens and when the lazy Susan reached a constant velocity
the spring-loaded cupula closed and if that fish were alive and well it would not have
experienced any movement at that steady state velocity.
When they slow the lazy Susan down the endo-lymph pushes the cupula in another direction and
the fish would be aware of a reduction in velocity.
Interestingly enough Steinhaus and Andolman were doing these observations before it became
possible to actually record from the vestibular cochlear nerves but their observations suggested
that each canal can signal direction of movement either forward or backward or left or right
or up or down or what have you.
See by virtue of having six canals, three in each ear, a pattern of firing can tell the
brain about movement in virtually any direction.
So Steinhaus and Andolman were suspicious of the fact that a single canal could tell you
about two directions of movement which turns out to be true.
So we know when we're moving forward, we know when we're moving backward, left or right,
up or down.
Later on when experimental technology permitted actually doing electrical recordings from
the vestibular system, we could verify this and it's been verified in a number of animals,
well in a whole series of animals, that in fact each canal signals by virtue of changing
its pattern of electrical firing to the brain, signals movement in two directions, two opposite
directions.
This has been discovered in all mammals and in rodents and it's been discovered in birds
and in fish that the semicircular canals can signal forward or backward.
Now you may think why would a bird or a fish need its brain to be aware when it's moving
backwards and I have given this some thought and I've seen shore birds for example flying
along and suddenly a gust of wind of unusual strength comes up and it can actually blow
the bird backwards.
Birds need to know when they're going backwards so they can increase their efforts and continue
going in a forward direction.
The same thing is true of fish.
A fish can be swimming forward and suddenly hit an unusual current that's stronger than
anticipated and the fish can actually be moved backwards.
They need to be aware of this to increase their efforts.
The only animal that I'm aware of whose semicircular canals only signal information in one direction
of all the animals that have been tested is the frog.
If a frog were to hop backwards it would apparently be unaware of the fact that it was hopping
backwards.
By knowledge no frog has ever hopped backwards so it's just as well.
So that's the first division of the vestibular system, the semicircular canals that give
us information about acceleration and deceleration.
The second division of the vestibular system is concerned with telling us about our orientation
and space with regard to the pull of gravity.
The gravitational field is taken as the zero point and if we lean left this system tells
us or right or forward or backward.
The structures for the detection of deviations from the upright with the pull of gravity
being the zero point is made up of two bony sacs that are located right under the semicircular
canals.
These two bony sacs are called the utricle and the saccule.
The utricle is the bigger of the two.
It can be envisioned as sort of a small elongated bird egg.
The saccule looks more like a small bony kidney bean, it doesn't have the symmetrical shape
as the utricle.
The utricle is bigger, the utricle contains 26,000 hair cells, the saccule is smaller
containing only 11,000 hair cells but they both seem to function in helping us to detect
deviations from the upright.
Now sometimes the utricle and saccule are referred to as the gravitational receptors
because they tell us about deviations from the pull of gravity and they also require
a gravitational field to work.
Let me explain how this comes to pass.
Consider the utricle which is bigger and maybe easier to visualize.
In the base of the utricle are hair cells.
The hair cells are very similar to the ones found in the semicircular canals and also
similar to the ones found in the auditory system.
So we have a layer of hair cells in the base of the utricle.
Over that layer of hair cells is a thin flexible membrane.
This membrane is malleable enough that it can be pushed on and when you push on the
membrane you displace the hair cells that have their tips in physical contact with the
membrane.
So we have the hair cells and a flexible membrane and on top of the flexible membrane
are calcium carbonate particles like little grains of sand made out of calcium carbonate.
These are known as otoliths which is a Latin word for ear rocks, little ear rocks.
The system is incredibly simple.
When you lean to the right the otoliths shift to the right and they depress the membrane
to the right and the hair cells are bent to the right and the brain is made aware of the
fact that you have bent to the right.
If you straighten up again the otoliths resume their even distribution on the surface of the
flexible membrane.
If you lean left the hair cells bend left because the membrane has bent left under the
weight of the otoliths which have now shifted to the left.
An incredibly simple mechanical system but it does require the presence of gravity.
What does this mean?
It means in a zero gravitational field this portion of the vestibular system doesn't
work.
It means astronauts for example who are floating weightless in space with their eyes closed
don't know whether they're right side up or upside down because their utrical and
saccule require gravity to operate.
There's an interesting story I saw an interview with one of the astronauts and he was being
questioned about what it's like to be in weightlessness and to just kind of float around and not knowing
up from down unless you open your eyes and he answered these questions candidly and he
said something very interesting about how they slept at night.
Astronauts sleep in the space capsule at night just floating around wherever they happen
to be.
This gentleman had a great deal of trouble falling asleep because he was used to the
feel of a pillow on his head and the way he creatively handled this situation was to get
a little pillow and a velcro strap and he would strap with velcro a pillow to the side
of his head and this permitted him to sleep at night.
Now he was in the habit of waking up halfway through the night and turning over on his
side and having the pillow on the other side of his head when he was back on Mother Earth
with a gravitational field.
So what he had to do is in the middle of the night in space wake up, unvelcro the pillow
from the right side, switch it over to the left and re-velcro it and then he could complete
sleeping in this zero G environment.
In addition to the gravitational sense not working in space, I will say that the smell
doesn't work in space either because remember smell needs volatile molecules to somehow
find their way to the olfactory epithelium.
So smell is not operative in a zero G environment either.
I think I'd like at this point just to take a few minutes and put in a plug for gravity
because I've heard gravity maligned.
I remember reading somewhere somebody referred to gravity as the curse of the elderly.
Now what do they mean by this?
Well they were talking about the fact that as we age we seem to sag and our shoulders
slump and our posture gets stooped and we take little shuffling steps as if the earth
is trying to pull us up.
That's not the fault of gravity.
That's because we have not been careful about maintaining bone density and muscle tone.
As a matter of fact in the absence of gravity we would all be as weak as kittens because
our muscles need to exercise against something and gravity gives some of us the only exercise
we're going to get.
I'm reminded of this because of the fact that when astronauts complete a mission in outer
space one of their biggest fears is that they're going to be too weak to walk out of the capsule
under their own power.
So what zero G does is it makes us weak.
So I submit that gravity is not an enemy but that gravity keeps us able to function and
able to locomote because in the absence of it the muscles would certainly atrophy.
Okay that's the end of the pitch for gravity.
Let's get back to talking about the vestibular system.
The operation of the utricle and saccule is pretty well known and part of our understanding
of the utricle and saccule came about because of the discovery that certain crustaceans
like lobsters and prawns and crayfish and so on, instead of having a utricle and saccule
they have a single organ that takes the place of both of these structures called the statocyst
organ but it works just like the utricle.
The crustaceans statocyst organ has a layer of hair cells in the base, it's got the flexible
membrane but instead of having calcium carbonate particles it has what are called statoliths.
Now some of these crustaceans secrete their own statoliths which serve the function of
otoliths and some creatures do not secrete their own but rather utilize sand from the
if they're ocean dwelling creatures, sand from the bottom of the ocean.
And some of these crustaceans have a species specific behavior, a reflex or instinct if
you will where they make sure that their statocyst organ has enough sand in it to do the job.
They will actually pick sand up and load up their own statocyst organ with grains of sand.
Now this permits us the opportunity to do a laboratory experiment.
We take one of these crustaceans and we shake all the sand out of its statocyst organ and
we put it in a container and on the bottom of the container we have steel filings, little
bits of metal filings and the creature follows its instinct and it will dutifully load up
its statocyst organ with these metal filings and when it is finished it will sit there
pleased with itself and now we can do our mischief because we come up to this animal
and you can guess what we're going to do, we're going to get a big magnet and we're
going to hold this magnet beside this creature's head and of course that pulls all the metal
filings to the right, it bends the hair cells under the flexible membrane in its statocyst
organ and the creature's brain gets the message, hey, you're falling over to the right and
the creature will make scrambling movements and attempt to right itself and if you want
to be mean or mischievous, depending on your definition, you switch the magnet over to
the other side and now the brain is getting a message, this creature's brain is getting
a message from the statocyst organs that it's falling to the left and the creature will
stramble back the other way and you can, if you want, you can play a little dance music
and no, you don't want to do that. Anyway, this demonstrates exactly how the statocyst
organ works and you can generalize exactly to the uterical and saccule.
Okay, now we've alluded previously to the fact that the vestibular system has a lot
in common with the auditory system, let me just review some of this. First of all, they
share a common cranial nerve. Half of the eighth cranial nerve is for hearing and half
is for the vestibular sense. They also share the same type of receptor, they all use hair
cells as the receptor, the auditory system and the vestibular system, both the semicircular
canals and the uterical and saccule, which means that everything we said about ototoxic
drugs in the context of hearing and hearing loss also holds for the vestibular system.
The other thing is that they both share a similar incompressible fluid to get their
job done and the bottom line is because of these close correspondences between these
two systems, anything that's harmful to one is most likely to be harmful to the other
also. Okay, let me deal with another phenomenon that is related to the vestibular system,
the phenomenon of motion sickness. Now, the most common variety of motion sickness that
many people have experienced is seasickness. So many of you will know what the symptoms
of motion sickness or seasickness are. They include such things as headache, chills, nausea
and muscular weakness. In general, it's a bad time. Well, there have been enough studies
of motion sickness and the vestibular system that I can make some general statements. First
of all, if you're passive in the situation, you're going to get sicker than if you're
active in the situation. For example, if you're in a car with bad springs and it's
bumping up and down and so on, you're much more likely to experience motion sickness
if you're sitting as a passenger than if you're actually driving. I'll talk about why that
seems to be the case in a bit. Another thing we can say about motion sickness is that movement
in the vertical plane up and down movement is worse than, in terms of making you sick,
movement in the lateral plane from side to side. Movement in several planes simultaneously
is the worst. Slow, oscillating movements are more likely to promote motion sickness
than short, rapid movements. The reason for this is because the way the eyes operate when
they're scanning the environment is short, rapid movements. So short, rapid movements
tended to make us motion sick every time we scanned and flicked our eyes around that we
would be at risk for this. The other thing I want to say about motion
sickness is animals show it too. This is just not some human invention or the result of
our suggestibility or our worry about getting it. Animals show motion sickness too. Motion
sickness appears to be Mother Nature's way of keeping us from harmful parts of the environment
like earthquake zones or ice flows or rough seas. And how does Mother Nature accomplish
this? Well, the brain is wired up such that when discontinuities occur between the information
that the vestibular system is sending to the brain and the information that the motor system,
through receptors that we will talk about in our next lecture, through the information
that the motor system is sending to the brain, this discontinuity is a sufficient condition
for motion sickness to occur. This is why the business between active and passive is
so important. You know, if you're standing on a boat or sitting on a boat and the boat
is rocking up and down and left to right, you're likely to get motion sick. But you
can replicate those same movements by walking and bending up and down and you're in fact
duplicating the same movements. But now the motor system is saying, it's okay, I'm doing
it. When you're passive, the motor system says, hey, I'm not doing that. This must be
either an earthquake zone or rough seas or something. I better make you sick so you won't
do this anymore. So it's the discontinuity of information between the vestibular and
the motor system that is responsible for the condition known as motion sickness or sea
sickness. Now, there's a special kind of motion sickness that is best known to college students
and periodically they ask me about this. Professor, what's the deal with bed spins?
Now, first time I heard that I had to say, what are bed spins? This is when a student
drinks too much, goes in, lies down on his or her bed and the room seems to be spinning
around. Well, I didn't know, so I looked it up. Here's the explanation for bed spins.
When you've had too much to drink, that alcohol begins to infuse into the semicircular canals,
into the endolymph, and it changes the specific gravity of the endolymph. Now, that system
is at equilibrium with the specific gravity as it's supposed to be. When you go messing
with it and then you lie down, instead of remaining in a rigid position, the cupula
falls over because the specific gravity of the underlymph has been changed. And so now
you're getting this continuity of information between the visual system and the vestibular
system because you're lying in bed looking up and the eyes are saying, hey, I'm not moving,
but the vestibular system is saying something is moving. And again, we experience motion
sickness. If those students were still awake when the alcohol began to evaporate and get
metabolized and leave the endolymph, they would experience a spinning in the opposite
direction as the specific gravity of the endolymph was restored and the cupula swung
to its closed position. So that's the story on bed spins. And as I indicated earlier,
apparently, ginger is able to minimize motion sickness in some way that I'm afraid I don't
understand. Let me quickly talk about some age-related changes that take place in the
vestibular system. And by the way, anybody who has aged know that such changes do occur.
For example, when you were young, remember how you used to love to get on swings and
roller coasters and things of that nature. Now the thought of that is not very appealing.
Why is that the case? Well, there are a number of changes that have taken place since you
were last on a roller coaster or a set of swings. First of all, nerve and nerve fiber
degeneration takes place. Individual nerve fibers in the vestibular part of the eighth
nerve are either thinning out so they carry information more slowly or dying entirely
so you're not getting the precise vestibular feedback that you used to get. And this causes
some uncertainty in the brain as to how to interpret these sensations that it's receiving.
In addition to the nerves beginning to show degenerative changes, you lose vestibular
receptors as a function of age. Another problem that sometimes accompanies changes in our
comfort with vestibular stimulation with age has to do with the fact that as we get older
we tend to experience calcium deficiencies. And remember the otoliths are calcium carbonate
particles so sometimes we can improve our vestibular situation by making sure that we
don't have a calcium deficiency. Now some of the changes in our comfort with vestibular
stimulation are actually due to factors other than changes in the nerves or the receptors
or the calcium carbonate particles. They have to do with changes in the tone of the connective
tissue that hold the internal organs in place. With age, connective tissue loses its tone
if you will and it permits greater movement of the internal organs. And this is a source
of discomfort. Another change that accompanies the aging process is we lose tone in our stomach
muscles which again permits more movement of the internal organs. And finally many of
us acquire abdominal fat. And so what swings and roller coasters are doing that make us
uncomfortable in addition to the less precise information from the vestibular system is
letting our internal organs slosh around in our stomachs which doesn't feel very good.
Experiments have been done on subjects at different ages where you are blindfolded and
you're put in a dental chair if you will and then the chair is slowly tilted. And for instance
when you're a healthy young person you can perceive a tilt of maybe two or three degrees
but some older people who have experienced some of the changes that I'm talking about
you can actually tilt that dental chair 14 degrees before they experience a tilt. So
there is definitely a decrease in the precision of the vestibular information that the brain
is getting as a function of age. In our next lecture I will begin talking about
the kinesthetic sense. Some people call that the muscle feedback sense but it is actually
far more than that. It is the last of the sensory systems we're going to talk about
that is concerned with sending information to the brain about the location of the limbs
and space based on movement. Thank you.
