Lecture 20 The Kinesthetic Sense, Motor Memory
Hello and welcome to lecture 20.
As you may recall in lecture 19 we talked about the vestibular system, the sensory system
that has two components, one that tells us about velocity and direction of movement,
and the receptors are housed in the semicircular canals, and the other component telling us about
our position with respect to the upright, sometimes called the gravitational system,
with the receptors housed in the utricle and saccule.
Today we're going to talk about another sensory system that tells us something about position
and space, but the kinesthetic system, the subject of today's lecture, tells us about movement of
individual body parts. Every single body part that contains either a muscle or a joint or both
is sending moment to moment feedback to the brain about where that body part is in space,
or whether the muscles are tensed or relaxed, or what the tension on the tendons is, or what
have you. The kinesthetic system, which most people have never heard of, is critically
important for our ability to engage in the activities of everyday life. For instance,
I'm going to send now commands from my motor cortex down to the toes, I'm going to say wiggle
those toes, and how am I going to know that that command was actually carried out? It turns out
that the kinesthetic system is sending information to my brain from the toes that are wiggling,
and it's saying mission accomplished. In the absence of kinesthetic feedback though,
how would we know whether those toes actually wiggled? Okay, now some people call the kinesthetic
sense the muscle feedback sense, and I suppose it is that, but it's actually a good deal more than
that too. The kinesthetic system does provide us with sensory information about what the muscles
are doing, but it also sends information back from receptors in the tendons, from the ligaments,
and also from receptors in the joints, so that we are constantly getting moment to moment feedback
about a variety of things. Let's go back to my wiggling of the toes example.
Every body part has two categories of nerves. Every body part that's capable of moving or
flexing or contracting receives motor input from the primary motor cortex in the frontal lobe,
and it also has a sensory nerve that carries information back from that moving body part
to the brain, saying mission accomplished. So for instance, I want to wiggle my toes,
and suppose the sensory nerve in my leg was cut, so I could send motor messages to the
toes and say wiggle, but with that severed sensory nerve, I wouldn't know that the toes were actually
wiggling unless I looked. The receptors in the muscles that tell us about the state of contraction
of the muscle are called muscle spindles, and the muscle spindles are very sensitive to the
state of contraction in that muscle, and they can give us information across the full spectrum of
muscle contraction, from the muscle is totally relaxed to the muscle is contracted to its maximum.
That's the job of the muscle spindles, to tell us about moment to moment changes in muscle contraction.
This turns out to be a critically important piece of sensory information to the brain,
because every limb has antagonistic muscle groups, and you don't want both of those muscle groups
contracting at the same time, or for instance your locomotion would not be smooth and fluid.
Suppose that the antagonistic muscle groups in my legs were both contracted at the same time,
I would have to walk like a penguin, so we don't want that, and the way that the brain is able
to keep antagonistic muscle groups from contracting simultaneously, and cooperating if you will,
is by attending to this moment to moment feedback from the muscle spindles. You've probably heard
the expression so-and-so, froze with fear, or if you're unlucky enough to have had that experience,
maybe you're telling someone else, I froze with fear. When somebody does freeze with fear,
what's happening is the emotional situation that they're encountering is so great that they lose
control or sensitivity to what the muscle spindles are saying, and all the muscles tighten up,
antagonistic muscles tighten up, and the person is immobilized. So the muscle spindle
makes it possible to do such things as walk and eat, and all the activities that we take for granted
that involve antagonistic muscle groups are due to the coordination possible because of feedback
from the muscle spindles. Let's talk about the receptors in the tendons. Tendons, by the way,
are those tough, sinewy tissues that attach muscle to bone. So each muscle is attached both at its
origin and at the insertion by tendons to the bones. Well, there are receptors in the tendons
also, and these receptors tell us about the state of tension that a contracting muscle is putting
on the tendon. This is also important information. The Golgi tendon organ is the receptor in the
tendon that monitors contraction and pressure and force on the tendon. The Golgi tendon organ
has a protective function. If the Golgi tendon organ in the tendons in the body
detects an unusually heavy load and fears that the muscle may actually be ripped loose from its
attachment, the Golgi tendon organ triggers what is called a clasp knife reflex. That is, the muscle
just quits. The muscle stops. Well, rather than attempting to explain it, maybe I can describe
some situations where you may have experienced this. Perhaps there was a time when you decided to get
back in shape and you were going to start doing push-ups and lifting weight and so on. So here
you are, you're doing push-ups and you want to squeeze out one more and you're pushing and pushing
and all of a sudden, boom, the muscle just collapses. That was the Golgi tendon organ firing this
protective clasp knife reflex. Or suppose you're doing bench presses and you're there and you're
doing them and you're going to squeeze out one more because you know, no pain, no gain. And the
Golgi tendon organ perceives this as an unusually heavy load, dangerous load, and it fires that
clasp knife reflex and boom, the weights come right back down. Or curls too, the same thing.
So this is an example of what happens to the Golgi tendon organ or what happens when the Golgi
tendon organ detects an unfamiliar load. It doesn't even have to be really dangerous. Sometimes if
it's an unfamiliar load, that clasp knife reflex will fire and the muscle just collapses. One of
the goals of athletic training is to teach the Golgi tendon organs to accept higher and higher
loadings without collapsing. This takes place through repetition, repetition, repetition, and the
Golgi tendon organ learns that this is not a dangerous loading. Another issue in athletic
training that involves the Golgi tendon organs has to do with the follow through motion that is so
necessary in sports such as golf or tennis or even bowling. You can tell just by looking that
somebody is a novice if they take a little short backswing in golf and then don't take a big follow
through in golf or somebody that takes a little choppy shot at the ball with a tennis racket
or in bowling somebody that doesn't give the big full follow through that is typical of people who
are experienced in those activities. So the Golgi tendon organ is in fact an important receptor
for gaining proficiency in certain skilled activities. Let's talk a bit about the ligaments
and the joints. Ligaments by the way are those structures that hold bone to bone at a joint
and of course the joints are the places where a bone comes together. There are receptors in both
the ligaments and the joints known as stretch receptors. Now these stretch receptors in the
ligaments and joints are also providing instant to instant feedback to the brain about things such
as the angle at which a joint is being held about the rotation taking place for instance in the
shoulder joint or the wrist and about the velocity of movement. So we take these things for granted,
the kinesthetic feedback and yet this kind of kinesthetic feedback about muscle contraction
and about joint angles and about velocity of movement and rotation at the joints and what
have you is critically important in the mastery of complex motor sequences. This is one of the
reasons why the kinesthetic sense is so vital to improving through practice. You must make the
motor response over and over again and then you visually assess the outcome. So you hit a golf
ball and then you look and see did it go where I want, was it as far as I wanted, was it too
after too right and when you get to the point where you are hitting the shot properly then you
have to tune in and see how does that feel and you're tuning into the kinesthetic feedback.
How does it feel when I make the proper response? You see you cannot just read a book and then be
proficient at a complex motor activity. You can read about the theory of and it can make suggestions
and what have you but the only way to become proficient at a complex motor skill is repetition,
repetition. You need to find out what it feels like when you do it properly and the kinesthetic
feedback is so aware, it makes itself so aware to you that you can repeat that same move.
My children took tennis lessons once and the tennis pro told them after you hit a shot properly
try and think how it felt so that you can repeat it. When you get so that you can hit the shot
properly whenever you want to then you must do it a thousand more times to own that shot so that
the brain in fact gets a good template to examine when you've done it properly what does it feel
like and when you don't do it properly what does that feel like. Kinesthetic sensitivity,
the precision of kinesthetic feedback differs considerably from one person to another just
as smell sensitivity and taste sensitivity and auditory sensitivity differs from one person
to another so does kinesthetic sensitivity. Most of us have sufficient kinesthetic precision
to learn to drive a standard shift car for example. Now a few unfortunate souls don't,
their kinesthetic feedback is not sufficient to permit them to acquire the motor skills necessary
to drive a standard shift car but most of us do and it is a complex activity. You're steering
with one hand, you're shifting with the other and you have the clutch pedal, the brake pedal,
and the gas pedal to work out between two feet and it depends significantly on your awareness of
how much pressure you're putting on the gas and how much pressure you're putting on the brake
and how fast or slow are you letting out the clutch and coordinating all that stuff. Without
kinesthetic feedback you couldn't learn to drive a standard shift car. As a matter of fact
without kinesthetic feedback you couldn't even walk. You would have to learn to walk all over
again. How do we know this? Well because there are some unfortunate individuals who because of some
neurological problem or other have lost kinesthetic feedback. In one instance this poor person
had to take to his bed. He didn't even trust being up and out of bed because he no longer knew
what his limbs were doing. He no longer was able to count on getting the feedback telling him
that he was feeding himself properly or that he was even walking properly.
Finally this individual marshaled his courage and his resources and he began
learning to walk again but he had to learn to walk a new way. Now instead of getting
kinesthetic feedback telling you what your legs were doing and which muscles were doing what he
had to monitor visually the left leg here then the right in front and then the right leg in front
and then the left leg in front and then the right leg. He never did get to the point where he could
drive a car which would be too dangerous. He wouldn't know how hard he was stepping on the gas or the
brake or whatever even an automatic transmission car but he did get so that by monitoring visually
he could walk downstairs, walk through a bus stop and get on a bus but he would have to watch
his left leg to make sure it got up and stepped on the step and he would have to watch his right
hand go out and reach the safety rail that people used to hoist themselves up on a bus and he did
get so that he could ride a bus again but his quality of life was diminished greatly. He had to
learn to feed himself all over again by watching what the right hand was doing and what the left
hand was doing. He could no longer count on that kinesthetic feedback that you and I take for granted.
Speaking of driving a standard shift car which I remember very well as a teenager
at first you have to cognitively, consciously focus on every move you're making and you have
to remember when you put the brake on you have to push the clutch in or the car will stall.
When you let the clutch out you have to give it gas or the car will stall. You have to remember to
shift gears with your right hand and you have to remember you don't shift into first while the car
is moving. I had to remember all that stuff. It was so demanding that I could not drive with the
radio on. It was too distracting and I certainly couldn't drive and have a conversation with a
passenger. That was a recollection that I have of learning to drive a standard shift car. Imagine
the precision and the fine tuning of the kinesthetic feedback needed for an Olympic gymnast or diver
to do those incredible feats of motor skill that they perform with such apparent effortlessness.
The twisting and turning and flipping and spinning and meanwhile their kinesthetic system
has to be sending moment to moment feedback to the brain. They do all this and still maintain
the grace and balance of a ballerina. It's absolutely incredible. The accuracy and precision
of that kinesthetic feedback is way beyond what most of us have. I look forward to the Olympics
every four years to watch the gymnasts and the divers because I am so aware of the precision
and the marvelous sensitivity of their kinesthetic system. If you don't want to wait for the next
Olympics, I say this in all seriousness, I watch all of Jackie Chan, the Chinese actor,
I watch all of his movies. The plots are relatively transparent and a little bit
simplistic but he does his own stunts and he is a marvelous athlete. He does the most incredible
feats of motor skill and makes them look easy. You can turn the sound off but I really enjoy
watching Jackie Chan movies especially the older ones. He's gotten a little older now and that has
consequences for the sensitivity of kinesthetic feedback but I find him marvelous.
The ability to perform complex motor skills like a gymnastics routine or a diving routine or even
driving a standard shift car depends upon an ability of the brain that cognitive psychologists
are very much interested in called automaticity. It's the way that complex motor sequences that
originally have to be consciously monitored every step of the way become self-propagating.
They sort of run off by themselves. How does this happen? Well, at first you have to learn segments
of the total behavior and then you practice and practice and practice and over learn these segments
and then you put the segments together and you do this over and over and over again and eventually
this interesting cognitive phenomenon called automaticity is initiated in the brain and the
only voluntary cognitive conscious decision you have to make is when to start the sequence.
For example, in driving a standard shift car after automaticity has kicked in and what happens,
by the way, is that each momentary instance of kinesthetic feedback signals to the brain
to produce the next momentary instance of motor outflow and all you have to do is decide when
to start the sequence. If the sequence has been over learned and automaticity has been attained,
you can tell when a gymnast, for example, goes to the line and they compose themselves and they're
about to make the only conscious decision that they have to make during that whole sequence
and you see this sometimes they'll raise their hands and kind of lean forward and you know the
routine is going to start then they take the first step or move or jump or run and the rest
of the sequence just runs off automatically automaticity. It's an amazing thing the same
with divers you can tell when a diver has made the voluntary decision to initiate the sequence
they kind of rise up on their toes a little bit and lean forward and then off they go doing this
beautiful beautiful motor routine. The fact of the matter is that you and I have experienced
automaticity over and above driving a standard shift car which is also an example of automaticity.
The light turns green and you decide well we better get going and the kinesthetic system and the
motor system cooperate and coordinate and off you go shifting gears perhaps listening to the radio
and carrying on a conversation with a passenger that's that's automaticity. Let me share with you
examples that you may remember from your life experiences of automaticity. I've had this
experience maybe you have too you've had a busy day at work you have a lot of things on your mind
it's time to go home you get into the car you turn on the ignition and the next thing you know
you're pulling in your driveway and you don't have a memory of a single move you made getting home
you did the whole thing under automatic pilot sort of that's automaticity you were the motor
responses are so ingrained and so automatic that you can spend your cognitive energy not thinking
about well I better put the turn signal on I better stop for the stop sign you can be thinking about
that problem that you left and were at work or thinking about what you're going to do for the
evening so yes automaticity is something that we've all had experience with it's not just Olympic
gymnasts another example of automaticity of a motor activity can be seen think back to when you
were in junior high school and maybe you were the one who was chosen to recite a poem at an assembly
and so initially you had to learn every one of those words in the poem separately and you had to
combine small groups of words but you rehearsed and you rehearsed and you rehearsed and comes
the assembly and you get up there and you make the conscious decision I'm going to start
when in the course of human events or the Gettysburg address four score and seven years ago whatever
it was once you make the decision to start and you say the first word the rest of it runs off
with with virtually no effort on your part that is automaticity one of the major differences
in athletic competition between players who do really well and players who do less well
is the degree to which they have established automaticity novices in a new sport must waste
their cognitive activity thinking of of concrete things like in golf for example weight on your
heels left arm straight head down shift your weight swing through the ball blah blah blah
what's the expert doing with his or her cognitive capacity while the beginner is talking themselves
through each and every step of the motor sequence the expert is saying um better loft the ball so
that it doesn't roll when it hits the green better aim to the right of the pin because the green
seems to slope left to right so the novice is working on the nuts and bolts of the motor activity
and the expert is planning strategy okay the same in tennis the beginner is thinking watch
the ball hit the racket remember to follow through remember your top spin twist your
your wrist and your shoulder to get top spin on the ball the expert is thinking
hit to the backhand rush the net put it away with a cross court drop shot one is thinking nuts and
bolts one is thinking strategy um the automaticity circuits which are presently being studied by
cognitive psychologists and cognitive neuroscience wherever they exist in the brain they must be
incredibly robust because once a motor sequence has achieved automaticity it seems to linger for
a long time you know you've heard people say once you learn to ride a bicycle you never forget
there is a grain of truth in that um once you learn to drive a standard shift car you'll never
forget it there's a grain of truth in that too once you've learned a poem to the point where
automaticity is involved and you say the first word and the rest of the poem sort of runs itself
off you'll probably remember that the rest of your life I still remember the Gettysburg address I
still remember in Flandersfield the poppies girl although I haven't said those poems in more than
half a century automaticity is a very robust cognitive phenomenon now um part of our concern
is with automaticity and kinesthetic feedback and the aging process so let's talk a little bit about
that um evidence suggests that maximum precision and sensitivity of kinesthetic feedback can be seen
in a in a young child around the age of 12 which is just about the age when the myelin sheath the
protective insulating substance that covers nerve fibers and keeps them from short circuiting just
about the time that that is completed too so it theoretically it would be possible for a 12-year-old
child to represent his or her country in the olympics now usually it takes them a few more years
because even when your kinesthetic feedback is is uh uh uh at its peak you still need a couple of
years of experience under your belt before you can perform at a at an international level but it is
not all that uncommon to encounter 13 14 15-year-old gymnasts representing their countries
in the olympics it's truly truly amazing well the kinesthetic system uh uh seems to be in place
and intact by the time you're 12 whenever i give you a number like that remember that's a ballpark
estimate a little sooner in some people a little later in others 12 is a ballpark estimate um the
system is in place at a relatively early age it also begins to show declines at a relatively early age
now um experiments in the laboratory and by the way that's where you have to conduct these
experiments because the declines i'm talking about uh are are initially too small to be seen in the
outside world so but laboratories have indicated small but measurable declines in kinesthetic
sensitivity by the time you are in your mid to late 20s is that discouraging well the fact of
the matter is that for most people those declines are totally unnoticeable because if you're a a
skilled athlete and you're even though you're maybe you're experiencing very slight kinesthetic
declines in your 20s the fact of the matter is that your experience and your self-confidence
are probably high enough that you're still going to perform in a quite acceptable manner
however it is rare indeed to encounter world-class athletes in sports that require the mastery of
complex motor sequences who are in their 30s by then the the deficits in precise kinesthetic
sensory feedback have reached the level where it's hard to maintain a a national ranking when
you're in your 30s at the amateur level it's rare to find athletes in their 40s still maintaining
a national ranking now of course it differs from one sport to another some sports require
extraordinary kinesthetic feedback like it would be out of the question to be a gymnast
or a or a diver and still perform at and be nationally ranked in your 30s or 40s
in tennis some rare individuals can still do it I am thinking as I say this about the the
women's tennis player Martina Navratilova she is now close to 50 and Martina Navratilova is still
competing in professional tournaments she's competing against young women in some cases
who are close to one-third of her age and she is quitting herself well now even Martina Navratilova
an outstanding athlete has had to make some concessions to the aging process for example she
now plays doubles rather than singles but her muscle tone is superb and her percent body fat
is is very very low so it's clear that she's still working very very hard but she's quite unusual
in general we can expect in terms of kinesthetic deficits mild
decreases in sensitivity through the 30s the through the 40s these deficits for most of us
are a little more noticeable and they become even more obvious through the 50s now how do they
measure such a thing well they have all kinds of laboratory equipment where the the person being
tested is blindfolded and their arms and legs are put in passive sling like things that can slowly
passively lift the arms or legs and and you tell when you've detected that movement has taken place
or at the joint they can change the angle of the joint then and this can test the stretch
receptors sensitivity when how much must the joint be angle be changed before you notice it
these are more passive tests they can also do things like give you a hand dynamometer and say
squeeze this thing half as hard as you're capable of then they'll say do that again
they'll see if you can squeeze it the same amount time after time or they can use a a radar gun and
say throw a ball at three-fourths of your ability speed wise then they'll see if you can do it over
and over and over again because all of these abilities repeating the same degree of grip
strength or throwing the ball just as fast all of these abilities require precise kinesthetic
feedback there's also a test they use that's sort of like a child's game with pickup sticks
to measure sensitivity of kinesthetic feedback in making small muscle movements
okay so the the bottom line though is that kinesthetic changes in sensitivity do occur as a
function of age and the older athlete must make adjustments uh the older athlete must learn to
substitute accuracy for speed and power so you do shorten your backswing and golf or you do shorten
that swing and the power on that big booming serve going more for accuracy than for power
those people who still care to compete in athletics at an older age may have to settle for competing
in sports that have age categories so you're competing against other people whose kinesthetic
systems have have undergone age related decline or you take up sports that have less of a need for
precise kinesthetic feedback for instance give up tennis and start taking up running where the
kinesthetic feedback is much less sophisticated the need for it now i know that i've given this
lecture a good athletic focus there's a reason for this if i were to talk about
normal individuals on normal aging the lecture would be quite boring because truthfully the
kinesthetic changes that we undergo as a function of age represent no major threat this is in the
case of normal aging not where there's some kind of pathology or or senile dementia going on but
in the course of normal aging kinesthetic feedback is really not going to have much of a major
impediment to you performing your everyday activities this is up to and through the 80s
this is the case so that's really kind of good news there may have to be some concessions made
for instance you may have to substitute an electric razor for a blade razor because of the
lack of precision about how hard you're pressing against your skin and you may have more trouble
with behaviors that require a very light touch like putting in contact lenses and things of that
nature but in all honesty health failure is much more of a problem for the elderly than than lack
of kinesthetic feedback one final point we are in the age of biotechnology and robotics and things
of that nature and there are robotic instruments that can beat a human at chess i would be very
surprised if robots or robotic instruments are ever devised that can learn a complex
motor sequence like a human being the difference being we have this wonderful exquisite kinesthetic
sense that provides us with that moment-to-moment feedback and a robot would not have this now i
did read recently about a robotic arm that is capable of doing microsurgery and this is all
well and good the full story however is that some human is at the controls of this robotic arm and
that human is using his or her kinesthetic feedback to operate that robotic arm so it's really the
human that's doing the intelligent part of that task we've been talking about the kinesthetic
system in this lecture the sensory system that provides momentary feedback about what all the
moving parts of the body are doing in our next lecture we will talk about the structure and
function of the brain we will start acknowledging the brain as the organ of perception and we will
start with lecture 21 thank you
