Lecture 21 Brain Mechanisms and Perception
Hi, welcome to Lecture 21. In Lecture 20 you'll recall we talked about the kinesthetic
system, that's the sensory system that provides us with moment to moment feedback from receptors
in the muscles, the tendons, the joints, and the ligaments. In this lecture, Lecture 21 we're going
to look at the structure and function of the human brain with special attention being played
to the cerebral cortex. We have on occasion referred to the brain as the organ of perception.
Today we're going to flesh that statement out a bit and also modify it because it turns out that
the whole brain of course is not involved in perception, rather the highest level of the
brain is the cerebral cortex. The human brain represents the highest level of organizational
complexity that any creature's brain that ever existed on the planet has reached. We're the
top of the heap. But the human brain as it exists today in its present form went through many many
stages and changes over millions and millions of years. I'm going to take you on a brief evolutionary
trek through the history of the brain. Now when we talk about evolution, some people when they hear
the word evolution they think about animals that used to exist and now they're dead and they've
been replaced. Brain evolution is a little bit different. The old parts of the brain didn't
just disappear, rather they are still in there. We have primitive parts in our brain that have been
unchanged for millions of years. In brain evolution what happens is a new part of the brain, a newer
part of the brain, simply grows over the old part and rather than taking away the functions of the
old parts, the new parts of the brain establish new functions. Okay so this will be an oversimplification
but basically accurate as we go through the different parts of the brain. We've already
mentioned a couple of these parts. I've shared with you the information that the oldest part of
the brain, evolutionarily speaking and chronologically speaking, is called the hindbrain.
When it first appeared on planet earth the hindbrain was little more than a cluster of cells
that grew on the end of the spinal cord. We still have a hindbrain in there today in our skulls.
The job of the hindbrain is to mediate the so-called vital functions, to keep us breathing,
to keep the heart beating, to keep the blood pressure within normal homeostatic limits.
This is the job of the hindbrain. Let's jump ahead a couple of million years from the hindbrain and
another layer of cells evolves and grows over the hindbrain and this we call the midbrain.
And we've already addressed the midbrain in earlier lectures. The midbrain basically has
two broad categories of functions. One, it maintains our level of sleep, wakefulness and arousal.
For example, the spinophilamic tract, which takes impulses from the free nerve endings,
the pain messages, goes to the midbrain and so pain is very effective at increasing our level
of arousal and alertness. Pain is a very potent stimulus in that regard. The other category of
functions found in the midbrain involve reflex orientation to sensory stimuli and we talked
about that too, so that the tendency to orient toward a stimulus somewhere in our periphery
is reflexive and controlled by midbrain circuits. The tendency to duck and cover when we see something
in visual space racing toward our heads is also mediated by midbrain circuits. So let's move on
from the midbrain, another several million years, another layer of cells evolving over the midbrain
and what we have now is the forebrain. The forebrain is concerned with a variety of functions.
One, the forebrain involves circuits that permit us or cause us to fulfill our survival needs, our
basic physiological motives, hunger, thirst, sex, temperature regulation, all of these vital needs
that we share in common with lower animals involve circuits in the forebrain. Emotional
reactivity, the more primitive aspects of emotion, fight or flight, fear, rage, these are controlled
by forebrain circuits in a region of the forebrain known as the limbic system. The forebrain is also
concerned with the automatic aspects of motor behavior, not the skilled voluntary motor activities
that we choose to engage in, but for instance if you're walking and you trip on a crack in the
sidewalk and you stumble, the ability to regain your balance automatically without thinking about it
involves forebrain circuits. If I were standing straight up and down as I am in the room suddenly
tipped to the left rather than fall over, what happens is the forebrain elicits reflexes to
regain that stability by throwing out your right arm and leg, you change your center of gravity,
and you don't fall over. The postural adjustments needed for walking that we don't have to stop
and think about, walking is actually more complex than we give it credit for being,
but because automatic circuitry takes care of this, shifting of the center of gravity from
side to side as we walk and things of that nature, these are all controlled by neural circuits in
the forebrain. Okay, so now let's grow another layer of cells over the forebrain, let's jump
ahead another couple of million years in evolution and we're going to grow a two millimeter thick
layer of cell bodies over the forebrain and we're going to call this the cerebral cortex,
the evolutionarily speaking the newest part of the brain. Now just as we've done for the other
lower parts of the brain, let's state the functions of the cerebral cortex in a sentence or two.
Well one role of the cerebral cortex is to mediate the so-called higher mental processes.
This involves things like thinking, willing, concept formation, and perception. Now there's a
keyword for the subject matter of our whole series of lectures, perception. So perception is the
province of the cerebral cortex. In addition to the higher mental processes though, the cerebral
cortex has another important category of functions. It provides necessary inhibitory circuits to the
lower parts of the brain. It is the cerebral cortex and its inhibitory circuits that give us
options. For example, an angry rat has no choice but to act like an angry rat, but an angry human
has a choice. You can either act like an angry rat because we have those circuits in the forebrain,
or we can utilize the inhibitory capabilities of the cerebral cortex and act like an angry human
being. A hungry rat has no option but to eat. A hungry human has two options. It can go ahead and
eat, or the hungry human can utilize the inhibitory circuitry of the cerebral cortex and say,
I'm hungry and I'd really like to eat, but I'm going to inhibit these primitive tendencies
impelling me to eat because today is a religious fast day, or because today I choose not to eat,
show solidarity with the homeless, or I choose not to eat because of a political protest or
something like this. So we have options that lower animals don't have because of the inhibitory
circuitry in our cerebral cortex. Okay, now let me take this anatomy of the brain a step further
and tell you that the cerebral cortex is divided into four lobes. If you want to know where the
front the lobe is, you hold your hand right over your forehead, you are now covering the
front the lobe. If you want to know where the parietal lobe is, take your hand and put it on
the very top of your head, you're now covering the parietal lobe. If you want to know where the
occipital lobe is, take your hand and put it on the back of your head, you're now covering the
occipital lobe. And if you want to know where the temporal lobes are, take your hands, left and
right hands and put them over your ears. You're now covering the location of the temporal lobe
in the brain. Okay, we have these four lobes. Now let's talk briefly about the functions
of these four lobes. This may come as a surprise to you, but the major function of the frontal lobe
is in motor activity. And some people hear that and they say, boy, I thought the frontal lobe was
the smart part of the brain, where we plan and make decisions and organize and do complex
calculations and things of that nature. Well, when we say the frontal lobe is concerned with
motor activity, we are using the term motor activity broadly defined, because it seems,
it turns out that most of the things that we plan or organize or arrange are actually preparing us
to then do a series of motor activities. For instance, when you get up on Saturday morning
and you plan your day, well, first I'll have breakfast, then I'll go to the gym, then I'll go
to the post office, then I'll go get the car washed. That's all frontal cortex planning,
because it all involves motor activities. I'm going to eat breakfast, the motor activity. I'm
going to go to the gym, motor activity. I'm going to go get the car washed, etc., etc.
Most of the things we plan are motor sequences. When a student is planning his or her course schedule
for the semester, front the lobe, because you're planning some motor sequence that you're going
to carry out. If you want to plan your major in college, well, my freshman year this, or this,
or this, and then junior year, that's motor, that's frontal lobe stuff. So when you read a map
to get you from here to Indianapolis or wherever you want to go, that's preparing you to get in
the car and then do a series of motor activities that gets you from here to Indianapolis. If you
read a blueprint and then build a building, front the lobe stuff. So when we say that the front
the lobe is concerned with motor activity, that's motor activity broadly defined. The front the lobe
also, by the way, has inhibitory circuits that can inhibit motor activity if it's not at an
advantageous time for you. For example, suppose you have a job interview for Monday. On Monday morning,
you wake up and you have laryngitis. And if you go to that interview, you're going to make a terrible
first impression. So you use the inhibitory circuits of the front the lobe to decide, well, I better
postpone this and reschedule it for a time that's better for me. That's in my best interest.
The inhibitory circuits in the front the lobe that have the ability to inhibit motor activity
are very, very important to us. Perhaps you can see the importance when I tell you that some
respected researchers in the area of attention deficit slash hyperactivity disorder believe
that ADHD, the core disorder being impulsivity and lack of impulse control, that ADHD comes about
because of under functioning of the inhibitory circuits in the front the lobe. See, in an
individual without ADHD, you get an impulse and you say, wait a minute, I better think that over
and you say, gee, that's not a good idea. I won't do it. In the case of ADHD, an individual gets the
impulse, they act on it and then later when it's too late, they say, gee, maybe I shouldn't have
done that. And some people think that the difference is these inhibitory circuits from the front the
lobe. This explains, by the way, the paradoxical effect of Ritalin. Here we have somebody that's
hyperactive and has trouble concentrating and you give them a psychostimulant. How on earth
does that work? Well, the theory that seems to have some merit is that you're giving this
individual a psychostimulant that's going to increase activity in the front the lobe thereby
increasing these under functioning inhibitory connections. Anyway, front the lobe is motor.
Let's go and look at some of the other lobes of the brain. Okay, let's put our hand on the top of
the head. This is the parietal lobe. The front of the parietal lobe is called the anterior parietal lobe
and the back of the parietal lobe is called the posterior parietal lobe. The front of the parietal
lobe, the anterior parietal lobe, is what we call the primary projection area for the cutaneous
senses. In other words, while the free nerve endings are going my way the spinal thalamic
tract of the midbrain, the encapsulated end organs by way of the lamniscal system are sending
precise cutaneous information to the anterior portion of the parietal lobe so that there is,
in fact, it's the case that if we if we electrically excite the anterior parietal lobe people will
feel cutaneous sensations on the skin. Okay, so that's where the skin senses project the anterior
parietal. The posterior parietal lobe is actually what we call a visual association area. Now,
we haven't used that term before. Visual association areas are concerned not with
the basic visual information but with that basic information combined into complex perceptions.
So whenever we talk about a visual association area you will know that we're not talking about
basic visual processes but rather talking about some complicated perceptual mechanism and we'll
have more to say of course about visual association areas because there are more of them in the brain
too. Okay, let's talk about the occipital lobe where if we put our hand over the back of our heads
here. The occipital lobe could pretty much be covered by a little skull cap if you were to wear
one back here. The very center of the occipital lobe is what we call the primary projection area
for vision. This is where basic visual data go, the middle of the occipital lobe. The periphery
of the occipital lobe, the area that surrounds the the basic area which is called the primary
projection area, is another visual association area. In other words, the periphery of the occipital lobe
is going to be concerned with more complex visual perceptions. By the way, we will probably not get
in fact we will definitely not get into any complex visual perceptions in this lecture
but stay tuned for lecture 23 when that's all we're going to talk about. Okay, let's move on from
the occipital lobe which again has a primary projection area and a visual association area
to the temporal lobe where you cover your ears with your hands and you're covering the temporal lobe.
The temporal lobe is shaped sort of like a wrinkly hotdog bun. It's more elongated
and that analogy with the hotdog bun is not so bad because you know you can split a hotdog bun
down the middle and you have a top half and the bottom half. The temporal lobe also has a top
half and a bottom half. The top of the temporal lobe is called the superior temporal area and the
bottom half of the temporal lobe is called the inferior temporal area. So we're not making a
value judgment here. We're not saying one is better than the other. Superior is used to refer to
the fact that it's the top and inferior is used to refer to the fact that it is the bottom. Now
the superior temporal lobe is actually an auditory area. All of the impulses from the auditory hair
cells go to the superior portion of the temporal lobe. The ventral bottom inferior half of the
temporal lobe is another visual association area. So we've got visual association areas in the
posterior parietal, in the peripheral occipital, and in the ventral temporal, the inferior temporal
lobe. Each of those visual association areas is of critical importance as we will see in lecture
23. Okay, now the interesting thing about all of the lobes of the cerebral cortex is they all have
interconnections with each other. So they are not only receiving information from the subcortical
regions of the brain, but they are giving and receiving information to each other, which has
some interesting implications for people. One of the things that the areas of the brain, especially
the association areas, one of the interesting advantages that gives us over lower animals is
that we are capable of forming multimodal perceptions, multimodal concepts. For example,
I can experience the perception of my significant other, either by the sound of her voice
or the smell of her perfume, or her favorite color, or a picture of her, or see,
because of the fact that we have interconnecting association areas, a number of different stimuli
can end up eliciting the same perception, and many lower animals, most lower animals, do not have that
option in their brains. Okay, now based on what I told you, if you were a neurologist or a
neuropsychologist, both of these are people who work with head injuries and brain damage,
the neurologists are using the high-tech imaging techniques to find out where the
damage is. For a neurologist, for example, the report might be you have a six-gram tissue mass
at the base of the third frontal convolution of the left cerebral hemisphere. Neuropsychology is
actually a branch of clinical psychology, so the neuropsychologist would say, and as a consequence
of that, you are going to have trouble with mathematical operations or something like that.
So the neurologist is interested in where the damage is, and the neuropsychologist is interested in
what is the functional consequence of that disorder. In any event, either of those two people,
if they were seeing a patient with frontal lobe damage, would be very tuned in and sensitive to
the possibility of motor involvement, because we said that the frontal lobe controls motor
activities broadly speaking. So somebody with frontal lobe damage, we would be looking for
their ability to plan sequences or inhibit motor activity, or if it were in the primary
motor area, we would be looking for some paralysis or perhaps deficits in fine motor speed or motor
strength. Damage to frontal lobe then is concerned primarily with motor deficits. Damage to any of
the other lobes, the parietal, the occipital, or the temporal lobes, is much more likely to
result in some kind of deficit of a sensory or perceptual nature. Now, let's talk a little bit
about the fact that the human brain has a left and a right half. And if you were to look at a model
of a human brain or a real human brain that's as a teaching specimen in a med school course or
something like that, to the naked eye, the left and right halves would appear to be mirror images
of each other. The human brain appears to have bilateral symmetry. Well, it actually does have
bilateral symmetry up to the level of the forebrain. The human brain shows bilateral symmetry
at the hindbrain, at the midbrain, and at the forebrain. But it is actually slightly asymmetrical
at the level of the cerebral cortex. Now, the thing is this asymmetry is not obviously noticeable,
and people really didn't notice it until good Lord God, 50 or 60 years ago, when a researcher
demonstrated that there are left hemisphere, right hemisphere, asymmetries. Now, if you had to guess
which hemisphere is slightly larger, you would probably guess the left cerebral hemisphere,
because you know that the vast majority of us are right-handed, and you probably know that the
left half of the brain controls the right half of the body, and the right half of the brain
controls the left half of the body. Well, if you guessed that the asymmetries favor the left
hemisphere, you would be absolutely right. How do we know this? Well, about 50 or 60 years ago,
a gentleman by the name of Wada came into possession of human brains from deceased people who had
willed their brains to science or something like that, and he did careful measurements of the brain
rather than just eyeballing it. And he found that there were two areas where the left hemisphere
seemed to be consistently bigger. One of these was along a region called the Silvian sulcus.
Now, you've not heard that term before, but the Silvian sulcus is actually the border of the
superior temporal lobe between it and the parietal lobe. So in other words, the Silvian sulcus is
longer right about where we perceive speech. The other area that Wada found asymmetries
favoring the left hemisphere was in structures called the pyramidal tracts. That's probably
another term that you haven't heard. The pyramidal tracts are the nerve fiber bundles that carry
information from primary motor cortex out to the peripheral muscles. Okay, now since the left
pyramidal tracts are thicker, and because the left side of the brain controls the right side of the
body, this makes sense with the fact that most of us are right-handed. Can we say that we are
right-handed because the left pyramidal tracts are thicker, or do you think it's that the left
pyramidal tracts are thicker because we're right-handed? It's a chicken or egg thing, and unfortunately
Wada's observations being on adult humans don't tell us whether we were born with these asymmetries
or not. People originally thought that handedness was probably something that our culture chose for
us or our parents chose for us, and I can see why they would think that because I've had students
in my class from India who have said that the schools want you to be right-handed in India,
and I've had a woman in class recently from the Philippines who said, in the Philippines,
they want you to be right-handed, and I know from personal experience I lived out of the United States
when I was younger, and I had to go to a Catholic junior high school, and they were very unhappy
if somebody was still using the left hand. So there are cultural forces trying to make more of us
right-handed. Many parents, by the way, want their children to be right-handed because they think
it'll give them an easier time through life, since most scissors are for right-handed people,
and golf clubs are for right-handed people, and desks are for right-handed people.
Then why, who and when did somebody decide, hey, let's make kids be right-handed? Some people say
it started with the Romans, because the Roman legions at one time Rome ruled the known world,
and the Roman legions required that all the young men from all the territories that Rome
was in charge of serve in the Roman legions, and the Roman legions said, you will carry your shield
in your left hand and your sword in your right hand, so if you were the parents of a baby, a boy
baby, you would want that baby to be right-handed because he might have to defend himself with his
sword in his right hand. Then why would the Romans want girls to be right-handed? Well,
I've heard the story that the Romans knew that if a woman holds a baby in her left arm, that the
baby is soothed by the heartbeat of the mother, and that frees the right arm to feed the baby,
or clean the baby, or do whatever chores the baby needs done. So some people said the Romans
wanted everybody to be right-handed. Well, that sounds good in theory, but archaeologists tell
us that many of the artifacts from prehistoric times were for right-handed cave dwellers,
so the story about the Romans doesn't answer that question. But the one who did answer it was
our friend Wada again. He went back to the drawing board in terms of measuring different parts of
the brain. This time he came into possession of the brains of stillborn babies. Now there's no
question that they had learned language or learned to be right or left-handed because
they were stillborn. He found anatomical asymmetries that we can now call unlearned anatomical
asymmetries in the brains of these stillborn babies, and again he found them in the cilient
fissure and in the pyramidal tracts. So it turns out, well, let me give you his figures. In Wada's
sample of stillborn babies, 65% of them had anatomical asymmetries favoring the left hemisphere,
24 had anatomical asymmetries favoring the right hemisphere, and in 11 he could find no measurable
difference. Can we extrapolate from those findings to humans, to normal adult humans? The answer is
no, because these babies were not representative of normal humans, adult or otherwise. Something
was wrong with these babies or they wouldn't have been born dead. If we look in the general population,
10% of us are left-handed and 90% of us are right-handed. The implication here is that Wada's
percentages are an underrepresentation of the degree to which the left hemisphere is dominant
in our culture. Is there any evidence for this? Well, yes. In brain damaged populations, we find
a much higher percentage than 10% being right hemisphere dominant and left-handed. Now I'm
not saying that left-handed people are brain damaged. Plenty of them are gifted and talented.
What I am saying is that in populations of brain damage as opposed to in the general population,
we find higher than 10%. Why could this be the case? Well, let's take a hypothetical sample of
a thousand newborn babies. Now we can expect that 900 of them would grow up to be right-handed,
left hemisphere dominant, and 100 would grow up to be right hemisphere dominant, left-handed.
Let's also assume, tragically, that maybe 1% of them are going to experience birth trauma,
forceps delivery, or whatever. That is going to produce brain damage and that others of them
are going to have early childhood head injuries. Now, the human brain possesses a characteristic
called plasticity. If you suffer brain damage as a child or an infant in the left hemisphere,
you're going to switch over and your right hemisphere is going to be your dominant hemisphere.
Similarly, if you experience brain damage in the right hemisphere, you'll switch over and your
left hemisphere will be your dominant hemisphere. If we assume 1% in both the 900 left hemisphere
dominance and the 100 right hemisphere dominance, we're going to have nine brain damaged left
hemisphere dominant babies switching over and being right hemisphere dominant. We're going to have
one of them is going to switch over and be left hemisphere dominant. This is why we have higher
percentages of lefties in the brain damaged populations. It is known that the left hemisphere
is our dominant hemisphere. The left hemisphere dominance for language is so great that it is
the dominant hemisphere for language in all normal right-handed people and 70% of normal left-handed
people ruling out the brain damaged people. 70% of lefties are left hemisphere dominant for language
of the remaining 30% of left-handed people. 15% of them have language in the right hemisphere
and 15% of them actually have language represented in both cerebral hemispheres.
This will become significant in lecture 22 when we talk about language perception.
Let me say that the aging process is also involved in changes in the brain as we age. Of
course, we're going to experience some unavoidable diffuse brain cell loss. However,
diffuse brain cell loss is not typically an issue in perceptual dysfunctions because
perceptual dysfunctions frequently require focal brain damage in a specific locus of the brain.
Fortunately, the normal aging process is highly unlikely to result in us having
serious perceptual dysfunctions. Now that's normal aging. The senile dementias, it's a whole
different story. In senile dementias such as Alzheimer's disease, it's been estimated that
elderly people may be losing as many as 100,000 brain cells a day. 100,000 brain cells today
and another 100,000 tomorrow and the day after. In the senile dementias, you are going to get
perceptual dysfunction because senile dementias are associated with serious memory problems.
Memory, of course, is an important aspect of perception because perceptions are based on
your past experiences with a given stimulus or stimulus situation. If you can no longer
remember those previous experiences, it's going to certainly alter your perceptions.
One of the best known of the early physiological psychologists, the gentleman by the name of
Carl Lashley, spent 20 years studying the different parts of the brain as it related to
memory and indirectly to perception. Lashley devised tests of memory for experimental animals
and he produced experimentally induced brain damage in hundreds and hundreds of animals until
he had explored every single conceivable part of the brain. He published the results of 20 years
of brain research on memory in a book called In Search of the Engram. Now, engram was the term
that physiological psychologists used to use for the memory trace. So what he was saying was this
research is in search of the place in the brain where the memory trace is stored. As a result
of his 20 years of research, he came to the tongue-in-cheek conclusion that memory is impossible
because he found no part of the brain that if destroyed would wipe out memory. The reason for
this is because what he was really saying was not that memory is impossible, but that memory is
spread out over many different regions of the brain, which is actually good for us because it
makes memory that much less vulnerable to diffuse brain damage. Okay, to quickly recap, we've talked
about the structure and function of the brain, talking about the evolution of the brain, the
lobes of the brain, left-right differences in brain functioning and wound up by talking about
diffuse brain damage associated with aging. In our next lecture, we will talk about some
very important human perceptual abilities.
