According to Einstein's general theory of relativity, a black hole is a region of
space-time where gravity is so strong that nothing, not even light, can escape.
The boundary of this region is known as the event horizon of the black hole, and
according to classical relativity, once an object has passed the event horizon,
it will never be able to escape the clutches of the black hole. However, when
you throw quantum mechanics into the mix, as is often the case, the situation
becomes a bit more subtle. In fact, in 1974, Stephen Hawking demonstrated that by
combining certain elements of quantum field theory with general relativity, it
was possible to show that black holes do in fact radiate, causing them to slowly
evaporate and eventually disappear. Now, I don't know about you, but when I first
read about black holes as a child, I was instantly hooked and desperately wanted
to find out more. The only problem is that the physics of black holes, and in
particular Hawking's work, is notoriously difficult and requires an
advanced knowledge of Einstein's theory of general relativity, as well as quantum
field theory. But is it possible to determine the most exciting and
mysterious properties of black holes using only advanced high school
mathematics? Well, it turns out the answer is yes, and in this short video, I'd like
to show you how. In fact, our strategy is quite simple. We are essentially going to
guess the structure of the black hole equations without doing the full
calculation, using a handy technique known as dimensional analysis.
Dimensional analysis is perhaps the most valuable tool in a theoretical
physicist's toolkit, as it allows you to construct equations without doing any of
the hard work, and as you will see, it's remarkably successful. So how does it work?
Well, the first thing to appreciate is that an equation in physics simply
represents a relationship between physical properties, and a measurable
physical property is referred to as a dimension. In what follows, we will focus
on the basic dimensions of length, time, mass, and temperature, which we will
signify with the letters L, T, M, and theta. To understand what I mean by
dimensional analysis, let's look at a simple example. The great thing about
physics equations is that they provide a relationship between the dimensions of
the properties appearing in the equation. For example, consider the equation
speed equals distance divided by time. To determine the dimensions of speed, we
simply refer to the defining equation, which tells us that the dimension of
speed is equal to the dimension of length divided by time. Square brackets are
used to signify that we are interested in the dimension of the quantity inside
the bracket. Now, it turns out that some physics equations are special, in the
sense that they contain what are known as fundamental constants. A fundamental
constant is a physical quantity that is believed to be universal in nature and
constant in time. The most famous example being the speed of light, which appears
in the famous equation equals mc2. This equation allows us to calculate the mass
energy of an object if we know its mass. The speed of light, c, is a fundamental
constant that tells us the exchange rate between mass and energy. Since c refers
to a speed, the dimensions of c can be written as c equals l over t. We also
note that we can use the equation equals mc2 to determine the dimensions of
energy, which can be written as ml squared over t squared. Let's now use this
dimensional information to explore some of the other fundamental constants that
will prove crucial to our understanding of black holes. Firstly, consider the
gravitational potential energy that exists due to the relative position of
two or more masses. If two masses are separated by a distance r, then the
gravitational potential energy can be calculated using the equation e equals
minus g big m little m over r, where g is Newton's gravitational constant. By
rearranging this equation and inserting the dimensions of energy that we
calculated previously, we find that the units of g are equal to l cubed over mt
squared. Next, consider the famous quantum energy relation e equals h bar
omega, which relates the energy of a quantum of light to the frequency of the
light. Here, h bar is the reduced Planck's constant. In order to determine the
dimensions of h bar, we simply rearrange the energy equation, and since
frequency has dimensions of inverse time, we see that the dimensions of h bar
is ml squared over t. The final fundamental constant that we'll be
concerned with relates to the field of thermodynamics, and more specifically
systems of large numbers of particles. According to the kinetic theory of gases,
for a system of n particles at temperature t, such as an ideal gas, the
thermal energy is related to the temperature by the equation e equals
three over two n kt, where k is Boltzmann's constant. By rearranging this
equation for Boltzmann's constant, we see that the dimensions of Boltzmann's
constant is given by ml squared over theta t squared. Having laid the necessary
foundations, we're now in a position to start building equations using the
fundamental constants as our building blocks. The rules of the game are as
follows. When using dimensional analysis to construct equations, we should include
the speed of light c when things are moving fast or involve light. We should
include the gravitational constant g when things are massive. We should include
Planck's constant when dealing with quantum systems, and we should include
Boltzmann's constant when things are hot. It sounds simple, so let's get started.
Our objective is to uncover the properties of black holes using
dimensional analysis. The good news is that our task is made significantly
easier because of a famous theorem known as the no-hair theorem. The no-hair
theorem states that all black hole solutions in general relativity can be
completely characterized by only three externally observable classical parameters
mass, electric charge and angular momentum. All other information, for which
hair is a metaphor about the matter that formed the black hole, disappears behind
the black hole event horizon and is therefore permanently inaccessible to
external observers. In what follows, we will focus on a special class of black
holes known as Schwarzschild black holes, which have neither electric charge nor
angular momentum, and therefore a Schwarzschild black hole is completely
characterized by its mass. Armed with the no-hair theorem and dimensional
analysis, we are now in a position to answer the following question. What is the
area of the event horizon of a black hole? Well firstly, black holes are
clearly massive objects and so our equation should include Newton's
gravitational constant g along with the characteristic mass of the black hole
m. Furthermore, we know that a black hole is a region of spacetime where
gravity is so strong that nothing, not even light, can escape and so we should
expect the speed of light to feature in our equation. Our strategy is to write
the area of the event horizon as a equals g to the power alpha times c to the
power beta times m to the power gamma and then we will use dimensional analysis
to determine alpha, beta and gamma. So let's do that. To fix alpha, beta and gamma,
we simply need to match the dimensions on either side of this expression. The
left hand side represents an area which has dimensions of length squared. For the
right hand side, we need to insert the dimensions of g and c that we
calculated earlier. If we do that then we find the following green expression. We
can then use the law of exponents to gather terms and simplify this expression
in which case we find the following. Now since the dimensions on both sides of
the equation need to match, this places a set of constraints on alpha, beta and
gamma. To make this clear, we can imagine writing the left hand side in an
equivalent form as follows. We can do this because any quantity raised to the
power of 0 is simply equal to 1. If we then match up the exponents of L, T and
m, we find a set of three simultaneous equations which can be solved by
substitution. After a little bit of algebra, we find that alpha equals 2,
beta equals minus 4 and gamma equals 2. If we then sub these values into our
original expression, we find that the area of the event horizon of a black
hole is proportional to g squared m squared divided by c to the power of 4. In
other words, the area of the event horizon will increase as more mass falls
into the black hole. More specifically, we see that if the mass of our black hole
doubles, then the area of the event horizon will quadruple. And so we begin
to see the power of dimensional analysis. Although we don't know the exact
value of the proportionality constant appearing in the mass area expression,
dimensional analysis does allow us to determine the structure of the
relationship. And often this is the most important part of an equation. It's
interesting to note that a detailed calculation of the black hole event
horizon yields the following exact expression. And we see that the structure
of this expression does indeed match the one derived using dimensional analysis.
So why is this mass area relationship important? And what is it telling us
about black holes? Well, the first thing to appreciate is that from a classical
point of view, nothing can ever escape from inside the event horizon of a black
hole. And therefore, in all physical processes, the area of the event horizon
can only ever increase. It can never decrease. Now, the idea that there exists
a quantity that can only ever increase with time might remind you of the second
law of thermodynamics, which states that the entropy of an isolated system must
increase with time. Because entropy is such an important concept, and a key
part of our analysis of black holes, it's worth taking a short detour to
understand the concept in a bit more detail. The concept of thermodynamic
entropy was first introduced into gas dynamics by the German physicist
Rudolf Klausius. Klausius had introduced the concept to describe the flow of
heat. He originally defined the change in entropy of a system as the heat
energy it absorbed divided by the temperature at which it absorbed the
heat. The remarkable discovery of Klausius was that because heat always
moves from high temperature regions to low temperature regions, the total
change in entropy summed over all the parts of the system that were exchanging
heat with one another was always positive. The entropy was always
increasing. But why is this true? Although Klausius had successfully
introduced a mathematical definition of entropy, he was unable to provide a
fundamental explanation of why the second law of thermodynamics was true.
However, in 1877, the Austrian physicist Ludwig Boltzmann provided a beautiful
explanation of entropy in terms of the microscopic components of a physical
system. According to Boltzmann, the entropy of a system is simply
characterized by the number of ways of rearranging the microscopic components
of the system in such a way that some macroscopic feature, such as the pressure
or temperature, remains unchanged. This statement is encoded in Boltzmann's
famous entropy law, which can be found etched into his gravestone. According
to Boltzmann's definition, the entropy of a system is equal to Boltzmann's
constant multiplied by the logarithm of W, where W is the number of
microstates corresponding to a particular macrostate. To make this a bit
clearer, imagine the bottom of a box is completely covered with red and green
marbles. Now imagine that you arrange the marbles so that the left half is green
and the right half is red. This corresponds to a particular appearance or
macrostate of the system. Let's label this macrostate as the split state. If we
then shook the box of marbles so that the two sets of marbles became thoroughly
mixed together, we would see a random arrangement of the marbles, which we
might label as a mixed macrostate. If we then shook the box again, we would get
a different arrangement of the marbles, but we would still label the macrostate
of the system as being mixed. In fact, there are a huge number of marble
configurations or microstates corresponding to a mixed macrostate. On
the other hand, there are clearly fewer ways for the marbles to arrange
themselves into the neatly separated split state. Boltzmann's great insight
was to realize that he could define the entropy as the number of microstates
corresponding to a particular macrostate. Fewer microstates corresponds to lower
entropy and therefore more order in the system. So what has this got to do with
black holes? Well, you can think of a black hole as a universal waste basket
that swallows up information as matter falls inside. Since a black hole refuses
to tell us what has fallen inside, we can view a black hole as a system that
has the same external state for lots of possible internal states. This suggests
that the black hole may have a very large entropy value. But exactly how large?
Well, we've already uncovered the first clue when we discovered that the area of
the horizon of the black hole always increases when mass falls inside. In
1972, Jacob Beckenstein, an Israeli physicist, proposed that it does indeed
make sense to assign an entropy to a black hole. And furthermore, that the
entropy of a black hole is proportional to the area of its event horizon. In other
words, Beckenstein suggested that it should be possible to write s equals eta
times a, where eta is a constant of proportionality. So how might we determine
eta? Well, the first thing we need to do is determine the dimensions of entropy,
since this will then allow us to figure out the dimensions of eta. To do this,
we refer back to the thermodynamic definition of entropy, ds equals dq
over t, which tells us that entropy has dimensions of energy divided by
temperature. And so we find that entropy has dimensions of ml squared t to the
minus two theta to the minus one. We can then use this to determine the
dimensions of eta, since eta is equal to the entropy divided by the area. And so
we see that the dimensions of eta must be mt to the minus two theta to the minus
one. Furthermore, we know that eta is a constant, and therefore eta must be
constructed from quantities which are themselves constant in time. And this
provides a strong hint that eta can be built using the fundamental constants
we encountered earlier. But which constant shall we use in our
dimensional analysis? Well, this is where we need to make an educated guess.
Firstly, we are dealing with gravity in black holes, and so we should expect
the gravitational constant and speed of light to be involved. Furthermore, since
we are trying to construct an equation for entropy, and entropy is connected to
thermodynamics, it makes sense to include Boltzmann's constant. And finally,
following the suggestion of Beckenstein in his original 1972 paper, we should also
include Planck's constant. As Beckenstein himself commented, we need not be alarmed
at the appearance of H-bar in the expression for black hole entropy. It is
as well known that H-bar also appears in the equations for entropy of many
thermodynamic systems that are conventionally regarded as classical. For
example, the Boltzmann ideal gas. This is a reflection of the fact that entropy is,
in a sense, a count of states of the system, and the underlying states of any
system are always quantum in nature. And so, following in the footsteps of
Beckenstein, we will propose that eta can be written as g to the alpha,
H-bar to the beta, c to the gamma times k to the delta. So, how do we determine alpha,
beta, gamma and delta? Well, as we've already seen, we simply need to apply the
rules of dimensional analysis. So let's do that. Firstly, we have already calculated
the dimensions of eta from the definition of thermodynamic entropy. Secondly,
we know that the combined dimensions of g, H-bar, c and k must match these. If we
substitute the dimensions we calculated earlier for the fundamental constants,
then we find the following yellow expression. If we then use the law of
exponents to gather appropriate terms together, we can write this expression
in the following form. Just like before, we can then match exponents on either side
of the equation to form a set of simultaneous equations. If we do this,
then we find the following set of constraints. We can then solve this set of
simultaneous equations by substitution, and we find that alpha and beta equal
minus one, gamma equals three, and delta equals one. If we then substitute these
expressions back into the original equation proposed by Beckenstein, we find that,
up to an undetermined numerical factor, the entropy of a black hole is proportional
to the following expression. In 1974, using a subtle and sophisticated
combination of general relativity and quantum field theory, Stephen Hawking was able to show
that the exact form of the entropy equation includes a numerical factor of exactly one
quarter, and so the modern-day expression for black hole entropy is written as s equals k c cubed
over four h-bar g times the area of the event horizon. One of the most immediately
striking aspects of this expression is that the entropy of a black hole is going to be
incredibly large, since the equation contains a factor of c cubed in the numerator and both
Planck's constant and Newton's gravitational constant in the denominator. So what is causing
this large entropy value? Well, according to Boltzmann, the entropy of a system relates to
the number of possible microstates of the system. So if we apply this to black holes,
it suggests that black holes should have some kind of microstructure,
which we can use to count states. Furthermore, the presence of both Newton's gravitational
constant and Planck's constant in the entropy equation suggests that these black hole microstates
might have something to do with the quantum theory of gravity.
We will return to these interesting observations towards the end of this video,
but for now, we wish to use the entropy equation to understand one of the most exciting predictions
of 20th century physics, Hawking radiation. In 1974, Stephen Hawking discovered a remarkable
fact about the universe. Black holes glow, emitting faint radiation, causing them to
eventually evaporate and disappear. The exact mechanism behind Hawking radiation
involves a complex and subtle interplay between the curvature of spacetime caused by the event
horizon and quantum fluctuations of the vacuum of empty space, a topic which I hope to return to
in a future video. Hawking discovered that since radiation appears to be emitted from the region
of space surrounding the event horizon of the black hole, it should be possible to assign an
absolute temperature to the black hole, the aptly named Hawking temperature. Furthermore,
because mass and energy are seen as equivalent according to Einstein's theory, when a black hole
radiates energy, it effectively loses mass, and therefore should eventually evaporate.
So let's now turn our attention to these remarkable discoveries and see if we can
calculate the Hawking temperature and evaporation time of a black hole using our rudimentary toolkit.
Our start point is to combine the first law of thermodynamics with the definition of
thermodynamic entropy that we encountered earlier. Assuming that the black hole does
no work on its surroundings, we can set dw equal to zero, and so we can write de equals
t times ds, where de refers to the change in energy of the black hole, t the thermodynamic
temperature, and ds the entropy. If we then rewrite this expression in terms of the temperature t,
we have that t equals de by ds. Next, if we assume that the total energy content of the black hole
is due to the mass contained within it, then we can use Einstein's famous equation to write
e equals mc squared. If we then combine this with the expression for t, we see that the temperature
of the black hole can be written in the following form, which we can then invert and write as c
squared times the inverse of ds by dm. So we see that in order to calculate the temperature of our
black hole, we need to differentiate the black hole entropy with respect to mass.
And so our next task is to rewrite the Beckenstein-Hawking entropy equation in terms of mass.
To do that, we simply need to substitute the event horizon area equation into the entropy
equation, and we find that s is proportional to the square of the black hole mass.
If we then differentiate this entropy equation with respect to m, then we find the following green
equation. And so we are now finally in a position to determine the thermodynamic temperature of a
black hole. We simply need to substitute this green expression into the equation we wrote for the
thermodynamic temperature. If we do this, then we find that the temperature of our black hole can be
written as h bar times c cubed divided by 8 pi kgm. This temperature is known as the Hawking
temperature of the black hole, and it's the temperature that we associate with the radiation
being emitted from the black hole. One immediately striking feature of this expression is that the
Hawking temperature is inversely proportional to the mass, and so the smaller the mass of a black hole,
the higher the temperature, and therefore unlike most objects, a black hole's temperature increases
as it radiates away its mass. But what kind of temperatures are we talking about? If we sub in
the values for the fundamental constants, then we find that the Hawking temperature can be approximated
by the following blue expression. To get a sense of scale, the smallest stellar mass black hole that
has so far been discovered has a mass of around three solar masses. If we insert this mass into
the blue equation, then we see that the Hawking temperature is around 2 times 10 to the minus
8 Kelvin, which is about 20 billionths of a degree above absolute zero. By way of comparison, we know
that the temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation is around 2.7 Kelvin,
and therefore a black hole of this mass would actually be absorbing far more energy than it
emits and wouldn't begin to lose mass until the universe has expanded sufficiently to reduce the
temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation. Okay, but let's for a moment assume
that the universe has expanded sufficiently and the black hole begins to lose mass through Hawking
radiation. How long will it take for all the energy of the black hole to radiate away? To answer
this question, we need to determine the power output of the black hole, the rationale being that
since power is defined as energy per unit time, if we know the energy content of the black hole
and the power output, then we can calculate the time taken for the energy to radiate away. So our
next task is to determine how the power output of a black hole relates to the Hawking temperature.
To this we now turn. Our start point is to use dimensional analysis to estimate the power
emitted per unit area from an object with temperature T. Since we're dealing with radiation,
we should expect our equation to include the speed of light, and since we're dealing with heat,
we expect our equation to include Boltzmann's constant, along with the temperature T. And
finally, we will also include Planck's constant. After all, it was by explaining the radiation
properties of hot objects that Planck was first led to introduce the constant that bears his name.
So let's begin by assuming that the power per unit area depends on the fundamental constants
in the following way. As before, we can determine the constants alpha, beta and gamma and delta
by matching the dimensions on either side of the equation. We see that the left hand side has
dimensions of mT to the minus 3, whereas the right hand side is given by the following blue
expression. If we expand out the brackets and simplify, then we find the following green expression.
If we then match up the exponents on either side of the equation, we find the following set of
simultaneous equations, which can be solved to find that alpha equals minus 3, beta equals minus 2,
and gamma and delta equal 4. And therefore, we see that the power per unit area is given by
the following green equation, which you might recognise as the famous Steffen-Boltzmann relation,
which says that the power per unit area of a hot object is proportional to the fourth power of the
temperature. A detailed quantum mechanical calculation yields the well-known exact result,
and we see that the numerical coefficient is equal to pi squared over 60. If you're interested
in how this result is derived, I refer you to my video on the cosmic microwave background radiation.
For our purposes, let's use the Steffen-Boltzmann relation to estimate the power output of our
three solar mass black hole, which if you recall, had a Hawking temperature of 2 times 10 to the
minus 8 Kelvin. If we plug in the numbers, then we find that the power output of the black hole
is incredibly small, around 10 to the power of minus 29 watts. For comparison, our sun has a power
output of around 10 to the power of 26 watts. Given the incredibly small power output of a black hole,
we might expect that it will take a very long time for a black hole to evaporate. But exactly how long?
To answer this question, we first note that because the power of the black hole will be
changing with time, we will need to express the power relation in differential form as DE by DT.
The appearance of the minus sign is due to the fact that the power of the Hawking radiation
is the rate of energy loss of the black hole. Next, we need to take the Steffen-Boltzmann relation
and rewrite this in terms of the mass of our black hole. To do this, we need to substitute the
expressions for the event horizon area and Hawking temperature that we've already met. If we do this,
then we find the following blue equation. Note that as the mass of the black hole decreases,
the power output will actually increase. Next, we will rewrite the energy in terms of the mass
by using Einstein's equation equals mc squared, where m is the total mass of the black hole.
If we sub this into the differential expression, then we can write our power equation in terms
of the rate of change of mass instead of the rate of change of energy. This makes sense because the
right hand side of the equation is expressed in terms of the mass. In order to solve this equation,
we will use the method of separation of variables. The first step is to rearrange this equation so
that we have m squared dm on the left hand side and dt on the right hand side. If we then integrate
both sides of this equation with respect to t, we find the following yellow expression, where t
equals zero refers to when the black hole starts evaporating and t refers to some later time.
Integrating m squared will give a factor of m cubed over three on the left hand side,
whereas integrating with respect to time on the right hand side will give rise to a factor of t.
If we then insert the limits, we find the following result.
We can then use this expression to estimate the time taken for an isolated black hole to
evaporate completely. In other words, the time taken for a black hole to lose all of its mass.
To do this, let's define t equals t evaporation as the moment in time when the mass of the black
hole has reduced to zero. If we then substitute this information back into our equation and simplify,
we find the following green equation expressed in terms of the evaporation time. Finally,
if we rearrange for t, then we find that the evaporation time is proportional to the cube
of the mass of the black hole. Plugging in the values for the constants, we find that the evaporation
time is roughly equal to 10 to the power of minus 16 times m cubed, where m is the mass of the black
hole at the start of the evaporation process. If we again consider a black hole of three solar
masses, then we find that the evaporation time is of order 10 to the 68 years. Considering the
universe is believed to be around 13.8 billion years old, we see that the time taken for evaporation
is many, many orders of magnitude larger than the age of the universe, and therefore a solar
mass black hole is likely to be around long after all the stars in the universe have died out,
making it highly unlikely that we'll ever observe the black hole's final farewell.
So is there any way that a black hole might evaporate in a shorter period of time? Well,
a quick glance at the black hole evaporation equation reveals that the only factor affecting
the evaporation time is the black hole mass. Could it be possible then that a black hole with
sufficiently small mass, perhaps created in the early universe, has an evaporation time roughly
equal to the age of the universe? That way, the primordial black hole could be coming towards
the end of its life at the present moment, and we might be able to detect the dying radiation burst
of the black hole. Well, it turns out that it's relatively straightforward to estimate what the
mass of such a black hole would need to be. We simply rearrange the black hole evaporation
equation for M, and substitute the age of the universe, and we find that the initial mass of
the black hole must have been around 10 to the power 11 kilograms, which is roughly equivalent
to the mass of an asteroid. Now, according to our current laws of physics, a black hole of such
small mass could not have formed as a result of stellar death, as is typical for black hole
formation. Rather, it's conceivable that such primordial black holes might have formed by random
fluctuations in the very early universe, and if so, these primordial black holes should be coming
towards the end of their lives. So what exactly happens during the last few moments of a black
hole's life? Well, we can estimate the amount of energy released in the last second of a black
hole's life, because this is equal to the energy equivalent of the mass of a black hole whose lifetime
equals one second. So if we sub in t equals one into the evaporation equation, we find that the
black hole radiates the energy equivalent of 10 to the power 5 kilograms of mass during its final
second. We can work out how much energy this corresponds to by using Einstein's famous equation
equals mc squared, and we find a value of around 10 to the power of 22 joules. By way of comparison,
the largest nuclear weapon ever detonated on Earth, known as the SA-bomber, released 10 to the
17 joules of energy, and so we see that the energy released in the final one second of a black hole
is roughly equivalent to the energy released by 100,000 SA nuclear bombs.
So could we detect this? The release of this much energy in one second might just be observable
here on Earth. Although it's only a fraction of a percent of the luminosity of the Sun,
it would come out in a characteristic burst of gamma rays which could hopefully be detected.
But how do we know it would be gamma rays? Well that comes from the Vien displacement law,
which says that for an object at temperature T, the wavelength corresponding to peak intensity
emission is inversely proportional to the temperature. I refer you to my video on the
cosmic microwave background radiation for a derivation of this result. For our purposes,
we can estimate the wavelength of peak emission by inserting the Hawking temperature corresponding
to a black hole of mass 10 to the 5 kilograms. And we find that the peak wavelength is of order
10 to the minus 21 meters, which is in the high energy gamma wavelength range of electromagnetic
radiation. And therefore the hope is that it should be possible to detect this characteristic
burst of gamma radiation, which signals the last few moments of an evaporating black hole's life.
It's worth noting that so far nothing of this nature has ever been observed,
and therefore at this stage primordial black holes represent a purely theoretical idea.
I would like to end by briefly discussing another important theoretical consequence of Hawking
radiation, the famous black hole information paradox. Soon after Hawking realised that
black holes evaporate, he recognised a serious problem. Imagine throwing a laptop or a book
or even a human being into a black hole. What happens to all of this information?
The problem that Hawking recognised is that the thermal radiation emitted from a black hole as
it evaporates has no memory whatsoever of what went into the black hole in the first place.
As we've already seen, only the mass and therefore temperature of the black hole
determines what type of radiation is emitted, and this would seem to imply that information
has been lost. In other words, we cannot use the Hawking radiation emitted from a black hole
to reconstruct the information content of what originally fell inside. Now this might not
immediately strike you as a problem, however the irretrievable loss of information conflicts with
one of the basic postulates of quantum mechanics. According to the Schrodinger equation, physical
systems that change over time cannot create or destroy information, a property known as
unitarity. This apparent contradiction between general relativity and quantum mechanics is
the information paradox, so either quantum mechanics is wrong or the information somehow
gets out of the black hole. One possible solution to the problem is known as the holographic
principle, which suggests that the information content of a black hole is somehow encoded
on the event horizon of the black hole. So let's look at this suggestion in a bit more detail.
As we've already seen, Bekingstein and Hawking were able to relate the entropy of a black hole
to the area of the event horizon. However, according to Boltzmann's definition of entropy,
it should be possible to define the entropy in relation to some fundamental microstates of the
black hole system. So what could these fundamental microstates be? To shed some light on this,
notice that we can rewrite the Bekingstein-Hawking entropy equation in terms of the Planck length,
which, if you recall, is believed to be the smallest meaningful distance that we can probe in nature.
If we square the Planck length, we get the Planck area, and notice that the Planck area
is actually contained within the Bekenstein-Hawking relation. In particular, we can write the entropy
as s equals k over 4 times the area of the horizon divided by the Planck area.
So we see that the entropy of a black hole is proportional to the number of Planck areas
that would cover the area of the black hole event horizon. So what does this mean? Well,
perhaps we could use these Planck size pixels to somehow encode the information that has fallen
into the black hole. More specifically, imagine that each Planck's eye cell corresponds to one bit
of stored information. So for example, with one bit corresponding to one Planck's eye cell,
we can encode two possible states corresponding to zero and one. With two bits or two cells,
we can describe four states corresponding to zero, zero, zero, one, one, zero, and one, one.
Continuing this pattern, we see that with n bits or n cells, we can describe two to the n states
corresponding to the two to the n sequences of binary digits. Then according to Boltzmann,
the entropy of the system would be equal to Boltzmann's constant multiplied by the logarithm
of the number of microstates corresponding to a particular macrostate. Well, if we take two to
the n as the number of microstates, then we see that the entropy would be proportional to the
logarithm of two to the n. We can then use the logarithm rule for exponents to show that the
log of two to the n is proportional to n. And we have already established that the number of cells
is proportional to the area of the black hole event horizon. And so we see we recover the
Beckenstein-Hawking relation. To get a sense of just how much information a black hole could
store using these Planck's eye cells, let's for the purposes of illustration, imagine that we
have a tiny black hole the size of a proton with a radius of order 10 to the minus 15 meters. We
can then estimate the number of bits as the ratio of the area of the event horizon to the Planck
area. And we see that we can answer of around 10 to the power of 41 bits, which is roughly 10 to the
31 gigabytes. Compare this to the total data storage on all the computers in the world,
which is of order 10 to the 12 gigabytes. And we see that a proton size black hole could contain
more information than all the world's computers by an unimaginably large factor. This general idea
that information is stored on the black hole horizon is known as the holographic principle,
since the information that falls into a black hole is somehow encoded on the two-dimensional
boundary, like a hologram. And therefore, according to this set of ideas, the information swallowed
by a black hole could be completely restored during the process of quantum evaporation,
since it always existed on the boundary of the black hole. The exact mechanism explaining how
this restoration of information takes place is still an open question in theoretical physics.
But there has been significant progress over the past 30 years to flesh out and generalize the
holographic principle, especially within the context of string theory. The remarkable conclusion
that comes out of this line of reasoning is the realization that in order to describe what is going
on in a volume of space, we need only concern ourselves with the physics that resides on the
boundary of the volume. You can think of a region of space as being surrounded by tiny
plank-sized pixelated cells. And when things move around inside the volume, that information is
somehow encoded in those cells. You can picture them lighting up. As you put more stuff inside the
volume of space, more of the pixels light up. And at the exact moment just before the volume
of space collapses to form a black hole, all of the pixels have lit up. In other words,
all of the information is at the boundary, not inside the space. What controls the physics
lives on the boundary of the space. And this is the essence of the holographic principle.
A detailed discussion of the holographic principle within the context of string theory
will no doubt form the basis of a future video. But for now, I would like to leave you with the
words of one of the founding fathers of the holographic principle, Leonard Susskind. The
universe, filled with galaxies, stars, planets, houses, boulders and people, is a hologram.
An image of reality coded on a distant two-dimensional surface. This new law of physics,
known as the holographic principle, asserts that everything inside a region of space
can be described by bits of information restricted to the boundary.
Thank you for watching and see you next time.
