Chapter 1.
What doesn't kill you makes you weaker.
The immune system is a gift of evolutionary engineering.
It can't possibly anticipate all the pathogens and parasites a child will come across, so
it is designed to learn rapidly from early experience.
The immune system is a sophisticated adaptive system, one that can adapt and grow with a
change in the environment.
This is the underlying explanation for what is called the Hygiene Hypothesis, the leading
definition of why allergy rates naturally go up as countries get wealthier and cleaner,
a case of the dangers of growth.
Of course, Friedrich Nietzsche's original quote, What doesn't kill me makes me stronger,
is not entirely true of taken literally.
Some experiences that don't kill you can leave you forever scarred and weakened.
Fragility is a direct function of status.
Children in third world countries daily brave the elements, but such an exposure may kill
another from affluent climes.
Teaching kids that setbacks, ridicule and unfortunate occurrences will cause lasting
destruction is dangerous.
Muscles need physical and mental challenges and stressors, or we disintegrate.
For instance, muscles and joints need stressors to evolve appropriately.
Too much rest causes muscles to weaken, joints to lose the span of motion, heart and lung
capacity to wane, and blood clots to form.
Without the challenges produced by gravity, astronauts develop muscle weakness and joint
degeneration.
Nassim Nicholas Taleb, the Lebanese-born statistician and stock trader Polymath, who is now a professor
of risk engineering at New York University, explains the harm of avoiding stressors,
dangers and small doses of pain.
In 2017, he published a bestseller titled The Black Swan.
Professor Taleb claimed that most of us think about risk wrongly.
In complex systems, unforeseen situations will certainly arise, yet we continue to assess
risk due to our past or deals.
Life has a way of springing up shocking occurrences.
Situations Taleb relates to the appearance of a black swan.
Based on experience, you assumed that all swans were white.
To better understand how society drifted towards fragility and what can be done to recover
our emotional and intellectual boldness, endeavor to read this summary to the end.
Chapter 2 The untruth of emotional reasoning.
Always trust your feelings.
In the happiness hypothesis, Jonathan Haid drew on the teachings of Buddha and other
philosophers to offer the analogy that the mind is divided into fractions that sometimes
conflict like a small rider sitting on top of a large elephant.
The rider symbolizes conscious processes.
For years, language-based thoughts occupy our conscious minds and we are in control to
some degree.
The elephant depicts everything else that happens in our minds, the bulk of which is
beyond the scope of our conscious reasoning.
Reasoning with emotions is what happens whenever the rider interprets what is happening in ways
that are constant with the elephant's reactive emotional state, without the added solution
of what is true.
Typically, the rider does his job without complaint, but the rider can talk back to
the elephant, especially if he can learn to speak the elephant's language, which is
a language of intuition.
Boethius demonstrated this talking-back technique by creating lady philosophy and having her
ask the sorts of questions one learns to ask oneself in cognitive behavioral therapy.
If you engage in this talking-back procedure regularly, it becomes easier to do.
Over time, the rider improves his skills and the elephant becomes better trained.
The two work together with a sense of mutual understanding.
That is the strength and promise of cognitive behavioral therapy, CBT.
In the 1960s, a psychiatrist at the University of Pennsylvania named Aaron Beck developed
cognitive behavioral therapy.
Clinicians presumed that depression and the distorted thinking that results from it were
just the surface indication of deeper problems, usually relating to unresolved childhood conflict.
For depression to be treated, you have to fix the underlying problem, and that could
take many years of therapy.
But Beck noticed a close connection between the thoughts a person had and the feelings
that came with them.
He noticed that his patients managed to get themselves caught in a feedback loop in which
negative beliefs caused powerful negative feelings, which in turn drove their reasoning,
prompting them to find evidence to support their negative beliefs.
Did you know?
According to a 2019 article on Starling Mind, cognitive behavioral therapy alone was found
to be 50 to 75% effective for overcoming depression and anxiety.
Chapter 3 Humans are tribal creatures who readily
form groups to compete with other groups.
One of Jonathan Haidt's favorite thinkers of all time is Emile Durkheim, the 19th to
early 20th century French sociologist.
Durkheim saw groups and communities as social entities that have a persistent need to improve
their inner cohesion in their shared sense of moral order.
He said that, as humans, we have access to a set of emotions that we experience only
when we are part of a collective group, feelings like collective effervescence, which Durkheim
interpreted as social electricity.
Social electricity is produced when a group comes together and achieves a state of union.
People can shuffle between these two levels throughout a single day, and it is the purpose
of religious rituals to pull people to a higher collective level, bind them to the group,
and then return them to their day-to-day life with their group identity and loyalty boosted.
In 1978, the sociologist Albert Bergensen published an essay titled A Durkheimian Theory
of Witch Hunts Using the Chinese Cultural Revolution of 1966 to 1969 as an illustration.
Bergensen used Durkheim to illuminate the madness that erupted in Beijing in May 1966
between Mao Zedong and the Red Guards formed by zealous college students.
During those years, the Red Guards fished out any trace they could find of capitalism,
foreign effect, or bourgeois values.
They were ruthless to the point of suspecting anyone successful or accomplished, imprisoning
and murdering them in the process.
Among the many brutal characteristics of the Cultural Revolution were the struggle sessions
in which those accused of ideological impurity were encircled, harassed, humiliated, and
sometimes beaten as they admitted their crimes, offered apologies, and promised to do better.
Over the next few years, millions were persecuted and thousands were murdered.
Free speech and the ability to tolerate offense are the hallmarks of a free and open society.
Greg Lukyanov Bergensen illustrates that there are three
features common to most political witch hunts.
They emerge quickly.
Witch hunts appear in spectacular eruptions.
They are not a normal component of social life.
Crimes against the collective.
The various accusations that occur during one of these witch hunts comprise charges of crimes
perpetrated against the nation as a corporate whole.
Charges are often trivial or fabricated.
These crimes seem to involve the most insignificant behavioral acts, which are somehow interpreted
as crimes against the nation as a whole.
Chapter 4.
Why the United States has experienced a steady increase in at least one form of polarization
since the 1980s.
American universities as complex institutions are becoming more disunited, angry, and polarized.
We begin to see the left and the right sealed in a game of joint incitement and outrage
that is an essential piece of the puzzle that the author is trying to solve in this guide.
Alison Stranger, a professor in Middlebury who had sustained a concussion at the hands
of protesters, said this in a New York Times essay she wrote.
In the days post-violence, some have turned this story as one about what's wrong with
elite colleges and universities, our coddled youth or intolerant liberalism.
Those analyses are incomplete.
Political life and lecture in the United States are at a heated point and nowhere is the reaction
to that more heightened than on college campuses.
Alison Stranger then listed the numerous ways in which former President Trump had disrespected
or offended members of marginalized groups while promoting hateful speech among several
of his followers.
One reason for the centrist and bipartisan poise of American politics is that during
and before World War II, the country faced a series of common enemies, including the
Great Depression, the Axis Powers during World War II, and the Soviets during the Cold War.
As a result of the loss of a common enemy after the collapse of the Soviet Union can
be anticipated to lead to more intra-tribal disputes.
Secondly, since the 1970s, Americans generally have increasingly self-segregated into politically
homogenous societies as Bill Bishop revealed in his noteworthy 2008 book, The Big Sort
Why the Clustering of Like-Minded America is Tearing Us Apart.
Successive research has shown that we live in economically and politically segregated
communities increasing daily right down to the city block.
The two major political parties have grouped themselves along similar lines.
The Republican Party featuring an imbalanced order of older, white, rural, male, and Christian.
The Democratic Party, on the other hand, features the increasingly young, non-white,
urban, female, and non-religious.
Minor segregations are enough to run the fabric of peaceful and productive societies.
A third reason is the media environment, which increasingly finds ways that foster division.
Then, there's the so-called filter bubble, in which search engines and YouTube algorithms
are developed to give you more of what you seem to be attracted to, leading both conservatives
and progressives into disconnected moral matrices supported by mutually contradictory, informative
worlds.
Chapter 5 The primary cause of the increase in mental
illness is the frequent use of smartphones and other electronic devices.
Jean Twenge, a social psychologist at San Diego State University and an expert on how generations
differ psychologically and why, names the generation after the millennials Ai-jen, which is short
for Internet Generation because they are the first generation to grow up with the Internet
in their pockets.
The oldest millennials born in 1982 searched for music and map quest directions using Netscape
and Alta Vista on their compact home computers in the late 1990s, but search engines don't
change social relationships.
Social media does.
Marking the line between generations is always difficult, but based on their psychological
profiles, Twenge suggests that one possible reason for the discontinuity in self-reported
traits and attitudes between millennials and Ai-jen is that in 2006, when Ai-jen's oldest
was turning 11, Facebook altered its membership rule.
You no longer had to prove enrollment in a college now.
Any 13-year-old or any younger kid ready to claim to be 13 could join.
Ai-jen is the first generation that spent and still is spending its formative teen years
submerged in the giant social and commercial experiment of social media.
Jean Twenge suggests that there are two major generational changes that may be driving the
rise of safetyism on campus since 2013.
The first is that kids grow up much more slowly nowadays.
The second main generational change is a quick surge in rates of anxiety and depression.
By 2016, roughly one in every five girls reported signs that met the measures for having endured
a major depressive episode in the previous year.
The rate for boys also increased, but more slowly, from 4.5% in 2011 to 6.4% in 2016.
Suicide and attempted suicide rates vary by sex.
Girls make more attempts, but boys die more often by irreversible methods like guns or
tall buildings.
The boys' suicide rate has fluctuated in recent decades, rising in the 1980s during
the massive wave of crime and violence that waned suddenly in the 1990s.
The rate of suicide in boys reached its peak in 1991.
While the rise, since 2007, does not bring it back up to its peak, it is still disturbingly
high.
Chapter 6.
The decline of play, all work and no play makes Jack or Jill a dull child.
When observed from a distance, child play is an unusual thing.
Peter Lafrener, a developmental psychologist at the University of Maine, points out that
children's play combines the expenditure of great energy with apparently meaningless
risk.
But if nearly all mammals engage in it and if some of them get injured or eaten while
doing it, there must be some pretty powerful benefits to compensate for the risks.
Play is vital for wiring a mammal's brain to develop a functioning adult.
Mammals that are withheld from play won't evolve to their full capacity.
Genes are crucial for getting the numerous cell lines that begin in the embryo and genes
direct brain development toward a first draft in utero.
But experience counts too, even while the baby is in the uterus, and after birth it
makes a difference.
Experience is so important for wiring a large brain that the first draft of the brain contains
a strong impetus to develop behaviors that will give the brain the right kind of feedback
to build itself for success in whatever environment that happens to surround it.
That's why young mammals are always eager to play irrespective of the risks.
It's easy to see how this works with physical and social skills.
The genes get the ball rolling on the first draft of the brain, but the brain is expecting
more.
The brain expects the child to engage in thousands of hours of play, including thousands
of collapses, bruises, disputes, taunts, coalitions, deceptions, competitions, and acts of exclusion
to develop.
Children who are deprived of play are more likely not to develop into physically and
socially able teens and adults.
Research has revealed that nervous children may arouse overprotective behavior from others,
such as parents and caretakers, in that this strengthens the child's awareness of danger
and decreases their perception of preventing the threat.
Overprotection might, however, result in excessive levels of anxiety.
Overprotection through governmental control of playgrounds and overstated fear of playground
accidents might thus result in a rise of anxiety in the society.
Vigorous physical free play, outdoors and done with other kids, is a vital kind of play that
our developed minds are expecting.
Chapter 7 Wiser Kids How To Build Children That Are Ready For Anything
Something is not going well with American teenagers as seen in the statistics on depression,
anxiety and suicide.
Now that you know that the decline of free play may be part of the reason for children's
intensified fragility, this is the best time to prepare your kid for life.
You cannot teach anti-fragility instantly, but you can give your children the gift of
an experience.
The gift of an experience starts with knowing that kids need some unsupervised time to learn
how to judge risks for themselves and learn to deal with things like frustration, lethargy
and interpersonal disputes.
Here are some specific recommendations for parents, teachers and all who care for children.
A. Resume that your kids are more competent this month than they were last month.
Each month, ask them what challenges they think they undertake on their own.
Suppress the impulse to jump in and help them when they're trying to do things and seem
to be doing them wrongly.
B. Let your kids take more chances and let them learn from getting some bumps and bruises.
C. Urge your kids to walk or ride bicycles to and from school at the earliest age as possible.
D. Find for your kids a group of kids in the neighborhood who come from like-minded
families.
E. Find ways for kids to get together in nearby parks or specific backyards.
Teaching kids that failures, insults and painful experiences will do lasting damage is harmful
in and of itself.
Human beings need physical and mental challenges and stressors or we deteriorate.
Greg Lukainov.
Your worst enemy cannot hurt you as much as your unprotected emotions.
Children, like adults too, are inclined to emotional reasoning.
They must learn to notice and manage their emotional reactions and choose how to respond.
A. Teach children the root of cognitive behavioral therapy, but in many ways it's just cognitive
behavioral techniques because the intellectual habits it teaches are good for everyone.
B. Teach children mindfulness, limit and refine device time.
If given the freedom, many children would spend most of their free time staring at a
screen, hence try placing clear limits on device time.
Two hours a day seems to be a decent maximum as there is no evidence of negative mental
health effects at this level.
Conclusion.
According to Jean Twenge, a psychologist at San Diego State University, the main cause
of the increase in mental illness is the regular use of smartphones and other electronic devices.
Less than two hours a day seems to have no harmful effects, but adolescents who waste
several hours a day interacting with screens, especially if they start in their early teen
years or younger, have poorer mental health results than adolescents who use these devices
less and who spend more time in face-to-face social interaction.
Our societies are plagued with an interesting set of untruths that are being fed to the young
generation, thus fostering fragility and levels not previously seen.
There's the untruth of fragility, that of emotional and not objective reasoning,
and the variations that exist between good and bad people.
There's also the enactment of bad ideas, sometimes with seemingly good intentions.
This blunder has been found to manifest in some school administrators and democratic leaders.
The greatest implication of the witch-hunting syndrome ubiquitous in our society today is
the various forms of segregation that have been birthed. However, the path to societal recovery
from degeneration involves molding wiser kids, universities, and societies.
Nothing is of more importance to the public wheel than to form and train up youth in wisdom
and virtue. Wise and good men are, in my opinion, the strength of a state, Benjamin Franklin.
Most students are not fragile, they are not snowflakes, and they are not afraid of ideas,
so if a small group of universities is able to develop a different sort of academic culture,
one that finds ways to make students from all identity groups feel welcome
without using the divisive methods that seem to be backfiring on so many campuses,
market forces will most likely take care of the rest.
Try this. Allow your children to engage in free play. Allow them to be exposed to challenges
and stressors that are within limits and age-appropriate, or they won't mature into capable
and strong adults able to engage productively with ideas and people that challenge their moral
convictions and beliefs.
