It's actually a joy to be here in Skye. Your brother ended up on a Greek island, you ended up on a Hebridean island. Who do you think won?
Oh, my brother. He was a sensible one. I could have made that decision for a long time ago.
Well, it feels extraordinary as a place. It feels like you're the end of the world. You could have ended up anywhere. You know, Trondlass and Oxford or whatever. Why?
I don't think I'd ever have ended up living in a city. I find it very important to be close to a wild and natural scene.
My brother and I shared a lot. When we were young, we just said there were two great places to live. One of them is the Scottish islands and the other is the Greek islands. He's ended up on the Greek islands and I've ended up in the Scottish islands.
You can live vicariously.
I came to see you eight years ago or so for the same project where I'd speak to influential and compelling thinkers about a question that they think you should be asking yourselves.
The question you offered them was, what is my culture preventing me from seeing? Since then, you've written a massive tome, which I have here, the matter with things. You've produced a huge amount. Is that still the question that you think we do well to start considering a bit more closely?
I think it's a very important question, because if you don't know what it is that's missing from your life, you won't know how to lead your life so as to rediscover the things that you no longer see.
So not knowing what it is you don't know is the fatal problem. Not knowing is fine, but knowing that you don't know is a very good position and exploring that.
But in our culture, we're encouraged to think that increasingly we know it all, that we've got it all worked out and we're organising life according to lines that we have set up.
And we're not aware of what it is that's gone missing. I think people of my age, I'm 71, see things having disappeared from life during their lifetime.
And I don't know quite how young people would know that these things were missing really, unless we were able to discuss them and open eyes to them.
So I wonder if we could begin by talking about what we, well maybe what you mean by seeing, attention as a moral act is kind of a shorthand for much of your work.
When you talk about what we're seeing, are you talking about what we're paying attention to?
I am, I'm not talking about visual sight, I'm talking about the things that we recognise and understand.
And though sight is a very important and powerful sense with which we get to know things in the world, it's not really what I'm talking about.
So what is it, I suppose, what is it that you think we are seeing and not seeing?
What are we paying attention to, to the exclusion of other things? What would be, say, examples of that?
Well, I think that we've been led to adopt and become enslaved by a certain way of looking at the world, which is mechanistic and reductionist.
And with that, a sense of values, a sense of purpose, a sense of there being something wonderful or inspiring and perhaps sacred in the world has gone missing.
And it's very sad that, it's not just my impression, but the research shows that a very large majority of young people over 80% think that their life is meaningless.
It may be that we've developed all kinds of gadgetry and technology, but nothing can really replace the sense of meaning by sheer material wherewithal.
So we value, we seem to be valuing what the left hemisphere values.
The left hemisphere is essentially in the service of utility.
The reason we have two hemispheres, and it's not just us, but all the creatures that we know have brains have two hemispheres.
And the difference is that they pay attention to the world in different ways.
And the left hemisphere's attention is in the service of utility.
It's a very narrowly targeted attention to something that's already known to be of value when it goes and gets it.
Now that is essentially how we look at what do we need, what would we like, what would make us more powerful, let's go for it and get it.
But the right hemisphere is seeing the whole picture, it has a sort of sustained, not a sort of sustained, it has sustained broad, vigilant attention to the whole.
And it therefore sustains our sense of a whole to which we belong and where our position has meaning.
But we've decontextualized everything.
We now don't understand that a thing is not just a thing, it changes its nature depending on the context that it's in.
When we take it out of the context in which it belongs and from which it derives its meaning, it no longer seems to have any meaning.
So the trouble with this world picture is it sees meaningless items whose only possible value can come from ways in which we can use them.
And this has largely dominated, certainly in certain sectors, the way in which people now think of the natural world as a heap of resource which we can mine and use and exploit for effectively utilitarian purposes.
But the kind of attention that the right hemisphere is able to give sees a living web of interrelationships.
So it sees that nothing is just what it is outside of the context, but always is what it is because of the relations in which it stands for everything else.
And indeed, in the matter of things, I argue that relations are primary, they come before the relator, the things that are said to be related.
So they actually emerge out of a web of meaning, and that meaning is often implicit, whereas the left hemisphere doesn't understand what's not made explicit.
This is also a facet of our culture, that things have to be spelled out in language that, as it were, a machine could understand.
But in fact, almost everything that matters to us can't be subjected in this way to a translation or a degradation into everyday language.
And so if you ask me for examples, obviously poetry, when you explain a poem, you've somehow destroyed it.
Although it's perfectly legitimate to pay that kind of attention to it for a while, but unless you re-embrace the whole with the new information, then you've lost something important.
But not just poetry, but obviously all the arts and music and painting and architecture, but also ritual, myth, narrative.
The ways in which we come to understand our place in the cosmos, which have always been very important, usually also involved with a story of the cosmos, a story about the superhuman, in other words, again, this sacred realm.
And I think all of this we lack to a large extent now. People are hungry for it, and when I speak to them about what has happened and show them, they immediately understand what's missing.
But they often say things like, until I read you or until I heard you, I wasn't really aware of how much was missing from my world.
So I wonder if we could begin by talking about what we, well, maybe what you mean by seeing.
Attention as a moral actor is kind of a short hand for much of your work. When you talk about what we're seeing, are you talking about what we're paying attention to?
I am. I'm not talking about visual sight. I'm talking about the things that we recognise and understand. And though sight is a very important and powerful sense with which we get to know things in the world, it's not really what I'm talking about.
So what is it, I suppose, what is it that you think we are seeing and not seeing? What are we paying attention to, to the exclusion of other things? What would be examples of that?
Well, I think we've been led to adopt and become enslaved by a certain way of looking at the world, which is mechanistic and reductionist.
And with that, a sense of values, a sense of purpose, a sense of there being something wonderful or inspiring and perhaps sacred in the world has gone missing.
And it's very sad that, it's not just my impression, but the research shows that a very large majority of young people over 80% think that their life is meaningless.
And it may be that we've developed all kinds of gadgetry and technology, but nothing can really replace the sense of meaning by sheer material wherewithal.
So we value, or we seem to be valuing, what the left hemisphere values. The left hemisphere is essentially in the service of utility.
The reason we have two hemispheres, and it's not just us, but all the creatures that we know have brains have two hemispheres, and the difference is that they pay attention to the world in different ways.
And the left hemisphere's attention is in the service of utility. It's a very narrowly targeted attention to something that's already known to be a value and it goes and gets it.
Now that is essentially how we, what do we need, what would we like, what would make us more powerful, let's go for it and get it.
But the right hemisphere is seeing the whole picture. It has a sort of sustained, not a sort of sustained, has sustained broad, vigilant attention to the whole.
And it therefore sustains our sense of a whole to which we belong and where our position has meaning. But we've decontextualised everything.
We now don't understand that a thing is not just a thing, it changes its nature depending on the context that it's in.
When we take it out of the context in which it belongs and from which it derives its meaning, it no longer seems to have any meaning.
So the trouble with this world picture is it sees meaningless items whose only possible value can come from ways in which we can use them.
And this has largely dominated, certainly in certain sectors, the way in which people now think of the natural world as a heap of resource which we can mine and use and exploit for effectively utilitarian purposes.
But the kind of attention that the right hemisphere is able to give sees a living web of interrelationships.
So it sees that nothing is just what it is outside of a context, but always is what it is because of the relations in which it stands for everything else.
And indeed, in the matter of things, I argue that relations are primarily they come before the relator, the things that are said to be related.
So they actually emerge out of a web of meaning and that meaning is often implicit.
Whereas the left-hand is it doesn't understand what's not made explicit.
This is also a facet of our culture that things have to be spelled out in language that has it where a machine could understand.
But in fact, almost everything that matters to us can't be subjected in this way to a translation or a degradation into everyday language.
And so if you ask me for examples, obviously poetry, when you explain the poem, you've somehow destroyed it.
Although it's perfectly legitimate to pay that kind of attention to it for a while.
But unless you re-embrace the whole with the new information, then you've lost something important.
But not just poetry, but obviously all the arts, music and painting and architecture, but also ritual myth, narrative.
The ways in which we come to understand our place in the cosmos, which have always been very important, usually also involved with the story of the cosmos,
the story about the superhuman, in other words, again, this sacred realm.
And I think all of this we lack to a large extent now.
People are hungry for it, and when I speak to them about what has happened and show them, they immediately understand what's missing.
But they often say things like, until I read you or until I heard you, I wasn't really aware of how much was missing from my world.
You say that never has humanity known so much, but understood so little in your book.
I feel like it's due to the very helpful sentence. Could you unpack what you mean then by understanding?
Yes, absolutely. I think I would make a distinction between information and knowledge, which has different kinds.
And understanding at a bubble wisdom.
So if we start with information, information is the collection of points of data, directly.
And obviously on that on its own, until somebody makes sense of it, it's not telling us anything.
That's where the idea that we're beginning to know something comes in.
And knowing can have two importantly different meanings, which carry with them different verbs in Latin, Greek and German, for example.
But in English we're saddled with the word know.
And I say I know that Paris is the capital of France.
That is the kind of model that the Germans call this.
And it's French, you know the facts.
But I can say I know Paris because I spent two years living there and I'm familiar with it.
And that is a different kind of knowing.
Now, in the sense of understanding, it's that second sense of kong-pong-do-kenen in German that they're knowing by acquaintance.
An experiential connection immersed in it in all its complexity that gives us knowledge.
Now understanding is taking it a further step.
And understanding is the equivalent of intelligence.
And one of my worries is that in calling whatever artificial mechanisms we create intelligent, we are denying something very important about the human and indeed animal mind.
Which is that it creates holes which are built up from experience of something that has flesh and blood, that has emotions, that has an innate moral sense.
Not something that's been fed into it by a clever chap in California and to make creative simulacrum, but actually intelligence.
And intelligence, again there are different words in the different languages.
But our word intelligence comes from Latin roots, inter-ledgeric, to read between.
And that brings on straight to my idea that in fact what we are looking at always is relations.
It is not the things that create the world, but the relations between them out of which they come into being that is important.
Everything is relational primary. And it's only secondary becomes non-relational when whatever it is we focus on has been abstracted from its context.
So being able to see the betweens of everything is really special and important.
And also what I like is inter-ledgeric, also means sort of reading between the lines if you like.
So in poetry I usually take an example of Hardy's astonishing body of poetry that he wrote in 1912 to 13 after his wife's death.
And the poems are unique and powerful, but if you ask me what are they about?
I say well they're about how painful it is when somebody you love knows.
Sort of collapsed, completely collapsed the meaning, the depth of meaning.
And that's another thing that matters is that if like information is two dimensional, if that, probably only one dimensional.
Knowledge begins to get, especially with the experiential kind of knowledge, to have depth.
And intelligence is when we can see into the depths of a larger picture and put it together in a way that means something.
But surprisingly this is very like the way in which the hemispheres do in fact relate to one another and should do correctly.
So the right hemisphere we know takes the first take on a new experience.
So this has been laid out by various neurosciences, particularly Elton on Gilbert,
that when we have a new experience in whatever modality the right hemisphere is alert to it.
And then almost instantly it's taken up by the right hemisphere and categorized.
And so it no longer becomes that particular experience in all its specialness and richness, but an exemplar of something.
A map, not the territory.
So effectively it's building a map. It's building a schema, a diagram.
And that's fine, but that information, there's nothing wrong with a map, but it needs to be applied to a real world, not mistaken for the real world.
And the difficulty at the moment is that we're beginning to mistake the map for the experiential world.
So we live in this very thin theoretical version of life in which everything has been decontextualized, rendered neutered by being made explicit.
It's lost its life.
And literally another interesting difference between the hemispheres is the capacity to see things as animate in the right hemisphere and the tendency to see them as inanimate in the left hemisphere.
You're right at the end of Matter of Things in your epilogue about the meaning crisis which you mentioned and the lack of belonging we have because we are disconnected from nature,
disconnected from one another, and disconnected from the divine which now seems like superstition and nature, a bank of resources we can read.
How can you connect the dots there between this kind of flattened, revitalized view of the world and the fact that we've become sort of disconnected from it?
Absolutely. You say the word belong there, and of course that suggests a sense of familiar, be it a family, be it nature or be it the divine cosmos, in which we play a part.
Out of which we came, so we derive from it, we're not external to it, which is why I reject the word environment, suggesting something different around us, is in us and we are in it.
And so in each of these cases we are what we are because of the set of relationships we would ideally have with a society of people that we can trust who share our values and with whom we can eat, pray, lead our lives.
And in the case of nature the very strong bond at one field which in me is a sort of instinctual longing to be in the presence of the wildness and of the natural theme.
I think we all have that feeling in us, for most of us, and until a couple of hundred years ago almost everybody in the world would have been living anyway in a natural setting whereas now perhaps only half do.
And the third is this is a belonging, in the sense of knowing that there's something beyond us, that is greater than us.
And if you want you can stop there and just say there is something higher than us, it would be irrational actually to suppose that there wasn't.
And that comes from being locked into the left hemisphere, the view of things, it only knows what it is it knows, it doesn't know what it doesn't know.
So obviously it thinks it knows everything because that follows. So it's bound to be missing anything else than what it can rationalise.
And the difficulty there is that we are evolving beings. What makes us think that at this point in evolution we finally can understand everything.
I sometimes say a mouse might think that, but we know more than the mouse, maybe the mouse probably knows more than we do in some areas.
We are missing something important. And I just want to say that in talking about those I mentioned that there's a sort of deep yearning for.
And I want to mention that belonging comes from an Anglo-Saxon root, Langian, to stretch.
And I talk about this more in the master and his microscope, but the idea is that there is a connection between things that can be stretched apart up to a point.
But they feel the need of the tension in that relationship and so they long across the length of the connection for one another.
So belonging is a very, very important point.
And this presumably is some measure of explanation for the epidemic of luminous, of mental health crisis.
This is the fruits of a left hemisphere view of the world.
Absolutely, yes. Because the left hemisphere does isolate things and sees them only in abstract and is frankly not emotionally very intelligent.
It's actually not cognitively that intelligent either.
I was surprised when researching the matter of things to discover that the right hemisphere is not only very obviously much more emotionally and socially intelligent,
but actually more important for cognitive intelligence than for IQ.
So the left hemisphere has done a good job on projecting itself as the one that knows and the one that understands.
But it's relatively stupid.
And in psychology there's something called the done in Kruger effect, which means that the less you know the more you think you know it all.
Yeah, absolutely.
You mentioned earlier values and purpose, which you've got chapters on, really small books on in the matter of things.
The way we pay attention is predicated to a shape to some degree by what we value.
And the values of the left are different from the values of the right.
You speak about Mach-Eller and his hierarchy of values with the holy and the good, the true and beautiful at the top and then the bottom, the instrumental and the pleasurable.
I guess if we're valuing things wrongly and therefore attending to things wrongly, what are the mechanisms by which that can be corrected?
We were speaking earlier in this podcast season to Dr. Keltner, who studies all and he says experiencing all seems to realign your values.
It often makes you go much more connected to one another, to nature, to the divine.
Did you say a little bit about when people have their values realigned in a way that reflects the right hemisphere more?
What are those experiences that lead to that?
That makes sense as a question.
Well, I think again, beginning from the sense that we don't know it all is a very good place to start.
I think the key feature of the way we think now is that it is hubristic.
In other words, it exemplifies an arrogant, overbearing sense that we know far more than we do.
And it not only is that disruptive of value and meaning, but it's also really not very intelligent.
So if one can rekindle the sense of awe before things that are beautiful, before things in people that are genuinely good,
and things that speak to us and therefore have a kind of truthfulness in the connection with us,
then we can begin to see a world that has much more meaning in it.
But currently, beauty is curiously being neglected by almost everything, including art.
A lot of modern art, the creator does not wish to be told that it's beautiful.
They wish to be told that it's powerful.
And power, of course, is the only value recognised by the left hemisphere.
But as Dostoevsky said, it's beauty that will save the world.
I puzzled over that for a long time because, of course, a sense of aesthetic value can lead one to be deceived.
But then making wrong judgments about what's good and true can also lead you to deceive.
But I think what he was getting at is that when we have really lost our bearings on truth and what is meant by goodness,
so that now truth is whatever my truth is, we make it happen, there's no sense of it being,
despite the fact that we, of course, I acknowledge and talk about this a lot, that we go to make parts of everything we experience.
That doesn't mean that we just make it up, and it doesn't mean that some things are not sure of another,
even though they may not be one single absolute truth.
Goodness has been reduced to the following over a lot of rather mindless rules and ticking boxes for having expressed certain values or positions.
And that, of course, has nothing really to do with goodness.
But the one thing that can speak to us directly is beauty.
And so in that state where we've been abandoned and felt lost by no particular bearings or goodness and truth, beauty can still call to us.
And I think that's a good and important point.
So I think all those three values, and they are, in my view, contributors to the sense of the sacred, their facets of the sacred,
regaining that in our world I think is important.
I'm not saying that everybody must suddenly start going to church or whatever.
That's not my point.
And I'd rather oppose to people who think that it's all in a book, whether that be a Christian book or a Muslim book or whatever.
It's about a disposition of one's spirit, one's soul, towards the world.
And what kind of a disposition is that?
It's one in which there is room for awe and wonder, which helps us to see not that we're useless or meaningless but curiously that we have meaning and value.
Because we're connected to something that is all inspiring that we know is bigger than us.
But nonetheless, we're not humbled in the negative sense that we're made to feel small, although that might happen.
We derive richness from that relationship.
I think that's one thing, and I know we're to be the sense of compassion for things.
And I think that's an important thing that's gone missing in our culture of anger, narcissistic rage, the heuristic belief that we are right and you must be wrong and so on.
And a degree of modesty, basically.
So I think those features, if we started adopting a more wondered, more modest and more compassionate view towards others, towards the world,
I think a lot of our problems will begin to heal themselves.
But as you know, in this world where people no longer feel there is any need or connection, mental illness is a colossal height.
Most people think of themselves as basically lonely.
And why? Because we have destroyed all the context in which people used to find their being and belonging.
This idea that we're prevented from seeing these things, which has come through, to some extent, technology, technology is our ability to manipulate the world.
It has removed us from it.
And you might also say that we are kind of educated into it. We're given a value system.
So as someone who's personally invested in the interest of education, I wonder what the principles might be of an education, if education is the way we create our own future,
like on what kind of priorities and principles should it try and move forward?
Well, it's only difficult to recapture things only in an educational system.
Although an educational system can be very valuable and important, obviously, and I believe my own education was profoundly important in shaping me.
But I think things have to revalidate the importance of the family, that the way in which you think about the world, the things that you hope to be good and right,
are part of what your family inculcates in you, by example, and sometimes by precept.
As to schools, I think the first thing I'd say, because a lot of people imagine that the right hemisphere is a bit sort of let it all hang out, you know, this is sort of a hippie hemisphere.
And that's how it was projected in the bad old days, when we used to say things like the left hemisphere is rational and verbal and the right hemisphere does pictures and gets emotional.
The important point for here is that the right hemisphere is not only much better at feeling really the deep emotions rather than superficial social emotions.
The ones preferred by the left hemisphere, anger, scorn, derision, a sense of self-pride, these are different from the deep emotions of togetherness, of sympathy, empathy.
And so forth. But the right hemisphere is also the hemisphere of control of inappropriate or excessive emotion, which people perhaps didn't expect.
And what I'm leaning to here is that I don't think that education should just be a matter of do your own thing and let it all hang out.
I think it's very important that there should be discipline. And discipline is now a sort of dirty word.
But actually, the loss of self-discipline in our world, which has been eroded very badly in the last 50 years, with trades of self-indulgence, self-promotion, and so forth, over self-discipline.
This will lead to tyranny, because if we don't discipline ourselves, then there's a need for external constraints on everything.
And so you see an explosion of rules and algorithms and principles and handbooks and so on, which none of it should be necessary if people have any sensitivity to what is required of them through a morally cohesive society.
So I think the sense that it's not all about us, it is about a society that we build to be proud of a society and its values, and as much as one recognizes what they are and agrees with them.
But above all, to know more about humanities. I mean, the key is in the word. Without humanities, we don't really understand human beings.
So it's very well to promote STEM subjects, which are the technical subjects, and I'm not saying they're not important at all.
But like the left hemisphere not being unimportant, it is very important, it nonetheless needs to be set within a context of what the right hemisphere knows.
And so all that technical information is only good if it's set in the context of a broader understanding of what human beings are and where we're going with our lives and with our society.
And that will come from studying literature, history, music, drama. These things are not just add-ons, you know.
These are the core in my view. And in the universities to begin with a thorough knowledge of Western civilization, beginning with the Greeks and the Romans and working forward.
I expect nowadays somebody will say that it's exclusive or something, but I think it's extremely important.
If you want to completely demoralize the people, tyrants have named this, destroy their history, cut them off from their history, and they will lose any will to defend themselves or anything else because they can't see any point anymore.
So we really do need to stop being silly about this and accept that we are depriving young people of something very, very important unless we give them a proper grounding in their own culture.
And that's not to say that it shouldn't include admiration for things that come from other cultures. I spent a lot of my life trying to emphasize the importance of Eastern values against those of the West.
And it's only more recently that I realized that it's really important now with people taking, you know, Sledgehammers and pneumatic drills through Western culture to say, hang on, this is something completely amazing that we created.
And you're using the freedom that it created, almost uniquely in the history of mankind, to destroy it. You have that liberty because of the very culture that you're against.
So something absurd is happening in education now, and it involves reintroducing what is required. It's not that everybody must go on being educated, quote educated, up to university level.
Some people will benefit from university and I'm sorry, some people won't. And when everybody has to go to university, then the universities themselves become less good places to learn.
And I know this is all very unpopular, but it seems to me common sense actually. And there's a lot of people that don't want to be in school after a certain age.
They become disruptive, pretty boys, and maybe the thing is to allow them to leave. And if they want to later, I think that universities should be a choice we make later when we've had a little bit of experience of life.
And then if you really want to go to university, you've got a burning desire to know more about whatever, good, go for it.
And better support such people in doing what they want to do, and that will make a better society and better universities to produce people that will make a better society.
It sounds wise, I resonate with that. Something you kind of alluded to and have written at length about is purpose and a sense that we maybe have produced purpose to something extrinsic.
It's instrumental. And lots of the most valuable stuff in life is intrinsically purposeful. And if we aim at, so I think you observed that we aim at happiness, and I would never call it measurably less happy, we aim at freedom and autonomy, but we're bound by restrictions and so on.
So I guess those are kind of extrinsic purposes, arguably. How do we know what to aim at? Do you think that's right? How do we know what to aim at?
Obviously in some ways this brings us to values again.
Yes, yes.
Because I see values as things that call to us from ahead. They may not be entirely resolved in the sense of brought into sharp focus for us, but they are entities that speak to us, that call to us. That is how I have experienced them.
One is drawn forwards towards the good, the beautiful, the true.
Now most of our images come from machines, and there's nothing more harmful than one can do. One can do it, then to try and approximate a human life to that of a machine, the functioning of a machine.
So they are things that guide where we want to go from and front, whereas a machine is pushed from behind. A machine has no sense of direction. It's made to go in certain ways.
When we come to talk about purpose, it's terribly important to distinguish between two kinds of purposes, and you did really allude to that when you said intrinsic, because machines have extrinsic purpose.
In other words, the machine itself is not aware of a purpose. The machine is simply carrying out a purpose of the human being that made it.
However, not everything has this utilitarian nature that is valued for it, and obviously examples are music and dance. These things are not valuable because they lead to us doing certain things.
They are valuable because they have intrinsic meaning and value that speaks to us. They acquaint us with something that is beautiful and speaks to us.
And that's what I mean by an intrinsic purpose. James Carrs, a philosopher, made a distinction between games that are infinite and games that are finite.
So an example of an infinite game would be something like music, which doesn't reach a goal and then stop, but can be carried on for as long as people want to do it because its purpose is in itself.
Finite games are done as a football game, so that we want an outcome out of a certain 90 minutes we have it and one team with one or the other.
So that is a kind of distinction. And I suppose that what I'm very keen not to suggest is that if I say that I believe there is purpose in the cosmos and I think it's there,
that I'm meaning it's put there by an engineering guard.
So when you look at the cosmos, even the inanimate cosmos at large, or what we think is inanimate anyway, we see something that is constantly evolving, changing towards complexity and a kind of beauty.
And there are drives, even in the inanimate world, inanimate structures have tendencies to go in certain directions.
When it comes to life, much more so. So that's an important thing to realise, that there is a kind of direction.
But it's not something that has been written in advance by the cosmos or by the ground of being or by God, whatever you want to call it.
That doesn't mean to say it has no purpose, it has a direction towards certain values and the details as it were are absolutely open.
So we're not, I believe, programmed to do every single thing we do.
And I just don't believe and I can't believe that anyone now could possibly defend Laplace's 18th century vision that if you knew the position of momentum of every particle in the universe at a certain point,
you wouldn't be able to unpack the whole of the rest of history.
Surely modern physics already tells us that such certainty is not available.
Now that doesn't mean to say that the only alternative is pure chaos.
There is something very important in the dipole of order and disorder and that the important thing is that there should be both present.
Without a bit of disorder the thing is dead and will sclerose and fossilise.
It's that element of potential for change that is so important in everything, not just in the living world, but perhaps particularly obviously in the living world.
And equally, of course, if there was only disorder and randomness, nothing would have any directional meaning.
So I believe that we are and exemplify something that is purposeful but does not mean that I have no choice.
I play it part and maybe I could expand on this a little.
Because the really fascinating thing is why should there be life at all?
It's a very expensive business life.
It uses a great deal of energy, causes a lot of suffering,
and it has to kick against the second law of thermodynamics,
against the increase in entropy that suggests, because we are all the time moving against that trend.
How could this have come about?
I think the first thing to say about it is that to get over a phase in a process that would always stop any further progress because it was in itself disadvantageous,
there has to be an ability for whatever it is to have a sense of something beyond.
A very good point made by Bruce Charlton is that a simple one really but an important one.
Why did sexual reproduction take hold?
Originally organisms existed by parthenogenesis, in other words they divided, and that was it.
The idea of having to find a suitable mate and only producing when you reproduce smaller numbers than you would get from being able to divide yourself
means that you're perpetually in that early phase at a disadvantage in terms of competition.
You're trying to do something that is uphill, and yet nonetheless somehow this has been brought into play and we carry on with that system.
Another important point is that life gives us the capacity to respond to something beyond.
Now that sounds a bit grand and vague but let me unpack it a bit.
So inanimate things do respond to another inanimate thing.
So we have periods of millions of years, rocks and dung get formed and move and change and so on.
But their ability to respond to things is very limited for them to have in them, I suggest, consciousness.
Though they exist in consciousness which is another matter.
So what is it special about life that makes it worthwhile?
I think it is actually the ability to respond to the values that are in the nature of the ground of being which are goodness, beauty and truth primarily.
But those are the key elements and I think that it's the bringing about it of beings that can respond to them and therefore resonate with them and help them fulfil themselves and help further them.
Or alternatively choose to ignore them and that's from right to do so, we have free agents.
But I think that is why there is life, otherwise it's a great puzzle.
As Ellen Whitehead said, there is very little survival in being alive, you last for a few years.
But if you are inanimate you can persist for a very long time.
So it can't be to do with creating creatures as a better and better at surviving.
Because life itself is not a very good system for surviving.
For the most ancient creatures, some examples of certain actinobacteria in the depths of the ocean, individual examples of them are a million years old.
So everything that's happened since the evolution has been generally towards things becoming shorter lived.
So how does one defend the difficulty of creating life, the problem with getting over the hump of entropy and the purpose of life?
And I think that purpose is to be in the dynamic partnership of cosmos and creation.
And Whitehead himself thought this, that the ground of being was ever more coming into being through, as it were, the dance of evolution with what it was bringing into being.
So is that baked into evolution? Evolution is the algorithm that kind of explains developing towards complexity and life.
But do you think baked into that is this ability to discern the given beautiful truth?
Yes I do think so, that's right.
I think another point that's relevant here is that until very recently we believe that evolution could only work by making billions and billions of false attempts until one happened by chance turned out to be helpful.
A single cell can be faced with an assault for which it is not programmed by evolution, nor has experience in its own lifetime if you'd like to put it that way.
It can make a change within a period of only a few days that if it had to happen by trial and error would take perhaps literally billions of years.
So there is built into these adaptive changes is something that allows us to make changes much faster than a kind of blind, furrowing of the cars up in the air and hoping that the one that you want will land in your hand.
That seems to be no longer a defensible position. I don't know why this is but it is the case anyway.
One has to take that into account. So interesting how does that happen? I don't know.
I think there are shapes, patterns if you like, that draw things towards themselves.
And in fact, since we accomplished that wonderful feat of decoding the human genome, we've been made to realise how little information there is in the human genome, never near enough to deal with what a growing organism is faced with.
And so there must be something else that allows forms and three dimensional shapes to be expressed that can't be expressed in the only 2% of DNA that actually gives information, instructional information.
So where is that? And I think that people are beginning to see that there must be electromagnetic fields or fields of some kind that physics could recognise that contains information
of a fish out of a form that something is moving towards. We see this in the evolution of creatures. If we interfere with their development, they will try to steer back to something.
If you chop off the head of an hematode worm, it will end to regrow its head. And it will also, the new head will have the knowledge that the old head had, that that head has been incinerated.
So where does it come from? When you cut off the antlers of a deer, every deer's antlers has a particular pattern, and it will produce the same pattern exactly that it has before, not the surrounding pattern.
But where is that three dimensional pattern stored? I don't have the answer to that.
I mean, what fascinating examples. You maybe think of, I think it's Simon Conway Morris, the paleozojous, who says that he points out that your evolution as an algorithm is very effective at describing these, but it doesn't describe something like music,
you know, where whales and song cultures, birds of counterpoint and melody and harmony and so on. So it's more like mathematics, something you discover that is beautiful.
And it brings to mind this idea that we are growing towards the beauty of the beautiful and the true that is part of the fabric of the universe.
Yes, yes. I mean, quite how it works is it's not something I claim to understand. But I don't think that that's a reason for trying to conceal or deny things that are matters of observation.
So there's something there that is shaping the course, the form, the nature of whatever it is that is coming into being.
May I ask you about those people who probably sound somewhere significantly different to you, who think the world is making good progress.
The late Hans Rosling or Stephen Pinker, who would say that. Actually, here's our hard data on longevity or literacy or healthcare.
What we're doing is clearly moving in the right direction. It seems like you would like to say, we're actually not moving in the right direction.
We need to back up and figure out where we've lost our way.
I know you've actually corresponded a bit with Stephen Pinker. What's your response to the people who say we're making good progress and this is the right direction?
Well, I think probably once again, it's a difference between the two illustrated by the difference between the hemispheres.
So the left hemisphere would want to say that something was good by ticking certain boxes that it's beforehand decided are going to be important.
So it finds, for example, that more people now earn a wage than in the past have did. So it says we're making progress.
And one of the things I'd like to say about that is that the reason that there are more people who earn wages is that there has been massive erosion and destruction of the environment and ways of life of indigenous people
who would be more or less forced to go to cities to try and get jobs, where of course they do get a pittance, but they are for the first time truly poor.
We know that levels of human flourishing, in other words, a sense of wellbeing, a sense of belonging, a sense of happiness, a sense of fulfillment,
these things are much higher in pre-modern Western societies than they are in such societies.
And that as people move into such societies, as unfortunately they do all the time, they become progressively more unhappy.
And one of the fascinating findings is that poor Mexicans who move to America, in the first generation of those who go there, their rates of mental illness are relatively low compared with the Native American population.
But in the next generation they become considerably higher, and in the generation after that they approximate to the levels of misery that are typical of the US population.
Now it seems to me that you can only argue that this is a better society by chance.
One of the things that strikes me about your work in is that you are taken in by people who have pretty different worlds.
They might be fairly Eastern, very Christian, or not religious at all, and to some extent they put a flag in your technique,
and he's like, what are you saying is something we resonate with?
So if you have a Venn diagram of these different perspectives with you in the middle, what is it that you think you're putting your finger on that they all resonate with?
I think that what a lot of people say when they write to me, and God bless them, a lot of do saying that my writing has changed their lives, or even saved their lives and so on, which is a remarkable and wonderful thing.
The common thing they say is, there was a lot of this that I knew at some level, and I understood at some level, but had no words to express, and what you've done is to enable me to see why believing those things and knowing those things is important.
And so I think what I've done is to bring things that are very hard to express, and are pitfalls and traps everywhere, in trying to express them to a point where people can read them and get them, even if they don't begin from that standpoint of understanding what it is I'm trying to unfold.
So I see my work as taking people on a journey to say, look at this, and let's have a look at this, and there's a good bit coming in an hour or two when we see a beautiful view, and then leading them to a position where their view of the world is quite different than the one they started off with.
And they're not forced to accept it, of course, I'm sure some people don't, but pleasingly a lot of people do, and so I think that is opening people's eyes to the value of imagination and of intuition, as well as science and reason, which I find myself championing a lot these days, because they're also under attack from people who don't like science and reason,
because they might show the things that they believe to be, you know, poorly evidenced. So I think it's that, and I think I hope, giving people hope, and giving them some sense that there is meaning and beauty and purpose there to discover.
But, you know, you have to have skin in the game, as it were, you can't sort of sit there and expect it to go plump into your lap, you have to make choices and you have to strive a little for those things.
I don't mean that sort of compete, but you need to sort of have a degree of conviction and determination to follow a path. And, you know, following through on something is quite important.
One thing that I come to realise rather late in life, that actually following through something, even though it may take you through a viewpoint where you have to change, and it should take you through a viewpoint where you have to change, is rather important.
If you're not sure when you don't like what's coming next.
Like you say, creativity requires resistance.
It requires resistance.
And growth, I think it was, I heard you point out in previous talk about that fascinating fact that trees, the grow into like a bio-do, never develop the internal strength because the resistance of wind isn't there.
That's right.
And I love that as a metaphor.
The biologists couldn't understand why are all these mature trees protected from every kind of heart? Why are they all falling over before they reach full maturity?
And the answer is they had nothing to resist and trees actually thrive on wind.
It's nice testing the wood and building the wood.
It's a beautiful metaphor for why life is not supposed to be a walk in the park.
It's not supposed to be just a matter of enjoyment.
In fact, that would be extremely disappointing.
I don't want to do a spoiler for people who haven't read the history of the world in ten and a half chapters, but maybe I will anyway.
It's a wonderful clever book and at the end of it, there was a story about somebody waking up in a hospital and a very beautiful nurse is bringing lots of things to eat.
And the person said, where am I?
And in the insuring conversation, it turns out that he's tied and he is in fact in heaven.
And he said, what am I supposed to do? You can do anything you like.
If you're a keen golfer, you can have a round of golf with kept nipples.
Whatever it is that you want to do, you can do it.
And he sort of thinks about this as a long conversation and he says, do people tend to stay up here?
And he says, no, usually after about 300 years they're asked to go back.
I just thought that was such a brilliant insight that actually we're not happiest when just everything is given to us.
There's something to be said for having to put oneself out to encounter resistance or overcome resistance and it helps one grow.
You're thinking of a very person in problem because technology has made life far too convenient.
There's not enough resistance and the texture of life feels different if you can breeze through it.
Yes, apparently architects have been asked to design shocking sensors with steps and things so that people actually do have to exert themselves.
And it's healthier than being whisked everywhere in lifts and on moving.
Yeah, of course the consequences in your body are not insignificant to climb stairs.
Where do you find hope in the best case scenario?
When you look at the world and you see things are not going too well,
things are not being made in the interests of the planet or the people in it.
But at the same time you get letters, you give talks, you inspire people to think differently.
Where do you find, I suppose, hope and what are going to be the engines of change?
Well, I think the answer to those two questions come together.
First of all, although things don't look as though they're getting better, it's a fool who predicts the future.
I don't know what's in store and therefore there is always room for hope and I think one has a duty in a way to hope
because otherwise we'd all just give up and then certainly everything would collapse.
But there is really grounds for hope in the very people who are going to have to be the agents of change,
namely young people.
And in just the last couple of months I gave lectures, public lectures in Oxford and Cambridge
and then in America in three or four different places.
And once I came away with was an overwhelming sense of how good and decent a lot of young people are
and they can be caricatured, the worst of them can be caricatured as having sort of righteous slogans about what must happen.
But the people I met were appropriately less arrogant, less know-it-all, delightful, responsive, creative, imaginative
and committed to trying to understand things and make them better and not just follow whatever rules were being laid down for them by the current media kind of pundits.
So I thought there is a great deal of hope here and it really was lovely for me and for them to say that they really resonated with what I was saying.
And so that was very strong.
There is a piece of experience, right, which is the right hemisphere.
Yes, absolutely.
So there we are.
So if I pull the threads together, I've asked you, well, we've got to know all over the place because there's so much in your thinking that it seems to connect to this question of what are cultures preventing us from seeing.
And it seems like if you take that characterisation of the left hemisphere as utilitarian, understanding values of your utility of pleasure but little else, and that's shaped the way we're attending and the purposes we're finding to great injury to the way that we're living and to the planet we're living in and so on.
And so to discover the answer to what are like cultures preventing us from seeing means listening more keenly to discern what is good and true and beautiful.
Would that be one kind of summary of how we attend better to what it is we're not seeing?
Yes, I think the first thing is being aware of what it is one isn't seeing.
Because unless you have that knowledge, you won't make the effort, of course.
So the first thing is to get people to a place where they experience some of the things that would give them a sense of something beyond what it is they so cleverly already know.
The business of education is not about confirming the prejudice that you come into education with about shaking your prejudices and by enabling you to see another point of view.
And so I always say that in education, it should be part of the business to teach people to argue for different points of view.
And so I could make an argument against myself before positions I may have stated in this interview.
But I think it's important to be able to do that and not to think that everybody who thinks differently for you must be criminal or stupid.
But they may have something there that is worth hearing and that there may be things that it's worth trying to experience.
I think reconnecting spending more time in nature and trying to bring yourself to be part of a group of people whose values you respect and spending some time with them.
And if possible spending time in spiritual practices, which may be conventional or unconventional, but they're better than none.
These things are at least orientating us to the idea that what we know is not at all. It's not the whole story.
And whatever that whole story is, we will never know it in full.
But it is part of the business of life to try and take ourselves on that journey towards a fuller understanding of who we are.
That was a wonderful lift.
Ian, thank you so much for your time.
Thanks for being so generous with your thoughts.
Thank you very much indeed.
