Lecture 3, Vesalius and the Renaissance of Medicine
Every so often a book appears in the history of medicine that becomes an extraordinary
milestone, no more than a milestone, a turning point in the entire process.
And after the publication of such a book, nothing is ever the same. Sometimes it's
only theory that changes and sometimes it's practice. And this current lecture
is about such a book. In fact, it is as much about a book as it is about a man.
The man is Andreas Vesalius of Brussels, and the book is the Humani Corporis Fabrica on the
structure of the human body. But that word fabric has been interpreted to mean not just
structure, but workings, as in the French Fabric, a factory, how something works,
because what Vesalius was interested in was just as much the physiology, the function of the
various parts of the body as he was in the anatomy itself. This book, when it was published in that
amazing year of 1543, when incidentally Copernicus put out the Orbium Celestium as well, gave the
world its first accurate, truly accurate knowledge of anatomy and a method by which it could be
studied. Until that time, there had never been serious, careful, systematic dissections of the human
body. There had been one or two people who had done such dissections. One was Baron Gereo de
Carpia about a century earlier, but their works were not well enough done so that anybody could
really get a true idea of what the inside of the body was like. Now this book not only provided a good
and careful and accurate knowledge of anatomy in a way in which it would be studied, it provided
directions by which anybody who had the appropriate equipment and access to cadavers could do the same
thing, but perhaps its most important function in the long run was that it began the process, although
it took centuries for Galen to eventually finally be debunked. It's the Salius's text that made the
book great and that created this change, but it's the work of the artist, young Steven Van Calcar,
who is a protege of Titian, that has left to us this heritage that when you think of the Vesalius
book, the Humanity Corporate's Fabrica, you think of the plates, you think of the drawings, because
the drawings are what is most commented on today. The final product, this 1543 book, is the culmination
of the skill of the craftsmen who made those magnificent wood blocks, the new techniques of
typography, member Gutenberg had invented movable type only about a hundred years before, and the
great changes in the art, the graphic art of the Renaissance, in which such as Leonardo, Michelangelo,
Titian, and Raphael were intrigued not only by anatomy, not only by perspective, but were
intrigued by movement, by motion, how animals, how humans move from place to place, turn the heads,
use their arms, whatever it may be. Those artists were interested essentially in physiology, they were
interested in function, so it was natural that with that interest, they and the anatomists should
come and work together, and this is what happened between young Vesalius and young Steven Van Calcar.
But the story of this book, and the story of Vesalius himself, is also the story of a series of events
that are representative of the Renaissance itself. For example, what do we think about when we think
about the Renaissance? We think about a return of interest in the human body, interest in humanity,
but manifested as thinking about what the human body looks like, what it does, its beauties, its
abilities, and of course in the Renaissance, the return to Greek learning, because now access had
come to the ancient Greek writings that were brought from Constantinople in the original, and we
think also of the rise of the universities, which were such a centrum, such a focus of Renaissance
life and thought. There's argument about what the first university was, was it at Bologna or wherever,
but we do know that the very first university that focused on medical teaching was the School of
Salerno that was founded in the 9th century, primarily to study medicine. The School of Salerno
became a model for others of the Renaissance University because it was open to students from
everywhere. Of course, here we are in the 9th century, where most of the ancient Greek medical
knowledge is in the hands of Jewish and Arab physicians because they have learned the Galenic
material from those texts. So in Salerno, not only were the professors of medicine Catholic,
they were also Jewish, they were also Muslim, and there were students who were Protestant,
who were Jewish, who were Catholic, and I understand, although we're not sure about this,
that there were some Muslim students as well. Well, by the 11th and 12th century, as Arabic
manuscripts were increasingly being translated into Latin, primarily by a man named Constantine,
the Afrikan who worked in Italy and Monte Cassino Abbe, as a matter of fact. Scholars began to
congregate in various cities, first to study them, but then to study together, to study anything that
came up, and they became like communities of scholars. The professors, of course, were doing
the teaching, but remarkably, for that time or any time, the students had as much authority in the
universities as the professors did. In fact, in many ways, they had more authority. They chose
their teachers, they invited teachers from other universities to come, and largely they determined
what was in the curriculum. Now, the curriculum of these early universities were primarily law,
medicine, and theology. That's what you would go to study, although some students were busily
studying the Greek teachings of so many centuries ago. The universities, because they functioned in
this way, were often wide open to all sorts of scholars, and not just the Catholic ones, and they
were therefore, although dominated by the church, not quite as tightly dominated as one might
expect. As a matter of fact, in certain situations where they were particularly dominated by the
church, the university or thoughtaries got together and decided that the governance should be given
over to Counts Palatine or some members of the nobility to get out from under what they conceived
of as being stifling. So remarkably, in the 14th, 15th, 16th century, there are these great
centers of learning that are equalities of community of scholars, both the faculty and the
students. And the church, although influential, is not giving anybody a significantly hard time,
and among them was the University of Padua. Now, the University of Padua was even less restricted
than most, because Padua was a city within the Venetian Republic, and the Venetian Republic traded
with the East, traded all over Europe. So it needed freedom. It needed freedom to attract people
from elsewhere. It needed freedom so that when their traders went off to the East, they were
understood as coming from what today we might call a liberal society. And this was reflected in the
University of Padua, which became eventually one of the great centers, except for the University of
Paris, the greatest center for studying medicine of the 16th century, and had in it students from
every European country. And the way they organized the students was fascinating, although not unique,
it was done in other places in the same way. They were organized into what was nations.
So the English students were in the English nation, the German students were in the German
nation, and the Jewish students were in the Jewish nation. And this went on around to Russia,
and who knows where, and each one of these nations would elect one student who was a counselor to
be their president, to intervene with the ultimate authorities. So this is the general
background against which Vesalius found an atmosphere coming down from Brussels as part of the
Belgian or Dutch nation that he could work freely in. Now, adding to the freedom was the fact that
the Catholic Church had gradually recognized that it was in its interest to allow certain amounts
of dissection of the human body. High prelates would die of some unexpected situation. They would
allow, the popes would allow a dissection to be done to look for some cause of death when it wasn't
explained by humors or who knows what else. But there was more to it than just that. And one of
the more to it's occurred in the year 1482, when Pope Sixtus IV was petitioned by one of the
German schools, the University of Tübingen, when they came to him and they said, we need more cadavers
for dissection. It's really important to verify galanic anatomy, and the way we teach our students
is we open bodies in the wintertime, because we only have a couple of days to do it, and it's easier
in the winter because it's cold and they don't decay. We need more bodies, we're not getting them.
Can you give us permission to take corpses of criminals who are executed?
Sixtus had been a student at the University of Bologna. He'd been a student at the University
of Padua. He had absorbed this liberal thinking, and he said, sure, I'll issue a papal bow, and he
did. So in the year 1482, before long, before Vesalius was born, we find the Pope himself issuing
a bull saying that local bishops can determine whether executed criminals or others who die
without a will, for example, or are found on the highway, can be given to two classes of people to
dissect, to the universities for the doctors to dissect, and to the artists, because we're getting
into a period when the artists are interested in motion, and they need to dissect muscles,
and they need to know, for example, about the human face, what muscles in the human face
actuate a smile or a frown. Church is very sympathetic to this. They want the artist to
glorify the church, to paint pictures and make statues of the great people in the history
of the church, and perhaps even of themselves. So this is why we find in the early 16th, late 15th
century, Leonardo da Vinci, for example, doing dissections all by himself in a hospital, in
buildings that are part of a church, and of course his great rival, his great younger rival,
Michelangelo, and then Raphael and Titian are doing the same thing. They were interested in
verifying Gale, and they were just interested in finding out about the body, so that they could
show movement and motion. Leonardo in particular, this magnificent genius whose interest was in
movement and function, dissected so many bodies, wrote such amazing anatomical texts which were
lost because he never showed them to anybody. So Veselius, when he was ready to begin his
dissections, knew nothing about Leonardo, knew a little bit about the artists, knew of Titian's
work, had actually been introduced to Titian's young apprentice, Stephen von Kalkar, and he arrives
in Padua to begin dissections of the human body. But let's go backward a little bit. Let me just
tell you a little bit about his life, so you'll see where he sprang from and why it was he wanted
to do dissections in the first place. Andres Veselius, whose family seat was in Wessel in Belgium,
which is where Veselius comes from, was the fifth generation of a line of doctors. The family
actually at this time lived in Brussels, although their home was up there in Wessel. It was natural
that he would be a doctor as well, but it was aided and abetted by a little accident of geography.
They lived in this large house. It was really a mansion that was at the top of a hill,
and you'd go down the hill and further away there was another hill called Gallows Hill,
which had been a place where criminals were executed, and instead of burying those criminals,
it was customary to leave them there, to rot for the birds to get at them, the vultures, the animals.
So on Gallows Hill were bits of bone, sometimes dried flesh, and little Veselius as a child of
seven or eight or nine would go down there and look at these structures, actually take the bones
apart, dissect them, and it got him interested in living anatomy. So when he gets to be 10 or 11,
the stories about him are that he's grabbing field animals, he's grabbing field mice, whatever he
can get, rabbits, and he's dissecting rabbits. So he is focused not just on the structure of
these animals, but how the muscles work, and perhaps even how the digestion works,
because he's doing vivisection as well. So he gets to the age of 15, and he goes to the local
university, the closest university, which is Le Van in Belgium. It wasn't particularly good
medical school, so he spends about four years there, and in 1533 he goes to the great university of
Paris. The first year he studies, as everybody studied, Hippocrates, he studies the philosophical
writings and the theoretical writings of Galen, and he devotes his entire second year, which is
his last year, to Galenic anatomy, taught as Galenic anatomy was taught in those days.
The professor is sitting on a very high seat behind a very high desk. In front of him is a
Galenic text, which he is reading, droning on, without even looking up. Down beneath him is a
table on which is lying a cadaver, being dissected by a barber surgeon who knows nothing about anatomy,
but he is being told what to dissect by yet a third man who is the demonstrator. So as the
Galenic text is being intoned from above, the demonstrator is pointing places out that he
wants the surgeon to expose to students, and the students are looking at this. These classes,
as I said, were usually held in the winter. They were held for three or four days. Their purpose
was really not to teach anatomy. The purpose was that the students should recognize the
authority of Galen, and the idea was to demonstrate those pieces of Galenic anatomy, including the
so-called Reedy Mirabile, at the base of the brain in which the vital numers were thought to be
converted to psychic numers, and they would show these things to the students as though they were
accurate and they were real. So there he is. He has now left the University of Paris. He's gone
back to Louvain to get his bachelor's degree. Then he goes to Padua. He wants to get a doctoral
degree. He's got this bachelor's in medicine. He gets to Padua in the year 1537, and it only takes
less than a year for him to get his degree, because he's so well-versed in all of this
material. He has proven himself to be an excellent technical disector. People are talking about his
skill. Well, why shouldn't he be skilled? He's been dissecting since he was knee-high to a grasshopper,
so he's really good at this. And so how do they reward this student who had the degree from Louvain,
now gets the degree from Padua, the day after he graduates? They make him Professor of Anatomy
and Surgery. He's 23 years old, and he's the Professor of Anatomy and Surgery.
Well, he decides he didn't like the way he was taught anatomy. He didn't like hanging around
with a bunch of his fellows while the demonstrator was pointing to things that this ignorant surgeon
was dissecting, and he didn't like listening to the droning about Gillan's texts. So he says,
I'm going to do this differently. I'm the Professor now. I'm running things. What I'm going to do,
and I think the students will appreciate it, is I will just close the Galenic text. I won't even
look at it. I've essentially memorized it anyway, so I don't need it. What I'm going to do is do
the dissections myself. I will not only do the dissections, but I will hang a skeleton next to
the body I'm dissecting so I can use it as a reference, and I'll do something even better.
I'll get animals, dogs, cats, monkeys, and when I reach a point when I'm dissecting inside the body
and I want to demonstrate something in living anatomy, I will vivisect the animal. He had
associates, of course, who would take these animals, bind them down, and he would vivisect them.
So the scene was now completely different. There was nobody sitting up on a high seat. The students
were gathered around Vesalius. He was doing these dissections, demonstrating things for them,
and Jung von Kalkar, whom he had, of course, met by this time, is drawing everything that he is
discovering that seems to be new and unexplained in Galen. Well, he's finding out things he hadn't
expected, this 23, 24, 25-year-old professor. And he says to Van Kalkar, you know, this is
pretty surprising what we're finding. It doesn't look like these old texts that everybody has been
talking about and using for instruction. Some of them were hundreds of years old. The pictures
were 100 years or 200 years old. There was a very recent book about 1498 by a fellow Mondino,
which actually showed anatomy that had nothing to do with reality. Why don't we produce a book?
You and I? That will be accurate. That will indeed show it the way it is. So they do.
They produce a book in 1538, when Vesalius is 24, Van Kalkar is a couple of years younger,
actually, with six huge anatomical plates. These plates are 19 inches in height by 13 inches wide.
There are six of them, as I say, and they're very accurate demonstrations of the anatomy
he had seen and Vesalius's texts along the side. They call it tabuli anatomicae sex, anatomical
tables, six anatomical tables. In the long run, it turns out to be a bit of a transitional work,
but it gets the two of them knowing how they can work together for publication. It gets them so
that they know the people who can make the wooden blocks for the illustrations. They get to know
the printers very well. So here we are, he's 24 years old, the year is 1538, his famous spreading.
He's doing something no one has ever done before. And as I say, the students were powerful in these
places, and students from different universities are saying, hey, come on, come here, professor,
teach here for a while. Well, Bologna is close. Bologna is a famous place, so he accepts an
invitation from a group of students in January of 1540 to go to Bologna and spend a few weeks there
demonstrating what he has learned. And the idea is he is going to demonstrate, not by himself,
but along with a man whose name is Corti, C-O-R-T-I. Corti is also an expert on galenic anatomy,
and the idea is that Corti will talk about galenic anatomy, and Veselius will demonstrate it.
Well, Corti was fooled. Students seemed to have known what was going to happen, but Corti would
talk about galenic anatomy, and then Veselius would get up with his knife and his skill,
and he'd show that it was wrong. He kept finding things that Galen had said were one way,
and they turned out to be another way. And he thought to himself, this needs a book. There are
too many mistakes. So he returned to Padua in late January, and the work began in earnest. He got one
corpse after another. Talcar always at his side, always drawing these pictures, and lo and behold,
in 1543 his book was ready for publication. The Humani corpus fabrica, or as historians have come
to call it, the fabrica. The book was a masterpiece from the point of view of book production itself,
a masterpiece from the point of view of pedagogy, and a masterpiece in the history of medicine.
And I might say a masterpiece in the history of art as well.
Here are some of the errors that he had found in Galen that he discloses in this enormous book.
At one point there was a particular bony structure in the back that he had identified that was very
different from galenic anatomy, and he recognized that he had seen it in some of his animals,
and suddenly it hit him. He realized for the first time, although Galen never says it in any of his
texts, that Galen had dissected only animals. And that was like a light bulb went off. And from then
on in he was able to understand why Galen had made these errors. So what were some of them? The
insertions and the positions of many muscles were wrong. There were something like 200 general
inaccuracies, but the most important of them was that no matter how hard Veselius looked,
in the cadavers he dissected, there was no riti mirabili, the keystone of Galenic theory,
where the vital pneuma is converted to psychic pneuma. It didn't exist. And he finally said,
and he wrote this in his book, quote, Galen was deceived by his monkeys. So he writes this book,
and the frontispiece of the book is this beautiful portrait of that anatomy seen by
Van Kalkor. You see the skeleton hanging near the body for orientation. You see the small
animals ready to be dissected. You see the professor, and he's recognizable as Veselius,
because there are other pictures we have of Veselius. And you see spectators,
including members of the clergy. He's pointing out that the clergy said this is all right.
The book itself is written in this wonderful Latin style. It does have instructions for doing
one's own dissections. And he says over and over again in the book, if you don't believe this,
there's no reason you should believe it. Dissect it for yourself. How different from Galen,
who would say, only I understand. If you study me, you will really know all there is to know.
He was saying, no, no, no, don't trust me. Here are the instructions for dissecting. Go ahead
and do it yourself. This book was organized into seven books, a book on bones, muscles,
blood vessels, nerves, abdominal, reproductive organs, the brain, the chest. It's a wondrous thing
to behold. He took the wood blocks to Venice, where the greatest of the wood block artisans were.
The greatest of the printers was Johannes Operinus and Basel. So he went to Basel. The book was
available for sale in August of 1543. He was 29 years old at this point. It is 663 folio pages,
11 large plates, and close to 300 other illustrations. And then he prepared a little
pony. He prepared an epitome, which he called the epitome, for people who couldn't afford
the whole major text or didn't want to go through it. And what was the result of it? He was attacked
on all sides. A storm burst over his head because he refuted Galen. He was a man who shared certain
personality characteristics with Galen. He himself was vain. He himself was contentious.
He was sure of himself, although he did admit that there were errors he could have made.
And yet he had that sense about him that I really do know I'm right. And he got more and more upset
with some of the great professors who attacked him only because he refuted Galen. So in December
of 1543, he just did his last public dissection in Padua. He was angry. He essentially burnt
every bridge to the Padua academic community by burning all of his papers. And he left.
What did he do? He did something that people have suspected he had planned all along. He became
the physician to Charles V, the Holy Roman Emperor. This couldn't have happened suddenly.
He must have been working on this. And as I think about it, in many ways it was a better job. He
wasn't getting paid very much as a professor. Professors, except for people who became famous
like himself, didn't get very much glory. By this time he had married, he had a daughter. He had to
support the family. And so going to be the doctor for the Holy Roman Emperor seemed like a great
thing. And there is evidence in his writings that the whole purpose of his anatomical studies
was to learn about the body so that he could be a better doctor. And here was his chance. So he
goes off to become the physician to the Holy Roman Emperor, which he thinks is going to be wonderful.
Toward the end of 1543, 1544, he continues to do this. But it doesn't work out to be what he
expects it to be. In the first place, there are lots of doctors. He may have been one of the senior
ones, but most of the others were Galenists. So they're not going to deal very well with him.
The king was a profligate fellow who drank too much, who ate too much. He would take advice from
anybody who happened to pass by, even if he was a quack and a charlatan. And the salius gets more
and more fed up. He reaches the age of 40. He reaches the age of 45. The emperor eventually
abdicates. Philip II takes over. He asks Philip II, can I please leave? Philip won't let him.
He says, well, can I do this? Can I go to Jerusalem on a pilgrimage? Philip says, fine. So he goes to
Jerusalem on a pilgrimage. By this time, he's almost 50 years old. He comes back from the
pilgrimage. About six months later, his ship is beset by a storm. There's a shipwreck. And he dies
on a small island in the Mediterranean. No one really knows where he is buried. And he left us
the first accurate anatomy text that was ever written. But he demonstrated the importance of
skepticism. That could have been one of his most important contributions, that nothing
must be believed unless it is personally verified. And when I think of the salius, I think of that
wonderful poem by Walt Whitman called So Long, which he ends with these words.
Camarado, this is no book who touches this touches a man.
