Lecture 8 Morton and the Origins of Anesthesia
The invention of surgical anesthesia was the first major contribution that American
medical science made to the world, and I think it's probably still the greatest
contribution we have ever made. Let me tell you what it was like before that day
in 1846 when ether suddenly appeared before everyone. Things had actually not
changed much since classical antiquity. The anodines, the painkillers, were still
primarily compounds that were opiates. They were either opium itself or they were
derived from opium. Some of them came from a class of pharmacological agents
called belladonna alkaloids that tend to make people very dopey and sleepy. The way
poppy seeds were prepared was you'd cut the seed, you could squeeze, if you got
enough of them together, some juice out of it, that was usually allowed to dry.
We're talking about Greek times, Roman times, talking about the 15th, 16th, 17th
century, dry into a powder. When you wanted to use it, it was reconstituted and
then it might be drunk, it might be sniffed up into the nostrils, and it was
affected that way. There was so-called mandrake or mandrigoro, which was
another one of the belladonna alkaloids. Sometimes there were combinations of
these things in the Middle Ages and in the Renaissance. There was something used
for anesthesia that was called a soporific sponge. They'd mixed several
of these ingredients together, put it into a sponge in liquid form and people
would suck on it. It is said that in Romeo and Juliet, the material that the
two lovers took to render them seemingly dead for a while was one of these
soporific sponges, because it's known that this kind of thing existed at that
time. So what was it like to operate? They had to operate on people. People were,
for example, frequently being injured. They had compound fractures with a bone
sticking out. Those would never heal without an amputation, so there were the
amputations to do. There were cancers on the body surface, like cancers of the
breast, various kinds of skin cancers. There were certain infectious diseases
like osteomyelitis or the bone that needed surgery. So what did they do? Well, of
course, they would give people opiates to try to deaden the pain. They might use
alcohol, a very common thing, especially with men. Operating rooms were not where
they are now. They were not in the center of the hospital. They were deliberately
kept very far from the center of the hospital. They might be in bell towers or
cupolas, sometimes off in some remote outbuilding. They might be in a tower so
that people would not hear the screams and the shouts of those who were being
operated on. Many large hospitals would have a bell that was used only for
summoning the orderlies. If an amputation had to be done, the people involved
would ring the bell. The orderlies would go six or eight of them and bring this
man to a dumbwaiter. Often, he'd be put on the dumbwaiter and be brought up. They
didn't want stairs so that people couldn't get into such places. They'd be
brought up and the surgery would be done in a room where the floor was covered
with sawdust because they had to be so quick and they were so bloody that the
only way to clean it up was to clean the sawdust up after every operation. The
patients were strapped down. The straps were never good enough so the six strong
men had to hold them and they were given either an opiate or liquor sufficiently
early so that they were somewhat doped up. It was very, very, very difficult not
just to be a patient but even to be a surgeon. Can you imagine going through
this kind of thing week after week during your career? It took an enormous
amount of personal courage or perhaps just not caring at all. Maybe that's
where surgeons got their reputation for just not caring. All of this would
change suddenly and very dramatically on the morning of October 16, 1846. But
before that date, when Ether was shown to be a surgical anesthetic, there was
nitrous oxide. And I'd like to tell you the story of nitrous oxide because it's
an important part of the story of Ether and of anesthetics in general. Nitrous
oxide had first been discovered in 1772 by someone named Joseph Priestley who
was a nonconformist minister and a bit of a chemist and did a lot of work in this
area. Humphrey Davy began experiments with it in 1795. He was only 17 years old
at the time. He went on to become a great practical scientist and this was one
of his first areas of research. And before long, by the time we get into the
early 19th century, nitrous oxide had developed one particular use. It had
become known as an apparently harmless and often hilarious form of
entertainment at parties. It was realized that if you sniffed enough of this
stuff, you really got silly. You started laughing and joking and acting not like
yourself. So if you went to a society party at that time, especially if it was
in a university atmosphere, it was very likely that there would be some kind of
container or canister of nitrous oxide from which everybody would sniff and do
silly things. I guess it was like suburbanites and cocaine or pot. That
was really what it was. They were called laughing gas parties. People would go to
them. Everybody knew you'd be going to a laughing gas party. And not only that, but
itinerant, you might call them mount of banks, traveling from city to city with a
large container of nitrous oxide would entertain people who had paid money to
see this show. And it so happens that on December 10th, 1844, a dentist in
Hartford, Connecticut whose name was Horace Wells, who was 30 years old, went
with his wife and a friend, another dentist named Riggs, to one of these
entertainments. And he volunteered from the audience. He was going to be a person
sniffing the nitrous and he went up on stage and Colton gave him some of this
stuff. And he got a slapstick as anybody else. And when it was over, he walked
down the stairs to his seat, which was on the aisle. And as he did, he whacked
his knee up against the side of the seat. So hard that when he looked at it later,
he realized he had bruised his knee, but he didn't realize he had done it. His
wife said, look, Horace, what have you done to yourself? Are you all right? He
said, oh, but sat down. And when he sort of came to a little bit, he thought, oh
my God, I can use this to pull teeth. And he went up to his office with Riggs, who
of course was a dentist and said, I've got to use some of this stuff. And they
prevailed before they left the theater, they prevailed on Colton to give them
some in a very small container. And he sniffed it. And he had his pal Riggs pull
one of his back teeth. They didn't feel a thing. So he began using it on his
patients. And it was very safe. Nobody had any complications. He did some
experiments on animals. And being a smart young fellow, he realized that
dentistry was not the only possible application for this material, that there
were these surgeons doing these operations, never even dreaming that it would
be possible to put somebody to sleep for such a thing. And yet he knew that if you
took enough nitrous and got past the laughing giggling phase, you'd fall
asleep and wouldn't feel anything. Well, he went to Boston, where a former
student of his, one William Thomas Green Morton, introduced him to John
Collins Warren, who was the senior surgeon at the Massachusetts General
Hospital, then as now one of the great American hospitals. And when Warren
heard that this young man had a possible means of relieving the pain of
surgery, he said, please try it. So they took him to the operating room, which
was in a dome of the Massachusetts General Hospital in the Bullfinch
Building, still in existence. And sitting in this operating room amphitheater where
students and members of the faculty anxious to see the new thing work. And
they got a volunteer who was a student and the volunteer sat down and they gave
him the nitrous oxide. And as the tooth was pulled, this boy screamed out in
pain. Of course, he later said he hadn't felt anything that must have been some
kind of reflex scream, but it didn't make any difference. The thing was a
failure. The whole experiment was a failure. And you know what, students
were like, they chased him out. And Humbug was the last word he heard. And the
last word he wanted to hear, he was devastated. He had counted on this for
everything. And he'd been ridiculed, humiliated in front of one of America's
greatest surgeons. You know what he did? He sold his practice to Riggs and he
devoted all of his time to working on nitrous oxide. He knew that it could work
and he was damn sure he was going to convince people that it was going to do
that. Meantime, William Morton, who had introduced him to the surgeon, had been
experimenting with sulfuric ether for more than a year, actually since 1844. He
had developed a new method of making plates after dental extraction. And in
order to put his plates in, you had to remove not just the tooth, which is what
most people were doing, but get the roots out as well. Dentists in those days
were not taking the roots out. This was a very painful thing. So he knew about
ether. Everybody knew about ether. Nobody quite had any idea that it could be
used for anesthesia, but it was known that you could rub it on the gums and it
would anesthetize the gums as a local anesthetic. It had been synthesized way
back by a Prussian botanist in 1540. In the early 19th century, observers had
noticed that if you sniff this volatile liquid, it gave you a sort of a stupid
dopey feeling and a generalized numbness. And so just as there were laughing gas
parties, there was another kind of party called ether frolics. So if you went on
Friday night to a laughing gas party, you could go on Saturday night to an ether
frolic. And people did this again, as I say, especially in university communities,
because these were chemical agents. Nitrous was a gas ether, of course, was a
volatile liquid, and you could get it in a university environment very easily. So
here's Morton, and he's working with ethers anesthetizing dogs. Actually, he
even claims to anesthetize birds and insects, but in any event, because he has
contact with Warren, who was the surgeon, he says to him, look, I know this awful
thing failed last year, February of 1845, but a year and a half has passed, and I
know what the pitfalls are, and I've got this other stuff. He wouldn't tell him
what it was. I would like to try it. Now, by this time, Warren was 68 years old. He
had been a surgeon since his late 20s, and he was a veteran of all of those
horrible scenes that took place in operating rooms all over the world. He
had inured himself. He had immunized himself, but it was still very, very
difficult. And after things had failed in February of 1845, he had thought it
will never happen. There will never be some type of chemical substance that will
allow surgical sleep. And yet, here was Morton, who seemed like a very trustworthy
young man. Turns out he wasn't so trustworthy, but that he might have the
amelioration he might have the way of relieving pain, so he said, okay, let's
try it. So they assembled once again. It was only a year and a half later, so most
of the medical students were still the same medical students. All the staff was
still the same staff. And they assembled actually many of them in the hope that
they'd see another fiasco. And they would get to yell humbug once again. Another
dentist making himself a fool in front of the great doctors. Well, this time, it
was not a volunteer. This time, there was a specific patient that the surgeon had
been wanting to operate on for a long time, but he knew it was a difficult
operation. It would take more than the usual two, three, or four minutes. It was
a tumor at the left angle of the jaw composed of limb vessels primarily, and
it would have to be dissected. And he thought, well, let's try it with this
patient. So they assembled in walks Morton with a globe of glass, especially
constructed with a mouthpiece. He'd only had it completed that very morning. And in
the bottom of the globe is this liquid material. And he puts the mouthpiece into
the mouth of this patient who starts sucking in the gas as it volatilizes from
the liquid. And before more than a few minutes have passed, he's fast asleep. The
young dentist looks up at the surgeon and says his exact words because they were
recorded. Sir, your patient is ready. And Warren begins to operate slowly, carefully,
takes him 25 minutes to dissect this thing out and remove it. He stitches the
wound up, the patient hasn't moved a muscle, and he's in this sort of semi-
amphitheater, which still exists. As a matter of fact, you can go visit it if you
want to at the Mass General. He walks to the edge and he looks up at this group
of people and says, quote, gentlemen, this is no humbug. And with those words, the
era of modern surgery began. Over 16, 1846. It was an amazement. Word of it was
published within six weeks in the Boston Medical and Surgical Journal, which was
the predecessor of the current New England Journal of Medicine. And News of
it went around the world. By December, it was being used in England by Robert
Liston, the great surgeon of the time. And in the following year, it was used as far
away as China. Everybody who thought it could never happen had, obviously, never
the less been waiting for it. And it happened. Well, here's Morton. He is
suddenly not just a national figure, but an international figure. And he wouldn't
tell anybody what it was. You'd think you smell ether, but he would put other
stuff into it to make it smell not quite like ether. He wouldn't tell them what
it was. He had this idea that he was going to get a patent on it, and he was
going to sell the rights to distribution. He was going to become a multi-millionaire
by this extraordinary thing that he'd accomplished. Well, just at that point,
within a week of his having done that demonstration, and by then they had done
one or two other operations using it, who appears on the scene but a professor of
chemistry at Harvard, whose name is Charles Jackson. And Jackson says to
Morton, now look, we've known each other for a while. Why don't you come out and
admit it? I was the one who suggested that you use this stuff. I was the one who
told you first that it could numb the gums, and I was the one who told you
that look at these etherfolics. You can put people asleep. Do experiments. You
know, I'm a chemist. I can't do this. Do it. And Morton denied it, and they got
into these heated fights. They were both a couple of crazies. And they really
became so antagonistic that they could barely speak to each other. But they
finally decided that maybe they could get a patent on it together. They would
compromise. And indeed, a patent was issued for ether, which was called
lithium by that time. Lithium is the name that Virgil gave to the sleep that
opiates can produce. So they thought if they called it lithium, no one could
figure out what it was, and the patent would be in effect. But of course, it
wasn't just them, the two of them, who decided on lithium. By that time, the
senior professors at Harvard had gotten in on the act too, and they wanted some
of the money, not themselves, but for the school. And they suggested this great
classical name of lithium. So here they are. It's called lithium. The Harvard
people now know what it is, but nobody else knows what it is, and there is a
patent on it. Well, there's poor Horace Wells. He's left his practice. He's
working on nitrous oxide. He knows he's been superseded. He's a thing of the
past. And he starts claiming priority, obviously not for ether, although he
did say that he had introduced Morton to ether, but for the whole notion of
anesthesia. By this time, it's been given the name anesthesia, because the
great literate Oliver Wendell Holmes, the autocrat of the breakfast table, has
suggested that name for it, anesthesia. So he says, look, I want priority for
this. I demand priority for it. And as they begin their debates and
communications with him, Jackson and Morton, they realized that he is not
quite in complete possession of his faculties. He has gotten so consumed with
a need for priority that he's just a little bit crazed by now. In fact, when
he got nowhere, he went off to France. Now remember, it's 1847 by now, and
France is still the Citadel City of Medicine. And he goes to the French
Academy of Medicine and the French Academy of Sciences, and he presents his
case asking to be named the inventor of the whole notion of anesthesia. He is
unsatisfied with what they tell him. He never gets any agreement to this. And in
January of 1848, after he comes back, he leaves his family. No one quite knows
where he is. And shortly afterwards, he turns up in New York City. How is he
discovered? He's discovered near Chamber Street and Broadway, standing over a
young prostitute lying on the ground, whom he has obviously knocked to the
ground, and he is pouring acid onto her. He's completely psychotic. He's gone
crazy. He's arrested. He's put into the tomb's prison. Somehow, he manages to get
someone to smuggle into him a small bottle of chloroform. By this time,
chloroform has been discovered, 1847, by James Simpson in Edinburgh. So this
little bottle of chloroform has been smuggled into him. He has sniffed just
enough of the chloroform to get rid of the acutist sense of pain, but not
enough to make him unconscious. Also smuggled into him has been a knife. He
has taken the knife and drawn it across the femoral artery and the groin while
lying in the bathtub naked, and he hemorrhages to death. And that was the
tragic end of Horace Wells. So that's 1847. Congress is now heavily involved in
this because Morton has gone to them, Jackson has gone to them, Wells has
written them letters in the past, and they decide they don't know who should
get the credit for this great invention, and they think, well, the best way to find
out is that we will offer a prize of a hundred thousand dollars, a huge amount
of money in March of 1848, and they've got Jackson competing for the prize and
writing in his claims, and they've got Morton competing for the prize and
writing in his claims. In the small town in Georgia, there's another doctor, the
only doctor, as a matter of fact, the only physician in this bunch whose name is
Crawford Long. And it's well known in this little Georgia town that in 1842,
long before any of this stuff happened, four years before that day at the
Massachusetts General Hospital, he had used ether to anesthetize one of his
patients to take a few cysts off the back of the neck, and that from time to
time he had done it again. He didn't think it was a big deal. After all, he'd
been to enough etherfollux when he was a student at the University of
Pennsylvania some years before to know that this was common knowledge, so it
was nothing he thought ought to be reported. And for all we know, other
doctors had done the same thing. Well, his friends point out to this modest,
quiet man, certainly not someone who would ever put himself forth. They point
out to him that, you know, there's a hundred thousand dollars involved here.
You better stake your claim. Reluctantly, Crawford Long finally states his
claim. He's prevailed upon to do it. Well, a whole bunch of other things were
happening at the same time. By this time the Mexican War had started, you know,
it was 1846 to 48, and here the government gives a patent to Morton and to
Jackson. They go and infringe their own patent by using it freely during the
Mexican War for amputations, first time incidentally that ether had ever been
used in a war. So the patent really didn't mean very much. But what did mean
much was the hundred thousand dollars. Crawford Long didn't push very hard for
that. He did, and his friends made him do it, this modest, unassuming fellow. But
these other two, Morton and Jackson, it was an emotional whirlwind. They were
suing people, or at least Morton was suing people, who infringed on what he
thought was still the patent. Jackson was doing the same. They were writing angry
letters at each other. Morton actually turned out to be a bit of a scoundrel,
more than a bit of a scoundrel. He was a cheat in business and swindled a lot of
people out of some things. So he had no thought of honesty or integrity. And the
tenor of this really was building up and building up. And Morton, in 1864, now we're
quite a bit after the period when he had first done this demonstration, the whole
thing has been consumed by argumentation. Finally, in 1864, he was censured by the
American Medical Association. He's not a doctor, he's not a member, but they felt
they had to do something because this is getting cheap and tawdry and horrible, so
they censure him. And that didn't help them. That really upset him. But what
upset him mostly was four years later, an article in the Atlantic Monthly
supported Jackson's claims. Well, he thought, look at this, public declaration
that that bastard Jackson is the one, when it's really me. So what do we do? He
rushes down to Washington. He's going to meet some congressmen, some senators, and
he's going to try to convince them he should get the $100,000, but perhaps
almost as important, he should get recognition. So he goes down there by
now, he's a real fine fetal. And he comes back, it's the middle of the summer, it's
hot as blazes, he gets into a cab, a horse run cab with his wife, and they're
driving through Central Park, sort of fast and furious, and all of a sudden he
stops the two horses by the lake, gets out of the cab, he jumps into the lake,
not deeply, his wife helps him out, and she realizes that there's something very
strange going on here, and he's had a huge stroke, and he died a few hours
later. So Crawford Long is still alive, he's just pursuing his practice, he's
taking care of people, occasionally using ether for minor surgical procedures,
he's delivering babies as people did in those days, physicians did. And Jackson
continues to press his claims, even though Morton is dead, Morton is buried
because he had lived most of his life in Boston in the Mount Auburn Cemetery in
Boston. And one day, in 1873, Charles Jackson happens to find himself in the
cemetery, without thinking much about anything, and what does he come across
but the monument on the grave of this man that he has hated so much during
life, William Morton. And you can imagine what the monument said, dedicated to
William Morton, who discovered anesthesia and gave the world this great
gift. He took one look at that, and instantly became acutely psychotic, and
never recovered. In a very short time, he was admitted to the McLean Hospital,
in Belmont, Massachusetts, which even today is a facility of the Harvard Medical
School, and he died there seven years later, never having recovered the least bit
from his psychosis. Meantime, Crawford Long had already died at the age of 62,
in June of 1878, he was delivering a baby, he was doing his daily work, like the
compassionate physician he was, and he felt the darkness coming over him
suddenly, and he took the baby that he had just delivered, handed it to a nurse,
fell down, and died of a stroke. It was a quiet death. Only Long had been destined
for a peaceful life and a peaceful death of all of these men. Welles, Morton, and
Jackson had all lived under tragic circumstances and died under tragic
circumstances. Their great contribution, which was intended to bring serenity
and peace to the millions, only brought turmoil and anguish to them.
you
