Lecture 11 Halstead and American Medical Education
The new order that came to surgery with the contributions of Joseph Lister and the primarily
German generation that arose at about that time was exemplified in the United States
by the career of William Stuart Halstead.
With him, the meticulous surgery based on scientific principles reached America, where
he spread it, he spread it like some Johnny Apple seed across the country, so that American
medicine in time, and it was a relatively short time, became the gold standard against
which the medicines of all other countries would be measuring themselves.
America became the focus of the pilgrimage for young doctors, whether they were surgeons,
internists, researchers, who wanted to learn the best ways of science and the best ways
of what we would later come to call biomedicine.
It all began because of William Halstead and a small group of extraordinary, talented colleagues
at the Johns Hopkins Hospital, Johns Hopkins Medical School and University.
The story of the origins of that unique place at that unique time are worth telling and
they're instructive.
In 1874, Johns Hopkins, who was a bachelor, very wealthy Baltimore merchant and banker,
left $7 million in his will for the founding of a hospital and a university.
Half of it was to go to the university, half of it was to go to the hospital.
The original trustees were mostly Quakers, as he himself, Hopkins was, and they were
very judicious in choosing the two men that they wanted to lead the university and the
hospital respectively.
The university was to be led by the man who was at that time the president of the University
of California system, Daniel Coyt Gilman.
The hospital would be led by John Shaw Billings, who had been the founder of the National Medical
Library and in time would go on to be the founder of the New York Public Library at 42nd Street.
These two consulted medical leaders literally all over the world, at least Europe and North
America, including Canada, and they decided on a particular philosophy of how they would
choose their leaders and the philosophy really had to do with the new scientific medicine
and the influence of the laboratory science on the clinical science.
They chose in time a youthful faculty of six men whose names read like an honor roll in
the history of American medical education and indeed medical education throughout the
world.
Every one of them had studied at German universities and every one of them was strongly influenced
by the German medical scientists.
In fact, it used to be said by William Osler, who was one of the older of the group, that
the whole bunch of them were Feddeutscht, they were Germanized, but of course that ended
up being the secret of medical progress in this transitional phase around the turn of
the century.
They were Franklin P. Mall in anatomy, he was 27 years old when he was appointed professor
of anatomy.
John Jacob Abel, who was 32, professor of pharmacology, a brand new subject, imported
almost literally from the German speaking schools, William Welsh was the oldest at 39,
he was professor of pathology, eventually he became dean of the school, Howard Kelly,
the professor of another new specialty, gynecology, which had had a checkered career, but only
in the previous perhaps half century was becoming recognized as a medical discipline, Kelly
was 31, William Osler, the professor of internal medicine, who went on to become the greatest
medical teacher this country has ever known, was in fact knighted when he went on to become
regious professor of medicine at Oxford, and William Halstead, who was 36, to be the professor
of surgery.
In May of 1889 the hospital opened, but the medical school couldn't open, and one of the
reasons the medical school couldn't yet open, in fact the primary reason, was that Hopkins
had left as part of the beneficence the money in B&O railroad stocks, and B&O railroad stocks
had gotten themselves into some major difficulty, half of the university's half was invested
in them, and there was a shortfall of some half a million dollars, and they couldn't
figure out how they were going to get this money.
Well, a committee, initially of four young women was formed, eventually the committee
got larger, and there were subcommittees all over the country, this committee of four young
women, every one of whom was the daughter of the university trustee, approached the
trustees and said, we will incorporate ourselves to raise the half a million dollars that you
need, and maybe even more, and of course that made the trustees very happy, but they weren't
happy when they heard the proviso that the young women had brought along with them.
They said, in the first place, this is almost predictable, women must be admitted on the
same basis as men, which was a completely revolutionary thought, there were women in
medical schools, especially in the German speaking schools, some of the French, but
not very many, medicine didn't appeal to women, and here these four to them girls were saying,
we want to get in just like the boys, same criteria, same everything, well they weren't
quite willing to accept that, but they certainly didn't want to accept the second proviso,
which was, this school had to be a graduate school, medical schools were not graduate
schools at that time, if you wanted to go to medical school, you finished high school
and you went, there were plenty of students who graduated from universities, but it was
certainly not necessary, and they demanded not only that the entering medical students
be graduates of colleges, but that they have studied biology, they must have a reading
knowledge of French and German, and their academic averages, what we think of as the
GPA these days, had to be rather high, medicine had not appealed in America to the highest
intellectual group of our youth, so this too was something different, in fact, Osler said,
well you know, I never could have gone into medical school if I had to pass those qualifications,
and of course they turned these women down, in fact they turned them down several times
until they realized they were desperate, so they agreed to both of these provisos, women
admitted on the same basis of men and these high academic standards, studies in biology,
chemistry, physics, all of these other things, and the women indeed raised the money and
more, and the school was able to open in October of 1893, about four years it took for all
of this to happen, and it opened as America's first medical school with a complete array
of laboratory courses, there were huge numbers of medical schools in America at that time,
any local docs who wanted to start a school would start it, they called them proprietary
schools because they were owned by doctors, there were almost no laboratories in American
schools because that isn't what was taught, science, again, had not gotten across the
Atlantic Ocean, it had stayed there in Central Europe and in France, a little bit in England
by now, but certainly not in America, so this was a way of making money, doctors were doing
it, there would be a dozen medical schools in a state like Michigan for example, there
might be one good one, let's say it's at the University of Michigan at that time, but
otherwise one could become a doctor in the easiest possible way and Hopkins was different,
here they had these crack-a-jack students, a significant proportion of them were women,
they were in close contact with the people who were doing the research like the pharmacologists,
there was a new biochemistry that was coming to be, they got great responsibility in the
care of patients and there they were in Baltimore altogether, almost as though they were all
in a monastery, it was a very dedicated academic group that started and they also had two other
things in the school that proved to be of great significance, for the first time in
the American Medical School, they had instituted what was called the full time system, which
meant that every professor worked for the medical school and no other place, you didn't have a
private practice on the side, if you were the professor of surgery like Halstead, everything
was done within the Johns Hopkins Hospital and the Johns Hopkins Medical School, some
of them like Halstead and Osler were allowed to have private fees, but this was kept to
an absolute minimum and their patients had to come into the Johns Hopkins Hospital, so
for the first time you've got this completely full time system, whereas in other schools,
if you were going to study a little physiology and there wasn't really much, you were taught
it by the local general practitioner who knew a smattering of physiology, so this was a
very different arrangement, in addition to which the Johns Hopkins Hospital and the
Johns Hopkins Medical School were under one management essentially, so that the professor
of surgery at the Johns Hopkins Medical School was the chief of surgery at the Johns Hopkins
Hospital and medicine was the same and in time pediatrics would come to be the same
and that also made a difference because all hospital policy was decided by the professors
in the university for the professor's teaching and patient care needs, well imagine being
a very bright young man or a very bright young woman and coming into such an atmosphere,
Baltimore was a rather remote city to most young people and so they were far away focusing
only on this work with these men who had been brought in for exactly the same purpose.
It was a grand experiment in medical education that started in 1893.
The experiment was so successful that when the Carnegie Foundation commissioned the educator
Abraham Flexner in the early part of the 20th century to carry out an exhaustive study of
all the medical schools in the United States to find out what the problems were and how
they could be brought up to speed, his 1910 report advised a complete reform of the system
and he also advised that the medical schools that were allowed to survive, he wanted a
lot of those schools closed, the proprietary schools closed, the schools that were allowed
to survive should be based on the general principles of the Johns Hopkins Hospital.
The one principle that was never accepted unfortunately was that women should be admitted
on the same basis as men.
In my own school, the Yale School of Medicine was 1916 before the first woman was admitted
and the Harvard Medical School was sometime in the mid 40s and this was an official policy
at that school as a matter of fact.
So Hopkins remained for all this long period of time in the early 20th century, the only
place where if a woman applied she knew that her application was looked at in the same way
as any young man's application.
Well Flexner made these recommendations but how do you carry them out without money?
And this is where the Rockefellers came in.
The Rockefeller Foundation provided 50 million dollars and essentially what happened was
that after the Flexner report, Flexner himself traveled to each of the schools that he thought
was worth saving and offered these schools money to institute the full-time system and
to develop a close affiliation with a hospital in which their students were trained.
That changed a lot of things and in this way every good American medical school became
modeled after Johns Hopkins.
And so when William Stuart Halstead came to Hopkins to be the first professor of surgery
and a major contributor it was into this extraordinarily heady atmosphere of research and clinical
work that was destined to transform medicine not only in the United States but eventually
in the entire world.
So let me tell you a little bit about William Halstead.
William Halstead was born to wealth.
He was the son of a very successful New York City textile importer.
They were an old American family.
He went to Yale where he was an athlete, certainly not a very good student.
In fact, if you go to Maury's, the great dining club at Yale, right over the entrance
is a picture of the very first 11-man football team that Yale ever had in 1873 and there
is a juggeared fellow in the back row who was the captain and that was William Stuart
Halstead.
That's what he was known for at Yale.
It certainly was not academics.
But for reasons that no one has quite been able to figure out, he started hanging around
the medical school during his senior year going to lectures.
And I guess the bug must have bitten him.
Why he thought he could succeed academically again is a bit of a mystery because he'd never
proven that he was a student of any kind.
But he applied to the College of Physicians and Surgeons at that time, loosely associated
with Columbia University.
He graduated.
He took an internship at the Great Bellevue Hospital.
He took a further period of training at the New York Hospital.
And then he went to walk the wards.
This thing that began with Leneck at the beginning of the 19th century, Americans were still,
if they could do it, traveling to European centers.
But now it was all to the German speaking centers, whether it was in Prague or Vienna
or Berlin didn't make any difference.
All the professors were German.
They all did things according to laboratory work that was then transferred on to the clinical
wards.
It was this exciting atmosphere and he spent two years there.
He didn't go for two or three days.
He'd spend weeks or months at a particular institution learning technical surgery, learning
research methods, and learning to combine the two and learning their methods of training
in the hierarchical manner of year by year by year, bringing people along with graded
responsibility until they were ready to become faculty members themselves.
So he returns to New York at the age of 28 in December of 1880 and it's time to start
practice.
And he's going to start practice and he's going to have his own research facilities
and work on all sorts of clinical problems that are research problems at the same way.
Well he, by this time, had shown that he had very good hands.
He was a very adept clinical surgeon.
He was a young society man.
His practice grew rapidly.
He worked at a group of about six different hospitals running back and forth from one
to the other, had a very active social life, had a bachelor pad with a young internist.
It was a great time.
Of course, he had learned the, the sterian methods of antisepsis now being converted
into asepsis and he saw that the New York surgeons were not very comfortable with it
and didn't want to accept it.
So you know what he did?
He goes to a bunch of friends and he collects a fund of $10,000 and on the grounds of the
Bellevue Hospital he builds what he calls an antiseptic tent.
It's a huge tent with maple floors, has running water coming in where he can carry out all
of the antiseptic and partially aseptic methods that he has learned and he is the only surgeon
that we know of at that time in New York City in about 1883, 84 who is doing this and he's
also writing papers.
So between this great social life and his research stuff and his big clinical practice,
he's burning the candle at every possible end and not just the two that are on a regular
candle.
Well, something unusual and different happens right in the middle of all of this hullabaloo
of a great young flashing career.
He gets word from one of the surgeons, Anton Vöfler, with whom he had worked in Vienna,
that a certain Carl Kohler, an ophthalmologist, has introduced the notion of putting drops
of cocaine into the eye to provide local anesthesia and that the idea for it came from
a psychiatrist named Sigmund Freud who was trying to use it by mouth to ameliorate the
pain of some of the neurology patients.
So Halstead gets the bright idea, if they can use it for topical anesthesia, why can't
we inject it into nerve roots and anesthetize, for example, an entire arm so that I can operate
on the hand or whatever.
So he gets a group of like-minded colleagues and they begin experiments on cocaine.
They do nerve blocks, they do local and regional anesthesia and they discover something very
interesting that if you use cocaine yourself, including sniffing the powder, things get
to be real fun.
Now these are our society boys and they love to go out to the theater and they love the
University Bowling Alley and so what they began doing was to sniff this stuff in the
evening before they went out for their entertainments, every one of them.
I think there were five or six of them became addicted to cocaine, Halstead obviously among
them in the midst of this burgeoning career.
Well, the word got out because everybody in New York knew, Halstead, William Welch who
went on to become the professor of pathology at Hopkins as you've heard, was at PNS at
this time and he got worried about Halstead.
Halstead went off to the Butler Hospital in Rhode Island to try to recover that flunked.
He went back again and then finally, Welch in 1886 when Halstead is 34 says, look I like
you a lot, you've got a brilliant future, come down to Hopkins, I'll take care of you,
you get a job in the lab and if things go well, you'll go back to clinical surgery.
So he does this, he comes down to Hopkins, apparently free of his cocaine habit, works
in the lab on numerous problems and the man who is going to be the professor of surgery,
McEwen, coming from Scotland for one reason or another decides not to come and they give
the job to William Stuart Halstead, who is now no longer a flashy New York surgeon.
He's completely changed, the cocaine habit has changed him.
He's now a slow, compulsively meticulous, almost plotting surgeon who studies everything
he does with great care.
His research is the same way, the record keeping is obsessional.
It's something no one had ever seen before but they're happy to see it because it is
like the Germans were.
It is so accurately done that remarkably his results operating on the original patients
are better than most other people's results.
And so he is supported in everything he does, in the laboratory he gradually learns how
tissues heal, that was the most important thing he wanted to learn when he did an intestinal
operation, had as the intestine net, when he worked some of the thyroid, had as the wound
heal itself.
These were primarily microscopic studies but he calls this very careful surgery, which
takes forever incidentally, three times as long as most surgeons of the time.
The surgery of safety.
At the same time he creates the modern surgical residency program by taking on the best of
the German methods, so he's got this graded residency program that he sets up at Hopkins
and being Hopkins, he's getting the best young men in the country.
During the course of his approximate 30 year career, he turned out 17 chief residents,
17 young men, who he had fully trained, of that 17, 11 of them went on to start university
residency programs, just like his, operating with what by then had become called whole
steadying technique.
It's almost like putting a clamp on every blood corpusal as it comes out.
It's a wondrous thing to see, you don't see any blood.
A surgeon even if you're afraid of blood, it's that careful and that well controlled.
So each of these 11 opened up their own university training program and they trained in turn
166 surgeons and this is what I mean by the Johnny Appleseed Phenomenon.
All over the country, American surgeons became whole steadying surgeons and it was not until
about, I would say the 1970s, before British, German, French surgery began to be more whole
steadying.
They would come and take many of the teaching methods and of course the science methods
but they couldn't bring themselves to slow down and operate the way he did and then finally
that happened.
So they are almost as whole steadying as we are and we're not quite as whole steadying
as we used to be but we're still very, very careful.
So what did he attack clinically?
What problems was he trying to solve clinically?
One of the problems was the problem of hernia.
The mortality rate of hernia was very, very high.
Hernia is a hole in the abdominal wall, the usual sort of hernia is through which a loop
of intestine gets caught, gets strangulated, patient dies.
Numerous ways of trying to treat it had been developed.
He did a very careful anatomical, grossly anatomical and microscopically anatomical study
of the abdominal wall in the groin and developed a technique of sliding tissues together in
such a way as to close the gap with only perhaps a 5% recurrent rate which he called the radical
hernia repair and that became the repair that all surgeons, at least in America, would eventually
use and really all over the world in time.
The innovation for which he is best known and has most recently been reviled is the
so-called Halstead radical mastectomy.
At the time he started his surgical career at Hopkins, there were no reports of women
who had undergone surgery for breast cancer living longer than three years.
The only women who were operated on were women with advanced breast cancer.
So they come in with these big bulky tumors that undergo surgery.
Within a year or two they would have local recurrences, they have spread all over the
body.
He did an experimental and literature search study of the lymphatic drainage of the breast,
of the musculature of the chest wall, of the way cancer in general spreads throughout the
body.
He came up with a notion that the only way to stop this was to take out huge amounts
of tissue and to take all of the lymph glands out of the arm.
He actually removed the two major muscles of the chest wall, pectoralis major and minor.
And by the mid 1890s he was able to report not only a significant number of women who
had lived beyond three years, but a very low number of women with local recurrences.
So this disease became converted from something that turned women into pariahs because they
would stay at home, they wouldn't go out, these great big bulky things would become
infected and there'd be stench and leakage through their clothes.
He had converted that to a situation where women were willing to come to doctors because
they knew some of them were going to be cured, but at the very least they would not have
to put up with the misery that they had before.
So as a transitional operation for these many decades it was indeed the answer.
Of course in time we found out how to make earlier diagnoses, we found out that an earlier
diagnosed tumor doesn't need such radical surgery, we found out the efficacy of x-ray
therapy and now we have chemotherapy.
So operations like his are rarely done, if at all, but this is how things got started.
He perfected thyroid surgery.
Thyroid surgery was extremely hazardous.
Most people at that time were operated upon for what's called thyrotoxicosis, hyperactivity
of the thyroid, where it pours out large amounts of thyroid hormone.
Thyroid hormone determines the rate of the engine of metabolism.
So if you're trying to operate on somebody and by manipulating the gland, you're letting
a lot of the thyroid hormone out, you start getting a rapid pulse, high fever and people
would die on the operating table.
Well, here's a man who operates with such meticulous technique, he's barely touching
the tissues, so he's not squirting a lot of this stuff all over the place.
And eventually, he reported 650 personally operated cases of thyroid surgery and very
few of them had gotten what's called thyroid storm, this explosion, and he had a very good
mortality rate.
One day in 1889, he happened to look at the hands of his scrub nurse, a not unattractive
woman who was dipping her hands in mercuric chloride before beginning the work, everybody
operated bare-handed in those days, and her hands looked terrible, which was quite different
from the rest of her, because she was a young, as it turned out, society woman, the family
had in the state in North Carolina, and he thought he had to do something to prevent
Carolyn Hampton, who worked with him every day from having these awful beefy red hands.
So he invented rubber gloves, and that's how he came to have rubber gloves.
And he reports this in a surgical article, which anybody can read, and is the first surgical
innovation that I know of, probably the only one, that was based on the beginning of a
love affair, because they eventually got married.
They never had any children, no one is quite sure why they lived on different floors of
their house on Utah, place in Baltimore.
One of the other things he did was to encourage young men to go into specialties that didn't
exist, Harvey Cushing for brain surgery, Samuel Crow for ear, nose, and throat surgery.
So he had this remarkable 30-year career that was very busy, but he didn't work very hard
at it.
He went home in the afternoons early, took every summer off, was discovered after he
died that although he was no longer a cocaine addict, he was a morphine addict.
And he was probably affected by morphine for a lot of his life.
But it was, as I say, a very productive career in spite of the cocaine and then the morphine.
When he died, he was eventually buried in Brooklyn's Greenwood Cemetery, close to the
graves of some of the most prominent New York public figures of the time, Horace Greeley,
Henry Ward Beecher, 19th century figures, Samuel, F. B. Morris, Peter Cooper, and their
worthy company for the greatest surgical innovator that our country has ever known.
