Lecture 4 Evolutionary Theory and Modern Psychology
In today's lecture we're going to talk about the influences of evolutionary theory on psychology
and in particular on modern psychology. Now that may seem to be kind of strange because
evolutionary theory was proposed back in the mid-1800s by Charles Darwin. How is it that
it's having its influences on psychology only now? Well actually, it did have influences
on early psychology and in particular psychoanalytic theory that we're going to talk about later
in the course. Psychoanalytic theory has some alludes to instinctive kinds of things, much
of the id when we talk about psychoanalytic theory is instinctive in nature. And so there
was some influence of Darwin and evolutionary theory on psychology in early psychology.
The behaviors then came along in about 1910 or so and they so took over psychology that
we ignored altogether anything being built in because they very much assumed the John
Locke position of having a tabular raza or a blank slate and this was to be written upon
by learning. So learning became the cornerstone of psychology and for almost half a century
only learning was studied in psychology and people forgot all about evolutionary theory
and there are reasons for this not only in psychology but there are some political reasons
for that as well that we won't go into today. And then in the 1960s you'll recall that
cognitive psychology came along and cognitive psychology also operated to some extent on
a blank slate principle. Again we've talked about this a little bit in the past and the
computer metaphor being used in cognitive psychology where you had the large mainframe
computer but not much was built in and in fact this was written upon by human experience
in terms of an analog of forming software programs with your human experience. And so
people didn't think much about evolutionary psychology and evolutionary theory had little
to do with psychology. This has changed and in the 1990s in particular the theory of evolutionary
psychology actually was named and there has been a great deal of research in evolutionary
psychology today. Now I want to talk about evolutionary psychology a little bit at this
point in order to prepare you for looking at some of the more traditional areas of psychology
because I think it's informative to do that and look at some of these from an evolutionary
sense. So we're going to go over some of the basics of the theory today. What Darwin actually
said was required for evolution. Then we're going to look some at some of the people who
have adapted evolutionary theory in recent times to the human and human behavior. Then
we're going to look at several misunderstandings about evolutionary theory as applied to human
behavior and why those misunderstandings are indeed misunderstandings. And finally we'll
discuss evolutionary psychology in terms of the way belief systems are changed and
some terms are like naturalistic fallacy. So let me get started by talking some about
what Darwin actually said. In 1859 Charles Darwin published his book called On the Origin
of Species. Charles Darwin was a naturalist and he had studied in school in order to be
able to look at plants and animals and how they developed the way they do and he took
a cruise on a boat called the Beagle and went in particular to the Galapagos Islands and
while on the Galapagos Islands he studied all sorts of different natural phenomena and
collected lots of different kinds of species and did extensive writing and when he came
back he had to try to decide what this all meant. What he eventually came up with was
the theory of evolution. Now there was somebody else who came along about the same time and
proposed the theory of evolution but Charles Darwin is usually given the credit for being
the father of evolution. And he proposed that there are really just three basic processes
required for evolution. It's really pretty simple but widely misunderstood by people.
The first of those processes is inheritability. You have to have some way that the genetic
message is passed down from parent to offspring and Charles Darwin rather surprisingly didn't
know much about how this happened and he was mistaken about how this happened and we'll
see in just a minute when I talk about Mendel that this was an update really on Charles
Darwin. They lived about the same time but in fact he was not familiar or at least did
not use Mendel's work in his theory of evolution but he knew that somehow the message had to
be transmitted from the parent to the offspring. A second thing that's required is variation.
This variation occurs through mutation or through sexual reproduction and in this way
variation is passed down to the offspring. In terms of mutation what happens is a mistake
is made basically. When the genetic material is selected from one of the parents or the
other a change is made in the genetic material and a different adaptation is made which might
cause a structural or behavioral difference in the offspring which is simply a matter
of a mistake. You also get some variation by sexual reproduction. One of the nicer things
about sexual reproduction other than the obvious is the fact that it produces variation. You
have the parents each making a contribution to the genetic outcome of the offspring and
there's sort of a roulette wheel that is spun every time we have a child and it picks off
genetic messages from the parents and from the grandparents and we get kind of a hodgepodge
of genetic messages that do produce some variation. So inheritability, variation and the third
thing that's required is some form of selection. Now this selection in Darwin's sense is naturalistic
selection, natural selection or what is sometimes called survival of the fittest but it doesn't
have to be that. You could have selection which is not natural. You can have breeding
for example. For example we take racehorses and we try to breed racehorses and we breed
them so they have these little thin legs and very powerful muscles and are very fast and
they're good for raising unless they break their leg. They're not very good for plough horses.
We breed them for a specific purpose and this is a form of selection. But usually you have
natural selection and all this means is that once one of these mistakes is made and you
get variation that mistake will stick around if it allows the offspring to be more successful.
Survive longer and reproduce better than it is selected through natural selection and
stays as part of evolution. So those are the basic three things that are required for evolution
and only those three things. Now subsequently that was a long time ago that Darwin suggested
these things and since then there have been a number of things that have happened that
kind of update evolution and in particular update evolution so that it can include humans.
The first one happened about the same time as Darwin and that's Gregor Mendel who was
an Austrian monk who was studying inheritance and he used plants for the most part to do
this and I'm sure you're all somewhat familiar with what Mendel did. He bred plants that
were tall and plants that were short and came up with the notion that the genetic material
was particulate. That is you don't get mixed messages, you get one message depending upon
what genetic material has been selected for the offspring. Up until that time and Darwin
thought that this was the case, a lot of people thought that there was blending that you had
a father and a mother and the offspring were some blended combinations. So if you have
a very tall mother and a very short father as their genes are blended you'll get a medium
size offspring and that's not true. As Mendel showed they get either the tall gene or the
short gene at least if it's a single gene case. In polygenic traits there are various
genes that may be combined in different ways but for the simple cases you only get one
gene and it's a particulate and it's either the mother's gene or the father's gene and
that was somewhat new to people and we now understand more about the inheritability part
of evolutionary theory because of Gregor Mendel's work. Ethologist Conrad Lorenz far more recently
he's an ethologist and he was studying animal behavior for the most part and he was one
of the first to show that there are innate behavior patterns that have developed as evolutionary
adaptations and that these are triggered by environmental cues. One of his more famous
studies he took gozzlings that had just been born to the mother goose and as they're hatched
the gozzlings look around and one of the things that's built into them is an innate tendency
to follow the first large moving object that crosses their field and that happened to be
Conrad Lorenz in fact and so as Conrad Lorenz walked around these gozzlings all lined up
behind him and followed him along you may have seen the picture of him walking along
with a whole string of gozzlings following him along and they have this built into them.
A fixed behavior pattern that simply says follow the large moving object as soon as you're
born it's called imprinting and so they do this and it doesn't matter to them whether
it's the mom or Conrad Lorenz they're the equivalent to this fixed action pattern that
simply follows this what's called sign stimulus and this was one of the first times and Lorenz
showed this not only in gozzlings but in lots of other animals that there are these fixed
behavior patterns that can occur at least in animals.
Biologist William Hamilton in the mid 60s proposed a kind of a new twist to evolutionary
theory and that's a topic called inclusive fitness up until this time it was thought
that fitness was pretty much parent to child and so if you had an adaptation that was passed
down to your offspring that would increase that child's fitness that then was direct fitness.
But what Hamilton showed was that there's also a topic of inclusive fitness. Inclusive
fitness says that it's important not only the reproductive success of your direct offspring
but also the reproductive success of genetic relatives. So for example if you are going
to be altruistic you might be altruistic and do good things for your children because indeed
they are your genes that are being carried along but you might also do good things for
your brother or your sister who share a part of your genes and you might do good things
for your sister or brother's offspring as well your nieces and nephews because they
share some of your genes so this altruistic behavior should be spread around. This got
people to thinking about the genes in a somewhat different way and it sort of became the new
unit of evolution up until this time the individual was kind of the unit of evolution that in
fact it was the survival of the individual that was important. This adaptation to this
theory said it's the genes survival that's important. The gene is the basic genetic unit
and we're just big bags of water. We're life support systems to carry around genes for
a finite period of time. We're mortal after all. The genes are seeking to be immortal and
so they're far more concerned about your reproduction and the next generation that they can live
in and become immortal. So the unit of survival is now the gene not the individual and that
makes a big difference in terms of the way you look at evolution.
Robert Trivers came along in the 1970s and proposed three theories that also extended
evolutionary thinking. One of these was reciprocal altruism. I just mentioned altruism with
respect to your own kin. Reciprocal altruism has to do with whether we can do good things
for other people and he said that there was an adaptive advantage to reciprocal altruism
that if you do something good for somebody else they're likely to do something good for
you. In evolutionary times suppose you come back from the hunt with a big leg of meat
and you bring that back and you don't have any storage facilities, you can't eat the
whole leg, your own family and so you might invite other people to share this leg of meat
with you and you don't get any direct benefit at the time. Why should you do that? Well because
next week maybe this individual will come back from the hunt and have his own leg of
meat and might share with you. So reciprocal altruism became important.
Also parental investment theory was suggested. With parental investment theory this says
that women and men invest far differently in their offspring. Women invest at least
nine months and with lactation probably more like at least three or four years in raising
the offspring and in actual fact probably more like ten years in raising an offspring
and men on the other hand at least in terms of minimal investment may invest thirty seconds
or a minute in producing offspring. And if that's the case we would expect different
patterns of behavior for women and for men. We might expect pickier women in terms of
picking a man who will provide resources for the offspring during this period of time that
she's investing in them. The man might have different values if this is the case. He might
find it more important to have women who are attractive and who in fact are quite fertile.
That might be a different value system that would be suggested by parental investment
theory. Finally he also suggested parent offspring conflicts and this is obvious because in fact
the parent is related to each of their offspring by the same amount. So as a parent I think
my two sons ought to share equally in things. They don't think that. My son because he's
related a hundred percent to himself, my older son thinks he ought to get twice of everything
that his younger brother gets because he's only related fifty percent to his younger
brother and the younger brother feels the same way about the older brother. So we get
into conflicts because I think they ought to share, they think they ought to distribute
the resources in a different way. In 1975 E. O. Wilson published Social Biology, The
New Synthesis and this was a quite controversial book at the time because he included a chapter
in evolution with respect to humans and this was one of the first times that it was suggested
that evolution could be applied to humans and it was really the beginning even though
he's a biologist, he's not a psychologist but it was the beginning of evolutionary psychology.
Evolutionary thinking as I've mentioned before in a former lecture is a way of asking why
questions as well as what and how questions and that's part of the reason it's kind of
exciting. Okay let me now talk about some of the misunderstandings about evolutionary
theory is applied to human behavior. One common misunderstanding is a false nature nurture
dichotomy and people often get it wrong with respect to evolutionary theory. They think
that people who are supporting evolutionary theory think that if it's built in the environment
has nothing to do with it when in fact most modern day evolutionary theorists thinks it's
both nature and nurture. The old nature versus nurture arguments have really gone by the
wayside is quite naive that it's always nature and nurture according to modern day evolutionary
theorists. A good example of this is suntanning. If I asked you is it nature or nurture that
gives you the color of your skin you might say well I suppose it's nature but in fact
if you stay out in the sun longer you turn darker. These light skinned people do. They
do that because of an adaptation. We have built into us melanin synthesis so that when
we're exposed to UVB sunlight our skin turns darker. That happens because it helps us to
avoid skin cancer. The darker we turn the less of the UVB that we get and it's UVB that
causes skin cancer. So this is nature's way of giving us an umbrella to protect us from
the sun and keep us from getting skin cancer. So why aren't we all just darkest can be?
Well because there's another thing that the sun does for us as well and that's vitamin
D and we get vitamin D from the sun and that's an important nutrient that we need to survive.
So we have to get some sunlight but not too much sunlight and so there is an adaptation
built into us through melanin that allows us to put more of the sun's shade up or less
of the sun's shade up by changing the color of our skin. Now if I asked is the color of
your skin due to built in kinds of things? To nature? Sure is. If you didn't have this
adaptation you wouldn't turn darker. Is it due to the environment? Well of course it's
due to the environment. If you didn't have the sun turning your skin darker it wouldn't
get darker. So in fact it is nature and nurture not nature versus nurture and we can point
that out in nearly every case. That adaptations are not adaptations where they set off some
pattern that's irrevocable but in fact that pattern, that adaptation works with the environment
and it's the combination of those two things that cause our behavior. In a similar way
intelligence is certainly not all built in. People get very upset about these kinds of
arguments sometime when we're trying to indicate that intelligence is due to the intelligence
of your parents. Well it is due to that but it's also due to the environment that you
grow up in. That's why we do things like hang mobiles over children's cribs and things
like that to try to change their intelligence through the environment. So it's a combination
of those things. A second misunderstanding is that if an adaptation is built in that
you can't change it. That if it's that way then you can't step in and do something else.
And again that is not true. We do have the ability to use logical thought to override
behavioral adaptations. These behavioral adaptations give us predispositions to behaving in a particular
way but are not deterministic in saying you have to behave that way. And this is quite
apparent when you have the ability to change things like the intelligence through the environment
A third misunderstanding is that current adaptations the way you are now is optimal.
And that's certainly not the case. Why? Because the current adaptations are due to our ancestral
history not due to today's environment. If you put the whole year, if you take a year
and claim that it's the time that humans have been around which is about 5 million years
some form of human has been around and you put that on a year and you ask where certain
kinds of modern things have happened in that year's time. For example when did agriculture
occur during this year period of time? Agriculture occurred as I recall about 9 o'clock on the
last day of the year. Prior to that there was no agriculture. We didn't till the fields
prior to that. When did cities and civilization occur? That occurred at about 1130 as I recall
during this year. When did the industrial revolution occur? That occurred within minutes of midnight
during this year. Where did our adaptations occur? They occurred through most of this
year's period of time not during the last half day of this period of time. So it's
not surprising that we have mismatches of the way we behave and the way today's society
is. It is not optimal the way we behave. Let me give you an example of that. We love
fat and sugar in our diets. I mean I eat, I would love to be able to eat, I don't do
it because I override it. It can be changed. But I would love to eat every piece of bacon
I see. I would love to be able to eat every twinkie I see. I love and you do too, fat
and sugar. And we're built that way on purpose. Our ancestors seldom ran across fat and sugar.
The animals, even meats back in those days, had 5% or less fat, not the 40% fat that we
get on our well-bred meat today. They didn't get sugar. We eat about two-thirds of a cup
of sugar every week and they didn't have refined sugar. They'd run across a beehive every now
and then or have a little sugar with their fruit. But they didn't have sugar readily
available in their diets. Every time they had a chance at it, they ate it. They also
had an adaptation that said, don't move if you don't have to. They were the ultimate
couch potatoes because that's the way you survive. When you have to go out and hunt,
you go out and hunt. But when you don't, you lie around and don't waste that energy. So
we have that built into us too. And if you look at today's society, that causes all
sorts of problems, in particular obesity and other health problems. Why we are having
a current wave of—we get better and better at putting more sugar and fat into our diet.
We get better and better at not having to move a bit once we sit down. And as we do
that, we have all sorts of health problems that are caused. Is that optimal? It most
certainly isn't optimal. And so, in fact, that's a mismatch. And we will point out
other mismatches as well as we get into more detail about evolution later.
Okay. Let's talk about just a few things having to do with some caveats that we want
to make with respect to evolutionary theory. For one thing, evolutionary theory, we have
to agree is, in fact, the most widely accepted theory about how we got to be the way we are.
However, the scientific belief system itself is just a theory. And there are other belief
systems that we might hold. If you're going to be an educated person, you probably better
know about evolutionary theory as one of the major components of the scientific belief
system. But if you recall back when we were talking about experimentation, for example,
we said that if you manipulate an independent variable, measure a dependent variable, then
you can say that it was the independent variable that caused the dependent variable. And why
did we agree that we could do that? Well, because that's what we believe. Basically,
scientists got together and said, we're going to believe this thing. It seems to work. And
so we're going to decree that that's the way it is. And that's our belief system. That's
the scientific belief system. But there are other personal belief systems that people
can have and that might compete and perhaps run in parallel with the scientific belief
system. Evolutionary psychology is also sometimes criticized as being too post hoc after the
fact that, in fact, my grandmother could have told me that kind of thing. So we already
know an awful lot about human behavior. And so we kind of know how humans are going to
behave to begin with. And we go back to evolutionary theory and we say, what can we justify from
evolutionary theory to explain this kind of behavior? And we discover we can explain
it quite nicely. The problem is that if we had behaved differently in the first place
and we knew that we were, we might have gotten a different cover story from evolutionary
psychology. And the people who are critical of this say that because it's so post hoc,
we can explain anything we might want to explain. And that probably was a criticism fairly early
on in evolutionary psychology. However, that's advanced to the point now where lots of behaviors
that are not obvious are being explained. And I think that is a weakening kind of criticism
of evolutionary theory. Finally, there is a danger in applying what's called the naturalistic
fallacy. The naturalistic fallacy says basically that if it's natural, that must be the way
it's supposed to be. And so we justify things that we shouldn't be justifying using the
naturalistic fallacy. And we've already talked a little bit about why that is not an appropriate
way to do things because of things like mismatches. So if we have different behaviors, say for
men and women, that are predicted by adaptations that have occurred left over from ancestral
times, it is inappropriate for us to say, well, that's the way it should be. It's okay
for women to be that way. It's okay for men to be that way because that's what's built
in. Because there may be an entire mismatch with the way we want our society to be or
the way modern day societies are. Just like it's not okay to eat all the fat and all the
sugar that's provided, there's a mismatch. It's not the society we want to have today
unless we want to have everybody lying in bed highly obese. So in fact, the naturalistic
fallacy is a fallacy. What I think is most important is understanding what the causes
of behaviors are, at least behavioral predispositions. If you want to change society, it's best
to know what our behavioral adaptations are to begin with if we want a society that's
different from that. And to go in naively and pretend that there are no built in adaptations
probably hurts us in trying to build the kind of society we want to build.
So what we've done today is go quickly over evolutionary theory. We have done this so
that we might be able to apply some of this as we're talking about the rest of psychology.
We talked a little bit about how the behaviorists and the cognitive psychologists kind of accepted
a tabula rasa, a blank slate, and how Charles Darwin came along and suggested that there
might be some things built in, how those built in things are accomplished through inheritability,
variation, and selection. And then we talked about some of the more modern adaptations
that have changed the basic theory of evolution. And we talked about some of the misunderstandings
that occur with evolutionary thinking, including the false nature nurture dichotomy, how some
people think you can't change it, and how some people think that it's optimal. And finally
we talked about some caveats you have to employ when you talk about evolutionary thinking.
So we're going to leave it at there, and I hope you will consider these things as we
go on to the other topics in this course. Thank you.
