Lecture 6 Details of Psychoanalytic Theory
In the last lecture, we talked about some of the fundamentals of psychoanalytic theory.
Introduced you to Freud, said how important the unconscious is in our behavior,
and how there's a lot of conflict going on at the unconscious level,
and there's also a lot of different energy forces that are moving at the unconscious level,
at least according to Freud.
And we also talked about some of the parts of our personality, including the id,
sort of the basic part that operates under the pleasure principle,
the ego that operated under the reality principle,
and the superego that operates under a moral principle.
But Freud's theory is more than sort of just a static theory.
As we grow older, we go through developmental stages.
And during these stages, we have this energy that I talked about last time,
this libido, this sexual aggressive energy,
that gets focused on various anatomical parts, according to Freud,
depending upon our particular age.
So I want to go over those stages today with you,
and I also want to talk some about defense mechanisms.
If you'll recall, we said there was a great deal of conflict at the unconscious level,
and we have to sort of protect ourselves from this conflict,
and the way we do it is through defense mechanisms.
So we'll talk some about that.
And finally, in this lecture, we'll wrap up by talking about the usefulness
of psychoanalytic theory today.
Is there anything useful about it today?
So we'll consider some of those topics at the end of the lecture.
All right, let's go to the developmental part of psychoanalytic theory,
and we have various stages of development.
And in these stages of development, we have this psychosexual energy
that is focused on various anatomical parts,
and that's where they get the names for these various stages.
The earliest stage is the oral stage,
and this psychosexual energy is focused on the mouth and on mouthy activities.
And during the oral stage, during the time that it's focused on the mouth,
certain things become important, like eating activities, other mouthy activities.
You'll find children with things that they manufacture to stick into their mouths
in place of their thumbs, and you can't stop kids from sticking their thumbs in their mouths.
They've got their thumbs in their mouths before they're even born.
But they also have things like teething rings and other kinds of things
that they can derive pleasure from these kinds of activities with their mouths.
The general notion in these stages is that you derive pleasure
from the stage, and if you derive sufficient pleasure,
at a certain point you move on to the next stage.
And it's required that you derive this pleasure in order to move on.
And if you don't, you might get hung up in a particular stage.
You might get fixated in a particular stage and not move on to the next.
In fact, initially Freud said it was impossible to move on to the next if you get fixated.
Later, he softened that position a little bit and said that you can move on in certain ways,
but leave some of your behaviors behind in the earlier stages as well.
So as I go through the stages, we'll talk a little bit about what happens
if you get fixated in that stage.
So you have this little kid who is concerned about mouthy activities,
especially eating, and you don't have to teach the kid.
They are born with reflexes to root for the mother's nipple,
and then once they get the mother's nipple to suckle on it,
you don't have to teach them that kind of thing.
They already have that mouthy activity built right into them.
And if they get enough to eat and they're satisfied with their mouthy activities,
they will move on to the next stage.
But if they're not, they may get hung up to some extent at least in the oral stage,
and that can be shown by a number of different possible fixations.
Somebody who doesn't get enough to eat, for example,
it might show up in later over-concern with eating activities,
and lead to obesity, lead to eating too much,
lead to perhaps eating disorders like bulimia and anorexia,
that sort of thing that all have to do with mouth and eating activities.
So that's one way that you might find somebody, at least according to Freud,
that would be a reason, an explanation, a cause for these kinds of behaviors.
It also might show up in certain kinds of leftover mouthy functions.
Back when, about 20 years ago, I had smoked pipe for about 15 years,
and smoking a pipe back in those days, lots of professors did that.
So I smoked a pipe, and probably half the time I had the pipe in my mouth,
it wasn't even lit.
I just enjoyed having that pipe in my mouth, and it allowed me to do mouthy kinds of things.
Today I use a toothpick sometimes in the same way.
When I'm lecturing on this in a large classroom,
I'll usually look around about this point in the lecture
and see three or four students with their pencils in their mouths,
and I say, aha, there you go.
You're still hung up to some extent in the oral phase.
So eating too much, smoking too much.
Freud, if he were around today, might argue that smoking was part of this,
and in fact, as I mentioned in the last lecture, Freud smoked a cigar himself,
and it caused him all sorts of health problems.
So smoking too much, perhaps even talking too much.
That's a mouthy activity.
Probably most professors are hung up to some extent in the oral stage,
at least according to Freud, because of the amount that they talk.
Now, assuming you've gotten through this stage,
and have satisfied, had the proper satisfaction in this stage,
you would then move on to the next stage.
The first stage would have occurred during the first year of life
and into the second year of life.
At about this time, with proper satisfaction,
you move, the energy becomes affected or focused on the other end of the gastrointestinal tract,
on the anus, and it's called the anal stage.
And this stage occurs during the second year and into the third year of life,
and it varies a little bit depending upon certain kinds of conditions.
During the anal stage, there may be a certain amount of pleasure
that's derived from the actual physiological activity of elimination.
But there's also pleasure derived because it's the first time
you have to follow somebody else's rules.
Because what happens during this time, if you look around,
you'll see that toilet training occurs during this time.
And so anal activities become very important in terms of toilet training.
And somebody now imposes some rules on this otherwise wonderful kind of existence
that you've led up until this time.
You have to do certain things at the right time in the right way.
And if you do so, you can get pleasure because you've satisfied somebody else.
Now, things can go wrong in this phase, too.
So in this stage, you can have a situation
where your parents are too concerned about getting it exactly right.
And so they impose this.
It's a particular time. It's two years of age.
Everybody's ready to toilet train at two years of age,
whether or not you're physiologically ready.
Here's how you do it.
They set up the whole situation in a very particular way.
And according to Freud, if this happens and there's over emphasis
on sort of the details of it,
a person might end up being obsessive-compulsive about things.
And we call somebody anal that way.
That's directly out of psychoanalytic theory.
If you accuse somebody of being anal,
you're saying what happened during the anal stage
is that there was too much emphasis on all of these details.
It could go the other way, too.
If there's not enough emphasis on that,
according to Freud, you might end up being kind of a slovenly person.
You look around and this person, you walk into their house
and there are things stacked all over and stacks of clothing over in the corner
that need washing and all of this would be an indication
of slovenly behavior that's left over from the anal stage, too.
So that's what happens.
And there are even more symbolic things,
like smearing somebody else metaphorically through things like gossip.
And Freud might say that that's a symbolic way
of still being in the anal stage.
Assuming you got through that stage okay
and you derived appropriate pleasure,
you would move on to the third stage, which is named the phallic stage.
The phallic stage occurs around three years to about five years.
You'll notice here the beginnings of the fact that Freud
sometimes gave women not their proper due,
because this is named after a male anatomical part,
not a female anatomical part.
So this energy gets affected or focused on the genitalia
and for little boys this becomes very important
for activities that have to do with dominance activities.
It's true that some of it may be some masturbatory activities, for example,
but also it has to do with activities that are aggressive.
Perhaps this is from our last lecture
where we were talking about the death instinct
and how that leads to aggression.
In this case, there's aggression.
And this aggression seems to be moving toward competition
and trying to establish where you are in the dominance hierarchy of life.
And so you see little boys who are playing with guns and swords,
sort of symbolic phallic symbols in this case.
You see little boys playing games like King of the Hill,
I'm bigger, better than you are,
kinds of more powerful, I'm up here and you're down here,
kinds of games.
And so this phallic stage is very important
during this period of time for little boys.
For girls, something slightly different is happening
and we'll talk about that in a few minutes
when we talk about the latent phase.
So for the little boys at this point,
they're playing these aggressive games
and they can get fixated in this stage as well.
If they don't get enough satisfaction in this stage,
that would be manifest perhaps later on
in somebody who's too overly competitive, for example.
The 45-year-old guy who's still out there in the basketball court
throwing elbows and trying to prove that he's a super jock
when he's well past his prime,
that would be an indication that somebody is hung up in the phallic stage still.
Or perhaps in his profession, he's a stockbroker.
He wants the biggest portfolio around,
or he's an architect and wants to build the most magnificent
and tallest building around.
All of these would be indications
that he's hung up in the phallic stage to some extent.
Another indication of that is the way that men treat women.
And in this stage, women are prizes to be won.
They're trophies.
And we even have language for that, a trophy wife, for example.
This person is a trophy.
And we also have a language for what goes on here.
Did you score last night?
I mean, this sounds like a game, doesn't it?
We're trying to treat women as objects in the phallic stage.
In fact, the whole word game has recently come back into vogue.
Do you have game, meaning can you play the field
and have some success with that sort of thing with women?
So in fact, if women are being treated as objects,
that would be some indication that the male is still in the phallic stage.
Okay, toward the end of the phallic stage, something happens
that I don't want to go into great detail now
that causes what's sometimes called a latent period.
And I'll come back and talk about why that is.
Once that period goes by,
then it is possible to move into the final stage,
and that's the genital stage.
And in the genital stage,
we still have the energy affected on the genitalia,
but it's in a very different way.
It's no longer a competitive way.
It's at this stage, which was Freud's final stage,
and he gets some criticism for that
because it seems unusual.
This stage occurs at about the time of puberty, the genital stage.
And to say that the person is fully formed and mature
right at puberty seems to be a stretch.
To claim that we don't, through the rest of our lives,
have psychosexual stages going on,
seems to be something of a criticism of Freud.
But at any rate, in the genital stage,
what we now have is the ability to form a sharing,
caring kind of relationship with somebody else
so that we have a sort of more permanent,
the woman is now not an object,
but in fact a partner in an enterprise
and intimacy develops that allows this kind of relationship.
And that's the genital phase, that stage, I'm sorry,
that occurs during about the time of puberty
if you've successfully negotiated all of these other stages.
Now let me go back a minute and talk about
one of the more entertaining aspects of psychoanalytic theory.
And this one, some people, I have trouble lecturing about this
with quite a straight face, but let me do it anyway.
In the phallic stage, let's go back to that
and let's take the little boy.
The little boy is interested in competition,
interested in winning the biggest prizes,
women are prizes to be won,
who would be the biggest prize to win?
Well, the most important woman in his life, who's mom.
So at the unconscious level,
now let's get this right, this is the unconscious level,
we don't have this little boy scheming to go out on a date
with mom and get her into bed or something like that,
but indeed what Freud says, and this was shocking to people,
was at the unconscious level,
the little boy does want to sexually possess mom.
He does want to go to bed with mom,
and that's a desire he has to win mom in this way.
But there's a problem, of course, and the problem is dad.
Dad's in the way, dad already has mom,
and he knows he can't quite get by dad, dad's a big guy,
and on top of that, dad may castrate him.
And so he has castration anxiety from dad.
And so dad's in the way, and he can't do this.
And this is a conflict, sometimes called the
the Oedipal conflict, or the Oedipal complex,
it's sometimes called that as well.
After a Greek tragedy where Oedipus wrecks
as a young man went to a foreign land
and then came back and fell in love with this older woman
and ended up having a relationship with her,
and then later found out it was his mom,
at which point he poked his eyes out
and other kind of the usual things that happen
in Greek tragedies.
And so this is named after Oedipus wrecks.
It's called the Oedipal conflict.
And so this is the conflict.
He'd like to possess mom, dad's in the way.
What's he gonna do here?
Well, we've written songs about that kind of thing.
I want a gal just like the gal who married dear old dad.
Well, he can't have mom, so he wants a gal
just like the gal who married dear old dad.
How does he get a gal like the gal who married dear old dad
to act like dad?
Dad was successful in doing this.
So in fact, he can act like dad in order to accomplish this.
And so he ends up learning to walk like dad
and talk like dad and do things the way dad does,
what's sometimes called sex typing.
He learns appropriate behavior for his sex
so that he can accomplish the getting of somebody like mom
since he can't have mom.
And so this latent phase takes a certain amount of time to do.
You'll remember that the phallic stage, we said,
is over about five years of age
when this Oedipal conflict is resolved.
And then you have to have this period of time up until puberty
for all of this learning to occur
for the little boy to learn to act like dad
so he can have somebody like mom.
All right, now what happens to the little girl?
This is all boy-related here.
Well, the little girl at this point, according to Freud,
looks around and she discovers that she's missing something.
She's missing an anatomical part.
She doesn't have a penis.
And so she has what's called penis envy, according to Freud.
Again, quite a controversial kind of a concept.
And so she feels incomplete without this penis.
And so how is she going to get this?
Well, dad's got one.
So it's kind of a similar situation,
a parallel situation with the little boy
because dad has one and so she would like to possess dad,
but she can't because mom's in the way.
And that's a conflict.
And this is called the electro-conflict for the little girl
after another character in a play
that had a similar sort of thing to Oedipus Rex.
So it's the electro-conflict.
So she can get somebody like dad
by acting like mom as a wife and a lover,
but she can also get a penis by having a child.
So she can have a boy child who has one of these.
And so she can also act like mom not just as a wife,
but also as a mother.
And so during this latent phase for her,
from the end of the phallic stage
until puberty and the genital stage,
she watches mom, acts like mom,
tries to act like a wife and tries to act like a mother.
So that's sort of the inner workings here of these stages.
And people find that sort of unusual and a bit bizarre
when they first hear those things.
All right, let's move on to a slightly different topic.
We'll come back and talk about stages
just a little bit at the end of the lecture.
Let's move on and talk some about defense mechanisms.
Again, if we go back to the first lecture on psychoanalytic theory,
what we ended up with was an unconscious level
where we had all of this seething kind of activity going on
because we had the death wish
and we had the life instinct that we're sort of fighting with each other
to try to gain control of the personality.
And we had the id who was trying to operate on a pleasure principle
completely unchecked by other parts of the personality
and instinctual kind of thing.
And then we had the superego that was like our conscience
that contained all the rules and was fighting with the id.
And we had the ego that was trying to referee this whole big mess
and through self-image and some other ways trying to mediate here.
But nevertheless, we end up with a great deal of conflict
at the unconscious level.
And that conflict sort of gets in the way of a good self-image.
And so, in fact, if we want to be mentally healthy,
one thing that we need to do is develop ways of coping
with all of this conflict that's going on.
And so Freud suggested that we do this
by, again, at the unconscious level, lying to ourselves a little bit, basically.
And having certain kinds of mechanisms to defend our sense of worth
from all of this stuff that's going on at the unconscious level.
And he called these defense mechanisms.
Now, he had a whole bunch of these defense mechanisms.
I just want to talk about three of these
as illustrative of the kinds of defense mechanisms he was talking about.
The first one that I will mention is repression.
With repression, again, if you picture the iceberg we had last time
with above the water line and the conscious level
and below the water line, the unconscious level,
what repression does is use this censoring mechanism at the water line
to push down and hold down everything at the unconscious level.
So we have certain thoughts and feelings
that we have a difficult time dealing with.
And so they don't enter into our conscious level.
Their push down doesn't mean they don't cause us problems.
They can still cause us some problems.
But at least at the conscious level, we feel pretty good
because we don't have to deal with all of this conflict
that's seething down at the unconscious level.
We keep it repressed.
We keep it pushed down at that level.
A second one and widely used one is rationalization.
With rationalization, in fact, some would argue
that that's the main function of the conscious level,
is to rationalize the way we're behaving
when, in fact, the cause of the way we're behaving
is derived at the unconscious level
and what our conscious level does
is run around looking at our behavior
and trying to come up with excuses
for why we behaved the way we did.
That's rationalization.
We can lie to ourselves a number of ways.
We can lie to ourselves about, for example,
suppose you have a goal you want to reach
and you can't reach that goal.
Well, one way to lie to yourself is to say,
well, the goal wasn't worth anything anyway,
the sort of Esop's fable about the fox
that was jumping up and trying to grab the grapes
and they were too high for him to get them
and he stalked off saying they were probably sour anyway.
So we say that the goal wasn't worth it.
We've rationalized that.
Or perhaps we rationalize a particular barrier
that's keeping us from getting to a goal.
And so that barrier, we blame on other people,
that barrier instead of blaming it on our own inadequacies
that keep us from reaching the goal.
So there are a number of ways you can employ rationalization
as a defense mechanism.
A third one is projection,
where you project some characteristic about yourself
on somebody else and attribute it to them
instead of to yourself.
There's a kind of cute piece of research
that was done on a fraternity,
where they went in and had all the fraternity brothers
rate themselves on such things as how generous or stingy am I,
how friendly or unfriendly am I,
and they rated their fraternity brothers as well.
And then they went in and they found that for a lot of people
they discovered that perhaps one person was rated as fairly stingy.
And so they then went to look at that person's ratings
and he rated himself as being quite generous,
but rated most of the other people as quite stingy.
He projected this characteristic of himself onto the other people.
And so this is another defense mechanism.
Again, these are all, let me remind you,
you're at the unconscious level.
We're not doing this.
We're not thinking devious thoughts at the conscious level
and making up stories and that sort of thing.
All of these are happening at the unconscious level.
And there are others like intellectualization,
sublimation, and some other defense mechanisms
that you might have heard of.
Now, are these good or are these bad?
Are these good for you or bad for you?
And how effective are they?
Well, I do a little exercise in my class
to try to illustrate this.
I say, imagine a continuum.
And on one end of the continuum is bad.
This is the worst person you can imagine.
This person is not smart, is devious, is ugly,
slimy as character you can imagine.
The other end, imagine good.
And that's the best person you can,
an honest person, smart, friendly,
the best person you can imagine.
And now what I want you to do, I tell my students,
is put yourself on this continuum somewhere.
Put a mental check mark on this continuum
as where you think you are.
I said, now I'm going to keep it simple.
I'm just going to bisect this continuum
right in the middle.
And I want you to decide whether your check mark
was on the good end of the continuum
or the bad end of the continuum.
Then I tell them all to close their eyes,
and I say, I'm not going to do this until I see every eye closed here.
And then I want you to hold up your hand
and tell me whether you are on the good end of the continuum
or the bad end of the continuum.
Okay, so everybody closes their eyes,
and I quickly hold up your hand,
and I look around and then, okay,
on the bad end of the continuum, hold up your hand.
And after they do that,
I tell them, okay, open your eyes.
I said, I just counted,
and there were three people out of this class of 200
who were in the lower half of the continuum.
Three people.
I said, now this is an exceptional class, probably.
But surely,
we have more than three people
who, if reality were to hold sway,
would be in the lower half of the continuum.
Why do most of you think you're in the upper half of the continuum?
I think it's because you employ defense mechanisms,
and you do so rather well.
I say, I think that's probably a good thing,
because I think defense mechanisms,
I would sure rather deal with people in life
who think well of themselves
than people who think badly of themselves.
So I think from a mental health point of view,
it's probably a good idea.
As long as you don't over-employ these,
because if you employ these to great an extent,
that's almost the definition of mental illness.
If you lie to yourself such that there's a break with reality,
that in fact is a definition of psychosis,
as we will see later on.
So when employed sort of in a normal way,
this is probably a good thing, defense mechanisms.
Okay, finally, let's talk a little bit about the usefulness
for today's world of Freud's psychoanalytic theory.
I mentioned in the last lecture
that some of my colleagues wonder
why I even talk about this anymore,
because they see very little usefulness.
And the major reason they see little usefulness
is that they don't believe it has any scientific credentials.
We talk about it as a theory,
but in fact in some respects it's an almost untestable theory.
How do you refute it?
How do you say no, there's not such a thing as repression?
Or how do you say,
no, there's not just the three parts of the personality,
there's another part.
How do you test that?
How do you run an experiment?
It's not a scientific theory,
it's really a way of talking about things,
more of a language.
And maybe if we accept it at that level,
that maybe we're better off.
In fact, Makita Brotman,
in an article I just read about a half a year ago,
was arguing that Freud is still valuable,
but not so much to psychologists anymore,
that in fact writers and theorists and philosophers
still like Freud a lot.
And they quote him a lot much like they do Marx or Hegel,
and consider him sort of a philosophy point of view,
not a scientific point of view.
And he was also an excellent writer,
and people appreciate that about Freud too.
So maybe there's something there in terms of our thought
about people and what human nature is like,
even if there's not too much scientific basis to it.
Linda Peterson wrote a tongue-in-cheek article
a few years ago about Freud,
and let me just mention some of this article.
She talks about how women have the mystery of birth,
and how this is a wondrous event,
and how man is gazed in wonder at the mystery of birth
and the new child,
and they're odd that the woman has this power and fortitude
to bring forth a new life.
And they have an envy that is the result of this.
And that envy is an envy called vagina envy.
Now this sounds a little familiar, doesn't it?
And that so they envy the fact
women can bring children into the world,
and that little boys are in awe of this,
and they wish to accomplish something different,
something that their poor organ can't accomplish.
And so in the man there's a sense of being incomplete,
a lack of inner self.
And so they have this vagina envy,
and so this results in things like
little boys wanting to have pockets in their pants,
and businessmen having pockets all over
in their shirts and pants,
and all of this in vagina envy.
She's doing this somewhat tongue-in-cheek, of course,
and pointing out the fact
that there is not much scientific basis
to psychoanalytic theory,
and you can change the language
and use it the other way around
to justify other kinds of concepts,
and that there's no way of refuting that.
Just like there's no way of refuting penis envy,
there's probably no way of refuting vagina envy either.
All right, is there anything in psychoanalytic theory for us?
I think I pointed out last time
that I think the most important thing in psychoanalytic theory
is the whole notion of unconscious,
because we do use unconscious
in building our social institutions.
And I think that's a very important
residual concept from it,
and nearly everybody believes that,
and that's a basic tenet of this theory.
It's also probably true that if you got rid
of the anatomical names,
we could even find some validity
in the various stages.
Indeed, I could argue that the first stage
should be probably if not,
we won't call it an oral stage,
but let's call it almost a survival stage.
You have to learn how to survive
when you're a kid, how to keep from choking,
how to get enough food in you to survive,
and that's a very sort of individual thing.
And then up to a point that works,
but then you have to learn to follow somebody else's rules.
Let's not call it the anal stage,
but let's call it sort of picking up on other people's rules,
so somebody says you have to do this,
and you have to learn how to do that.
And then the third stage, let's not call it the phallic stage,
but let's call it a socialization stage, let's say,
where you have to learn not only the rules
of one other person,
but now you have to learn the rules of society.
Where do I fit into that?
And finally, you probably, at some point,
in order to be a mature individual,
have to have the capability of developing
an intimate relationship with somebody as well.
So if we get rid of the anatomical names,
perhaps even that has some validity to it.
So now we've been over the various parts
of psychoanalytic theory,
and you can take it for what it's worth at this point.
If you find it useful as a language to talk about things,
then I'm glad that I told you some about it.
Thank you.
