These lectures are part of the Great Courses series they are produced by the teaching company.
These lectures are titled Psychology of Human Behavior Part 2.
Lecture 13 Physical Therapies, ECT, Surgery, Genes.
In this lecture we are going to continue our exploration of the physical therapies.
You will recall we had gone completely over the various classifications of disorders.
Then last time we talked about how there were different categories of therapies that might be employed for these particular disorders.
The physical therapies, as you will recall, are based upon the notion that there is something physically, perhaps biochemically,
something wrong with the physiology of the person.
If the problem is at that level then you want to intervene at that level and you want to do something to try to manipulate biochemically
the central nervous system or even structurally the central nervous system.
So that is what we are going to talk about today.
The last time we talked about drug therapies, psychopharmacological interventions,
where you might have an effect at the neurotransmitter level and try to change behavior in the way that neurons talk to one another.
So that is a very widely and the most widely practiced version of physical therapies.
Today we are going to talk about a couple of other versions of physical therapies.
These are quite controversial and toward the end we will talk a little bit about some of the ethics involved in using these therapies.
The first thing that we are going to talk about are shock therapies.
There are several kinds of shock therapies that we will mention and go into the history of those shock therapies and go into the practice of these shock therapies today.
We are then going to talk briefly about psychosurgery, a technique that was used quite a bit in the past and to some extent still today,
where you actually go in and try to change the structure of the brain.
And then we are going to talk a little bit about gene therapy and while that is not currently used today,
it holds great hope for the future and we will talk a little bit about that and also talk then about some of the ethics of these therapeutic techniques.
So let's start off talking some about shock therapies.
And by shock here we are not necessarily referring to electrical shock.
We are really talking about the body going into shock and as we will see in a minute, the shock usually produces a convulsion
and it is that convulsion that may have some therapeutic benefit for the person.
You might wonder why somebody ever thought that maybe going into shock and having a convulsion would be good for you
and this was approached by a fellow in Hungary and I will tell you a bit of the story here in a minute,
but he thought he saw in the data that people who have convulsions like grand mal seizures who have epilepsy, let's say,
have a decreased incidence of schizophrenia.
It turns out the data were wrong that he was looking at, but he thought he saw that trend.
And this is the mid-1930s. He actually did this in 1934, 1935
and back in those days that was long before we had committees for the use of human subjects
and you'll also realize that people were in mental institutions and had been there for a long, long time.
This is prior to psychoactive drugs that would benefit their condition.
So these people were often in mental institutions for the rest of their lives.
In fact, schizophrenia, which is called dementia precox at that time, was considered to be a disease that was a deteriorating disease
so that you got it and you got worse and worse throughout the rest of your lifespan
and that there was nothing that you could do for it.
So in those dire kind of circumstances, it was considered at that time at least appropriate to do some experimentation
on mental patients to see if you could get any improvement.
And so this fellow, Maduna, who had looked at these statistics, decided to do that.
He had a patient named Zolten who was in Budapest, Hungary at the time.
He was in his 30s, a day laborer who had come down with what we would today call catatonic schizophrenia.
And so he would lie on his bed. He had been in the hospital for four years.
He would lie on his bed without moving, just with shallow breathing, unable to take care of himself.
He had to be attended to all the time, had not said a word, not indicated that he was even alive other than the fact he was breathing
for this whole period of time with his catatonic schizophrenia.
And so Maduna decided he would try something with him.
He took camphor and oil and injected it into Zolten.
And Zolten then began to sweat. His breathing became more labored.
And over a 45-minute period, he looked like he was going through more and more distress.
And after about 45 minutes, he went into an actual convulsion, which lasted about a minute or so.
And so he went through this convulsive state, and then the convulsion stopped.
And then he recovered to some extent and started breathing normally.
And there was no apparent difference in his behavior at that point.
And they put him back into bed after that.
Maduna didn't know quite how often to do this, but he kind of guessed from some other kinds of medications.
And he put him on a schedule where about every four or five days he would give him one of these supposed treatments.
And there was no particular effect until after the fifth treatment, Zolten went back to bed.
And two days later, he woke up, sat up in bed, said he was hungry and wanted breakfast,
and got up and had some breakfast, and had no memory of the previous four years.
He had no idea why he was in a hospital, that he had been in a hospital.
And he went around for several hours, about a half a day, and then relapsed back into his catatonic state.
So they did these treatments, continued the treatments, each time he would last a little longer.
And finally, after about the eighth treatment, he went home, resumed work, and five years later,
according to reports, and you sometimes can doubt these things,
but according to reports, five years later, he was still working and able to carry on with his life.
Well, this amazed people when Meduna reported this, because people did think that this was a continuing degenerative kind of disease he had.
And so other people began trying this.
They quit using camp for an oil and started using some other kinds of drugs,
and shortly thereafter went to insulin shock, that they would put people into an insulin shock.
And so they used various kinds of chemicals with mixed success.
All the stories are not like Zoltan's story here.
Some of the stories are not nearly so good.
And in fact, over the years, chemical induced, chemically induced shock has been decreasing,
and was completely eliminated then after a few years, largely because of the next treatment that I'm going to talk about.
Because with chemically induced shock, it's very much dependent upon the person's weight.
It takes a long period of time, and during that time, prior to a convulsion, the patient is very uncomfortable,
and there are all sorts of different kinds of potential problems with it.
So at about the same time, it was 1938 in this case, a couple of people in Italy decided that maybe they could induce convulsions a different way.
And rather, this story is a little strange here, they went to a stockyard apparently,
and saw how animals were having shock put through them to induce unconsciousness prior to being slaughtered.
And so they said, well, if you can produce unconsciousness that way, maybe we can do this with a human.
So they took a patient and put electrodes on either side of the head,
and passed an electric current through the person, and they discovered that rather quickly they could induce a convulsion in the patient.
And this had less complications than chemically induced convulsions.
So they started doing this, and they got pretty good results with it.
At least it was reported that they got good results.
While originally used to treat schizophrenia, as is in the case of Zoltan,
today ECT, which is electroconvulsive treatment, that's where ECT comes from,
this is a convulsion produced electrically, is primarily used for major depression.
In some cases it is used for mania in the manic phase of bipolar disorder,
and in some cases it is still used for catatonic schizophrenia,
but by far and away it is used for major depression.
There are some possible bad side effects of this, especially with the early procedures for ECT,
such as memory loss and even broken bones as the person went into a convulsion.
However, today a very different kind of procedure is used.
Originally the person was given no anesthetic, was given no muscle relaxant,
and the convulsions could be rather large and dramatic.
They could chew their tongue up, they could break their bones and that sort of thing.
Nowadays the person is given a general anesthetic, the person is given a muscle relaxant,
so in fact when they have the convulsions you can just barely see it.
Perhaps you see some twitching in the hands or in the toes,
and that's the indication of a convulsion.
You would never know they had it if you wouldn't hook them up to an EEG machine
and look at their actual brain waves.
So they are also given oxygen during this period of time
since the muscle relaxant is keeping them from breathing.
And also nowadays the electricity is quite different.
It's high voltage, but they often nowadays give brief pulses instead,
and they also have changed the electrode placements in some cases.
Rather than putting them on either side of the head,
they will do it in one hemisphere quite frequently
and not have it go all the way across the brain.
And that apparently helps relieve any memory loss that they might have.
So the undesirable side effects of ECT have been pretty much minimized by today's procedures.
Now you may think that ECT is no longer used
because in fact it got a lot of bad press in the 1960s, 1970s.
You may remember a movie one flew over the cuckoo's nest that Jack Nicholson was in.
And if you saw that movie, you would have seen him supposedly getting ECT at that point
and having great memory loss and very much changing his personality.
And later he was given a prefrontal lobotomy,
which we're going to talk about here in a minute.
And people thought that this was a terrible thing.
The movie portrayed the doctors and the mental health staff as being villains
and Jack Nicholson was the hero in the movie Fighting for Freedom.
There was a general tenor back in those days that this was a bad thing to do
and that it was a barbaric procedure.
And so ECT was nearly discontinued about that point.
And it's only back in recent years that the use of ECT has increased again.
Twenty years ago there were about 33,000 patients a year who got ECT
and today there are about 100,000 patients a year who get ECT.
And it's usually given pretty much in university hospital settings
because many of the other places that used to give ECT
no longer have the appropriate equipment for doing that.
It is used, as I say, for people with major depression.
And it is used generally as a last resort kind of technique.
If a person has major depression they may enter into psychotherapy
and try to talk about the problem to improve their condition.
Following that, if they don't get any improvement,
they may put them on antidepressant drugs and try those,
things like we talked about last time, like Prozac.
If that doesn't work and they've tried it for a long period of time
and the person is severely depressed so that this person may be threatening suicide
or even attempting suicide, looks like a very dangerous situation,
then they might try ECT if they have been resistant to the antidepressant drugs.
So it's usually used while 100,000 people sounds like a lot.
It's not very many compared to the number of people
who have major depression in this country.
So it is a minority of patients who actually get ECT.
Why does it work?
Well, it's rather embarrassing, but we can't tell you why it works.
ECT, there are speculations.
We do know that a person having ECT,
that there's a massive change in the transmitter substances
and so it's probably through the transmitter substances that you have some action.
Perhaps norepinephrine, that sounds from some of the research,
it looks like norepinephrine may be the one,
but all the transmitter substances,
it really does sort of in a minor way dynamite the brain
and change things around and somehow the brain changes the way it allocates transmitter substances
and that's probably the source of the improvement that people get.
And there is an improvement.
People say, well, does this thing even work?
Actually, in about 60 to 70% of the cases,
there's a positive response to ECT.
It's actually one of the best, I mean,
that response is like what you get for Prozac
and some of the other better weapons in our arsenals
against mental health disorders.
So ECT does work and that's good news.
However, it is still very controversial.
Some people think it is a barbaric procedure and it is.
I don't want to be hooked up and have electricity put through my brain.
It sounds pretty barbaric to me.
On the other hand, I don't want to be hooked up and have a heart bypass done either
with my chest cracked open to talk about a barbaric procedure.
So I'm not sure you can just look at kind of the surface level here
and say, well, because it's barbaric, we're not going to use it anymore
because we do a lot of barbaric things in medicine.
There's lots of blood and other kinds of things that happen in medicine
that's not too pleasant.
So I think that's a poor criterion.
Some of the criticisms are that there's memory loss
and certainly with the procedures that was originally done,
there was considerable memory loss.
Today, that's minimized.
The person may have come out of the treatment confused
and even unable to learn something for a few hours that day.
In the more severe cases, the person may have forgotten things that occurred
as the disease came on, as the disorder, the particular disorder came on,
may have lost a couple of months of memory.
But it's very unusual to have memory loss that would affect a person's job
that they forget the way they were trained to do their job or something like that.
That would be unusual.
But that's one of the criticisms that's made of it.
Another criticism is that we don't know why it works.
And that seems like a kind of shaky criticism as well.
We don't know why aspirin works either, but we continue to use it.
So I'm not too sure about that criticism.
But the people who are fighting ECT have had some effect.
In some states, such as California and Texas and Tennessee,
the use of ECT is very restricted by the law.
They had tried in California to completely eliminate ECT,
and it was judged unconstitutional by their courts
that they were infringing upon the mental health establishment
and their ability to make judgments.
But it is severely restricted, and you still hear lots of criticism.
Just last night, I was listening to the TV set and was watching CNN
and a fellow from the Church of Scientology was talking about ECT
and how it was a barbaric process
and how there was this massive memory loss and all the bad things about ECT.
He was also deriding psychiatrists in general and drug therapies
and even the classification system we spent a number of lectures on.
But that's sort of the flavor of what you sometimes get with this criticism.
In 1999, there was a report from the U.S. Surgeon General,
however, that did vouch for the efficacy, that is the effectiveness of ECT
and also the safety of ECT.
So I don't want to be too much, too strong an advocate of it,
but I think it is something that we should still consider as a therapeutic intervention.
Let's move on and talk about psychosurgery.
With psychosurgery, what you do is actually go in and do surgery
on the central nervous system in some way.
Back in 1935, that date is starting to sound familiar
because a number of things happened in the mid-30s there.
There was a procedure invented to try to see whether there could be some improvement
for people who had been in the mental institution,
typically somebody psychotic, typically somebody with schizophrenia,
who had been long-term mental patients in institutions.
This was first done in Portugal by a fellow named Antonio Moniz,
and in fact later, this is a prefrontal lobotomy we're talking about,
later he won the Nobel Prize for this.
In 1949, he won the Nobel Prize for Medicine for this procedure.
As a footnote, he was also shot by a former patient who had had this procedure done to him.
Let me describe the procedure.
This is a prefrontal lobotomy.
The frontal lobe is the part of the brain,
if you look at it from the side toward the back,
you have things like the occipital lobe and you have the temporal lobe on the side
and in front, behind the forehead, you have the frontal lobe.
And the prefrontal area is the very front part of that,
the part kind of right up above the eyeballs.
And that's the prefrontal area.
And they thought that there might be some benefit by severing the connections from the prefrontal area
that go to the deeper parts of the brain.
And so they did surgery on several patients to find out whether there was any improvement,
where they would open the skull and actually go in and sever the connections
and in some cases remove the prefrontal cortex from the patient.
And when they did this, they discovered that some of the patients,
probably the majority of patients, changed in terms of how upset they were,
how agitated and even how aggressive they were.
So you took a patient who had been in the mental hospital for 30 years,
his patient perhaps running around being aggressive, having to be literally kept in a cage
or tied to a bed.
And now you do this procedure on the patient and the patient is much quieter,
appears to be much happier.
And in fact, originally they could not find any noticeable change in intelligence
if they gave them an intelligence test.
And it was a while before they could find out exactly what had happened with this patient.
And that's probably why he won the Nobel Prize.
It seemed that things quieted down in mental institutions.
You had people who were going to be there the rest of their lives.
They now appeared happier.
And so while we look back on it, somewhat a scant at what they did,
at the time it was probably considered a fairly good procedure.
Now there were some bad side effects.
With the original operations, there were mortality rates,
which are high in any time you open the skull.
They did revise the procedure later,
and I don't want to go into too much detail because people get queasy about this.
But there is access to the front part of the brain through the eye socket,
and it's possible to in fact do this procedure with just local anesthetic.
And in some places they would do the procedure as many as 50 patients a day at the height of this.
And this procedure was used on tens of thousands of patients in a 20-year period from 1935 to 1955.
So it was a widely used kind of procedure.
And when they revised the procedure, they had much less mortality rate.
There were some side effects in selected cases of people who had wild personality shifts,
and that's unfortunate.
We do know today a lot more about what the prefrontal cortex does.
And it does have a lot to do with our personalities,
and in particular what it apparently does is have a lot to do with our ability to plan for the future,
to be goal-oriented.
And perhaps that's what makes us uniquely human, in fact.
If animals are unable to anticipate their own death, for example.
We know that's happening.
We can anticipate the future like that.
So some people would argue that's what makes us human.
This procedure is no longer used today, as I've described it.
Sometimes there is psychosurgery that's done a process called orbital undercutting that can be done,
but it's done in a very select way.
We might like to tell a story that people had a moral awakening and decided this was a terrible thing that they were going to do.
And you will notice that this procedure was pretty much discontinued in the mid-1950s.
What else happened in the mid-1950s?
If you listen to the last lecture, you know what happened in the mid-1950s.
Psychoactive drugs came along.
The anti-psychotic drugs came along.
And what you then had the ability to do was make some headway against major disorders like schizophrenia
without having to do psychosurgery.
And that was a big advance.
And so I truly believe that historically the reason why prefrontal lobotomies went into disrepute about that time
was because of the psychoactive drugs.
Psychosurgery is still very controversial.
However, there are some forms of psychosurgery still used.
It is done in a much more specific way for disorders like obsessive-compulsive disorder.
To some extent, if a person has self-destructive behavior,
and some people with episodes of uncontrollable aggression,
and what they do nowadays is go very deep into the brain and destroy very small amounts of tissue,
more like the size of a pea, let's say.
And they'll sometimes do it by dropping an electrode in there and destroying that tissue
without going in with knives and having to cut it out.
It's quite controversial.
It's considered an experimental procedure at this point,
and it's still under review, and they are very careful to get informed consent
before they do this kind of procedure nowadays.
A third thing that could be done is electrode implantation.
That was tried at a certain point.
There was a mental patient, and this was about the time that they were discovering
various parts of the brain, did specific things like having pleasure centers
and pain centers in the brain, and also an arousal center.
And this particular patient, again, this is back before the days of the ethics committees
that would have prevented it, this particular patient had narcolepsy,
a sleep disorder in which he would be sitting there talking to you in a fallacy,
much like some of my students do in my class, just drop off immediately to sleep,
and it would affect his job, and he wasn't able to go about his life normally.
And so they dropped an electrode in his arousal center,
and while they were about it experimentally, they put one in the pleasure center
and in the pain center as well, gave him three buttons so that if he was dropping off to sleep,
he could push his button if he noticed it or somebody else could come push his button
and wake him back up, and it apparently worked fairly well that way.
He tried the pleasure button, loved it, said it was like an orgasmic experience,
he used that quite a bit, he taped over the pain button after trying it once,
very crude kinds of stuff, and that's probably something that we wouldn't ever use.
However, there are possibilities for more sophisticated ways of doing this.
I have a colleague who once worked with chimpanzees, and they would take EEG recordings
off the chimpanzee's brain, and they would present the chimpanzee, for example,
a slice of an orange, which would produce a particular spiking activity in the brain,
and they would then program a computer that whenever this happened,
they would zap the pain center of the chimpanzee's brain,
and they discovered that they could eliminate this particular brain spike that would occur
by giving a pain and then a pleasure signal.
So it perhaps would be possible that if we could identify a particular neurological pattern
in the brain of a particular disorder, it might be possible to reinforce or punish
this kind of thing and get a change in the actual brain waves.
There are no places where this is being done, I should point out,
this is not even an experimental procedure, but a possibility.
The final possibility is genetic engineering.
I made the bold statement some years ago when I was lecturing that we would have cured
most of our mental illnesses by now, because if we could just find where in the gene it was
and do genetic engineering to change that gene, we would be able to have a true cure
for mental illness instead of just treat the disease.
The problem is that I didn't realize when I made that statement
that most mental illnesses, now we know more about the genetic structure, are polygenic.
They're in multiple locations on the gene, and it's very difficult to identify all of those
multiple locations, and on top of that, we still don't know very much about how to engineer
those locations once we get there.
It will in the future be possible to splice genes and do some changes like that
if we can discover the location of schizophrenia, let's say,
where we then go in and tweak those genes wherever schizophrenia occurs
and try to correct the disorder. That's a great hope for the future.
Now that the human genome project is complete, perhaps we can move that direction.
But even in genetics, they're discovering that this is a far more complex situation
than was ever imagined, so this is a hope for the future,
but not something that we can currently do.
I just want to talk a minute about some ethical concerns.
As I've talked about these things, you might say, isn't that terrible?
My goodness, the psychosurgery of all things, and ECT, I sure wouldn't want that.
Who's going to decide that I'm going to have that or not?
Or genetic engineering? Once we start genetic engineering, who's to say
your personality's bad, and so you need to be genetically engineered to be different?
You can imagine the ethical concerns. I suppose we could do
do electrode implantation, and we measure your EEG,
and any time you have an anti-government thought, we zap you and get you to change your...
Now we're talking Big Brother here, and I hope that scares you.
It certainly scares me. The problem is, anytime we have something in our arsenal
to go against abnormal behavior, we've discovered something that could go against behavior in general.
And when we are having as much difficulty as we saw in an earlier lecture defining
what's abnormal behavior and what's normal behavior, what are the boundaries there
and where do we draw the line, then who makes the decision about when we change behavior?
It's a real scary question. Do we let the mental health people make that decision?
Do we allow the patient to make the decision?
A patient that might be debilitated by the disorder?
Do we let that patient's family make the decision?
Do we have a board of lay people who are not professionals make that decision?
It's a real big question, and as we get more and more control over abnormal behavior,
we'll have more and more control over behavior as well,
and those kinds of questions are going to be continuing questions that stay with us
and will bother us and we'll have to deal with them as we go through these kinds of therapies.
I say that specifically with reference to physical therapies because those scare people the most
because they seem to operate without even considering the human and the human's judgment.
So you see what the problems are.
So today we finished up talking about physical therapies.
We covered electrical and also shock treatment as well as some chemically induced shock treatments
and some of the history of that and it's used today.
We talked about psychosurgery and some of the tainted history of psychosurgery
and how it is used in a very limited extent today.
We talked about electrode implantation and the possibility for future use as a therapy
and we also talked about the possibility of using gene therapy as well.
Next time we'll move on to a different type of therapy, the talking therapies.
Thank you.
