Lecture 16 Behavior Therapies Classical Conditioning
In this lecture we're continuing our series of therapies and the various kinds of therapies.
If you'll recall we've gone over all the mental illnesses and we've talked already about two categories of therapies.
These were based upon different notions of what causes the problem in the first place.
The first type was physical therapies and we talked about drugs and we also talked about some things like electroshock treatment and physical and psychosurgery.
That was based upon the premise that the problem was of a physiological or biological nature.
Then we spent a couple of lectures talking about psychotherapies, the talking therapies.
Those were based upon the notion that if we have a problem it's due to inappropriate thinking,
either at the unconscious level where thinking and emotions reside according to psychoanalytic theory,
or due to inappropriate thinking at the conscious level, as is the case with theories like cognitive and humanistic theories and therapies of psychotherapy.
Today we're going to move to a new and different topic and that has to do with behavior therapies.
With behavior therapies the premise is that they're due to inappropriate learning.
That somewhere in our lives we've learned responses to certain stimuli and that those responses may be inappropriate responses.
And according to the behaviorists there were two major forms of learning.
One form of learning has been called classical conditioning and what we're going to talk about today are behavior therapies based upon classical conditioning.
And the other form of simple learning is operant conditioning and in the next lecture we're going to talk about behavior therapies based upon operant conditioning.
Now this is one place in the course where the order in which I teach the topics is a bit unusual.
In a typical course, in a survey course of psychology, we would have already talked about classical and operant conditioning and later on in this course we'll have a full lecture on each of those two topics.
So instead of lecturing you entirely on that I'm going to give you just a quick overview of what classical conditioning is and the conditions under which it occurs in order to prepare you for the kind of therapy I'm talking about today.
Classical conditioning is the pairing of a stimulus or situation with a particular emotion.
And this pairing is usually, it occurs beyond our control, it's just a situational kind of variable. Let me give you an example.
You have a child is walking to school and at a certain point on the trip to school a large dog comes over and jumps on the child and starts barking and perhaps even nibbling on the child a little bit and scares the child to death.
Okay, not literally to death. Scares the child a lot.
And after this then the child has developed a kind of phobia. I don't really call it phytophobia or exactly what you would call it but he has a fear now of large dogs.
And this occurred not because the child was thinking about dogs, not because there was some unconscious level that was causing conflict but in fact simply because he had the stimulus, a large dog, paired up with a very frightening situation and the child had this involuntary response to the frightening situation.
And in the future when these pairings occur again, when you have another large dog, the child is likely to feel that way again.
So that's a very simple kind of explanation for how classical conditioning works.
You have a pairing of a stimulus or situation with a highly emotional kind of feeling and that pairing might occur again in the future.
And it's not something that the child tried to learn, it's in fact in this case an inappropriate response.
You wouldn't want the child to be afraid of every big dog that comes along.
And then the second thing that kind of happens when this occurs, after classical conditioning has occurred, the child will then try to avoid situations with big dogs.
Maybe the child will refuse to go to school that same route again because he's afraid he'll run into the big dog again.
And this leads to avoidance conditioning or avoidance learning, another topic we'll talk about later.
And one of the interesting things about avoidance learning is it tends to be self-reinforcing.
So the child takes a different route to school, misses the dog, says, phew, I missed the dog, I'm reinforced because the dog didn't attack me this time.
And that makes it more likely for the avoidance to recur.
And the child's going to take that other route the whole time.
If somebody has a fear of heights, they avoid climbing ladders or climbing trees.
Somebody has a fear of snakes, they avoid going into the woods.
And as they avoid it each time, it reinforces their behavior.
And so a lot of people think that's the way phobias occurred.
Freud thought that that was not the way phobias occurred.
He thought that we had this generalized anxiety at the unconscious level and that a phobia was simply a manifestation,
one external manifestation of this unconscious level of anxiety that we have.
But the people who do behavior therapy don't think that's the way phobias occur.
They think it's simply inappropriate learning of a simple nature as in the case of classical conditioning.
In some cases, it requires multiple pairings, but in particularly strong cases, as the case of the large dog,
even one pairing will bring about this particular phobia.
And the goal then of therapy is to substitute a new response for this inappropriate response when it occurs.
And the inappropriate response will then go away if we have a new appropriate response to it.
Joseph Volpe devised a therapy called systematic desensitization,
which is a form of behavior therapy based upon classical conditioning,
in which he paired stimuli progressively from the weakest to the strongest with a new response.
And so you take a stimulus that produces anxiety and you start with a weak stimulus and pair it with a new response
all the way up into pairing it with a strong stimulus until you have repaired these things enough
that you have a new response even to a strong stimulus.
And I'm going to give you and walk you through a case of this systematic desensitization today
and sort of have you pretend that you're a client who's come to see me
and you want systematic desensitization done because you have a phobia, an undue fear, let's say, of closed places.
And that this phobia is so strong it's preventing you from going about your daily activities,
that you have to drive to work and it's a little crowded in your car
and you have to go through a tunnel to get there and that's very terrifying for you
and then you get the work, have to get into an elevator to go to an upper floor
and you even take the steps because you don't want to get in the elevator.
So this is causing you a lot of problems because you have this phobia, this undue fear of closed places.
And so we're going to deal with that in a therapeutic session.
Now the first thing I might want to do is set up this hierarchy of anxiety producing events
from the weakest to the strongest.
Alright, so I might ask you, well tell me about a situation in which you have just a little bit of anxiety but not very much.
Now when I present this at my university, I'm usually in a lecture hall that holds 200 students
but doesn't have any windows, feels a little tight actually in that lecture hall
and somebody might say, well a room like this would make me a little bit anxious, not too bad,
I could probably stand it but I'd be just a little bit anxious in this room.
So that might be a good step.
And so I'd write that down and say, now what I want you to do is come up with a realistic image of this,
as strong an image as you can that has all the detail in it,
so it's not only the lecture hall, sort of a concept of this room,
I want you to have an image like you're sitting in this room
and you can look around and you see that the walls are paneled
and you can see that the chairs have green upholstery on them
and you can see me up front with the blackboard and other things in the lecture room.
So that when in the future I ask you to call up an image of this event,
you can come up with a full-fledged image of the event.
And then we'd move on to now I want you to come up with a situation
that is just a little more anxiety-provoking.
So we might take another classroom that's smaller that holds maybe 30 people
and again I want you to have this full-fledged image of this event
so that you can imagine it in a great detail.
And then what would be a bit more anxiety-provoking than that?
Well, a seminar room that only holds maybe eight people would be even
and I'd start feeling really pretty uncomfortable in that room this person might say.
And then we work our way through to say the elevator in the specific elevator,
one the person's familiar with, they can look around the elevator,
see the rails and see what the walls are made of
and again have a firm image of this in their mind,
and they're probably down to something that's very anxiety-provoking for the person.
So they might picture being shut up in a foot locker, let's say,
which would be probably anxiety-provoking to most of us,
but being terrifying to this person with the claustrophobia.
So what we've attempted to do is go from fairly little anxiety
to great anxiety situation in about 12 to 14 steps.
And you want to make those steps about equal so that subjectively at least
it seems to the person as if we're just going one more step toward a greater anxiety
with each of those particular situations.
And we want to again have images that are high fidelity enough
that the person can call those up and it almost seems like the person is in that situation.
So that's the first step that we would go through here.
The second step is to try to teach the person to relax.
The general notion is here as we do our pairing
is that it's impossible to be relaxed and anxious at the same time,
that there's no way that your muscles can all be relaxed
and you're lying back and feeling comfortable and still be anxious.
So what we're trying to do is replace the anxiety from this event with the relaxation
and we're trying to do so by teaching the person to relax.
Most of us don't know how to relax.
We tell somebody to relax and they're tense and they...
What do you mean, relax?
Well, there are ways of teaching people to relax
and one of those ways is systematic muscle relaxation
or progressive muscle relaxation and this is taught to the client typically.
And I'm going to take you through that.
I'm going to sit down in a chair here
and I'm going to go through various muscle groups and get myself very relaxed
and what I'd like to encourage you to do if you're in an appropriate situation
is to go through this with me.
So if you're in the audience, if you can find a chair and sit down,
one preferably with arms where you can sit back comfortably,
I would encourage you to go through this little exercise with me.
If you're driving down the road in a car and listening to this on tape or a CD,
don't do these exercises, do them later.
I'm going to sit down here for a minute
and sit down and try to take a fairly comfortable posture
and lean back and I have a chair here that I have my arms on
and what we're going to do is go through these muscle relaxation exercises.
In order to do that, we're going to start with one particular.
You could start different places in the body.
I'm going to start with the right arm and the right forearm and fist.
The first thing I'm going to do is squeeze those together
and then I let it loose and I feel it starting to relax a little bit.
Not a whole lot, but a little bit at this point.
So I'm going to do it again.
I squeeze my fist together of my right forearm and hand and let it loose
and this time I can feel the energy flow out and it's feeling more relaxed.
Now, still not relaxed enough, so I'm going to do it one more time.
I squeeze that hand together in the forearm and let it relax.
Now, if I were to make a subjective comparison between my right arm,
which I'm not going to move now because it's relaxed and I don't want to disturb it,
and my left arm, my right arm feels much more relaxed.
It would be somewhat difficult for me to move the hand.
It would be some effort for me to move the hand.
It feels nice and relaxed at this point.
Now, I might move up to another muscle group,
so I take my tricep and my bicep at this point
and I squeeze them together, try not to disturb the lower arm.
Squeeze them together against each other and then let them relax.
Again, feel the energy flow out of the muscle and it's getting a bit more relaxed.
Again, I need to do it again here.
Tighten it up and let it loose and it's feeling a bit more relaxed.
I feel the energy flowing out and one more time should be enough for it.
Do it quickly this time.
Now, my whole right arm feels pretty relaxed,
almost like it's perhaps paralyzed and it takes something for me to move it at this point.
It's certainly much more relaxed than my left arm, which feels quite normal at this point.
I'd want to move on perhaps to my left arm and I'd do the same sort of thing.
I'm going to take you through this a little quicker than I would do
if we were doing a real therapeutic session.
In the therapeutic session, it might take a whole hour to go through this
and make sure we get each muscle group relaxed, particularly the first time.
As you learn this, you can do it more quickly.
Now, I go to the left arm and do the forearm and fist and feel the energy flow out.
Again, making a comparison, the left arm is starting to get relaxed,
but it's nowhere near where the right arm is.
The right arm is starting to get really nicely relaxed.
Do the forearm again on the left side.
Let it relax and then feel the energy flow out, getting a bit more relaxed.
I'll do that one more time and then do the biceps and triceps
and I'll try to hurry this along just a little bit more.
The biceps and triceps again and feel the energy flow out.
Now, I'm sitting here with both of my arms relatively relaxed.
I can feel still a difference where my right arm hasn't moved in a while
and it's feeling quite relaxed.
Now, I want to move on to some other muscle groups
and we have muscle groups throughout our body.
So, I might start at the top of my head and I can actually move my skull separate from my head.
Those who have that ability to do so, you can wiggle your ears
and you have a problem because if you wear glasses,
your glasses will also drift down your nose every time you move your skull back and forth like that.
But if I pull my skull back like that and then let it relax,
I can feel the top of my head getting more relaxed.
And then I might be able to move down to my face and squeeze my face together,
making kind of a grotesque kind of thing where I squeeze my face together like a prune,
like that and then I let it go.
And I can feel that relaxing a little bit and I might move down to my jaw
and squeeze, clench my teeth and squeeze my jaw together and then let it relax.
And I'm doing it too quickly to get very relaxed,
but at this point my head ought to be fairly relaxed,
move down to my neck and squeeze my neck muscles together and then let them relax,
carry a lot of tension often in our necks, let that relax,
go to our shoulders and squeeze our shoulders and our pectoral muscles together
and let them relax, feel the energy flow out again,
down to our abdominal muscles and flex our abdominal muscles
kind of like we're about to do with sit-up and let those relax.
And then move down to perhaps my hips and squeeze my cheeks together
and then let them relax.
And my legs, my quad muscles in my legs, I can flex those.
If I can avoid having a cramp here, I'll be doing a good job and let those relax
and down to my calf and flex my calf and let that relax.
Again, I do each of these probably more like three or so times
and each time judging back by the sort of referent muscles that I started with
to make sure I'm getting things relaxed
and down to my feet where I may splay my toes apart and then let that relax.
Now, at this point, I am beginning to feel fairly relaxed
and if I had taken a little more time to do this,
I would be in a state where I could begin this kind of therapy that we're going to talk about.
This is useful, by the way, for some other kinds of things.
If you're having insomnia, for example, you can try progressive muscle relaxation
to relax yourself in bed so that you end up sort of feeling like a sandbag there
just lying in bed with all your muscles relaxed.
So you can use it for various things.
In fact, it's part of meditation sometimes where you attach this to a word, a mantra
and associate it with this relaxed state and then you can bring it on fairly quickly.
So even if you're driving, say, in traffic and get stopped at a traffic light for two minutes
and you've had a quite tense day and your body's all tense,
you can go through progressive muscle relaxation and relax at the stop sign.
Not going through all of these things that we've done right here,
but if you learn to feel what your body is like when it's relaxed
by having gone through progressive muscle relaxation a number of times
and then you associate it with another stimulus like a word,
you can sometimes bring yourself into a relaxed state in 30 seconds or a minute.
And so you might find that a useful kind of talent to develop.
So if you are a client of mine, we've gone through this exercise and gotten you into a nice relaxed state.
All right, so we're now a session or two into therapy.
It may have taken us a session or two to go through and do this hierarchy of anxiety-producing events
where we came up with these vivid images and then it may take a session or two for me to teach you
how to relax going through muscle relaxation.
And now we're ready to do actually the systematic desensitization that we're going to do.
And when we do that, we will start pairing up the relaxation with the image.
So I might bring you in and the next session we go through the relaxation exercise.
You're sitting there entirely relaxed.
And now I say while you're relaxed, I want you to close your eyes.
And I want you to think of that first image on our hierarchy of anxiety-producing images.
Think of yourself in that large classroom, picture the walls, picture the seats, picture the whole setting.
And I want you to remain entirely relaxed while you're doing this.
And sometimes the person might be able to do that.
Often the person can't do that.
I say, OK, if you can't stay relaxed, immediately get rid of the image.
Don't have that image anymore.
Then relax again, get yourself back to baseline for relaxation, and then come up with the image again.
And do that repeatedly until the client can come up with the image of this anxiety-producing event while remaining relaxed.
And once you do that, you've started to break this sort of avoidance kind of thing they're doing,
where you're forcing them to confront this image at the same time they're relaxed.
And by being relaxed, they can't be anxious.
So as soon as they can do that, we'll then move them to the next image, the one that's a bit more anxiety-provoking.
So now they may be coming up with the image of that classroom that held 30 people while they're trying to remain relaxed.
And then we'll move on to the image of a seminar room while they're trying to remain relaxed,
each time making sure that they either get rid of the image or successfully pair it up with the relaxed state.
Now in some cases, we may find that they can't deal with the image.
And if that's true, it's probably the case that we did not have proper steps between our images,
that we've gone too far with a particular image, and they can't make that kind of leap.
So we would try to insert another image in there perhaps, come up with something between those two anxiety levels that they could achieve.
And so you step your way through these various images down to the highly anxiety-provoking images,
and they can now picture themselves on an elevator while remaining entirely relaxed,
all the way down to perhaps the footlocker, that may be pushing it some.
But at least at this point, they are far less anxious than they were when we started the therapy.
And when I first heard about this, I said, well, okay, great, now the person can picture being in an elevator without being anxious.
That's not going to do them much good. What if they really get in an elevator?
Well, the good news is that this does generalize pretty nicely to the real-world situation, where they are actually in an elevator.
And people report that they are far less anxious when they get into the real-world situation.
It might have been possible for us to do this systematic desensitization using the real-world situations.
For example, in that case we call it in vivo. Let me give you an example of that.
Suppose you have this poor fellow where the dog jumped on him and he has phytophobia,
and we're going to try to get rid of that for him.
Now in this case, it might be fairly easy to set up real-world situations to try to correct his problem,
so he doesn't have to imagine it, come up with images.
Adults are a little better at doing that anyway.
He might bring him in to the room, have him sit down, give him an ice cream cone, not as a reward,
just to get him relaxed. Mom's there, he's got his ice cream cone, he's feeling pretty good.
And I might say, now, Johnny, outside the window, if you look out there, you'll see way across that field out there,
a dog, and he's tied up out there.
I just want you to look at the dog while you're eating your ice cream cone and try to stay calm.
And so he looks at the dog, eats his ice cream cone, and stays relatively relaxed.
Now the next time, we might have the dog closer to him, perhaps right up next to the window.
The next time, we might have the dog in the room, perhaps in a cage on the other side of the room,
where again, the dog can't get at him.
And so we successively pair this up with the real-world situation in vivo,
where he is experiencing this previously anxiety-provoking stimulus or situation while he is in a relaxed state.
Until we get, perhaps, a nice fluffy little dog up next to him, where he can actually pet it and feel pretty good,
and then maybe we'll get a slightly bigger dog the next day.
So we go through these same kinds of steps that we were doing when people were imagining it,
but we're doing it in the real world.
So it's possible to do it that way too, and the outcomes are slightly better.
But the surprising thing is that the outcomes for this, even when they're imagining it, are really quite successful.
With about 12 to 15 sessions, people often can overcome their extreme anxiety for these situations
and report considerable improvement.
But it's also possible to, rather than exposing the client gradually with the systematic desensitization,
to expose the client more abruptly to it.
It seems a bit cruel, but sometimes people are willing to do this kind of thing.
You wouldn't spring it on somebody, but they would be willing to try this kind of thing without the intermediate steps.
And it is possible, and quicker if the person can stand to do it, to have this occur in just what's called flooding
in one step, where they go directly to the high anxiety-producing situation.
Suppose you have somebody who's afraid of flying on an airplane,
and rather than having them picture an airplane and picture getting closer to an airplane and all of that,
instead in vivo, in real life, where flooding is appropriate, you take them onto an airplane,
and you convince them that it's okay, and you say, it's all right, your heart's going to be racing,
you're not going to feel comfortable in this situation initially, we understand that's the case,
we've explained why this is an inappropriate fear, but nevertheless you've agreed to go on the airplane with me,
while it's just sitting here on the ground, we're going to take the person into the airplane and let them suffer a little bit.
But what you're doing is you're breaking again the avoidance cycle of the person avoiding the situation,
and you now put them in the situation, and they learn that it's an appropriate response to be okay with being on an airplane,
that they don't have to have this illogical fear that they developed over sitting in an airplane.
And so it's possible to do this in a real world situation where it's called flooding,
and it's also possible to do this using images as well, where you jump them right to one of the high anxiety images,
in which case it's called implosion.
The general idea for both flooding and implosion is that you're just breaking the avoidance cycle,
you're not allowing them to escape the situation, and so the self-reinforcing that occurs when they avoid the learning situation will be broken,
the client will learn a new kind of response and break this link between the situation, the inappropriate link,
between the situation and the dire outcome.
Now, less research has been done on evaluating flooding and implosion than systematic desensitization,
but what little there has has shown it to be effective.
So what we've talked about today is a form of behavior therapy that's based on classical conditioning.
With classical conditioning, you have the person facing a particular stimulus or situation and learning an inappropriate response.
Usually a highly anxious response, especially in the case of phobias.
And this is built up and then reinforced by avoidance, where they now avoid that situation and have self-reinforcement.
And in order to break that avoidance cycle, what we do is force the person to be in the presence of that stimulus or in that situation while they're feeling something else.
In the case of systematic desensitization, that's being relaxed.
And so we did the little exercise where we came up with images of anxiety producing situations,
and we taught the person to relax using progressive muscle relaxation and then paired up the relaxed state with these images.
And this allowed the person to then experience the images and eventually the situation while remaining relaxed.
We also mentioned that it's possible to do this without the intermediate steps and go right to the highly anxious situation
in the case of flooding where you do it with a real stimulus or in the case of implosion where you're doing it with an imagined stimulus.
And these behavior therapies seem to work pretty well.
Thank you.
