Lecture 17 Behavior Therapies – Operant Conditioning
This is our last lecture in the series on therapies.
You recall that we went through the various classifications of mental disorders, and then
we entered into this series on therapies.
And we talked first about the physical therapies, which are based upon the assumption that there's
something biologically or physiologically wrong with the person that has to be corrected.
Talked about drugs, psychosurgery, electrical-vulcive shock at that point.
We then talked about therapies based on problems with people's thinking and feeling, and we
called those psychotherapies, and we talked about psychoanalysis and some other psychotherapies.
And recently we've been talking about behavior therapies.
Last time we talked about a behavior therapy based on classical conditioning, and these
therapies start with the notion that there's something that's been learned wrong.
And so what we have to do is get people to learn things right.
And one of the very simple forms of learning was classical conditioning, and another very
simple form of learning is operant conditioning, and that's what we're going to talk about
today, is behavior therapies based on operant conditioning.
And these are sometimes also called behavior modification.
Now operant conditioning, we will talk about at some length later on, we have a whole lecture
on operant conditioning, and we'll go into great detail at that point about operant conditioning
and the conditions under which it occurs.
Today we're just going to give you a brief sketch of operant conditioning, so you understand
it enough to understand how a behavior therapy might be based on operant conditioning.
So we'll discuss operant conditioning and the concept of shaping.
We'll talk a little bit about punishment as well as positive reinforcement.
And then we'll also talk some about token economies, where we use a secondary reinforcer
instead of a primary reinforcer.
And toward the end of the lecture we'll also talk about biofeedback.
With biofeedback, you're still doing operant conditioning, but you're doing it on the autonomic
nervous system, the involuntary nervous system, and we usually think of operant conditioning
having to do with voluntary behavior.
So that's our agenda for today.
Let's start out then and talk a little bit about operant conditioning, and under what
conditions operant conditioning occurs.
It's really quite simple.
In this case you have a response, which is followed by a reinforcement, which makes that
response more likely to recur.
Now a response here is usually, as I was just mentioning, a voluntary response.
When we talked about classical conditioning, in that case we were generally talking about
an involuntary response.
We were talking about somebody having fear, for example.
If you recall the example I used at that point of a little boy who has a dog jump on him
and he develops fear of it, that's not a voluntary response.
I don't stand here and say, now I'm going to have fear.
But I can stand here and say, now I'm going to raise my arm, or now I'm going to sit in
the chair.
Those are voluntary responses.
So we're generally talking about voluntary responses with operant conditioning.
Then the reinforcement is usually a primary reinforcer, but by that I mean it's something
that works with our basic biology, something like being hungry and eating, being thirsty
and drinking.
Those would be primary reinforcers, although there are also secondary reinforcers like
money, for example, would be a secondary reinforcer.
Now if you're looking for a particularly complex response, you may also have to use the process
called shaping.
With shaping what you do is reinforce successive approximations to the response.
Now you're probably already familiar with this kind of thing.
Suppose you were going to try to train your pet dog, and you want to train your dog to
roll over.
You automatically would expect that you'd have to get some reinforcement for the dog.
So you might go to the store, get some pieces of meat or some doggy food, and bring that
home.
And then you know that you're going to have to give the reinforcement close in time to
the response that you're going to evoke from the dog.
And so you might start out, and you would say, now roll over.
Roll over.
Oh, a stupid dog can't learn anything.
You know that you can't do it that way.
You know that you have to reinforce successive approximations to it.
So you might say, roll over.
Roll over.
The dog gets bored, lies down on the floor, and you give it a piece of food.
It has to lie down before it can roll over.
So that's a good enough response.
And so when you say roll over, maybe the first five or six times, it's good enough if the
dog just lies down.
Then you might want the dog not only to lie down, but lie on its side.
So you say roll over, and you don't reinforce it until it's on its side.
And that may last three, four, five times as well.
And then finally, you don't want to reinforce it until it actually rolls over.
And then you reinforce it, and then you can produce this fairly complex response by successive
approximations or what we call shaping.
We'll see how that works within this behavior therapy.
Now this is one place where I like to emphasize a little bit the importance of basic research
because behavior therapies turn out to be very effective therapies, and yet they're based
on this fairly basic research process.
Back in the middle part of the last century, when B.F.
Skinner was working with rats in a laboratory and running them in operant conditioning boxes
and having them press levers and having food pellets roll down troughs and that sort of
thing, I'm sure a lot of people would walk into his laboratory and say, what is this
guy doing?
Of what possible relevance could that be to us?
And why are we spending taxpayers' dollars to have him do this kind of work?
Well, it turns out that that very basic kind of research and the books he wrote, such as
a book called Schedule of Reinforcement, are the very basics for behavior therapies.
And often it's the case that basic research turns out to have an application, and this
is one of the best examples of that.
When we use operant conditioning in behavior therapy, the therapist has to define the response
that the therapist is looking for very carefully, and then choose an appropriate reinforcement.
Now let me use it as an example, an elementary school teacher, and this teacher is trying
to get the classroom to be quiet so that she can teach.
And Johnny's a problem child, and Johnny gets up and runs around the classroom, doesn't
stay in his seat, is disruptive to the other kids, and she doesn't like that.
She wants Johnny to stop that.
And so her natural reaction is to try and get him to stop it.
She's going to yell at him, Johnny, get back in your seat.
Johnny gets back in his seat, sits there for 30 seconds, gets back up out of his seat.
Johnny, Johnny, come here.
I told you, get back in your seat.
Johnny gets back in his seat, short time later he's out of his seat.
Johnny, are you over there again?
Get back in your seat.
Now what's she trying to do?
She's trying to reinforce him, actually in this case punish him by yelling at him to
get back in the seat.
And she thinks she might be successful with this, or she wouldn't be doing it.
If I were an outside observer, I might observe that Johnny's getting out of his seat more
and more, not less and less.
By definition, she's reinforcing him for getting out of his seat.
Maybe Johnny wants attention, and she's giving him attention every time he gets out of his
seat, so he gets out of his seat more and more.
If I were a school psychologist called in to try to help the teacher, I might observe
this kind of thing, and then point it out to the teacher saying, you realize that this
isn't working, maybe what we can do is make the reinforcement clearer to Johnny, and more
overt.
So I've bought you a bag of M&M candies.
And what I want you to do is when Johnny stays in his seat for 30 seconds, we'll start out
with 30 seconds, then we'll make the interval longer.
When he stays in his seat for 30 seconds, I want you to go over and give him an M&M candy.
And when he gets out of his seat and starts walking around the classroom, I want you to
ignore him until he gets back in his seat.
Then when he sits there for 30 seconds, give him an M&M candy.
Now at first, that may be a little chaotic, but after a while, we would discover that
indeed Johnny's staying in his seat more and more, and now maybe she only has to give
him an M&M every couple of minutes or something like that.
We have sort of broken this cycle where she thought she was punishing Johnny, but actually
reinforcing him made it overt, and we're using behavior therapy to do this.
Now she would probably want to wean Johnny off the M&Ms and make it a more appropriate
reinforcer such as praises or affection later on instead of just using M&Ms, or we might
end up with a rather pimply obese kid in our classroom, and she would want to do that anyway
because that's the kind of reinforcement Johnny will be getting from his other teachers once
he learns of the appropriate behavior.
Let me talk about one of the more famous places where behavior therapy has been used, and
this was done some time ago.
I've been showing a movie produced about Ivar Lovas some 25 years in my classes, so
he started this some time ago, but it's still widely used.
This therapeutic procedure that I'm about to describe, I know is still used partly because
in my psychology building, we have bulletins on the board looking for people to help with
autistic children and their families who have put these bulletins up to try to get the students
to come help them using this specific procedure I'm about to describe.
Ivar Lovas is attempting to teach language skills to autistic children in this movie
that I show.
These are severely autistic children.
They seem to be cut off from the external world.
We talked a little bit about autism when we were going through the classifications of
mental disorders.
If you'll recall, autistic children have communication problems.
They engage in repetitive individual play.
They may be sitting there in the middle of the floor spinning a toy of some sort or spinning
themselves.
Spinning is a big thing that they do.
They do a lot of self-stimulation, and they sometimes do self-destructive behaviors in
terms of even hitting themselves in the face repeatedly until they're bruised and bloody.
These are very severely autistic children that he's dealing with.
He wants them to learn language.
One of the more controversial things he did early on, at least, was use punishment.
The general idea was you use punishment to get rid of the undesirable behaviors long
enough that you can start positively reinforcing the desirable behaviors.
This seemed somewhat logical, but you can imagine why this would be controversial, especially
with young kids.
Because from an ethical point of view, what is informed consent mean with young kids?
You can't get their parents to agree to this, but nobody wants to shock young kids.
What he would do, in fact, is you would have this severely autistic child who's sitting
there banging himself in the head repeatedly and hurting himself, and Lovas would shock
him with a shock that was somewhat painful, but not in any way dangerous, and he would
stop this child who had been hitting himself in the head, would stop, and for a minute
or two, nothing happened.
He might hit himself in the head one more time, get shocked again, and then that behavior
wouldn't be there anymore for minutes at a time, sometimes 10 minutes to a half an hour.
It's at that point you can begin to use positive reinforcement to reinforce positive behaviors,
and these other behaviors often don't even show up again.
But punishment is quite controversial.
There are several problems with punishment besides the ethical problem.
One of the problems is that while punishment can temporarily eliminate undesirable behaviors,
the people who are being punished quickly learn to discriminate the situation in which
they're being punished from other situations.
So maybe when Lovas is in the room with his shocking apparatus, he stops these self-destructive
behaviors, but the child may learn quickly that it's only when Lovas is in the room that
this happens.
So he starts back up with the behaviors as soon as he leaves the room.
So people learn discrimination, and it makes punishment a more difficult thing to use than
something, some other form of control that might be used.
If you've ever seen The Clockwork Orange, which is a movie that came out a number of
years ago, but it's still on from time to time, it's kind of a cult movie that people
watch.
This is a movie which is centered on the main character who was a fellow on the streets
who was in gangs and was a very violent, aggressive fellow, and got locked up in an
institution, a penal institution, because of this.
And while he was in the institution, he underwent behavior modification against his will.
And punishment was used where every time he engaged in aggressive behavior, he would
be punished.
I think he was shocked in the movie.
And this occurred over and over again until he no longer engaged in aggressive behavior.
The ironic thing is they then put him back out on the street with the gangs again, and
every time he started to engage in aggressive behavior, he became nauseous and couldn't
do that, and was no longer able to compete in this predatory environment on the streets.
A very strange movie, but it points out part of the problem with punishment again.
All right, what Lobos would do beyond getting rid of the self-destructive behavior, at this
point he would start to positively reinforce, and he would put these children in an intensive,
at least 40-hour-a-week kind of program where they used positive reinforcement.
And at first they would just try to get the behaviors of looking at him, paying attention
to him, because these autistic children, since they seem to be sort of cut off from
the external world, are always looking around somewhere else and acting like the therapist
isn't even there.
And so one of the first things he might try to do is try to establish eye contact.
So Lobos is sitting there, Suzy is sitting across from him, he says, Suzy, look at me,
and she's looking off.
Suzy, look at me, and she finally looks over at him.
He immediately reinforces her with some cereal, and she eats the cereal and then starts looking
off again.
Suzy, look at me, she looks at him, get some cereal.
So at first, very simple kind of behaviors, just make contact with me kind of behaviors,
or Suzy, sit up, Suzy, stand up, those kind of behaviors, where you get at least some
linkage between the reinforcement and the behavior.
Then they would move on to verbal behavior, since they're trying to teach language.
They try to get the child to at least make some sort of noise, which they'll do, and
then reinforce that.
And this may occur for days and maybe weeks at a time, just this little piece of behavior
you're looking for.
And then you might move on to a word.
And they have problems with words, partly because they've not done this before, but
partly because they have a thing called echolalia that I mentioned a little bit earlier in the
course, and that is just repeating or parroting back what you say to them.
So Lovas might say to Suzy, say bird.
And Suzy says, say bird.
No, no, I want you to just say bird, she says, say bird.
She's parroting back, she doesn't understand that he wants just to hear the word bird.
So they get to the word level, and then they start putting words together into sentences.
This again is a process of shaping that's going on here.
And he might be trying to teach Tommy, let's say, to where the block is going.
He has a block and says, the block is on the dresser versus the block is opening the drawer
and sticking it into the dresser.
The block is in the dresser, and then has Tommy say this.
And eventually Tommy can say, he says it in a rather stilted way.
The block is on the dresser, or the block is in the dresser.
One thing you notice, even after they start forming sentences, is it doesn't sound natural.
It's not the way we would say the sentence.
So something's going on here, but at least he's learning sentences at this point.
And this may be after some months and even years of therapy that we get to the sentence
level.
Now Lovas' program has been criticized to some extent, partly because of the punishment
thing I was mentioning earlier, and partly for subjecting children to such intensive
kinds of treatment.
This is a very intensive kind of thing.
Takes a long time for it to occur.
And then, as I mentioned a little earlier also, autistic rights groups are also now
claiming that autism is not really a disorder that needs to be corrected.
So they think he is subjecting these children to a lot of stress when it's not necessary.
There's one other thing that's a bit of a criticism, but not really of the program
so much.
After I showed this movie to the students in my class some 20 years ago or so, I always
had this warm glow because here we started out with these kids who were engaging in self-destructive
behavior, completely unable to talk, and at the end of the tape here they were forming
sentences and on their way into the real world.
They have now put a new ending on that movie, and the movie I now show follows up on these
kids who had the therapy.
Let me give you one example.
Tommy's now in another institution, and for 10 years following this therapy, the state
didn't have enough money to continue the therapy.
Tommy's lost a lot of the skills he had.
They show a case where one of the therapists is going to visit Tommy, and he walks in and
Tommy is there, but Tommy doesn't have a job, Tommy doesn't have any friends.
He talks still in this very stilted way.
They go out to a fast food restaurant, and Tommy tries to order, he says, I want a big
back with a diet coke, and the guy behind the counter sort of says, what did you say?
I want a big Mac with a diet coke, and you can see that Tommy's not going to get along
in the real world the way we hoped that he would.
So this kind of reinforcement has to continue, and there is certainly more hope for Tommy
than there was if we had left him alone, but it's not quite the panacea that we might have
thought at the end of the original movie.
Now there are other behavior therapies that are used with autistic children nowadays.
Some of these are focused on labeling, where they label objects in the environment.
In other cases, they're actually using virtual reality simulators to help, because you can
have an environment that they're looking at in a virtual reality situation where the
particular objects are already labeled for them and help them learn.
In some cases, tokens are used, especially in fairly controlled environments, like in
mental institutions.
A token is something like a poker chip that can be traded in on a token, in this case is
a secondary reinforcer, and it can be traded in on a primary reinforcer.
For example, they can trade it in at the commissary for some food, or trade it in on other kinds
of privileges around the institution.
And so if the mental patient makes his bed, for example, he might get a token, or if he
does some other chore properly, he might get a token.
If he takes his medications without complaining, he might get a token, and he accumulates these
tokens and can then use them later.
And this seems to work pretty well, even for fairly severely disabled folks like schizophrenic
patients.
Tokens seem to do a fairly good job, and they have some advantages, and one advantage is
that they can be used and not get in the way of other conflicting behaviors.
If I give you something to eat, you have to eat, and I may be wanting you to do something
else.
They also resemble secondary reinforcers in society, like money.
So they may generalize some to this.
But there is a problem with generalizing these too far into the real world, where somebody
isn't handing you a token all the time for doing the good kinds of things.
Now there is another form of operant conditioning, which is a bit unusual.
As I mentioned, we usually have operant conditioning with respect to voluntary behaviors.
But it has been discovered that there are some behaviors that we usually consider involuntary,
the ones associated with the autonomic nervous system.
This is the nervous system that does things like control our heart rate, to some extent
control breathing, control our bodily functions, and it is possible to reinforce these autonomic
responses as well.
And when we do that, this is called biofeedback.
Let me give you an example of that.
Suppose you were a person who wanted to relax more, who wanted to get into a meditative
state, and we know by hooking you up to an EEG machine that when you're relaxed in a
meditative state, you produce alpha waves on the EEG machine.
These are slow, high amplitude kinds of waves.
Otherwise if you're thinking actively about something, you're producing beta waves, which
are a higher frequency, lower amplitude kind of a wave.
It is possible through biofeedback to get you to change the kind of brain waves that
you make.
I might hook you up to a machine that is like an EEG machine that is measuring your brain
waves, and it will automatically determine whether you're producing alpha waves or beta
waves.
And every time you produce an alpha wave, it will feedback information to you in the
form of a low tone.
So every time alpha waves go on, you may hear this tone do kind of like that, otherwise
you don't get a tone.
And since you're motivated to try to produce alpha waves, this is reinforcing to you.
So it's just like operant conditioning.
You have a response that is producing an alpha wave, and you get a reinforcement, a positive
reinforcement of this tone.
And if we do that, we would discover that over time, over several different sessions,
you would go from producing perhaps 80% beta waves and only 20% alpha waves during a particular
session to the opposite of that, to producing more alpha waves, maybe 80% alpha waves and
only 20% beta waves.
That seems strange, doesn't it, that you could actually control your brain waves.
And you may be doing it by mediation.
You may be thinking different kinds of thoughts like lying on the beach instead of running
in a marathon or something like that.
So you may be mediating it, but somehow people learn to produce alpha waves through biofeedback.
It's also possible to do things like control your hand temperature.
I can hook you up to thermocouples that I put on your fingers that measure your hand
temperature.
And I can, again, give you a tone when your hand temperature gets warmer, let's say.
So at a particular number of degrees, I would have the tone come on.
And again, that would reinforce the warming of your hand.
You might say, well, why would I ever want to do that?
Some people kind of have congenitally cold hands and would like to have this happen for
them.
But another reason is that apparently hand temperature is somehow associated with migraine
headaches.
It is an indication of blood flow in the body.
And as the blood flows to the periphery of the body, out to the hands, apparently there's
a positive effect in this blood not going to the brain so much.
And there is some positive effect even on migraine headaches from something like this.
So this is another successful biofeedback.
Again, it's operant conditioning.
The response is to get your hands to go warmer.
Again, we're usually considered that an autonomic kind of thing.
I have trouble imagining standing here today and just thinking my hands warmer without
having biofeedback to help me with it.
And then it's reinforced by a particular tone again in this case.
So with some fairly short sessions, we can control some of our autonomic responses.
This has not been as successful for some others, however.
For blood pressure, that's one I would like to control.
I take a little pill every day to try to lower my blood pressure just a little bit, not a
serious problem.
But I would like to be able to do that without the pill.
But I know that biofeedback is not very good for doing that.
So this is a rather unusual case where we can use the principles of operant conditioning
and call it biofeedback to control autonomic behaviors.
Now, how good are these behavior therapies that we've been talking about?
Both the ones based on classical conditioning and the ones based on operant conditioning.
These have been evaluated, and they have been found to be generally very successful.
They have some of the best statistics in terms of the efficacy or effectiveness of these therapies.
I mentioned in a previous lecture when we were talking about psychotherapy, an article
that Hans Eisner published that was rather devastating to psychotherapies and claimed
that psychotherapies weren't doing much good for people.
In that same article, he did evaluate behavior therapies, and his general conclusion was
that there was considerable efficacy to behavior therapies.
You often get recovery rates on the order of 80 percent or so, which is a very high
number for most of the things in our arsenal against mental illness.
So behavior therapies are one of the more effective things that you can do.
It is true that behavior therapies are used in many cases for conditions which are not
quite so severe.
They are used to a little bit.
I did mention the fact that you can use token economies with schizophrenic patients.
But for the most part, we're talking about things like phobias, which are not quite so
severe.
So the statistics may be a bit distorting.
But in general, behavior therapies are quite effective.
So let me go quickly back over what we talked about today.
We talked about the behavior therapies based on operant conditioning.
Said that operant conditioning, in that case, you usually have a voluntary behavior that's
followed by a reinforcement that makes that behavior more likely to recur.
And for complex behaviors, you might want to use a process called shaping.
That punishment can be used, but it is not quite as effective.
There are ethical considerations and also considerations of the person learning to distinguish
between the situations in which punishment is used and when it's not used.
We talked about the application of these kinds of therapies in an educational setting, such
as a classroom, and also for autistic children and trying to get them to learn to speak.
We did mention token economies, in which case you're using a secondary reinforcer instead
of a primary reinforcer to control the behavior.
And finally, we talked about biofeedback and said this is the case where you're using operant
conditioning to try to control an involuntary or autonomic response instead of a voluntary
response.
And finally, we did mention that in general, behavior therapies are fairly successful forms
of therapy.
So that concludes our little series on therapies, and next time we'll be getting more into the
science of psychology.
Thank you.
