Lecture 18, Models of Motivation.
At this point in the course, we've pretty well covered abnormal psychology and clinical
psychology. And from here on out, we're going to deal, for the most part, with people who
are normal. And we're going to ask some basic scientific questions about these people. What
motivates them? How they learn? How they perceive? Basic fundamental science questions like that.
And today, as the first of those lectures, we're going to talk about motivation and models
of motivation. Asking the very basic question, what does motivate us? And we're going to
spend considerable time looking at one particular model, the homeostatic model, which is a kind
of biologically oriented model. And we're going to look at some of the terms that such
as drive and need that go into this model. And then we're going to look at the case of
hunger in particular, and some research that has explored the case of hunger with respect
to the homeostatic model. Then we're going to do some critique of the homeostatic model
about what things it can do for us and what things it cannot do for us. And finally, we're
going to look very briefly toward the end of the lecture at a different kind of model,
Maslow's model that leads to self-actualization. And it's a very different kind of model. There
are lots of models of motivation, and we're only able to cover a few of those in this lecture.
So let's go back to the fundamental question about what motivates human behavior. If we
asked that question, if I asked you that question, what motivates you? For example, why are you
participating in this course? You might tell me something like, well, I want to be more
informed, or I might press you a little bit and say, well, what specifically do you hope
to gain out of this course? You might say, well, maybe it'll make me more successful
at my job. That's something I'd like to do. Again, I might keep asking much like a young
child does, why, why, why? Well, why do you want to be more successful about your job?
Well, so I can be promoted. Well, why do you want to be promoted? Well, so that I can earn
more money. Why do you want more money? Well, so that I can buy a nicer house and good food
for my table and that sort of thing. At that point, we're at a place where we might be
able to apply the homeostatic model to it. This is kind of reductionist thinking, though,
trying to get to the lowest level of what motivates us, and some people think that that's
not the way to go. Historically, if we wanted to know what motivated people, and if we look
at literature and some of the other courses, in fact, that are released by the teaching
company, lots of those folks talk about what motivates us. The historians do, the philosophers
do, the people who do literature and art do, and in the early history, one thing we would
discover is that people thought that they were kind of pawns of fate, that it was the
gods that were moving people around sort of at their will. And so a lot of the early theories
of motivation in the everyday world, at least, were theories of deities that were moving
people around. When Darwin came along, we already talked a little bit about Darwin, and proposed
the theory of evolution, he put people back as animals. And so Darwin thinks that what
motivates people is much what motivates animals. And he would be fairly comfortable with the
homeostatic model that we're going to talk about today. Freud came along, and we've talked
considerably about Freud as well. And you'll recall that what Freud thought motivated us
was the unconscious level and the life forces and death forces and all of those kinds of
things that we talked about with psychoanalytic theory in terms of what motivates us.
Well, let's look at this psychological, biological model called the homeostatic model. A homeostatic
system is a system that behaves in order to stay in the same state. Homeo means same,
and static means state. So we're talking about something that works to stay in the same state.
In your house, you have a homoesthetic system comprised of your furnace and your air conditioning
system and your thermostat, and it works to stay in the same state. It gets a little
too warm, the thermostat indicates that, turns on the air conditioner, gets a little too
cold, the thermostat moves over and a little bimetallic strip makes contact and turns
on the furnace, and it acts to stay in the same state within a certain range of what
you set on your thermostat. So that's a homeostatic system. In much the same way, we have homeostatic
systems, and all animals do, to try to maintain a kind of optimal biological state. And if
we get out of the optimal state, it may lead to ill health and even death if we get too
far out of that optimal state. Now there are physiological mechanisms for trying to keep
us in this same state. For example, if you get too hot, you'll start to sweat, you'll
perspire, and that's your body's attempt to cool itself off. So the evaporation of the
water on the surface of your skin is much like an evaporative cooler that you'd find
in the southwest of this country that cool houses, and by the evaporation it uses up
calories and cools us off. If we get too cold, we start to shiver and get goosebumps on our
body, and shivering is a way of working our muscles to warm ourselves up a little bit.
And the goosebumps, in fact, make the surface of the skin a little rougher, and it doesn't
lose heat quite as readily when it is in that condition. So we have these physiological mechanisms,
and not all animals do. If you go study crocodiles, for example, crocodiles don't shiver or sweat.
When crocodiles get too cold, they climb out on a hot bank or on a rock and let the
sun warm them up. They get too hot, they slide down in the nice cool water and let it cool
them off. So they behave in certain ways to maintain an optimal state. And indeed we do
too. We can only shiver and sweat so much. Other than that, we build furnaces and we buy
coats and we do other behavioral things to try to maintain this optimal state of temperature
as well. So what we're concerned about, since this is a course in psychology, not physiology,
is behaviors and how we behave to maintain an optimal state. Imagine that your wine
dined and loved in a nice optimal state at this point in your life, but time conspires
against you, and after a while you will drift out of this optimal state in certain ways.
And it's at that point that you need to try to get back into the optimal state. The first
thing that happens in this model is that you have a need. A need is a physiological state,
and unless you somehow correct what you need, you will get into some trouble. Now at that
point we don't necessarily know that we have that need, because what happens is that the
need must be converted into a drive. A drive is a psychological state, and once we have
the drive we know we have the need and we have to do something about it. Now those seem
to be so linked that it may be hard for you to imagine the difference between the need
and the drive. So let me point out a couple of instances where the need and the drive
are not quite so linked. I'm a scuba diver, and one of the things that they taught me
very early on in my scuba course was that you need to exhale as you rise from the bottom.
Alright, so at your 33 feet and you come to the surface, unless you exhale, something
bad will happen to you, and it will. If you fill the balloon up full at 33 feet, because
that's at two atmospheres, and take it to the surface, it tries to get twice as big,
because it's one atmosphere at the surface, so the balloon will blow up on the way up.
It's an artificial situation being able to fill the balloon up or our lungs up at that
level. It was not until the aqua lung was invented by Cousteau back in the late 40s that we were
able to do that, where we could go down to 33 feet or 66 feet and take a full breath
of air and then try to ascend to the surface. But we can now, and because it's an artificial
environment, our bodies are not built to tell us that we have a need to exhale. And if we
don't, we might get an air embolism, where air is forced into the lung sacs and eventually
into the bloodstream and may go to our brain and cause us to have a stroke or death. So
it's important to exhale, and the reason they emphasize it so much in the scuba course
is they also realize that we have a need that's not converted to a drive. You don't have this
extreme pain that's saying, I got to exhale as you're going up. See, needs are converted
into drives very often through pain, sometimes through pleasure as well, but often through
pain. Pain is one of our best friends. It may not seem like it when you're having the pain,
but indeed, if you didn't have pain, you wouldn't have most of your needs converted into drives
and you'd do something like perhaps sit down on a radiator and sit there until you said,
you smell something burning when it's you. You need to have the pain. It's a way of telling
you what you have to do in order to survive. And so since you don't have this, you have
to be, in the scuba diving case, you have to be over-trained to do things like exhale.
The same is true flying around in an aircraft. One of the reasons they have to tell you every
time, ad nauseam, that you have to take this air mask, this mask that drops down and put
it over your face, is that in fact, if the aircraft loses pressurization, you don't really
know that there's a problem. You feel perfectly happy. It's kind of a narcotic effect. You're
smiling as you pass out and go off to die from not having enough oxygen. And so again,
they have to tell you over and over again, you need this oxygen. We're not supposed to
be flying around at 35,000 feet. We did not evolve in that environment, so our body does
not have a way of converting the need into a drive.
One other thing that may drive this point home to you is one thing that we do have where
we have a drive without a necessary corresponding individual need. And that's the case of sex.
We have certainly a sex drive. I think none of us would doubt that we have a sex drive.
Because that's all sorts of problems and pleasures. But that sex drive, we don't have an individual
sex need. You're not going to die without sex. You may feel like it, but you're not
going to die without sex. Your species will die without sex, so it was important. You
can't build it in at the species level, so it had to be built in at the individual level.
So here's a case where you have the drive without the necessary corresponding individual
need. I spent a little time on this because it's not always obvious to people the difference
between a physiological need and the psychological drive. Once it is converted into a drive,
you then know that you have to do something about it. And what you do about it is to usually
behave in some way. And you behave toward a particular object, like food if you're hungry,
and you eventually consume that food, which puts you back into the optimal state. So that's
kind of the circle. As we leave the optimal state, we have a physiological need. The need
is converted into a psychological drive. The drive energizes our behavior. We behave toward
a particular object, which we consume usually, that puts us back into the optimal state.
And according to the homeostatic model, that's why we do things. Now the case of hunger has
been studied more than any other case. And so we can look at some research that can tell
us something about this homeostatic model. And one of the first things they did was look
for the source of hunger. Why do we feel hungry? People know that they have stomach contractions
and that they also have stomach pains. And the question was whether it was these stomach
contractions that are causing the stomach pains. A fellow named Cannon, whose name we
will hear again in the lecture on emotion a little bit later on, Cannon had a, I think
it was one of his graduate students, he forced to do this, and had the student have a balloon
put into his stomach on a tube that went down the student's throat. And they blew up this
balloon and the student also had a little button that he could push that indicated every
time he was hungry. And they wanted to know whether there were correlations between the
stomach contractions and the pushing of the button. And indeed they found that there were,
which indicated to us, to the researchers, that stomach contractions are indeed correlated
with hunger pains. However, we don't have drives in our stomach. Our stomach isn't smart
enough to contain a drive, so it has to communicate somehow with the central nervous system where
we do have drives. There is a nerve that goes between the stomach and the brain, but that's
probably not the major source, because we know we can cut that nerve and people will
still report, I mean we don't do this experimentally, it happens to people sometimes, and they will
still report being hungry. Or if you do cut the nerve in a rat, they will still eat when
they are hungry. So apparently this isn't the main messenger at least. The next place
they looked was in the blood. And the way they did this was to take some dogs and they would
take one dog and have it eat until it was completely full. And they would take another
dog that hadn't eaten in about a day, and so it was pretty hungry. And then they would
essentially interchange their blood. So the dog that had just eaten its blood would then
go to the dog that hadn't eaten and the dog that had eaten vice versa. And what they discovered
is that the dog that had just eaten would start to eat again once it got the blood from the
dog that hadn't eaten. And the dog that hadn't eaten would appear to be sated to have already
eaten and would not eat. So apparently the blood does do something in terms of communicating
to the central nervous system about hunger and the need for food. However, we don't think
with our blood either. So somehow we have to find a place in the central nervous system
that contains the center for telling us that we need to eat. And so they did some work
with some rats at this point. And at this point they went in to the hypothalamus. Now
the hypothalamus is an area fairly deep in our brain. If you looked at the brain from
the outside, you see mainly cortex on the outside of it. And as you go further in you
get the limbic system and some other kinds of things. And way deep in the brain is the
hypothalamus. It's a fairly old part of the brain from an evolutionary point of view.
Animals have hypothalamus, although many animals don't have the more recent cortex on the outside
of the brain. So it's a fairly basic kind of part of our brain that it's been long
thought has to do something with our basic biological systems, our life support systems.
And they would take a rat and for this particular part of the hypothalamus they would take it
out and the rat would overeat. And if they took more and more of this part of the hypothalamus
out, the rat would overeat more and more. In fact the rat, if you took all of this area
out would literally eat itself to death. Now that indicates the hypothalamus must have
something to do with hunger, right? And in fact what it probably indicates is that the
hypothalamus, which is bathed by the blood, the blood is apparently carrying a message
to the brain through the hypothalamus about whether or not it needs food. And the hypothalamus
is kind of acting like a switch to turn off and on the hunger drive. Now it's much more
complex than that. I'm oversimplifying the case because we know that we have not just
one switch, but we have many switches and we have many hungers and we can distinguish
one food from another. If you let a young child pick its own menu and this child has
not been exposed to a lot of fast foods and artificial foods, that child will do a pretty
good job of picking a nutritious menu for himself or herself. They'll balance their
diet pretty nicely. And if they're missing something, they'll pick up more on that and
rebalance their diet. So we apparently have several different kinds of switches and the
hypothalamus is much smarter than just being a switch telling us whether we're hungry
or not. In fact there's some strange cases where children, there's a case where children
developed rickets and had a calcium deficiency. And that child would start gnawing on the wall
because the wall, the plaster in the wall apparently has calcium in it. The parents were
concerned and took the child to the hospital and they put the child into a room that didn't
have that kind of wall and the child, in fact I believe in that case, died. The child's
body was smart enough to know it needed the calcium somehow and smart enough to figure
out that the wall had some calcium. So we're much more sophisticated than just sort of
an off on switch. But at least we know the hypothalamus has something to do with eating.
The hypothalamus, since it is located in the brain, has lots of neural connections to the
cortex of the brain, the outside surface of the brain where we do our more advanced thinking.
So the hypothalamus communicates to the cortex as, hey we're hungry down here. And the cortex
says, well what shall we do in order to satisfy this hunger? And the cortex can do advanced
thinking and so it can decide that it has to go earn money or it has to go steal food
or it has to go hunt for food. Somehow it has to satisfy the needs of the hypothalamus.
And that then leads to behaviors that are directed toward food. And once you get the food,
you consume the food and that puts you back into the optimal state. Now that's a pretty
little model, isn't it? I mean it seems to explain hunger rather nicely. But the problem
is if you want to use this model to explain a bit more complex behaviors, there's some
difficulty to it. I mean does it explain why you're participating in this class or in this
course? Probably doesn't. I mean if we did that we would have to take that long chain that
we were talking about before. Why are you participating in this course? So that you can
learn more, so that you can do better on your job, so that you might get promoted, so that
you might get more money, so that you might get some food. That explains that complex
behavior of participating in this course. Well why are the people who are not participating
in the course not participating in the course? Are they not hungry enough? Well you can see
a sort of ludicrous kind of chain of events that we have to go through. And we can't explain
why you participate in the course and somebody else doesn't from this basic homeostatic model.
It's very much tied up in primary reinforcement and primary kinds of needs. So that's a basic
problem with the model. There are some other problems with the model. If I took you to
and paid you some good money for going to a room and lying on a mattress and I put gloves
over your hands and tubes over those gloves and I put an opaque shield in front of your
face and I had the room very quiet except for perhaps a low hum of an air conditioner in
the background. And I paid you for lying there on that mattress with time just passing. What I
have done is put you in a sensory deprivation environment. At first you might like it. Maybe
you're catching up on your sleep the first 24 hours and things are okay. And they did
this. This is a piece of research I'm telling you about. They did this with college students
and indeed the first day they were fairly comfortable with things. The second day they
started to get a bit uncomfortable. And some people started reporting that they didn't know
quite whether they were asleep or awake. Couldn't distinguish their dreams from reality even.
The third day they were dropping like flies from this experiment. They didn't want to do this
anymore. That it just freaked them out. They thought that this was, they couldn't stand to do this.
Now can we use the homeostatic model to explain why they can't stand to do this? These people are in
the optimal state. They're taking care of all of their needs. They're comfortable. It's a proper
temperature. They are fed as unobtrusively as possible. Why are they dropping out of the
experiment? Apparently they have some sort of a need for sensory stimulation. They say,
well, okay, we'll fix up the model. We'll put a need for sensory stimulation in our optimal
model. All right, let's look at another. Suppose I take a chimpanzee and I want to observe him.
So I put him in this big wooden box and I cut some peep holes into the box so we can look
in at the chimpanzee. Every time I look through that peep hole, what do I see? I see a big
brown eye on the other side looking out at me. You can take monkeys and you can put them
in a box that has a little puzzle that they have to solve to open the lock of the box and
they open the lock and a little window opens and they can look out at a little toy train
going around. They'll do this over and over again to open the window to look at the train.
Why are they doing this? How can we explain what motivates these animals to the homeostatic
model? Maybe there's a need for curiosity. So we put another band-aid on the model. There's
a need for curiosity as part of the optimal state. Suppose you're on a Saturday, you're
quite comfortable, you're sitting at home, you've had enough to eat, you're in the optimal
state and you say, well, gosh, I'd like to go do something and depending upon what you
like to do, maybe you're going to go skydiving or maybe you're going to go dirt bike riding
or maybe you're going to go to a movie, that's a scare movie kind of movie. And how do we
explain that? You were in the optimal state and now you put yourself at some risk. I used
to be a stock car driver. How could you ever explain the fact that I was a stock car driver?
I go out and get on this dirt track, get covered with dirt with this loud noise, these noxious
fumes in the track and put myself in a position where I might be killed at any minute. How
can I explain that with a homeostatic model? Well, maybe we have a need for risk. Put another
band-aid on the model, a need for risk is in the, you see what the problem is. The model
can explain fairly simple behaviors, but when you get to complex behaviors, you have to start
fixing up the model every time you find a complex behavior it can't explain. And the reason we
were putting together a model in the first place, the reason we do this kind of thing in
science is so that we can explain behavior. So we can explain and perhaps control and perhaps
predict the kind of behaviors that we're going to get. That's the whole use of models or
theories in science. And so this homeostatic model is not doing a very good job for us in
terms of explaining our behaviors when we get to more complex behaviors. And every time we
have to fix it up, we're getting a bit unscientific about it. It's sort of like in the early
history of psychology when people were proposing instincts and they would see a certain kind
of behavior like animals say herding out there and they say, well, there's a herding instinct.
And then they'd see another kind of behavior and they'd name that kind of instinct. It sounds
like science because you're naming things, but you're not really explaining things. And what
you need to do with your theories is explain things. And the homeostatic model unfortunately
doesn't do a very good job of that with the exception of fairly simple and biological kinds
of behaviors. So I think it has some value to it. That's why I talked about it. And it's
probably the most widely accepted model in psychology for explaining behavior. But it has
grave limitations and we should realize that. There is a model that has been suggested more
recently that exemplifies a completely different approach to motivation. And that's a model
that's been proposed by Abraham Maslow. And we've already referred to this in one earlier
lecture where I talked about self-actualization with respect to therapies. What Maslow says is
that we have a hierarchy of needs. And he often exemplifies this by having kind of a pyramid
where at the bottom we have one level of needs and in the middle we have some more levels
of needs and at the top we have a level of needs. And at the bottom we have needs such as
physiological needs. And probably the homeostatic model could do a good job of explaining these
physiological needs. These are the needs to get enough to eat, enough to drink, enough shelter
to keep from dying and that sort of thing. And what Maslow says is until the physiological
needs are met we can't move to the next level. But once those needs are met it's possible to
move to the next level and have something different motivate us. The next level for example is
safety. So once you get enough to eat, once you get enough to drink then you are concerned about
safety. That's the next thing that motivates you. And you can see that somebody in fact might run
across the street even if there's a sniper up there in a war torn country in order to get
something to eat because physiological is first and then safety is second. Once you have
safety satisfied you can move on to other more esoteric needs like love and esteem. It's hard
to even fall in love when you're worried about whether or not you're going to get killed at any
minute. But once you fall in, once you are safe you then can fall in love and then you can worry
some about self esteem for example. And once you work your way all the way up to the top of the
hierarchy sitting at the top of this pyramid is self actualization. Self actualization is
supposed to be the highest level, the one that we should really work to try to achieve. So for
Maslow this is the ultimate in life is to become self actualized. And self actualization has to do
with being all that you can be so that you are fulfilled in all the ways that you could be in
your life. And the problem for many people is that they are stuck in these lower levels and haven't
satisfied their appropriate needs in order to get to the place where they can truly be self
actualized and have a completely fulfilled life. So that's Maslow's model and you can see it's a very
different model, much more based just upon concepts and far less on having a scientific basis. And
there are a number of models of motivation that are like that. So today we considered the general
topic of human motivation. What motivates us? We looked at over history how a number of things have been
suggested such as the gods of fate, Darwin suggesting we're motivated much like the other animals are,
Freud suggesting we're motivated at the unconscious level by certain conflicts in our personality.
Then we looked at the homeostatic model and this is a model where we work to stay in the same state
and we do psychological things that lead to behavior so that you have a need which is converted to a drive
and that drive goes toward behavior and motivates it and takes us back into the optimal state.
We saw some of the problems with the homeostatic model, how it could explain perhaps simple and more
biologically based behavior but doesn't do a very good job with more complex behaviors.
Then we looked just very briefly at Maslow's model where his notion is that you have levels and you have to
satisfy lower levels before you move to upper levels and at the upper level is self-actualization
where you can lead a full satisfying life. So those are the theories of motivation. Thank you.
