Lecture 22 – Drugs, Depressants, Narcotics, Hallucinogens
This is the second lecture of a two lecture series that I'm doing on psychoactive drugs.
To recall that in the last lecture, we defined what a psychoactive drug was and we defined
a number of terms with respect to psychoactive drugs such as dependence, tolerance, physical
addiction and psychological addiction.
And then we spent considerable time talking about stimulants as a class of psychoactive
drugs.
Today, we're going to talk about some other classes of psychoactive drugs, the other major
classes, including depressants.
Under depressants, we'll talk about the barbiturates, we'll talk about tranquilizers
and also alcohol.
Then we'll talk some about the narcotics, the drugs derived from the opium plant.
We'll also talk some about hallucinogenic drugs.
And finally, spend considerable time talking about marijuana.
Now the depressants as a class of drugs, sometimes called also downers, have a calming
effect on the user and it's also the class that has the highest potential to be lethal
to possibly kill the user from an overdose.
Depressants have this because they tend to shut down the life support systems of the
body.
The central nervous system at the very basic levels, down deep in our central nervous system,
from an evolutionary point of view in the very old part of the central nervous system,
we have our life support systems.
And what the depressants do is depress the life support systems.
And if you depress it too far, they quit providing life support for the body and you can get
the ability of these drugs to kill you.
We'll talk about that a little bit more when we talk about alcohol and the likelihood of
being depressed, of being killed by alcohol.
The first of the subclassifications under depressants are barbiturates.
And barbiturates have been around for a long time.
They've been used as sedatives for people who are quite distraught from some precipitating
event, perhaps a death in the family or something like that.
And the person will become sedated and they can help induce sleep as well.
Because of their danger, barbiturates are seldom prescribed today, and partly because
also the next class we're going to talk about is tranquilizers.
And they are much safer and can be used in the place of barbiturates.
Where barbiturates are still used today to some extent is for people who are having convulsion
kinds of problems and they do act as a pretty good anti-convulsant.
The combination of barbiturates and alcohol is a particularly lethal combination.
Since they're both depressants, they have additive effects as depressants and they also have
interactive effects in that they will interact with each other and make both of them somewhat
stronger.
And this combination has led to the death of a number of Hollywood celebrities, a little
less so now that barbiturates are prescribed less frequently.
But it used to be the case that somebody would go to a party and they would come back feeling
like they're overstimulated from this party, having had a lot of alcohol, even though alcohol
is a depressant.
We'll talk about why people sometimes think it's a stimulant in a minute.
So they think they're stimulated, they want to, they can't sleep, so they want to come
down and take barbiturates and the combination of those, as I say, because they have additive
and interactive effects both as depressants can, in fact, shut down the life support systems.
Tranquilizers came along and have pretty well now replaced barbiturates.
They are considerably safer.
They are used for symptoms of anxiety and stress in the user and are prescribed by doctors,
although some people take them because they feel like they just simply mellows them out
even when they don't have a diagnosis of anxiety and stress.
These tranquilizers have names that I'm sure most of you are familiar with, things like
Valium, Xanax, Librium, Milltown, those kinds of names.
They can produce dependence and withdrawal symptoms as well.
I remember seeing a television show where they were talking about Valium and had somebody
on there who was claiming that even though they used Valium quite extensively that they
had no problem with withdrawal symptoms and about that time the person went through withdrawal
symptoms and actually fainted on the floor, which was a pretty good indication that they
were wrong about that.
There are some other classes of tranquilizers that are in use today.
One called Rohitnol.
You may also have heard of it as Rufies.
It's a colorless, tasteless liquid that in heavy doses can produce sleep and amnesia.
The way it's sometimes used is it is used to spike drinks of victims of rape because
the person loses levels of consciousness and sometimes can't remember the events that
happened while they're in a reduced level of consciousness.
There's another even newer one called Gamma Hydroxybutyrate or it's more, you understand
it's hard to pronounce, so they usually call it GHB.
It's been around pretty much since about 1999.
It's also a tranquilizer as well.
It can be used as a date rape kind of a drug, but it's also used by people in rave situations
at club parties who are using ecstasy to counter the effects of ecstasy as well.
Alcohol is a depressant drug and it's derived from the fermentation or distillation of various
sugar-based substances and a lot of people do not believe it's a depressant because it
does seem to have stimulating effects under some circumstances.
Apparently what alcohol does as well as act as a depressant is it acts as a depressant
for your inhibitions as well.
So it can depress the inhibitions thereby releasing some kinds of behaviors that you
would not normally engage in and the person seems to be stimulated under certain kinds
of conditions.
It's very dependent upon the conditions that a person is in.
Alcohol is used worldwide and in terms of health problems such as death and lost work
and money spent and all of those other kinds of things, alcohol use is probably the biggest
drug problem within the world.
About 40% of U.S. population regularly use alcohol and depending upon how it's defined
alcoholism accounts for about 14% of the U.S. population.
Alcoholism has a fairly strong hereditary component.
There are a couple of different kinds of alcoholism.
The one that's usually called early onset alcoholism that occurs fairly early in life
apparently has a strong genetic component and has hereditability rates of about 55%.
This is especially strong for men and men are fairly likely to inherit alcoholic characteristics
from their fathers.
The physiological effects of alcohol are numerous.
It affects sodium, serotonin, GABA, glutamate, and dopamine.
Most of those are transmitter substances.
Sodium affects the sodium that has to do with the actual firing of the neuron.
The rest of those are transmitter substances that we have mentioned previously in this
course.
Using use of alcohol can increase the risk of a variety of health problems including
liver problems, heart problems, stroke, and so forth.
Because it's a depressant, alcohol can also cause death due simply to toxicity, the person
taking in so much alcohol that it becomes toxic to them.
One way of assessing the safety of a drug is a thing called the therapeutic index.
The therapeutic index is used by pharmaceutical companies when they're assessing the safety
of a drug.
The way they define the therapeutic index is that in a little formula where TI, the
therapeutic index, is equal to LD, the lethal dosage of a drug in the numerator, over ED,
the effective dose of the drug.
The lethal dose of the drug is defined as the amount of the drug that would kill half
the people who are taking the drug.
The effective dose of the drug is defined as the amount of the drug that would be required
to get the effective dosage for half the people who are taking it.
The lower the TI, as you can see, the more dangerous the drug is.
If you had a TI of one, what that would say is that half the people would die trying to
get the effective dose of the drug.
So you would never want to take a drug with a TI of one.
So the lower the number, the more dangerous the drug is.
The therapeutic index for alcohol is between five and ten, meaning that it's a fairly
dangerous drug, and meaning that it would take five to ten times the effective dose
in order to kill you.
So if an effective dose for you, let's say, is two drinks in an hour, then if you took
ten drinks in an hour, between ten and twenty drinks in an hour, it could kill you due to
its toxic effects.
And a lot of my students don't realize this, particularly college-age students have had
little experience with alcohol, and for the first time they're turned loose and can drink
as much alcohol as they want to, and sometimes they'll end up chugging a bottle of hard booze.
And that can kill them, and they don't realize that that's the case, just by shutting down
their life support systems.
The toxic effects of alcohol can kill them.
Marijuana, on the other hand, is not a depressant.
We'll talk about it in a minute.
It's perhaps a hallucinogen, although it's probably not even that.
But for marijuana, the therapeutic index is about 35,000.
And what that means is that a person would have to smoke a wheelbarrow full of it or
eat a pickup truck full of it in order to die, at least, of the toxic effects.
Doesn't mean it's entirely safe.
And in terms of toxicity, it is far, far safer than alcohol is.
Let's move on and talk about narcotics, which are opiates, because they're derived from
the opium plant, or in some cases they can also be manufactured as artificial drugs and
have similar kind of compositions.
So for the narcotics, we're talking here about drugs like morphine, heroin, methadone,
codeine.
And these drugs are different mainly by how quickly they cross the blood-brain barrier.
The more quickly they pass through the blood-brain barrier, the more euphoric their effects are.
The quicker the high you get from these drugs, and the quicker they're depleted as well.
We have a blood-brain barrier that, in fact, separates our bloodstream from our brain,
and this slows down the effects of many drugs.
And one of the differences, for example, between morphine, which is a relatively slow in crossing
the blood-brain barrier, and heroin, is how it goes through the blood-brain barrier.
This also points out part of the reason why its drug use is particularly dangerous for
the developing fetus for a pregnant woman, because the fetus does not have a blood-brain
barrier, and the small child develops a blood-brain barrier as it gets older.
So the mother, if the mother, say, is a heroin addict, she's getting the effect of heroin
as it crosses her blood-brain barrier relatively slowly, and the baby is getting the full blast
of the drug because it doesn't have a blood-brain barrier.
So the baby can be born actually more addicted to the drug than the mother is at birth.
Now, these drugs apparently work because we have opiate receptor sites in the downstream
neurons that pick up transmitter substances produced by these drugs, and this means that
we probably produce our own drugs within our body.
Elsewise, why would we have a receptor site if we didn't produce these drugs ourselves?
And indeed, it's been found that we do produce a morphine-like substance called endorphins
within our body.
Endorphin means endogenous morphine.
That means we manufacture it ourselves.
It's not nearly so strong.
A drug is, say, something like heroin or something like that.
But we do produce this kind of drug.
It helps us when we experience pain to mitigate the effects of pain.
The opiates, particularly heroin, can be highly physiologically addictive or physically addictive
with severe withdrawal symptoms, and I think most people are well aware of that.
The withdrawal symptoms may be nausea, diarrhea, muscle cramps, headaches, dizziness, all sorts
of different kinds of symptoms with these withdrawal symptoms from the opiates.
Illegal opiates are also usually injected, and that leads to other kinds of dangers as
well, such as infections and blood diseases and conditions such as the transmission of
HIV, which is extremely high among those who share needles who use the opiates.
Let's move on and talk a little bit about the hallucinogens.
Hallucinogens are drugs that alter your sensory experiences in some way, and there are a number
of subclasses of hallucinogens.
One is LSD, a drug I'm sure you've heard of.
It's been around now for a number of decades.
LSD is not usually considered to be addictive, and it's typically used for occasional trips
that are characterized by altered states of consciousness.
LSD is chemically very similar to serotonin itself.
Most of the drugs we've been talking about act by releasing transmitter substance that's
manufactured in the presynaptic neuron and dumped into the synapse.
In this case, with LSD, apparently the LSD itself is so similar to serotonin that it
acts like serotonin once it gets into the system.
For this reason, even somebody who does not produce enough serotonin themselves can get
the effects of LSD.
They sometimes in fact get heightened effects from LSD, because since they cannot produce
enough serotonin themselves, they tend to get more receptor sites on the postsynaptic
neuron, and because they have more receptor sites, the LSD being similar to serotonin
fills more of those receptor sites, and they get an even bigger effect from LSD.
Sometimes the hallucinogenic effects of LSD are so strong that the user becomes extremely
upset, and this may put the user in dangerous situations.
So while LSD is relatively safe in terms of not being very physically addictive, its
danger comes when the person, due to their behavior, puts themselves into dangerous situations.
There are some mushrooms such as peyote, which is also called mescaline, and psilocybin that
are used as hallucinogens, but not very frequently among the general population.
They are in some cases used by Native Americans as part of religious observances.
I want to spend a little time talking about marijuana and the effects of marijuana, and
while I have in your study guide put it under hallucinogens, it's probably the wrong place
to put it technically.
Most drug classification systems do put it as a hallucinogen, but technically it's probably
not a hallucinogen.
It does not work chemically the way a lot of the hallucinogens do, so it's probably
in some respects the wrong place to put it.
Marijuana is produced from the cannabis sativa plant, which is a member of the hemp family,
although hemp, which is used for the manufacture of rope and clothing and that sort of thing,
contains far less of the active ingredient than the typical marijuana plant, and it's
produced by chopping up stems and leaves and flowers of this plant, and it is a mildly
hallucinogenic drug that may be used by as many as 20 million people in the U.S. and Canada,
so it has fairly widespread usage.
The active ingredient in marijuana is abbreviated THC, and we did not know what that active
ingredient was for many years, I believe it was in 1968 that an Israeli researcher identified
what the active ingredient in the drug is, and we now have about 5% or so THC.
It sometimes goes as high as 7% and even higher nowadays in plants, and this compares
to the plants in the 1970s, which as you'll recall was one of the highest usages of marijuana,
that averaged between 1% and 2%.
So today's plants are some 500 to 1,000% more potent in terms of the amount of the active
ingredient in the plant than it was a number of decades ago.
When inhaled, the effects begin in about 10 to 15 seconds or so, and these peak at about
one hour, although the remnants of the drug are still in the system days later, and sometimes
even weeks later, they reside in the fatty parts of the body, and a person can fail a
drug test even a week or a couple of weeks after the use of marijuana.
That's part of the reason why there do not seem to be a fairly strong withdrawal effects
for marijuana, because the active ingredient stays in the body for some period of time
and doesn't drop off rapidly.
The total effects when inhaled is at about five or six hours.
When eaten, the effects begin in about two hours and peak at four or five hours and last
up to 18 hours, and people sometimes get into trouble when they cook their marijuana into
brownies or something like that, because they start eating those brownies and do not get
much effect, and an hour later they're still munching on brownies, and two hours later they
have more marijuana in their system than they realize that they have.
But fortunately it's not as potent that way, it's about as potent when it's eaten as when
it's smoked.
Marijuana rather strangely has a reverse tolerance effect in that experienced users get high
more quickly, and people didn't believe that for many years, and it turns out that there
are physiological reasons for this reverse tolerance effect.
The high that they get from marijuana is not really due to the THC, it's due to what the
THC is broken down into as a derivative or secondary component of the THC.
And so with experience, tolerance develops, and the THC is broken down more quickly into
the secondary and more potent kind of ingredient, and it's a secondary component then that gets
the user high more quickly.
It also goes away more quickly as well in this case as tolerance develops.
So there really is reverse tolerance with marijuana.
While marijuana may be psychologically addictive, evidence suggests that it's not very physically
addictive in the classic sense of the term.
Under influence of marijuana, performance does change.
One of the most notable things that people report, introspectively, is that time seems
to change, seems to lengthen.
That's one of the least subjective experiences that people have.
If we put people in the laboratory and test them, we will find various differences for
people who are experienced users and naive users.
You can define that however you wish, experienced users perhaps will use it several times a
day for a week or a month period of time, naive users seldom use marijuana.
The typical experiment nowadays didn't used to be this way.
The early work on marijuana was pretty crude, and in fact some of the earlier work was completely
nonsense because it used to be thought that the active ingredient was only in the male
version of the marijuana plant rather than the female version of the marijuana plant,
and so they would use the female version as a control group, and it turns out that both
of these contain about the same amount of THC.
So all of that research didn't tell us very much.
Nowadays it's highly controlled, the government controls pretty regularly the use of marijuana.
In order to do research you have to have marijuana that's usually given to you by the government,
and they can produce marijuana that either has the THC in it or doesn't have the THC
in it but tastes like it does.
And so you would typically have an experimental group with the THC, and they would smoke marijuana
plants with the THC in a control group that does not have the THC, then you would also
do this with experienced users as defined by whatever criterion you're using, and by
inexperienced users as well.
So that's the way the typical experiment would be done.
Now if we set up such an experiment and had somebody do a fairly simple task, let's say
a task like a rotary pursuit task.
That's like having a record turntable with a little disc on it, and they have a stylus
and they try to follow that disc around on this turntable, and then you measure time
on target how much time they've been able to keep their stylus on the disc, very simple
motor task like that.
The typical finding there would be that a naive user would show some degradation under
the influence of marijuana, an experienced user would actually show very little degradation
on a task like that.
If you move to a cognitive task where a person might have to do a task, for example, I would
show you symbols and give you a little one page dictionary that converts the symbols to
numbers or letters, and as the symbols come up you have to push the correct key to indicate
what number or letter that symbol stands for.
In a fairly simple kind of task, we would find much the same result as we would find
with the rotary pursuit apparatus.
For naive users there would be considerable degradation.
For experienced users you wouldn't see much degradation.
In fact to show much degradation for the experienced users, you have to get a much more complex
task, a task such as the following.
Start with the number 100, subtract 7 from it and add 3 successively until you get to
a target number, let's say 51.
So you start at 100, minus 7 is 93, you add 3 to it, 96, subtract 7, 89, add 3, 92 and
so forth until you get to a particular target number.
Even experienced users are notoriously bad at this, they forget the number that they're
working toward.
So they have trouble keeping a goal in mind while they're actively, cognitively working
on a particular task.
This doesn't surprise people who've been around marijuana users very much, who they
know one of the characteristics is they start big long sentences with a lot of clauses in
those sentences and sometimes forget where that's the end of the sentences even going.
So that's perhaps not too big a surprise.
If you get to a task like a driving simulator task, you would discover that you do get some
degradation for experienced users, you get considerable degradation for naive users, but
you don't get anywhere near the degradation for experienced users that you get for experienced
users of alcohol who are under the influence of alcohol.
In terms of the driving simulator task, experienced users are less degraded than our users of alcohol
on a driving simulator.
Now this doesn't mean it's necessarily safe to drive while under the influence of marijuana.
It puts somebody into a real driving situation, there are all sorts of judgment calls that
have to be made.
We do know it affects their perception of time, so certainly it affects their perception
of speed, both of themselves and of other people, so it's probably not a safe thing
to do, but as a general rule it's probably a little safer than it is for those under
the influence of alcohol.
When deciding whether or not to use an illicit drug, there are several issues that we need
to consider and I hope everybody who considers whether or not to use drugs will bring to
bear at least a number of kinds of values when trying to make this decision.
For one thing, for illicit drugs, even if the legal penalties are small, there are some
states for example where the use of marijuana is only a misdemeanor at most.
Nevertheless, there are problems in terms of employment where you have to fill out a
form, often an application that asks you questions, have you used drugs in the past, and social
disclosure may be, the consequences may be great.
If you're running for political office, you sometimes ask about your drug history and
that can certainly go against you.
The second factor is that illicit drugs do not come with any safety guarantee.
They're manufactured in home labs, they're grown under conditions that you don't know
what's been added to the soil, they're sometimes laced with other drugs, and the FDA does
not guarantee their safety.
A third factor is that we don't know much about the interactive effects of drugs.
I've told you some about the effects of alcohol, the effects of marijuana, the effects of
other kinds of drugs, but I haven't told you anything about the interactive effects because
we don't know much about the interactive effects of drugs.
And finally, the use of drugs can exacerbate existing psychiatric conditions that you might
not even be aware of.
So all of these things have to be considered when you're trying to decide whether or not
to use certain kinds of illicit drugs.
So today we've talked about several subcategories of drugs, we've talked about the depressants
and how particularly dangerous those are, talked about the narcotics and some of the
effects of the narcotics, talked about hallucinogens, and we've talked about marijuana.
So I hope that you've learned something from these drug lectures and I hope it's something
that you will find a practical value.
Thank you.
