Lecture 30, Perception, Forming Internal Models
This is the first of two lectures on the topic of perception.
Perception I think is one of the more interesting topics in psychology.
And we're going to today talk about a topic that's kind of difficult to convince people
of.
We're going to talk about the general nature of perception and the fact that we are not
in direct contact with the external world, a concept that's extremely difficult to convey
to folks.
And in doing this, we'll also talk about the fact that we use very subtle cues to form
an internal model, or even multiple internal models, and that sometimes the internal model
that we form is wrong.
It's not in correspondence with the external world.
So that's what we're going to do today.
In the next lecture, we will move on and talk about how we use organizational principles
to put these cues together to form an internal model.
We will also talk about what cues we use, and in particular with depth perception.
And finally, we will talk about whether perception is built in or learned or some combination
of those things.
So that's what we're going to do over the next two lectures.
This lecture I like to call an affective lecture.
That is, I'm trying to convince you of something.
I'm trying to change the way you feel about the world as much as change your cognitive
structure about what the world is like.
And I think this is particularly important at the start of a lecture on perception.
And I will tell you basically what I'm trying to get across in this lecture in just the
next couple of sentences.
I want to convince you that we are not in direct contact with the external world.
That what we do is pick up cues as to what's out there and form an internal model.
We can use very subtle cues, we can entertain multiple internal models, and sometimes those
internal models are wrong.
Now the reason this is such a difficult concept is we believe that we are in contact with
the external world.
And about everything we do convinces us that that's the case.
We walk around and we see objects and we see objects that have different colors.
And our other sensory systems confirm that.
I see a podium here and I can reach out and touch the podium and if I run into it I'll
knock it over.
So my sight is confirmed by my sense of touch, smell.
Our other sensory systems all confirm the reality of the world out there.
And so it seems like we are in direct contact with the external world.
But we forget that we're only picking up fairly subtle cues of the external world.
And in fact, both from a sensory point of view, because we're limited in a sensory way,
and from a perceptual point of view, because we can't pick up all the cues that are out
there to form an internal model, we only pick up some of them and form an internal model,
that we are wrong about this a good deal of the time, and that the external world may
be fooling us.
Now the reason we usually can get along and our internal model will suffice is that it
usually works.
After all, our internal model and the way we put our internal model together was tuned
by evolution to have the most important cues entered to form our internal model.
And we'll look at that when we look at some sensory things here in a minute, why we're
tuned in specific ways from an evolutionary adaptation point of view.
Now Plato wanted to get this thought across to folks, and the way he did that was to tell
a parable that you may have heard.
Plato tells this parable of a young lad, perhaps at a fairly young age, being captured
by a tribe, and he was chained to the wall of a cave.
And so he's chained to the wall of this cave, and all he can see on the other side of the
cave is a gray surface.
And the surface is a bit uneven, and the opening to the cave is off to his side and somewhat
behind him, and that's where light comes into the cave.
And so his only sensory experience is various shades of gray on the wall across from him.
And as people cross by the entrance of the cave, he'll see their shadows kind of undulate
across the wall because it's somewhat uneven.
So as things move in his world, they also change shape all of the time.
And that's his entire experience.
He's not allowed to look at his captors when they feed him and that sort of thing.
At least this is the parable.
When he's a young man, his tribe discovers that he is held captive there, and they come
and rescue him and release him from his chains and take him outside.
And Plato wonders, what was his experience when he goes outside?
Will he act normally?
Will he see things normally?
Will he say, hi mom and dad, it's good to see you, haven't seen you in a while?
Or will he go outside and be completely freaked out by the experience?
Because the world outside follows completely different rules from the rules that were being
followed in his very limited cave existence.
Now I think he would be somewhat upset about what's going on outside.
It would be sort of like you took away our sensory constraints and we could see the real
world out there for the first time.
Now you say, how are we constrained?
Invision, we're constrained by the fact that we see only a little bit of the electromagnetic
frequency spectrum.
If the frequency spectrum is this long, so I'm holding my fingers about a foot apart,
we would see maybe a half an inch of that.
That's what we pick up and we egocentrically call light.
That's the thing that we can see.
And yet you have the rest of that electromagnetic spectrum that has infrared ultraviolet radio
waves, microwaves, all this other stuff going on there.
We just don't pick it up.
Imagine if you will that somebody could throw a switch or take you out of your own personal
sensory cave out into the real world and you are now tuned to all of this stuff that's
going on out there.
So overnight somebody throws your switch, you get up the next morning, you can hear every
radio station playing in your head.
You can see all the TV stations that are coming in, the pictures on these stations.
You hear everybody's cell phone calls going through your head.
You're seeing objects not only in terms of the usual light spectrum, but much like telescopes
that look at the universe using radio waves and other kinds.
You see all of that out there as well.
I mean I think you would be like the guy coming out of the cave and be freaked out by this
experience because you now are tuned to the real world to everything that's going on out
there in terms of the electromagnetic spectrum.
And it's not just the electromagnetic spectrum, it's also things like sound.
We are tuned to certain sound characteristics.
At best we can hear about 20,000 hertz down to about 20 hertz.
If we're really good as we get older that drops off a little bit.
And we're most sensitive to about 500 hertz up to perhaps about 2,000 hertz.
We don't hear the low rumbling vibrations below 20 hertz.
We don't hear the high frequencies above 20,000 hertz even though they're there.
If you sound a dog whistle, you won't hear the dog whistle, but dogs can, they're tuned
higher than we are.
Dogs are tuned even higher because they give out very high frequency sound and that's the
way they fly.
That's kind of their radar or their sonar, if you will, that they're giving out these
sounds and feeling the echoes coming off.
So we're not exposed to all of those kinds of sounds.
So we're limited in terms of sound as well.
And if we were tuned to all of this, we'd hear a whole bunch of high frequency stuff,
the electrons hitting the tube on our TV set and that kind of thing.
Even in terms of smell, for example, we are not tuned to all the chemicals that are floating
around in the atmosphere.
There are all sorts of chemicals that we egocentrically call odorless, meaning we can't smell them.
But nevertheless, there are these chemical molecules that are volatile and are floating
around out there and we have them but we do not have receptors for these particular chemicals.
So we don't smell them.
A good example is natural gas.
Natural gas for us has no odor.
Now you say, but I smell natural gas.
That's because they add a chemical stink to natural gas so that you can smell it because
they know it would be dangerous if you couldn't smell natural gas.
You wouldn't realize you had a gas leak in your house so that you left the gas on on
the stove so they put a chemical in there that we can smell in order to allow us to be
sensitive to the natural gas smell.
There are even individual differences here as well.
When I was a kid, we had a sav in our house that was used for a particular skin condition
that I don't want to go into and I used this sav and to me it was the stinkiest stuff that
you can imagine.
I'd smell this and it'd be just a gross smell to me.
My sisters couldn't smell this at all.
There was just a difference genetically in what we could smell and what we couldn't.
Now again, the reason we are tuned from a sensory point of view to these kinds of things
is that these were important in terms of adaptations from an evolutionary point of view.
Why are we tuned to this particular frequency spectrum?
Mainly because our earliest ancestors evolved in the forest.
If you evolved in the forest, what kind of frequency would you want to see?
You'd want to see a lot of greens, that's what the leaves are, reds, that's what the
fruits are, yellows, blues perhaps, a little less so, browns because that's what the limbs
are.
And if you look at what we're sensitive to, it's that narrow range that includes the
kinds of signals that are given off by the trees and the things that we eat, the things
we have to grasp, the things that are important to us in terms of survival and reproduction.
So that's why we're tuned to those kinds of things.
That's part of the reason we see distinctive colors.
Colors are not defined by frequency.
They differ in frequency, but frequencies do not have these distinct demarcations between
colors that we see.
Red for us is very different from green, but from a frequency point of view, it's fairly
close to green, and there's not a distinct break in the frequency spectrum between red
and green, or between green and yellow.
Yet we see those as distinctly different colors, and for good reason.
Our sensory system is built to make those fine distinctions so we can tell the difference
between the fruit and the leaf in evolutionary terms.
So we are tuned in a sensory sense to our environment, and that's what we perceive.
Even perceptually, we do not experience the entire external world.
We pick up cues and form internal models, and we can pick up only certain kinds of cues
and we ignore other kinds of cues in forming our internal model.
For example, we have a blind spot on our retina, and we don't see that in our internal model.
There's this big hole, and we just fill it in in forming our internal model.
So there are a lot of cases in perception where we do this.
One thing that we do when we form our internal model, we are very good at this, and we can
pick up fairly subtle cues to form this internal model.
In your course guidebook, you'll see a picture of something when you look at it that looks
like the face of a cow.
In fact, all it is is kind of a horizontally oriented oval with two little dark dots above
it, and two things that look kind of like smooth leaves above it, which represent the
ears of the cow, and most people will look at that and say, aha, I see a cow face, or
maybe with the way I drew it you'd see a pig face, but nevertheless it looks like an animal
face to you, much like when you look at a smiley face where you see a circle and a couple
of dots and a little arc, you say that represents a face, a human face in this case.
We pick up these subtle cues and form our internal model, and we're very good at this.
I have another picture that I often use in my class of a Dalmatian in front, it's a black
and white picture of a Dalmatian in front of some leafy kind of surface that again looks
black and white, and these little blotches, when you look at it, you can see the Dalmatian,
a dog, if you plug this thing into a computer, the computer would be lost.
There's not enough contour on it to indicate that it's a dog, and the computer would have
no idea what it is.
The computer would have a difficult time with this cow face in terms of identifying it as
a cow face, and yet we're very good at this.
Again from an evolutionary point of view, we probably got pretty good at this about distinguishing
dogs from leaves, for example, or distinguishing an enemy coming through the forest.
We got good at picking up these subtle cues and forming internal models.
So that's one characteristic of humans that's kind of important.
A second thing to note is that we can carry around multiple internal models.
We actively seek out cues to form our internal models.
It's a very constructive kind of process, much like what we were talking about in the
memory lectures, that we would pick out cues and put those into memory, and then when we're
asked to come up with our memory, we take those cues and construct something that we
then pretend is what we remembered.
This is a very similar kind of process.
What we're doing is picking up cues out there and using those cues to construct an internal
model, and then we pretend that that internal model is true.
This is such an active process as we bring those cues in, the cues may take us one direction
and then another direction, and we keep looking for an appropriate internal model.
We want to get it right because it's very important for us to get it right.
So when we have ambiguous cues, sometimes we have a difficult time figuring out which
internal model is the true internal model.
Then in your study guide, your course guide book, you'll find something that's labeled
a Necker cube.
The Necker cube is a two-dimensional representation of a three-dimensional object that's like
a cube that's formed perhaps out of wire or out of plexiglass, so you can see through
the cube, and all you see are the outlines of each of the faces on the cube.
When you first look at this cube, it looks fine, looks like it has one orientation, and
you're quite comfortable looking at it, but as you look at it for a few seconds, what
will happen is that what looked like the front face of the cube will suddenly become the
back face of the cube, and the back face will become the front face of the cube.
It will reverse on you because the cube, there are no indications about what should be the
front face.
Not like in a normal, solid three-dimensional cube where the front face would occlude, would
cover up the back face.
In this case, you can see through it, and so you get multiple interpretations.
Most of these illusions that I'm talking about are, in many cases, they are illusions that
have to do with taking a two-dimensional object and interpreting it as a three-dimensional
object, and it's not surprising we do that.
Again, from an evolutionary point of view, we live in a three-dimensional world.
It's only been fairly recently that we could represent the three-dimensional world in two
dimensions, probably started with cave drawings and that sort of thing, and nowadays, of course,
we see that all the time in photographs and TV shots and that kind of thing.
But most of our evolutionary history was in a three-dimensional world, so it's not surprising
that we see two-dimensional objects as three-dimensional if we can, because that's what our internal
model is tuned to do, what our perceptual systems do is give us three-dimensional models
if they can, because that's the way that we think that the real world operates.
You see this necker cube, and your very active system tries to interpret it properly, and
the cues are ambiguous enough that they can have two different interpretations, and it'll
flip back and forth on you, and it's very distracting once you see the two interpretations
to try to hold one.
You can sit there and look at the picture and say, now, I'm going to concentrate very
hard and keep it in one orientation, but your system will override you, and with its active
construction process, will bring about the other interpretation, and it'll flip back
and forth on you as you do this.
So this is one case where you can have multiple, in this case, two internal models.
There are other examples of this as well.
There are several other standard illusions, some of which that you may have seen.
There's an illusion called the faces and vase illusion that most people have seen at this
point.
It's a very popular one, and what it looks like is two faces looking at each other in
profile in front of something like a light window, and so you see the profiles of these
two faces in front of a square light window, and that's what it looks like at first.
But then you can have a different interpretation of this.
It could be that the light from the window is actually an object itself and looks like
a vase, a symmetrical vase, between the two faces, and now the faces go away, and that
just becomes a black surface with a white vase down the center of the picture.
Again, once you see both interpretations of this, it'll flip back and forth for you, and
you have a difficult time holding one interpretation and ignoring the other interpretation.
There are other illustrations as well.
There's one that you may have seen with an old woman, a young woman illusion that'll
flip back and forth on you, and again, in each of these cases, it's a competing internal
model that's causing this.
One of my favorites is an illusion with the necker cube, in which not only do you have
a necker cube, but you also have what appears to be a flat white surface with holes in it
that you can see through the holes in this surface, and you can see the cube, it's ambiguous
enough that you can see the cube in front of the surface, or you can see the cube in
back of this surface looking through the holes and seeing the cube behind the holes, or you
can see the surface is bisecting the cube where half of the cube is in front of the
surface and half of the cube is behind the surface, and the cube is going through the
holes in the surface, and this is a particularly interesting one to me because you have six
interpretations of the same stimulus here.
It's a necker cube, so you have two interpretations that reverses on you and switches back and
forth regardless of whether you see it in front, behind, or intersected by the surface,
and then you can see it in front, or behind, or bisected by the surface, and in those cases
you see six different interpretations of it, and it'll switch back and forth on you through
six different stages. With one stimulus, a representation, you can get six different
internal models, and it's a good illustration, I think, of how constructive our process is
here. Now the third kind of thing I want to mention today is a case where our internal
model is just wrong. It's not in correspondence with the external world, and this is what
we usually think of as visual illusions. A good example of this is the Mueller-Lyer
illusion, and there is also a representation of that in your book, and to describe what
it is, it's two horizontal line segments, and in one case you have an arrowhead that
is kind of a standard appearing arrowhead, where the arrow is pointing outward from the
ends of the line, and in the other case you have an inverted arrowhead where the arrowheads
are pointing inward and attached to the ends of this horizontal line. Now what people see
when they view this Mueller-Lyer illusion is they see the case with the inverted arrowheads
that the line segment is longer than the case with the normal appearing arrowheads, and
people have wondered why that is for some period of time. In this case your internal
model is just wrong. You see one line is longer than the other, and it's not, you can take
away the arrowheads and show that the lines are exactly the same length, so your internal
model is wrong. People have wondered why that is. Some have proposed that it might be that
we look at it as a three-dimensional object instead of a two-dimensional object, and the
arrowhead, the angles coming in from the arrowhead for the longer one, the one that appears
to be longer, looks like the near corner, or the far corner of a room, and the far corner
of a room being farther away from us would look longer than the near corner of a room.
The other one looks like the near corner of a room, and so that was one interpretation
given or one explanation for why this illusion is effective. Unfortunately they've tried
this by taking it to folks who live in round houses, round huts, and have never seen corners
of buildings and corners of rooms like this, and they still get the illusion, so there's
some indication that that's not a satisfactory explanation for it.
Another set of illusions that give us a false internal model. In your course book you'll
see two squares. One of these is a black square and one is a white square, and then the middle
of each of these squares is another smaller gray square. When you look at this, the gray
square that is surrounded by the black surface looks considerably lighter than the gray square
that's surrounded by the white surface. This is usually called a gray contrast effect.
This to me is a very powerful illusion. I can look at some of these other illusions and
convince myself, at least logically, why I'm getting that illusion and kind of overcome
it if I think logically about it. This one you will never convince me that those two
gray squares are the same shading. Even if I cut off the surrounding surface and look
at the gray squares in comparison to one another, they still look to me, I cannot believe that
they're the same shading, and yet they are. It's a very kind of powerful illusion. There's
one other one that I included in the course guide as well, and in this case it's an illusion
that looks like a wagon wheel with spokes, and superimposed upon this wagon wheel are
two horizontal lines that cross the wagon wheel. Those horizontal lines look like they're
bowed outward. They're not. They're perfectly flat lines, and the wagon wheel distorts them
and makes them look like they're bowed outward. I don't want to go into the particular reasons
for that, but I usually show my students this illusion by having the straight lines and then
using a transparency where I can add the wagon wheel or take the wagon wheel away, and they're
amazed that the bowed lines become straight lines once you remove the wagon wheel. There
are all sorts of illusions like this. Some of the most sophisticated illusions, I would
send you to a website that we have in your course guide. Dale Purvis's website, Dale Purvis
is a professor at Duke University who studies perception. We'll refer to him in the next
lecture when we're talking about some theories of perception, but he has a particularly interesting
website, and this website has a lot of color and contrast kinds of illusions on the website
where you see colors and shades that are in shadow or appear to be getting direct light
or are in shadow, and those things look entirely different, and yet if you take away the context,
they're the same, much like the gray contrast thing. But these are much more sophisticated
things. I would encourage you to go to this website and take a look at those illusions
there. Now we have illusions in other modalities other than the visual modality. I've concentrated
here on the visual modality, but let me mention a couple of other ones. When I do this lecture
for my class, I play them a tape recording of a tone that sounds like it's a decreasing
frequency. So it sounds something like doooooo and you listen to this and it keeps going
down, and it keeps going down, and a minute later, it's still going down, and you say
how can I hear that tone if it's decreasing in frequency? Why isn't it gone out of my
ability to hear it? In fact, it's not decreasing in frequency at all. It's keeping the same
fundamental frequency, but they're changing the timbre of the tone, some of the other
frequencies that make it sound to you like the tone is decreasing, even though it's
staying the same.
This was actually made by having a tape recorder with a loop on it, and yet it sounds like
it's going down, going down, going down.
It's an amazing kind of an illusion.
You can do this with touch as well.
You can take something like a silver dollar or a poker chip and hold it with your thumb
and your finger and take your other hand and grab the sides of it and start rotating it
around the axis of the one hand's thumb and finger.
As you rotate that and close your eyes and rotate this thing, it'll start feeling instead
of being round like it's an oval shape, and that gives you a different kind of illusion
as well.
As a kid, had an illusion that you created by pushing your arms, your hands on the inside
of a door and pushing for a while, and then stepping away from the door and your arms
felt very light.
That's another kind of illusion that you can have.
There are lots of ways of producing illusions other than just in the visual system.
The other sensory systems are also subjected to this kind of false internal models.
What we're trying to do in today's lecture, and the reason I showed you or described these
kinds of illusions, is to simply try to convince you that we are not in direct contact with
the external world.
We pick up cues and form an internal model, and usually that internal model suffices.
It's okay.
We don't run into objects, and we don't step off cliffs, and we don't do stupid kinds
of things because these internal models evolved in an environment that kept us safe and where
they were usually correct.
We can show conditions where they're wrong, in which case we suddenly are confronted by
the fact that we are not in direct contact with the external world.
That's a sort of hard thing to swallow.
After all, if you remember back when we talked about mental disorders and defined psychosis,
our definition of psychosis was that we lose contact with reality.
What I've tried to convince you of today is that we're all a little crazy because none
of us are in contact with reality in the end.
Thank you.
