Lecture 33 Evolutionary Psychology, Altruism and Mating
This lecture is the second in a three lecture series on evolutionary psychology.
You will recall from last time that evolutionary psychology is one of the newer areas in psychology.
In many respects it's just getting started.
What we did last time is talk about what are some of the requirements for evolution to
take place.
We also talked about kind of the context for our human ancestors, what was the environment
like during their evolution, and that gave us some idea of perhaps how we ended up the
way that we are.
We then looked at Desmond Morris' interpretation of this context, and we considered questions
why we are a naked ape, and we also talked about sex and aggression, and put those within
the context of evolution as well.
Today we're going to talk about evolution in even more detail, and we're going to talk
about two major parts of evolution.
Evolution has to do with altruistic behavior, and that has topics such as inclusive fitness
and reciprocal altruism.
We're going to talk in great detail about that.
We're also going to talk about differential parental investment, and how that brings about
different strategies for men and women in terms of their mating strategies, both in
short-term mating strategies and long-term mating strategies, so that's where we're
going today.
Darwin had a real problem with altruism.
Altruism of course is helping behavior, and he couldn't understand why anybody would
help anybody else, not only amongst humans, but among animals.
If after all, one of the cornerstones of your theory is that survival of the individual
is most important, why should we ever use our resources for somebody else's survival
rather than our own survival, particularly if that other being happens to be a competitor
of ours?
Why would that ever happen?
And Darwin was really stumped by this, and couldn't explain it in his lifetime.
Now we have a couple of explanations for it, and in order to understand those explanations,
you sort of have to change the picture of evolution a little bit.
You have to quit thinking of survival, and you have to quit thinking of the individual,
which may seem like we're taking the basics of evolution away, but in fact, survival is
only part of it.
The greater part of it is reproduction, because it's not the survival that's so important,
but producing replicates of the person or the animal that's most important.
The second is the individual is not particularly important.
The individual is just a life support system, a bag of water, if you will, a temporary container,
what is sometimes called a vehicle in evolutionary psychology for carrying around the genetic
material, and that's really what the individual is about.
What evolution is really about is the evolutionary material, and that evolutionary material trying
to become immortal.
The evolutionary material doesn't care much about the life support system, other than it
wants to keep that life support system alive long enough to produce some replicates of
itself.
And so if you start thinking about the basic unit of evolution as being the genetic material,
rather than the individual, you can start explaining some things like altruism.
One of the important people who established some of the principles by which you could
talk about altruism was William Hamilton, who while in the 1960s was working on his dissertation
proposed one of the cornerstones of altruism, and that's called inclusive fitness theory.
William Hamilton was a very bright fellow, unfortunately he died in the course of research.
He was out in the field doing research and contracted a disease, and so he's no longer
with us.
But he's one of the most important pioneers in evolutionary psychology, because he proposed
with inclusive fitness that it was not so much our direct offspring, that was certainly
a great part of what evolution is about, that our genes are trying to do replication
through having kids, but in fact our genes are also related to people besides our kids.
In other words we are related 50% to our kids on average, our biological offspring, but
we're also related 50% to our siblings, our brothers and sisters, we're related 50% to
our parents, we're related to our nephews and nieces at 25% of our genes we share with
them, our second cousins, it's about 12.5% of our genes that we share with them.
So we have this sort of extended, this inclusive family, and the fitness of that inclusive
family is important as well as the fitness of our direct offspring.
And when you start thinking about it that way, you begin to understand why we might
do things at least for our kin, good things, altruistic things for our kin, and that was
an important contribution that Hamilton made, and it's perhaps should not be of much surprise
to us, because if you ask people what they do for other people, their kin are right up
there at the top of the list, and we are more likely to be doing things for our kin than
for anybody else, and we'll go into some of that research in a minute.
First let's look at a bit more formal version of inclusive fitness as proposed by Hamilton,
and this is a little formula that's called Hamilton's Rule.
What Hamilton said is that C is less than R times B. Alright, C in this formula is the
cost to ourselves, or the cost to the person who is doing something for somebody else.
C, the cost to ourselves, is less than R. R is the relatedness of the person doing something
to the person who is receiving the benefit, and B is the benefit that that person receives.
So what Hamilton's Rule says is that if the cost to ourselves is less than the relatedness
times the benefit received by the person, then we ought to do that act.
Let me give you an example.
If you're standing on the bank of a river and you have somebody floating by who's in
serious trouble, they fell in the river and they're about to drown, and you have to decide
whether to save this person, that would obviously be an altruistic act, and you're trying to
decide whether to do that.
One thing that you might do is look at that person and try to figure out how related you
are to that person, and that usually happens pretty automatically.
I would look down, I see it's my son who's in the river.
Do I save my son?
Well it depends on the formula, and I quickly, my genes, quickly do this formula, and obviously
they're not down there doing mathematics, but in fact my genes are figuring out based
upon this formula what's going to be the cost to you.
And I might know how good a swimmer I am, how likely I am to drown if I jump in that
river and try to save my son, and perhaps I think it's maybe 25% of the time it might
take me and I might die from jumping into the river.
What's the relatedness?
Well if it is my biological son, and we're never quite sure about that, we'll talk about
that in a minute, parental uncertainty of the father of whether or not this is truly
his offspring, but let's assume that I'm pretty sure this is my son, so I'm related
50% to this, to the boy, and what's the benefit?
Well if I don't save my son, I reckon that he's probably going to die in the river because
he's having a difficult time.
So under those circumstances, should I save my son?
Well probably so.
If I think I'm only going to die 25% of the time, I'm 50% related, the benefit received
is one, so in fact 0.25 is less than 0.5, and so I ought to act in that case.
Now suppose it's my nephew who's in the river, should I save my nephew who's related 0.25?
Well it's a close call in that case if this works out this way.
Suppose it's my second cousin who's in the river, well forget my second cousin, I'm
not going to save my second cousin, alright?
And so I would do this kind of formula any time I see somebody in the river, or any time
I'm going to do something for somebody else.
Now you can see some seeds of some difficulties here, suppose I'm not related to this person,
or suppose I'm related only in a very minor way to this person, maybe it's my neighbor's
kid, and maybe it's less than 25%, I think that I'm going to drown, I think it's a fairly
low likely event that I will drown, should I save this kid?
Well I don't know, how do I know how related I am to this kid?
I look out there and I say does he look anything like me?
And if he looks a little bit like me, I think well maybe in the past we have, my genes are
saying this, again I'm not consciously doing this, I determined that perhaps I could be
related to this, this boy.
Now suppose this boy has a different skin color than I do, you can see some of the seeds
of racism here in that formula, because if this person has a different skin color than
me, then maybe I'm not related to this person at all, I may be, I actually have some third
cousins who have a different skin color than mine, so maybe I am related, although my genes
probably wouldn't think so, and so you can see some of the seeds even of racism perhaps
being built in with this formula.
Alright now there's been a number of studies that have been done, looking at whether or
not this general inclusive fitness theory holds up, and whether this formula holds up,
Hamilton's Rule, let me tell you just about a little bit of this research.
One of the pieces of research was done on non-humans, on ground squirrels, ground squirrels live
on the ground and gather food and have little holes that they jump into when predators attack
them and that sort of thing, and predators attack them all the time, predators like coyotes,
and one of the ways they protect themselves against predators is to have alarm calls.
They sound a sort of high-pitched staccato whistle that the other ground squirrels can
hear.
Now the question is, why should they ever call to the other ground squirrels around there?
That's really altruistic behavior, because their calling probably makes them more likely
to be eaten by the predator, and yet they're trying to save the other ground squirrels around
there.
That's altruistic behavior in animals that's difficult to explain, and so people wanted
to try to explain this, and there were a number of possible hypotheses here.
One possibility is that it's not altruism at all, but in fact it causes predator confusion.
So the predator, everybody starts scurrying around when the call comes out, and the predator
gets confused and doesn't know who to attack, and so you're more likely to survive.
So that's one possibility.
Another possibility is that the calling may deter the predator from attacking at all.
He's lost his edge of sneaking up on the group, so he stalks off and does something else,
and that might help save your life as well.
So those two things don't even require altruism.
Another possibility is that there's reciprocal altruism, that somehow this ground squirrel
knows that I'll call this time, and somebody else will call the next time, and I'll gather
some benefit because of reciprocal altruism.
It's kind of a sophisticated thing for ground squirrels to be thinking about.
Another possibility is parental investment, that in fact maybe I can save my genetic offspring
even if I'm not saved.
So Hamilton's rule might explain something like that.
And the final one might be inclusive fitness, that there are a lot of these ground squirrels
in the group who are related to me, and I might be eaten, but lots of my genetic material
will survive in these other kin.
So those were the possibilities.
They did some research and discovered that the first two were not true at all, because
the caller was more likely to be eaten by a large margin.
So it is not a benefit to the caller to call out.
The third one, reciprocal altruism, they discovered that it's not linked to the longevity of the
caller with other members of the group, and it's also the case that the familiarity of
the caller with the others in the group has nothing to do with it.
So reciprocal altruism is probably unlikely.
Parental investment probably could be some of it, but they know that the call will still
go out even if there are no kids in the group.
So it's not just parental investment.
And so it looks like it's inclusive fitness that's explaining this.
It's typically the female who calls because the females tend to stay in the group and
the males tend to leave the group and go to different groups, so they have less kin in
the group.
One would expect that it would be the female who's doing the major calling, and also females
will call more often if they have sisters, nieces, aunts present in the group.
And all of this sounds like it's support for inclusive fitness.
So ground squirrels, at least, support the notion of inclusive fitness.
Let's talk about who leaves what to whom in wills.
That's another way that you could look, and now we're going to move to humans.
Because squirrels don't leave wills, so we're going to go to humans here and find out who
leaves stuff to other folks in wills.
And if inclusive fitness is true, we could make a number of predictions, because here
you have a resource that you're giving as a benefit to somebody else, even though you're
now dead.
And the question is, who do you want to benefit from this?
Inclusive fitness predicts a number of things.
First of all, you would predict that you're more likely to leave your resources to kin,
to somebody who's genetically related to you, and also to your spouse, because your spouse,
the general idea is that your spouse will likely leave it to the kin as well.
Than to people you're not related to.
And what they did here was they took a thousand wills, this was a Canadian study, and they
took a thousand wills and looked at who indeed was, that people left their stuff to.
And they discovered that 92% of the time they left their possessions to their kin or to
their spouse.
Only 8% of the time did they leave anything to non-kin.
That's a support for inclusive fitness.
The second thing that you might predict from this is that the closer kin, that is, those
who are related more closely to you will receive more resources than kin who are not
so closely related to you.
And indeed they found that for .5 kin, those who are related to you 50% like children,
they left stuff to .5 kin at 46% of their resources.
They left only 8% of their resources to kin who were .25 kin, like grandchildren.
And less than 1% of the time did they leave anything to kin who are 12.5% kin.
So in fact there was a direct relation to how related they were and what they left to
their kin.
And finally, there would be a prediction not directly from Hamilton's rule, but also
with a slight tweak to Hamilton's rule of leaving more to offspring than to siblings.
And the tweak of the rule you have to do is not only have the relatedness in there, but
also have the reproductive value of this kin to you.
If you're writing a will, typically your siblings are older, perhaps they're even past
child-bearing years at this point.
And so from a reproductive point of view, there are not nearly the value to you that
your kids are, who are probably more likely to be in their reproductive years, or if you're
old enough perhaps your grandchildren, although now we're getting out of the evolutionary
range because people probably died at 35 or 40 in ancestral times.
So at any rate, you would predict that siblings would get less than children.
And indeed, children got 39% of the resources and siblings got about 8% of the resources.
So that's upheld as well.
So that's additional evidence for inclusive fitness.
One final thing that they did in research was to look at questionnaires asking about
helping behavior.
And they would set up a situation.
One situation was there's a burning building and there's somebody in the building, there
are a number of people in the building, but you can only save one person from this burning
building before the fire gets too hot to help anybody else.
And who would you save in this building?
And then the other was that you're going to go to the store to pick up some things and
you could pick some things up for somebody else as well.
Who would you pick things up for?
So the kind of minor everyday kind of helping versus a life or death kind of helping situation.
They did this by questionnaire and they discovered some things that indeed also support inclusive
fitness.
For both the life or death and the everyday situation, it was lined up quite orderly depending
upon the relatedness that people with a .5 relatedness were helped far more frequently.
If that's the person from the burning building that could be saved, you'd save a .5 person
in terms of relatedness over a .25 person over a .125 person from the building.
And the same was true for the most part for the everyday kind of thing, although there
was one minor difference there that I don't want to talk about.
Age also made a difference and again in terms of reproductive value, you would predict that
age would make a difference.
For the most part, younger kin were helped more than older kin as you would predict by
reproductive value.
So all of these pieces of research tend to support the notion of inclusive fitness.
I want to move on and talk a little bit about mating behavior.
It's a very widely studied thing in evolutionary psychology, not surprisingly because we now
know that it's not only survival, but even more importantly reproduction, that's the
important thing for evolution.
If that's true, we might expect that mating behavior is extremely important.
Now if we're going to try to explain the difference in mating behavior of men and women, we should
understand a little bit about what's called differential parental investment.
That simply means who contributes more as a parent in terms of investment in the offspring.
And very quickly I'm sure you could immediately see who contributes more.
It's not just who does the housework, but even the reproductive act.
What's the male contribute to that?
Maybe a couple of minutes at a time, maybe a teaspoon of sperm out of an unlimited supply
of sperm, that's the minimal contribution at least for the male.
That's not much.
What's the minimal contribution for the woman, for the human female?
Well nine months gestation period at least.
Probably especially in the ancestral times, a three to four year lactation period during
which time she's not going to generally be able to have other children during that period
of time.
And then probably a minimum of a five or six year rearing period beyond that.
So we're talking about a minimum contribution of at least ten years time here.
That's a whole lot more than demand.
Once you understand that there's differential parental investment, by that huge amount you
can start to understand something about the difference in mating behavior.
For all animals, not just humans, the one who contributes more in terms of parental investment
is the one who's the choosiest.
In some cases, in some animals, it's the male.
There are some horse fish, is that what you call them?
And there are some beetles where the male actually contributes more to the situation.
The female will lay an egg, the male will inseminate the egg, and then the male hangs
around and protects it, protects the nest and provides some of the food and that kind
of thing.
And when that happens, you get a switch in this, and the male becomes choosier.
And the female becomes more beautiful, usually larger, more aggressive, because the female
is now competing with other females for access to this choosy male, so the whole thing switches
around and sort of reverses, gives a mirror image to what we have with humans.
So the woman ought to be choosier, the male ought to be more aggressive and more competitive.
And we know that that's the case, the male's also somewhat larger than the female with humans.
And in terms of strategy, sexual strategy here, the male should be much more interested
in short-term mating than the female is.
And that's certainly the case, and I'll cite some research here in just a minute that points
up that being the case, because what he wants to do is produce as many offspring as possible.
That's one strategy for him.
The more offspring he produces, regardless of whether he takes care of any of them, some
of them are likely to live, and they will carry his genes, replicates of his genes.
And that's one way for evolution to take place, where there are lots of replicates out there
of the genes, so that the more females he can impregnate, the better off he is in terms
of a short-term strategy.
Now the woman doesn't engage much in a short-term strategy.
When you get into the details of it, there are some circumstances under which women do
engage in short-term strategies, but for the most part, her strategy will be to have
a long-term relationship, a more committed relationship, where she has a male around
to provide resources in this pair-bonded situation to her very few but high-quality kids.
He is producing these low-quality kids out here, but I'm overdoing it for the male because
he has a second strategy as well.
He also has a long-term strategy because if he does have a pair-bond and has a quality
spouse and quality kids that he brings resources to, they are much more likely to survive,
and he is also much more likely to know that they're his, and that's one of his strategies
as well.
So the male is really carrying around two strategies, a short-term and a long-term strategy, whereas
the woman primarily has the long-term strategy.
Now what kinds of research findings can we look at to see whether this is indeed the
case?
There was a study where they had male college students who were standing waiting to cross
the street and an attractive woman co-ed walks up and says, one of three questions, would
you like to go out with me?
The second question, would you like to go back to my apartment with me?
Third question, would you like to have sex with me?
Just right out of the blue, like that, and the question is, what is the male going to
say?
Well, let's take the, would you have sex with me?
Question first, 75% of the time, the male says, yes, I'd like to do that.
I hire a percentage, then would you like to go back to my apartment or would you like
to have a date with me?
75% of the time, the guy says, yes.
How many women do you think said yes under that same circumstance?
None.
Not a single woman said yes when faced with that same kind of question.
That is a huge difference in men and women.
One of the biggest sex effects you'll ever see in men and women, far bigger than other
kinds of sex effects.
And that would be predicted by this difference in short-term strategy and long-term strategy
of men and women.
If men are asked how many sex partners they'd like to have in their lifetimes, the average
number that they say is about 18.
If you ask women that question, the average is about four or five.
Again, a very large difference there.
If you ask men and women, which they would find more distressing?
Having their partner has a deep emotional attachment to somebody else or finding out
that their partner is enjoying passionate sexual intercourse with somebody else.
Again, our theory would say, what's the worst thing for the woman to have happen in this
case?
Well, because it's a long-term kind of thing, she doesn't want her spouse falling in love
with somebody else and stop bringing in the resources for this investment she's made in
this family.
So her biggest fear is that she's going to have the resources stopped, that is being
abandoned.
Well, if he has a strong emotional attachment to somebody else, that might lead to abandonment.
What's the man's greatest fear?
The man's greatest fear is that he is providing resources to genetic material that is not
his.
In other words, that his spouse will have cheated on him, that he's a cuckold, in fact.
In fact, he finds it terrible to think about her having sexual intercourse with somebody
else.
He's less concerned about the emotional attachment here.
Indeed, that's what you find out, that the men are much more upset by picturing their
mate having sexual intercourse with somebody else than emotional attachment.
If you go across the world, 37 cultures, although over 10,000 people have been surveyed, and
when the women are asked what is their preference for characteristics in men, they say good
financial prospects is very high on their list.
It's over twice as high as it is when you ask men what characteristics they're looking
for in women.
What do you suppose men are looking for in women?
They're looking for somebody who is attractive, somebody who's pretty.
Because prettiness is associated with being fertile, and indeed it is.
In faces, the more symmetrical the face, the healthier the person is, the more likely that
person is to be fertile.
The waist to hip ratio is a big indicator of attractiveness that men find in women.
That is associated with a waist to hip ratio of .7 is ideal, and it is associated with
fertility as well.
For men, attractiveness is what's most important, and part of that is also youth, because women
are most fertile at the age of 20 or so, and so young women are more attractive than
older women as well.
This research that's done, one of the striking things for the difference between men and
women is the effect size.
In psychology, small effect sizes are about .1 or .2, medium of sizes are about .5, large
sizes are .8 or .9, something like that.
The difference between men and women in math skills, for example, is .15.
The difference between men and women in verbal skills is about .11.
The difference between men and women on most of these things that I've just talked about
is around .9 or .1, huge differences as you would predict by differential parental investment.
I think that's a pretty impressive support for this part at least of evolutionary psychology.
Next time we'll talk about some additional issues with evolutionary psychology.
Thank you.
