Lecture 36, Recap, Omissions, and Into the Future
This is the final lecture in our 36 lecture sequence in this course, and what I would
like to do today is to recap the topics that we've been over in this course, talk about
them, and quickly hit them, and I think you'll be surprised how many topics we've actually
covered in this course.
That should take about half of this lecture.
Then I'd like to discuss, just very briefly, three areas that we've not had the time to
discuss in the course, but these are areas that are of particular interest today in psychology.
Then I'd like to make a couple of predictions about the future and where psychology is going.
If you recall at the beginning of this course, we said that what we were going to try to
do was cover the standard areas of psychology, the academic areas, and we have done that
for the most part, although we are going to try to put these areas in a historical context
and also try to emphasize some of the modern approaches and issues in psychology.
So let me go back over the various lectures and what we've done and try to remind you
where we've been.
In the first lecture, what we did is talk about historical precursors to psychology from philosophy
and also from biology.
We talked about clinical versus experimental psychology and pointed out that about two-thirds
of psychologists would call themselves clinical in some form or another and about a third
would call themselves experimental psychologists.
We made the distinction between a psychologist, a clinical psychologist, and a psychiatrist
in terms of training, in terms of being able to write prescriptions and that sort of thing.
We talked about some of the history of experimental psychology and clinical psychology in terms
of both theoretically and in terms of the methods they use and also we gave a preview
of the rest of the topics in the course.
In lecture two and three, we talked about methods that are used in psychology.
In lecture two, we emphasized experimentation and we talked about how you needed an independent
variable, a dependent variable, control variable, random variables, and confounding variables
and the difference between those, and how if you do run an experiment, one of the nice
things is that you can infer causality.
It's the only one of the techniques that very cleanly you can infer causality.
In lecture three, we talked about some other quantitative, non-experimental designs such
as correlational observation and other quantitative designs.
With correlational observation, we made the point that you cannot infer causality from
correlational observation even though it is quantitative.
We also talked about some qualitative designs such as ethnography, naturalistic observation,
and case studies and we pointed up some of the dangers with these non-experimental designs
such as not being able to infer causality, such as subjectivity, and such as retrospective
reporting where you're not quite sure of the accuracy of people's memory.
In lecture four, we had a brief introductory lecture of evolution and I wanted to put it
there so that you could consider evolutionary kinds of things as we went through the rest
of the topics in the course and we talked about some of the requirements for evolution
and some of the misunderstandings in terms of evolutionary theory.
In lectures five and six, we talked about Freud's psychoanalytic theory and in lecture
five, we emphasized the unconscious nature of this theory that the unconscious level
drives our behavior according to Freud and we also talked about the parts of the personality,
the id, the superego, and the ego and what those contained.
In lecture six, we talked about the developmental stages in psychoanalysis, the oral, anal,
phallic, and genital stages.
We talked about the edipus and electroconflicts and what the dynamics of those conflicts are
and finally we talked about defense mechanisms such as repression and rationalization and
projection and how we use those to protect our egos in the face of conflict.
In lecture seven, we tried to define abnormal psychology and said what criteria do we use
in deciding whether a particular behavior is abnormal or whether it's normal and we
talked about possible criteria being such as statistical criteria, moral, happiness,
illness, and whether or not the person is likely to harm him or herself or harm somebody
else and we also talked about classification systems for mental illness giving particular
emphasis to the diagnostic and statistical manual which is the modern day classification
system.
Then in the next set of lectures, we talked about the various mental disorders and some
of the symptoms of those disorders and in some cases some of the causes of those disorders.
In lecture eight, we talked about anxiety disorders including phobias, panic disorders,
generalized anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorders.
We also talked about mood disorders such as unipolar depression and bipolar depression
and talked about some of the symptoms of those disorders.
In lecture nine, we talked about cognitive disorders and the symptoms such as delirium
and dementia and also amnestic disorders, people with memory problems and we emphasized
Alzheimer's disorder as one of those cognitive disorders.
We also talked about somatiform disorders, those are disorders having to do with the
body, disorders such as hypochondriasis, somatization disorder, pain disorder and conversion disorder
and we also talked about dissociative disorders including multiple personalities.
We also talked about substance-related disorders and sexual and gender identification disorders
including sexual dysfunctions and also the parapherias.
In lecture ten, we talked about schizophrenic disorders including paranoid schizophrenics,
disorganized schizophrenics, catatonic schizophrenics and residual schizophrenics and we talked about
some of the possible causes of schizophrenia.
In lecture eleven, we talked about disorders first diagnosed in infancy, childhood and
adolescence including ADHD, autism, Tourette syndrome, mental retardation, we also talked
about personality disorders such as paranoid, schizoid, antisocial, borderline, histrionic
and some other personality disorders as well.
In lecture twelve, we began a lecture series on therapies and the first two lectures had
to do with the physical therapies, the assumption being that there is something wrong, it has
to do with the biochemistry of the body apparently and under physical therapies in that first
lecture we talked about drugs and the use of drugs for curing mental or for trying to
help people with mental disorders including antipsychotic drugs, antidepressant drugs,
anti-anxiety drugs and also lithium.
In lecture thirteen, we talked about some other physical therapies including electro-compulsive
shock treatment, we talked about psychosurgery and the experimental techniques of electrode
implantation and genetic engineering which are not used today to treat mental disorders.
In lecture fourteen, we moved on to talking about psychotherapies, the talking therapies
and in that lecture we talked about psychoanalysis and some of the techniques used in psychoanalysis
such as free association, dream analysis, projective tests, hypnosis, word associations
and we talked about the dynamics of what goes on during psychoanalysis such as establishing
a rapport with the patient, the build up of resistance, transference of feelings toward
the therapist and then counter-transference.
In lecture fifteen, we talked about other psychotherapies including humanistic psychotherapies such
as non-directive or client-centered, we also talked about cognitive psychotherapies where
we are dealing with people's thoughts and we also talked some about group therapies
and we also considered the efficacy studies having to do with the effectiveness of psychotherapies
in general.
In lecture sixteen, we talked about behavior therapies, those that were associated with
classical conditioning such as systematic desensitization, flooding and implosion.
In lecture seventeen, we talked about again behavior therapies but those that were associated
with operant conditioning such as the use of reinforcement and punishment to change
behavior and also biofeedback.
In lecture eighteen, we talked about models of motivation, gave particular emphasis to
the homeostatic model but also briefly discussed Maslow's hierarchy of needs model of motivation.
In lecture nineteen, we began talking about emotion and pointed out that emotion is difficult
to study because it's a private event but there are various ways of trying to study
emotion and what you measure with self-reports.
We talked about facial expressions, the polygraph, pupil size, psychological stress evaluation
and other kinds of physiological measures for measuring emotion.
In lecture twenty, we talked about theories of emotion including the common sense kind
of notion of emotion, the James Long theory of emotion, the Cannon Bard theory of emotion,
cognitive labeling and even a theory of emotion that has an evolutionary basis to it.
Then we moved on and talked in the next two lectures about psychoactive drugs and we defined
not only what a psychoactive drug was but some other terms such as tolerance, physical
addiction, withdrawal, psychological addiction and in that lecture we also talked about one
of the subcategories of drugs that is stimulants.
In lecture twenty-two, we talked about some other subcategories of drugs.
We talked about the depressants, narcotics, hallucinogens and marijuana in that lecture.
In lecture twenty-three, we talked about social psychology and we said that social psychology
has three major areas of emphasis and we gave some examples of those but we spent most of
the time talking about persuasion and influence and we used Chaldeany's book on influence
to lead us in the rest of that lecture and in the next lecture.
He proposed that there are certain triggering mechanisms that cause us to be influenced
or be persuaded by somebody else and the first of those was reciprocation and we talked in
some detail in that lecture about how reciprocation can be used as a triggering mechanism.
In the next lecture in twenty-four, we talked about the other triggering mechanisms, commitment,
social proof, liking, authority and scarcity and I illustrated those by a little sales job
that I had done that illustrated each of those particular influences.
In lecture twenty-five, we talked about simple learning and in particular classical conditioning
as a simple learning process.
We talked about the unconditioned stimulus, the unconditioned response, the conditioned
stimulus and the conditioned response and how those are defined and how they're put together
in order to bring about classical conditioning.
We talked about the time course of events and classical conditioning including acquisition,
extinction and spontaneous recovery and then we talked some about stimulus generalization
and discrimination.
In lecture twenty-six, we also considered simple learning but in this case, we talked about
operant conditioning and under this topic, we talked about shaping, the reinforcement
of successive approximations to a response and again, we talked about the time course
of events and operant conditioning using the same terms we'd used before, acquisition,
extinction and spontaneous recovery and finally, we talked about some schedules of reinforcement
and how powerful these schedules of reinforcement are in bringing about certain kinds of behaviors,
schedules of reinforcement such as fixed ratio, variable ratio, fixed interval and variable
interval and then in lecture twenty-seven, we talked about complex learning and in particular
under complex learning, we talked about avoidance learning where an animal or a human would
learn to avoid getting a punishing reinforcement.
In probability learning, we discovered that people were pretty good at learning probabilistic
structure of the world and then we also discovered that people could do concept formation and
we discussed that concept formation is probably the way that people learn vocabulary.
We also talked some about language learning and tried to determine whether or not language
learning could be explained by simple learning as Skinner had proposed or whether language
learning was a more sophisticated process that used some built-in modules as Chomsky
had proposed.
In lecture twenty-eight, we talked about memory, started off talking about ways of assessing
memory such as recall, recognition and relearning and then we talked about illusory memories
with the little demonstration that people, when trying to remember a list, would come
up with a false item in the list and then we talked about full-blown false memories
and Elizabeth Loftus' work with false memories where she discovered she could actually put
false memories into people's minds.
In lecture twenty-nine, we continued talking about memory and talked about memory aids
or mnemonics and we talked about several kinds of mnemonics such as chunking or clustering,
such as imagery and such as mediation and then we had a demonstration to show how you
would use these mnemonics to try to remember something.
We also talked about theories of forgetting, why it is that our memory is not perfect.
We talked about decay theory which explains it by the passage of time.
We talked about interference theory that says it is due to interfering activities occurring
either before or after the memory we are trying to remember and finally consolidation theory
that says that it takes some time for the memory trace to consolidate.
In lecture thirty, we moved to the topic of perception and we spent a whole lecture trying
to convince you that we are not in direct contact with the external world.
What we do is pick up cues as to what's out there and form an internal model.
We can use very subtle cues, sometimes we can entertain multiple internal models and
finally sometimes those internal models are simply wrong.
That's a difficult concept to try to appreciate, the fact that we are limited in the way we
are and not being in direct contact with the external world.
In lecture thirty one, we talked about some ways of organizing these cues to form an internal
model.
The built-in principle suggested by the Gestalt School of Thought, we talked about perceptual
constancies which suggest that fairly early in life, we learned that there are certain
constancies in the world such as shape constancy, size constancy, color constancy and brightness
constancy and that once we learn these constancies we build our internal models as if these
rules were true.
And finally we looked at cues of depth perception in that lecture and saw how these cues could
be used to form an internal model and we considered whether or not perception was built in or
learned.
It's a nature-nurture kind of issue and we discovered that there's some evidence that
indicates it's built in and some evidence that indicates it's learned.
In lectures thirty two through thirty four, we talked about evolution and evolutionary
psychology.
We talked about evolutionary principles in lecture thirty two.
We talked about the early history of human ancestors in that lecture as well and we used
Desmond Morris' book, The Naked Ape, to try to answer some questions about why we are
the naked ape and also some questions about why we are the sexiest of the apes and also
why we engage in war and aggression as much as we do.
And finally in lecture thirty five, we talked about engineering psychology, a topic most
people are unfamiliar with, talked about how engineering psychology has to do with the
study of the human as an operator in a human machine system and the capabilities and limitations
of the human and some terms like human factors and ergonomics, talked some about the history
of engineering psychology and some design principles as well and that leads us up to
where we are today.
I hope it impresses you that you have learned as much as you have about these various topics
in psychology.
We've tried to cover these fairly in fair detail.
Today from here on, I'd like to talk just very briefly about a few areas of psychology
we've not had the time to talk about, but areas that are of increasing importance in
psychology.
The first of these is neuropsychology and this refers to the interplay between our behavior
and neurological systems and one of the major research areas in neuropsychology has to do
with brain imaging and there are various techniques to do this.
Brain imaging, what you do is have a person process information in some way and then you
try to figure out what areas of the brain are being used in the processing of this information
and there are various ways of doing this.
One technique is called functional magnetic resonance imaging or FMRI and in this case
you're using the magnetic properties of the brain to figure out what areas of the brain
are being used.
Electroencephalogram is positron emission tomography or PET scans in which case you're
using a radioactive isotope that's been put in the blood to tell you something about the
blood flow to various areas of the brain and then the electroencephalograph or the EEG
in which electrodes are put on the scalp and we can get some idea of the workings of various
areas of the brain as well and using these techniques we've learned quite a bit about
brain function and what areas are used in certain kinds of tasks.
To give you an idea of the kind of thing that you might be able to do, suppose you hooked
somebody up to an apparatus like this, like a PET scan for example and then you had a person
try to read a word and as they read that word you would see what area of the brain kind
of lit up, which area of the brain is receiving increasing blood flow and that would tell you
what area of the brain has something to do with reading words and then you might give
them a second task and that is to somehow come up with the meaning of a word and you
might find a different area of the brain lights up and if you want to know purely what area
is involved with meaning, with the semantic properties of a word, you might want to take
that area and subtract out the area that had to do with reading of the word because when
you're trying to come up with the meaning, first you have to read the word, where you
can use technology to subtract out the picture that has to do with the meaning or you subtract
out the picture having to do with the reading from the picture having to do with the meaning
and you get the pure picture of the meaning of the word.
So this brain imaging research has led to great progress in determining what parts of
the brain are used for what processes and also to help confirm some other of the theories
of the cognitive modeling theories that are proposed.
A second area that is of importance in psychology today is cognitive modeling. How we know what
goes on in the black box? You'll recall that the behavior has said that it was impossible
to know what goes on in the brain. Cognitive scientists have discovered that you can know
something about what goes on in the black box. Let me just give you sort of an example
of something you might be able to do in terms of figuring out what's going on in the black
box. There's a technique called mental chronometry. Chronometry has to do with time and the passage
of time and so I might give you the following kind of tasks. Suppose I showed you an array
of items that are numbers or letters and have you searching for a particular target number
or letter in that array? And I time how long it takes you to find that target. Suppose
I wanted to know whether in a task like this when people are doing visual search, whether
they are using serial search that is looking through a series of things one at a time in
order to find the target or whether they're doing parallel search, whether they're dealing
with all the targets at the same time. I might be able to manipulate the array size and figure
out how much time it takes you to do this. So I might show you an array with two items
in it and then an array with four items and an array with six and an array with eight.
If it's serial search and I time you on this, I would discover that there's a linearly increasing
function as a function of array size, that it takes you longer the larger the size of
the array. Another example of computational modeling is called parallel distributed processing.
In this case, a computer model is used that acts much like a human and learns the properties
of the environment. In these models there is a layer of nodes and those nodes pick up
very basic information about the environment. Suppose this program we're trying to learn
to read words. Some of the basic inputs to the program would be lines and curves and
angles of various letters. And then this first layer of nodes would be identifying letters.
There'd be another layer of nodes that would be identifying, taking those letters and trying
to form words out of them. And then this model with progressive trials with feedback would
learn to read words, never having been programmed to read words. The model itself learns much
like a human does. That's another example here of computational modeling. And these
models have been used to learn words, to learn to use pictures and other stimuli as well.
For the most part in this course we've talked about young to middle aged adults and pretty
much ignored children and ignored older individuals as well. The area of developmental psychology
studies human behavior across the lifespan and a particularly rapidly growing area at
the moment. In my university we have a new program in gerontology and this is the study
of older populations, healthy older populations as opposed to geriatrics which has to do with
medicine. And in this case the gerontologists look at things like the presumed decline as
people get older and they're cognitive processing. We know for example that older individuals
take longer to process information and we might wonder why that is. Are their brains
just getting slower? What's going on here? Well one of the kinds of things that they've
discovered is that while older individuals take longer it's probably because they are
less likely to want to make errors. The younger folks are less concerned about errors and perhaps
for understandable reasons older people are more prone to avoid errors and so when they
do this they take longer to do those kinds of things. That's the kind of thing a gerontologist
would study. And then developmental psychologists also study the behavior of children, even
pre-verbal children. Pre-verbal children can tell you something even though they can't
tell you through words. Let me give you an example of an experiment that might illustrate
that. Children you might want to know whether they have object permanence, whether they see
an object and realize that that object will stay the same. One way of investigating that
would be to take an object like a sphere and pull it behind a screen and as the sphere
comes out the other side it's no longer a sphere but it might be a cube. Well these children
pay more attention to the world when things change, when they're surprised by things.
And we would find that as the sphere became a cube after it went across that the children
pay more attention to that than if the sphere remains a sphere. That would tell you something
about whether these children know something about object permanence. So those are some
areas of psychology that we haven't had much time to talk about but areas of increasing
interest in psychology. At this point I'd like to talk just briefly about what I think
is going to happen in psychology in the future. And I have two predictions that can be made.
One of these has to do with clinical psychology. I think that in clinical psychology we're
going to get to the point in the fairly near future of being able to find some cures for
mental illnesses. Now you may recall when we talked about various therapies I pointed
out that none of these therapies were actually cures. They dealt with symptoms but they didn't
reverse the process in any way. I think that with the mapping of the human genome and now
that the human genome has been largely mapped we will begin to be able to find out where
we have some of the sources of our problems with mental illness. It's not going to be
easy because as I pointed out earlier in the course these are polygenic traits for the
most part. That means that they occur in multiple genetic sites so we're going to have to find
all of those sites and associate them with a particular disorder. But I think we're going
to make progress in doing that kind of thing. And when we make that progress we'll certainly
be able to do a better job of classification of mental illnesses because we'll have something
besides just the symptoms to go on. But we will also perhaps be able to do some intervention
where we actually go in and change some of these sites and tweak the genetics and actually
cure the mental disorder. I certainly hope that's the case. A second thing that I think
will happen in psychology is that we're going to spend more and more time applying the scientific
findings that we have to real world problems out there. The taxpayers of this country have
spent a lot of money discovering what goes on with people's behavior. And we've built
a large science now in psychology that tells us those kinds of things. But we've done very
little in terms of applying this science to real world problems. If we look at the problems
of the world, problems like war and aggression, crime, education, health problems, obesity,
AIDS, you'll see that these are all behavioral problems. That's the purview of psychology.
We ought to be able to tell the folks who do policy issues and set up programs how to
set those up with a scientific basis. I think we'll be doing more and more of that as time
goes on. All right. We're toward the end of this course now. This is the last lecture.
I just wanted to finish up by reminding you when we started this lecture, I said that
I thought psychology was the most exciting thing that you could even have a course on.
That we're all interested in human behavior and that that's an exciting thing to talk
about. I hope you still feel that way after having had this course. I hope in fact I've
increased your excitement about psychology. Thank you for being a student in this course.
I've had fun teaching it. Thank you. We genuinely hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our
great courses series. Our courses are available to order online. Visit our website at www.teach12.com
or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12. That's 1-800-TEACH-12.
Thank you very much.
