These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by the teaching company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lectures are university professors carefully selected by the teaching company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled, Understanding the Fundamentals of Music, Part 1.
The lecturer is Dr. Robert Greenberg of San Francisco Performances.
Dr. Greenberg is an accomplished educator and composer.
He received his BA from Princeton University and his PhD in music composition from the University
of California at Berkeley in 1984.
He has served on the faculties of the University of California at Berkeley, California State
University and the San Francisco Conservatory of Music, where he chaired the Department
of Music, History and Literature and served as the director of the Adult Extension Division.
Dr. Greenberg is currently a music historian in residence for San Francisco Performances,
the city's premier presenter of chamber music, instrumental and vocal recitals, jazz and
contemporary dance.
Professor Greenberg has received numerous awards for his compositional work.
They include three Nicola de Lorenzo prizes in composition and commissions from the Kusevitzky
Foundation of the Library of Congress and the Alexander String Quartet.
Professor Greenberg prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, biographical notes
and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 – The Language of Music
Welcome everyone.
This is Lecture 1 and it is entitled, The Language of Music.
Yes, the musical language, music theory.
You will forgive me for turning, as I always do in moments of intellectual want, to my
Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, which defines the word theory as, and we quote, the analysis
of a set of facts in their relation to one another, unquote.
My friends, few words offer as much rational solace as does the word theory.
Examining the plausibility of a theory demands that we analyze facts, reason logically, think
objectively and examine comprehensively.
Having done so, we will, assumably, arrive at a conclusion that is the end product of
a process of scientific method, which is itself defined as, principle and procedures
for the systematic pursuit of knowledge involving the recognition and formulation of a problem,
the collection of data through observation and experiment, and the formulation and testing
of hypotheses, ergo.
If something is a theory, it is knowable, it's something we can study, it's something
we can learn, it's something that is explicable and rational.
The theory of relativity, the theory of evolution, game theory, complex, yes, but concepts that
can be understood, compartmentalized, absorbed and digested.
Music theory, implied in that compact and also innocent sounding phrase, is the idea
that there is a knowable, graspable, all-encompassing set of truisms that once understood, compartmentalized,
absorbed and digested, the very essence of music will stand revealed, its various elements
and expressive content united into a singularity the whole greater than the sum of its parts.
Wrong.
Speaking for myself, I dislike the phrase music theory almost as much as I dislike the phrase
music appreciation.
What we call theory, what we call music theory, is in reality a huge and varied syntax, a
syntax that deals with the various ways sounds can be arrayed across time to create a musical
experience.
We don't grasp musical syntax the way we grasp facts and the analysis of facts, rather we
first learn to distinguish different sonic and temporal phenomena.
Then we come to understand how those phenomena are interrelated, after which we can begin
to understand how and why we perceive structural integrity and expressive meaning in a given
section of music.
Learning musical syntax is very much like learning a language.
We start with the rudiments and ever so slowly accumulate understanding and insight as we
comprehend that language in ever more sophisticated ways.
The phrase music theory would imply that there is a science of music, a set of rules and
regulations of absolute rights and wrongs that govern what composers can and cannot
do as they create a piece of music.
Wrong again.
In reality, music theory, like music itself, is an art and not a science, something much
more akin to language with all its idiosyncrasies, quirks, eccentricities and inexplicable idioms
than it is a body of knowledge covering general truths or the operation of general laws especially
as obtained and tested through scientific method, which is how my web call defines science.
The point of this introductory screed, let's think of those aspects of music theory that
were about to study, timbre, meter, tonality, harmony and so forth, not as a body of truths
and laws, but rather as a constantly evolving and variable syntax.
What this course is and isn't and what we can expect to accomplish in 16 lectures.
My friends, in any high school, college or conservatory music theory course, the first
prerequisite is the ability to read music.
Now this makes absolute sense.
If we're going to study the syntax of any language, then we need to be able to read
that language.
Would any of us contemplate taking a course on the syntax of the English language without
first being able to read?
Well of course not.
And yet, the limitation of a non-interactive course like this one is that it cannot teach
the intricacies of music notation and therefore it cannot provide a notationally and therefore
visually based exploration of music theory.
Well, to tell you the truth, our limits are a blessing in disguise.
Now before you begin packing this course up to return for a full refund, I would explain
from both a philosophical and practical point of view how this course is going to work, what
you're going to get out of it, and on what pedagogic precedence it rests.
Philosophically, my teaching company courses have always assumed that the attentive listener
can perceive and understand pretty much anything, provided we know what to listen for and provided
we listen carefully and intelligently.
Even the nature of a course like this, I cannot teach you how to read and write music.
But I can teach you to hear and identify those aspects of the musical language that are collectively
the means to comprehending on a fairly intimate level the music of the Western repertoire
and, to a not insignificant degree, the music of many other world cultures as well.
And thus the essential goal of this course, to provide you with the intellectual tools
and listening skills necessary to deepen immeasurably the experience of, one, my other
teaching company courses, and two, pretty much any music you might encounter, be it
concert music, popular music, jazz, rock and roll, whatever.
The pedagogical precedence on which this course rests are those foreign language teaching
methods that present a language as an integrated whole through conversation.
Yes, we're all aware that if we want to master a language, we will sooner or later have to
resort to workbooks, conjugation exercises, vocabulary lists, and the like.
Just as if we want to master the art of music, an intense and extended notation-based course
of study will sooner or later be required.
But I would state the obvious.
We must crawl before we can lose, and walk before we can surf.
And obviously, we all learned our native language by ear before we learned to read it.
So this course is about using our ears, about discovering and exploring musical syntax through
our ears, by learning what the parts of the musical language sound like, rather than what
they look like on paper.
We'll start with those aspects of the musical language that are most easily perceived by
ear, meaning timbre and meter, and from there we'll move on to the more challenging syntactical
elements of tonality and harmony.
An important point to be made upfront.
The syntactical elements on which we will focus will be those of the European musical
tradition, from the time of ancient Greece through the 20th century.
We make no apology for this, there's just so much that can be covered in 16 lectures.
Music as a language.
The reason why we can't teach music as a language is because music is a language.
It is a mode of sonic communication through which a tremendous amount of information of
all sorts, aesthetic, stylistic, emotional, and so forth, can be transferred with an ease
that belies its complexity.
The cliché that music is the international language may be tiresome, but it is accurate.
I would suggest that music is the ultimate language, a mega-language, a language in which
our hard-wired proclivities to use successions of pitches and sounds to communicate are exaggerated,
intensified, and codified into a sonic experience capable of infinitely more expressive depth
and nuance than mere words alone.
Music, a guiding definition.
Before we begin to listen, we've one more vital task, and that is to actually define
music, a discussion that could positively finish off this lecture and the next given
how many different ways music has been defined across the span of recorded history.
In lieu of such a potentially tiresome discussion, we'll want a definition of music that includes
pretty much everything and excludes pretty much nothing, a definition that will provide
a starting point for our exploration of the musical language, of music theory.
But before we offer our definition of music, I would present to you a couple of traditional
definitions.
The dictionary defines music as, and we quote, the science or art of incorporating intelligible
combinations of tones into a composition having structure and continuity, unquote.
My friends, there's so much wrong with that definition that it's hard to know where to
begin.
For example, who's to determine what constitutes an intelligible combination of tones from
an unintelligible combination of tones?
And what about drum music, an entire repertoire that doesn't use tones, meaning individual
pitches at all?
And then there's the phrase about combining tones into a composition, a phrase that would,
by definition, exclude improvisation and most oral tradition and folk music.
And the last phrase of the definition that music is the art of combining tones into a
composition having structure and continuity?
Yes, much music displays a perceivable structure and continuity, but you know what?
Much does not.
All in all, that's as useless a definition of music as I've ever heard or read, and
I do wish that the good folks at Merriam-Webster had consulted me before they printed it.
We turn next to the great mid-20th century composer, Roger Sessions, who was the teacher
of my teacher, a gentleman named Andrew Embry.
Sessions defined music as, and we quote, controlled movement of sound in time, unquote.
Better, although we respectfully ask, controlled by whom?
Our working definition of music will draw on what is best in Sessions' definition.
Music is sound in time, or if you prefer, time ordered by sound.
That's it, and that's enough.
That definition isolates the two essential aspects of music, sound and time, without
any qualifications.
To definition, we can most comfortably live with.
When we talk about the sound aspect of music, we'll be discussing everything from instruments
and instrumental combinations, to melody, harmony, texture and tonality.
When we talk about the time aspect of music, we'll be talking about some aspect of rhythm.
We begin with that most accessible, most easily perceived sound aspect of the musical language.
Tambour.
Tambour, part one.
Tambour, spelled T-I-M-B-R-E, refers to the actual physical sound or tone color produced
by individual instruments and or combinations of instruments.
If music is a language, and indeed it is, then musical instruments, singly and collectively,
are the voice of that language.
We are going to spend the remainder of this lecture and lectures two and three discussing
this most accessible aspect of the musical language.
Along the way, we will build a vocabulary for addressing other sound aspects of music,
with sidebars on instrumental genres, dynamics, transposing instruments and the evolving nature
of the orchestra.
From the beginning, yes, in the beginning, there was the human voice, and accepting the
torturous, canine-like eululations of certain high-profile pop singers, the voice is good.
It is trite but true to say that most music, like language itself, springs from the voice.
As we are all generally familiar with the sound of the human voice, we will move directly
forward to the sounds of western orchestral instruments.
However, let us always be aware that most musical instruments aspire to the flexibility,
the lyricism and to the expressive power of the human voice.
Instrumental Classifications Instruments are classified by how they
initiate and maintain their sound.
Aside from the human voice, there are five major classifications or families of instruments
in the western musical tradition.
One at a time.
Instrumental classification number one, stringed instruments, which initiate their sound by
being either bowed or plucked.
Bowed stringed instruments, the most numerous instruments in the modern orchestra, for reasons
we will discuss in a moment.
They commonly initiate and maintain their sound by rubbing a bow against a string.
Plucked stringed instruments, like the guitar and harp, initiate their sound by plucking
a string.
Instrumental classification number two, the woodwind or wind instruments initiate and
maintain their sound by blowing air into a generally cylindrical instrument, either directly,
in the case of the piccolo and flute, or through a thin piece of cane called a reed, as in
the case of the clarinet and saxophone families, or through two very small reeds clamped together
with a small space in between them.
These are the so-called double reed instruments, the oboe, English horn and bassoon.
One might wonder why these instruments are collectively referred to as the woodwinds
when, in fact, they are not all made of wood, for example, the flute.
The answer, well, when the term was invented, they were indeed all, including the flute,
made out of wood.
My friends, the fully metal flute didn't become standard until the 1930s, long after the term
woodwind was coined and in common use.
Instrumental classification number three, the brass instruments.
We observe, ever so quickly, but with great reverence, a few of nature's miracles.
The miracle of birth, the existence of love, the northern California coastline, the fact
that when the brutally flatulent sound of a bronxed cheer is passed through a cupped
mouthpiece and then through several feet of metal tubing, the sound that emerges is
no longer flatulent, but rather sweet, mellow and only vaguely metallic in sound.
Now as you can tell, my trombone playing days are far behind me, but that doesn't change
the fact that brass instruments are a miracle of nature.
Instrumental classification number four, percussion instruments.
Percussion instruments initiate and maintain their sounds by striking, scraping, rattling
or mashing one object against another.
Instrumental classification number five, keyboards.
Now this is a problematic classification because properly classified, a harpsichord would be
a plucked string instrument, the piano a percussion instrument and the organ a wind instrument.
For now, let's just group them together and avoid the certifiably Talmudic discussion regarding
their classification.
Thank you on this one.
My friends, if this course had been written back in the 1970s or 80s, it would have included
a sixth instrumental category, electronics.
There was a genuine belief back then that digitally synthesized sound was the wave of
the future and that an entirely new vocabulary of sound, one relevant to the technocracy
of the modern world, was just around the corner.
You know what?
It never happened.
As it turned out, composers prefer to write for real people playing real instruments and
audiences would rather listen to real people playing real instruments.
Ironically, more than anything else, digital electronics are used today to imitate those
antiquated instruments that they were purportedly going to replace.
One by one, let's examine the instrumental families that make up our classifications,
beginning with the bowed strings.
Bowed strings, the violin family.
The violin family consists of four instruments, which together span a range of over five octaves.
The four instruments of the violin family correspond to the four basic ranges of the human voice,
soprano, alto, tenor, and bass, what's referred to in shorthand as SATB.
The violin is the soprano voice, the viola, the alto voice, the violon cello, or cello
for short, the tenor voice, and the contra or double bass, the bass voice.
If all instruments accepting the percussion aspire to the condition of the human voice,
well then it's the violin that gets closest to that condition.
Perfected in workshops in and around Cremona, Italy, between roughly 1600 and 1750, the
violin is capable of an extraordinary degree of lyricism, power, agility, nuance, precision,
and sheer, unworldly beauty.
It is, without any doubt, one of the great creations of our species.
As an example, let's hear the beginning of Johann Sebastian Bach's Chacon in D minor
for solo violin from his partita number two in D minor of circa 1720.
It's an amazing work in which every one of the violin's lyric and dramatic capabilities
are pushed to the limit.
It's an amazing work in which every one of the violin's lyric and dramatic capabilities
are pushed to the limit.
It's an amazing work in which every one of the violin's lyric and dramatic capabilities
are pushed to the limit.
It's an amazing work in which every one of the violin's lyric and dramatic capabilities
are pushed to the limit.
It's an amazing work in which every one of the violin's lyric and dramatic capabilities
are pushed to the limit.
It's an amazing work.
The viola is two to three inches longer than the violin and is pitched a perfect fifth.
That's five white keys on the piano lower than the violin.
The violas got a softer, fuller, somewhat less focused tone than the violin,
and more often than not, it plays an accompanimental role to the violin.
As an example of the rich husky voice of the viola, let's hear a bit of the first movement
of Robert Schumann's Merschen builder for viola and piano of 1851.
The first movement of Robert Schumann's Merschen builder for viola and piano of 1851.
The first movement of Robert Schumann's Merschen builder for viola and piano of 1851.
The first movement of Robert Schumann's Merschen builder for viola and piano of 1851.
The first movement of Robert Schumann's Merschen builder for viola and piano of 1851.
Among the bowed strings, the cello is second only to the violin in terms of its lyric capabilities.
And really, my friends, is there a sexier instrument in all the orchestra with its deep, resonant, throaty tone,
and its frankly voluptuous shape resting comfortably between its performer's knees?
We think not.
We sample the beret from Bach's Suite for solo cello number three of circa 1720.
The second movement of Robert Schumann's Merschen builder for viola and piano of 1851.
If the violin and cello together constitute the foreground of the string choir,
those instruments most likely to be given a principal melody line or a theme,
then the double bass, like the viola, generally plays a supportive or background role.
Where the viola typically provides middle support by supplying countermelodies and filling in harmonies,
the bass provides the foundation for the entire orchestra,
as the bass line and the harmonies underlain by the bass line govern the other higher instrumental parts.
The basses are big instruments, often over six feet tall, with a big, powerful, if rather ponderous sound,
perfect for providing an underpinning, but unless a composer wants to create a particular effect,
less than ideal for playing thematic ideas.
As such, my friends, the basses are rarely given solos in orchestral music.
Perhaps the single most famous orchestral bass solo is the opening of the third movement
of Gustav Mahler's Symphony No. 1 of 1888.
The movement begins with a dark, ominous, funereal, absolutely wacko version of the round Freire Jacques.
It's a tune that Mahler knew as Bruder Martin, as played by a solo bass.
Music
Sidebar, instrumental genres.
We interrupt this regularly scheduled examination of western musical instruments
to broach the subject of instrumental genres.
An instrumental genre is a particular grouping of instruments.
There are three generic instrumental groupings with which we should be familiar, solo, chamber, and orchestral.
A solo work is a composition for one instrument and one instrument only,
like the Bach violin partita and cello suite we just sampled.
A chamber work is a composition for two or more instruments in which there is but one player per part,
like the movement from Robert Schumann's Merschen builder for viola and piano that we also just sampled.
An orchestral work is a composition for multiple instruments in which at least one part is doubled,
meaning the two or more instruments play the same part, the same music at the same time.
For example, Gustav Mahler's Symphony No. 1, which we just heard at the beginning of the third movement,
calls for around 30 violinists, divided into two parts, 16 first violinists and 14 second violinists.
Those 16 first violinists are all playing the same part.
The same is true for the second violinists.
We say then that the first and second violin parts are doubled and any such doubling would qualify a work as being orchestral.
Exit sidebar.
Back please to the bowed strings.
The violin family creates a homogeneous and non-fatiguing sound from top to bottom.
And for that reason, it has been the backbone of the orchestra since the orchestra came into existence in the 17th century.
My friends, when we say non-fatiguing, we mean that we're willing and able to listen to bowed strings play for an indefinite length of time,
as opposed to a piccolo ensemble which would almost instantly induce both bleeding and hysteria.
Just as the strings are by far the most numerous instruments in the orchestra,
so the string quartet, an ensemble consisting of two violins of viola and a cello,
has been almost from the moment of its invention around 1750 the single most important and prestigious chamber music combination.
Let's listen please to a string quartet and let's be aware of the blend, the rich homogeneity of its sound from top to bottom.
Mozart, string quartet and B-flat major, the Hunt, movement one opening.
Mozart, string quartet and B-flat major, the Hunt, movement one opening.
The Hunt, movement one opening.
Mozart, string quartet and B-flat major, the Hunt, movement one opening.
The Hunt, movement one opening.
The Hunt, movement one opening.
The Hunt, movement one opening.
The Hunt, movement one opening.
The Hunt, movement one opening.
To answer the question, why does a string quartet consist of two violins of viola and a cello,
not a violin, viola, cello and a bass? Well there are two reasons.
One, at the time the string quartet was born the bass as we know it had not yet developed.
Two, even if it had already existed the bass would still not have been an appropriate instrument for a string quartet.
You see, by its very nature the string quartet assumes that each of its four constituent instrumental voices will be an equal player in the development of the music.
The bass is neither supple nor agile enough to be able to participate on equal terms in the four-part conversation that is by definition a string quartet.
Now talk about a rich homogeneous sound. Let's now sample a string orchestra, an orchestra consisting of simply first violins, second violins, violas, cellos and basses.
We're going to hear the first movement introduction to Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky's glorious Serenade for Strings of 1875.
In my humble opinion there is not a more lush, more goosebumps inducing sound on this planet than that of a string orchestra.
The first movement introduction to Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky's glorious Serenade for Strings of 1875.
The second movement introduction to Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky's glorious Serenade for Strings of 1875.
The second movement introduction to Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky's glorious Serenade for Strings of 1875.
The second movement introduction to Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky's glorious Serenade for Strings of 1875.
Bode strings gone wild. Bode stringed instruments are capable of producing an incredible variety of different sounds because we must. Let's sample some of that variety.
Consordino with a mute. Bode strings can be muted by clipping a small, comb-like device to the bridge of the instrument, which muffles and darkens the sound by reducing the amount of vibration transferred from the strings to the body of the instrument.
Composers will mute the strings for various reasons, sometimes for the mood of quiet intimacy that muting creates, and sometimes to highlight a non-muted instrument.
As an example of the latter, we turn to the third movement of Johannes Brahms' string quartet number three of 1875.
Brahms marks the movement agitato, agitated, and he turns the thematic duties over to the viola. Brahms, aware that the viola could very well be drowned out by the other instruments, mutes the violins in cello, thereby putting the unmuted viola in high relief.
That was a short excerpt. I know we want to hear it again, so let's hear that again.
Sul Tasto and Sul Panticello
Sul Tasto and Sul Panticello.
Another way of changing the tone color of a bowed stringed instrument is to ask the player to bow over the fingerboard called Sul Tasto, meaning literally on the fingerboard, or ask them to bow near the bridge called Sul Panticello, meaning literally on the bridge.
Bowing over the fingerboard, Sul Tasto, creates a soft flute-like sound, not unlike that created by using a mute. However, it takes a few seconds for a mute to be put on or taken off, whereas Sul Tasto can be affected instantly, merely by bowing higher up on the string.
Now, you'd think that composers would use Sul Tasto all the time, instead of the mute, except for one thing. String players really dislike playing Sul Tasto. You see, in order to make their horse-hair bows grip the strings, string players rub the bows with rosin.
When you play Sul Tasto, you inevitably get rosin on a part of the string where, sooner or later, you're going to have to put your fingers. Ergo! Rosin on the fingers. Rightfully, string players hate having rosin on their fingers. My friends, it's like putting velcro on the blade of an ice-gate.
Now, as a composer, you can insist that a recalcitrant string player play Sul Tasto, but she won't like you for it, and by association, she won't like your piece. The player might even decide that a bad performance is a necessary inevitability, given your insensitivity towards her and her instrument.
Ah, sorry about all the wrong notes, but I couldn't help it because of all the rosin on my fingers.
Bowing near the bridge, what's called Sul Panticello, reduces to almost nothing the fundamental pitch, leaving only its overtones to be heard. Oh, it's a killer effect, and it produces a weird, glassy fingernails on the blackboard sort of sound.
Such a moment occurs near the conclusion of the fifth movement of Beethoven's String Quartet and C-sharp minor Opus 131 of 1826. Our excerpt will begin with a series of plucked or pizzicato notes, followed by the strings playing Sul Panticello, after which the players will move their bows back to a normal bowing position.
Let's hear this amazing change of timbre then, from Sul Panticello back to Modo Ordinario, or ordinary position.
It's an extraordinary effect, and how a clinically deaf composer thought of using it, we can't know, but we must hear it again.
But, it's an extraordinary effect, and how a clinically deaf composer thought of using it, we can't know, but we must hear it again.
Col laneo. Col laneo is another fabulous string technique, although like sultasto, composers
should use it sparingly and judiciously. Col laneo means literally with the wood, meaning
that the players flip their bows over and use the wooden side of the bow to play the
strings. Now we won't hear much pitch in a col laneo
passage, but we'll hear lots of clicking, especially if the composer indicates the
passage is to be played col laneo battuto, meaning that the players actually bounce the
wooden side of the bow on the string, as Hector Berlio's indicates should be done during this
following passage in the 5th and final movement of his symphony fantastique of 1830.
Oh too good, let's please hear that again.
Great as that sounds, string players dislike playing col laneo even more than they do sultasto,
and again, who can blame them? Playing col laneo can scratch and even chip the varnish
on their bows, bows that are often as valuable as the instruments themselves. String players
will usually carry with them a backup or junk bow for just such occasions.
Pizzicato Pizzicato means to pluck the strings. It's
a very common technique, and there are various sorts of pizzicati. You can pluck the string
with the fleshy part of the finger, which is the most common type. You can pluck with
your fingernail in order to get a more brittle effect, or you can pull the string so far
back than when it's released, it snaps against the fingerboard, creating a percussive effect,
something called a snap or bar tuck pizzicato. Let's hear some garden variety finger pizzicati,
the opening section of the third movement of Tchaikovsky's symphony number 4 of 1877.
No mystery regarding what we're about to hear, as Tchaikovsky entitles the movement
Scherzo Pizzicato.
Tchaikovsky's symphony number 4 of 1877 is a very common technique, and it's a very common
technique, and it's a very common technique, as Tchaikovsky entitles the movement
Scherzo Pizzicato.
Tchaikovsky's symphony number 4 of 1877 is a very common technique, as Tchaikovsky entitles
the movement.
When we return, our exploration of instrumental timbre continues. Thank you.
