Lecture 4 – Beat and Tempo
Welcome back. This is Lecture 4. It is entitled Beat and Tempo.
My friends, back in Lecture 1, we defined music as simply as we could as being sound in time or as time defined by sound.
To this point of the course, we have discussed those most accessible and easily perceived facets of the sound aspect of music – instrumental timbre and dynamics.
Now time to begin an exploration of the time aspect of music. When we talk about the time aspect of music, we're talking about some aspect of rhythm.
We contemplate the word rhythm. Aside from being at the extremely short end of the vowel stick, the word is frankly almost too general to be of any use.
We can talk endlessly about harmonic rhythm, body rhythm, innate rhythm, the rhythm of the spheres, the rhythm method.
I got rhythm who could ask for anything more and so forth. So aside from occasional use, we will do our best to avoid the word rhythm entirely in favor of more specific terminology.
I wish it wasn't as important as it is, but it is. I'm a firm believer that if we have words with which we can identify nonverbal phenomena, like a musical event or the taste of a wine or the smell of a flower,
we will be able to recognize and distinguish those phenomena to a degree and with a confidence far beyond that which we would if we didn't have the verbal means to identify them.
Look, we all laugh at wine talk, but it works. Without a vocabulary with which to identify the subtleties of taste, texture and smell, every discussion of vino would begin and end with the same statement.
Taste like wine.
Likewise, with visually perceived things like color, who decided that yellow was yellow, that blue was blue and that light brownish tan was taupe?
Arbitrary yes, but without such shared verbal designations. How would we be able to recognize and distinguish between different colors?
Oh apropos of nothing. What are they feeding those nice folks who name the colors of Crayola crayons?
New colors include, and I kid you not, manatee, outer space, jasbury jam, razzmatazz and beaver. Yes, beaver.
Learn to distinguish and identify those colors, my friends, and you'll have an eye.
But to the point, terminology, properly defined and illustrated, goes hand in hand with our ability to identify and distinguish purely musical phenomena.
Let's learn some words.
Beat or pulse.
The shortest or smallest time division to which we can comfortably move our bodies, to which we can comfortably dance, is called the beat or the pulse.
We'll discuss that definition in a moment, but first, let's listen to some music and let's find the beat.
I'm going to clap over the excerpt, and I want you to clap or tap your feet or toes or fingers or whatever to that beat.
This is not hard stuff. Groove with me. Here we go.
Here we go. John Philip Seussas, The Stars and Stripes Forever of 1896.
Beat or pulse.
The shortest or smallest time division to which we can comfortably move our bodies, to which we can comfortably move our bodies, to which we can comfortably move our bodies, to which we can comfortably move our bodies, to which we can comfortably move our bodies.
Beat or pulse.
Now, we defined beat or pulse as being the shortest or smallest time division to which we can comfortably move our bodies, to which we can comfortably dance.
This is obviously a subjective definition.
Look, maybe you've had a long, hard day and you're tired.
Perhaps that most comfortable time division for you at this moment is slower than the one I clapped.
Or perhaps you're wired, having just consumed a triple espresso, with the result being that the most comfortable time division is rather more on the faster.
Or perhaps you're wired, having just consumed a triple espresso, with the result being that the most comfortable time division is rather more on the fast side.
Beat or pulse.
I would suggest that if you can comfortably dance to that beat, you might consider cutting back on the caffeine, unless of course you are a gerbil.
Tired or wired, the fact is that 99.99% of us will feel the same basic beat and will move our bodies to that beat in tandem.
Listen, it's another conversation for another time, but we're hardwired to react this way.
Powerful beats affect us metabolically. Our heart rates and respiration gravitate towards the speed of the beat.
A beat that can coordinate group activity, be it social, sexual, work-related, ritual, whatever.
The power of dance is primal and instinctive.
It's a survival mechanism that allows us to coordinate our movements and activities with one another and with the tribe.
The beat in music represents time, and once a beat is established in a piece of music, a process that takes only a few seconds,
it becomes a continuum on which the entire musical structure rests until a composer or performer chooses to somehow alter that beat and thus create a new continuum.
My friends, it's a constant source of amazement to me. Just how much musical and expressive information is contained within the beat in a given section of music.
It's relative strength, it's speed, how certain beats are emphasized or accented, and how beats are grouped or not grouped.
For example, I trust we had no problem finding and feeling the beat in John Philip Seuss's The Stars and Stripes Forever.
It is strong and steady and of a moderate speed.
Not only was its beat strong and steady, but we were hearing the beat grouped in sets of twos.
Once more, let's hear the first minute of the march, and this time, let's feel these groupings of two beats in your body.
Move to them, march to them.
One, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two.
One, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two.
We'll talk lots more about meter, that is, how beats are grouped in our next lecture.
For now, let's just be aware that we recognize John Philip Seuss's The Stars and Stripes Forever as a march, because we perceived in it a steady series of moderately paced beats grouped in twos.
I repeat, it's a constant source of amazement to me just how much musical and expressive information is transmitted via the beat in a given section of music.
Let's hear another piece of music. Our first task is to simply find a beat we are comfortable with, and then move some part of our body, preferably something in the lower half.
And by this, I mean our feet, okay, to the beat.
Once we've found and gotten comfortable with the beat, our second task will be to identify its properties and then what those properties tell us about the expressive content of the piece of music as a whole.
Onward to Johannes Brahms's Op. 39, No. 4 for Piano For Hands.
I'll begin to clap the beat halfway through the excerpt, about 21 seconds in.
Like the Sousa March, the beat here is as solid as it can be. Like the Sousa March, this is body music, music meant to make us move.
Unlike the Sousa March, the beats in the Brahms are not being grouped in twos, but rather by threes.
We'll discuss how these groupings are achieved in the next lecture. For now, I just want us to hear the Brahms excerpt again, and I will indicate the groupings by counting three.
All I expect from you at this point is to recognize that the beats in this music are indeed describing, defining groups of three.
One, two, three, one, two, three, one, two, three.
So, what does the nature of the beat tell us about this piece? First, its power and clarity tell us that this music is rooted in dance, in physical movement.
Second, its moderate speed and groupings in three tell us that it is a particular kind of dance, a three-step dance called a waltz.
Tempo. When we talk about the relative speed of a passage of music, we're talking about its tempo.
Tempo means time in Italian, and, gratefully, the terminological lexicon of musical tempo terms is in Italian.
We say gratefully because Italian musical terms have two great assets. One, they actually sound like what they mean, and two, they're easy on both the ear and the tongue.
To the former point that they sound like what they mean. My friends, which of the following two words means very slowly, and which means very fast?
Largo and presto. Yes, Largo with its long vowel and relatively soft articulation sounds like molasses in January, slow and gooey. Largo.
Whereas presto with its shorter vowel, its sibilant S, presto, and its sharper consonants simply sounds faster.
Okay, how about vivace and lento? Which one means lively and the other slowly? Again, a no-brainer. The word vivace sounds lively. The word lento sounds lugubrious.
But, as a word, lento still sounds good, yes? Lento. It falls easily on the ear and the tongue.
As opposed to German, lento in German is ganz langsam. Largo very slowly in German is ganz, ganz langsam. No, it's not pretty. Neither is schnell, which means the same as presto, or the German equivalent of vivace, which is aufgeregt.
The six basic tempo designations are, in decreasing order of speed, very fast, presto, fast, allegro, moderate, or walking speed, andante, moderately slow, adagio, slow, lento, very slow, largo. Again, presto, allegro, andante, adagio, lento, largo.
Now, obviously, there are lots more Italian words that address this issue of tempo, although these six words comprise the vast majority of tempo markings we will encounter, which presents a problem, a sometimes big problem.
I've just sat down at the piano, and on the music stand is the first movement of Mozart's piano sonata in C major of 1788. Above the first notes at the upper left-hand corner of the first page of the movement is the word allegro, meaning fast.
My friends, how fast is fast? Should I play it this fast?
Or should I play it this fast?
Or perhaps this fast?
The question, how fast is fast? When Mozart wrote allegro at the beginning of the piece, how allegro? How fast did he want it to be played?
It's not just a good question because when it comes to proper interpretation, matters of tempo are the question. Determining the most appropriate tempo remains the single most important decision a performer can make, as well as an endless source of argument,
ranker, and even blood feuds between musicians. Ideally, Mozart would have qualified that designation of allegro. He would have given us more information. Rather than a genuine allegro, he probably meant an allegretto, or an allegro moderato, something a little less fast, something like this.
How do we know that's what Mozart probably wanted? Well, we don't know, not for sure. It's just that the piece sounds better at that tempo. It breathes and has a sense of pacing that seems appropriate to its melodic and harmonic material.
85 years later, in 1873, Johannes Brahms, doing his level best to be absolutely crystal clear as to the moderately fast tempo of the third movement of his string quartet, opus 51, number one, indicated that the movement should be played allegretto molto moderato e comodo,
which means, literally, very kind of sort of fast, but moderately and leisurely. Does that make any sense to any of you? Was Brahms being as clear as he wanted to be, or was he just further muddying the waters of tempo?
I would tell you that allegretto molto moderato e comodo is just the sort of Brahmsian tempo designation that prompted the 20th century American composer Carl Ruggles to ask, quote,
What the hell is that supposed to mean? Unquote. Brahms should have used metronome markings. Why he didn't, is anyone's guess. In 1815, a Viennese builder of mechanical musical instruments named Johann Nebemuck Malzel patented a device he called a metronome,
a device that could be set to make a regular clicking sound anywhere from 40 to 200 times a minute. By using a metronome marking, a composer can indicate exactly the tempo of a piece of music by indicating exactly how many clicks or beats should go by per minute.
Mozart then would have saved us all a lot of trouble had he lived long enough to own a metronome and had he marked his C major piano sonata, quarter note equals 116, meaning 116 beats per minute. Here's what that sounds like on a metronome.
And now I would play it at that tempo, so comfortable, and it would have been so specific. So that settles it, right? If a composer employs a metronome marking, a performer will know, at the very least, how fast to start a piece of music.
Yes, in an ideal world, performers would indeed honor a composer's metronome mark. Unfortunately, as we all know, we do not live in an ideal world. For example, Beethoven's symphony number three, the Eroica or heroic symphony, is about the trials and tribulations of a heroic machismo character who must overcome his inner demons as well as fate itself.
In other words, Beethoven's third is about Beethoven. The opening theme of the first movement, initially played by the cellos, the baritone voice of the orchestra, is the hero himself. Beethoven got himself a metronome and proceeded to write metronome marks into many of his works, including this third symphony.
For the first movement of this third symphony, Beethoven indicated a tempo of dotted half note equals 60, meaning that the piece should be played this fast, and I reset the metronome. Here's Beethoven's indicated tempo.
And now I'll play it at that tempo.
In a 1961 recording of Beethoven's third symphony, conductor A, considered by many the great Beethoven conductor of the mid 20th century, begins the third symphony this way. How heroic does this feel?
Beethoven's third symphony, which was played in the early 19th century, is about the same as Beethoven's third symphony.
Beethoven's third symphony, which was played in the early 19th century, is about the same as Beethoven's third symphony.
Beethoven's third symphony, which was played in the early 19th century, is about the same as Beethoven's third symphony.
Beethoven's third symphony, which was played in the early 19th century, is about the same as Beethoven's third symphony.
Well, that's a big snore. For your information, that conductor chose to begin the symphony at 46 beats per minute, nearly 25% slower than Beethoven's own metronome mark.
Now, in a 1994 recording of the same piece, conductor B performed the same passage this way.
Beethoven's third symphony, which was played in the early 19th century, is about the same as Beethoven's third symphony.
Now, doesn't that feel better? Doesn't that sound heroic? Yes, it does.
It almost goes without saying that conductor B has hit Beethoven's notated tempo spot on 60 beats per minute.
So, which conductor is right? Conductor A or conductor B?
My friends, might I suggest that Beethoven is right and clearly conductor B has chosen to honor Beethoven's wishes.
Now, if conductor A were standing here today, I have no doubt that he might make a good argument, perhaps even a compelling argument in favor of his interpretation of the symphony,
providing he didn't stick a sausage-like finger in my chest and tell me that if I didn't like it, I could blow it out my sack butt!
Behavior rather typical of the old-style autocratic German conductor he was.
But back to this conductor's interpretation and the question it begs, does interpretive license extend to ignoring a composer's notated tempo?
No, it does not.
My friends, this is simply another example of the power of the livering over the dead.
Really, do any of us think that conductor A would have conducted the aeroaca at the tempo he did if Beethoven had been in the recording studio with him?
We can hear Ludwig van now, shrieking from the back of the room.
You! You! Yeah, you! I'm talking to you! That's right, the one with the stick! You're messing with my tempos! Don't you ever mess with my tempos!
Knowing Beethoven, as we do, we would never, in his presence, mess with his tempos, and neither, I believe, would have conductor A.
Period instruments versus modern instruments and the right tempo.
I'm still being asked, although not as often as I was 15 years ago when this was still a hot button issue, as to whether I prefer recordings made with period instruments or modern instruments.
It's a fascinating thing, this period instrument revival we've seen in the last 30 years, and it deserves a much longer and more reasoned discussion than we have time to give it now.
A few big statements before getting on to the point, which is tempo.
First, I've heard some wonderful period instrument recordings, and I've heard some absolutely dreadful ones.
I've heard some wonderful modern instrument recordings, and I've heard some that are so bad that I've had to brush my teeth after having heard them, just to get the taste out of my mouth.
As always in life, the means are important, but the end result is what matters.
If a performer is willing to follow the one commandment, thou shalt honor the composer's wishes as best as can be defined, then a responsible performance is likely to be the result.
Period instrument zealots claim that we should hear Beethoven's music the way Beethoven's own audience heard it.
That argument assumes that there was a fixed instrumental standard in Beethoven's time, something we can copy and imitate today.
Well, there wasn't.
On top of that, the great bulk of the string and wind instruments available in Beethoven's time would have been much more likely to slip out of tune during the course of a performance than anything we'd hear on a modern recording.
The quality of the instruments themselves would have been much less consistent than anything we'd hear on a recording.
Likewise, the sheer level of musicianship we hear on a modern recording will eclipse all but the greatest ensembles of Beethoven's day.
If Beethoven could somehow hear the best modern recordings of his symphonies, and for that matter, his piano sonatas and string quartets, I believe he'd be stunned.
In his own lifetime, he would have never heard his music performed so well.
Conversely, Johann Sebastian Bach had the opportunity to play an early piano, which he dismissed out of hand as being a toy.
Does that mean we're supposed to ignore Glenn Gould's superb recordings of Bach's harpsichord music played on a modern grand piano?
Now, speaking for myself, I will generally prefer a great period instrument recording to a great modern instrument recording.
But for me, it's not a matter of hearing what Beethoven's audience heard, but rather of hearing what Beethoven wrote down on paper in terms of timbral balance, articulation, and tempo.
Back to Beethoven's symphony number three.
Beethoven scored the symphony for two flutes, two oboes, two clarinets, two bassoons, three French horns, two trumpets, two timpani, and strings.
In total, eight winds, five brass, timpani, and strings.
Beethoven's string section would have numbered about 40 instruments, playing incidentally on gut rather than steel strings,
resulting in an overall orchestral complement of 54 players, precisely the number employed by conductor B.
Let's hear the beginning of that performance again.
Crisp and beautifully balanced, yes? Yes.
We hear the winds and brass speak because they are not being drowned out by too many strings,
as opposed to so many modern orchestra performances in which an orchestra's entire string complement of over 60 stringed instruments is used in performance.
I'll be the first to admit it.
60 plus modern strings make a marvelous sound, but those modern steel stringed instruments are bigger, louder, and less supple than those of Beethoven's day.
Used too many of them in a performance, and the 13 wind and brass instruments for which Beethoven also composed will not have a snowball's chance in Miami of being heard.
In such a string heavy performance, timbral balance goes right out the window, along with whatever essential musical material the winds and brass are playing.
Articulation and tempo.
Period strings are very different from modern stringed instruments.
As performance venues grew larger during the 19th century, the strings were modified to make them capable of playing louder.
Steel and wound strings strung at a higher tension replaced gut strings.
The thicker strings and higher tension required that the necks of the instruments be enlarged, the bridges made higher, the bodies reinforced, and the bows made bigger and more totally strung.
These changes did indeed make strings capable of playing louder, but at the cost of flexibility.
Period stringed instruments speak more rapidly and are capable of a lightness of attack and articulation that their modern cousins simply are not.
Very simply, it's easier to play faster on period strings than modern strings, and it's therefore easier to honor the sorts of faster tempos and articulations that were created with these instruments in mind in the first place.
Back to the beat.
All the beats we've observed thus far in this lecture have been steady and even, and as such, informed at a basic level by dance, that is, by physical movement.
While we listen to the following excerpt, I will clap the beats. Feel free to clap and or tap along if you wish.
Here's the question. Are the beats in this music steady and even, and if not, why not?
She's only a bird in a gilded cage, a beautiful sight to see.
You may think she's happy and free from care, she's not, though she seems to be.
To stand when you think of her wasted life, for youth cannot mate with age, and her beauty was sold for an old man's gold.
She's a bird in a gilded cage.
Well, were the beats steady and even? Yeah, about as even as a hockey player's teeth.
No, they weren't. The performance sped up and slowed down constantly. Why? The answer, my friends, is in the words.
The ballroom was filled with fashions throng, it shone with a thousand lights, and there was a woman who passed along the fairest of all the sights.
A girl to her lover then softly sighed, ah, there's riches at her command, but she married for wealth, not for love, he cried, though she lives in a mansion grand.
She's only a bird in a gilded cage, a beautiful sight to see. You may think she's happy and free from care, she's not, though she seems to be.
To sad when you think of a wasted life, for youth cannot mate with age, and her beauty was sold for an old man's gold. She's a bird in a gilded cage.
OK, why wasn't the beat steady and even? Because our performance stresses the words and the story that the words tell.
The tempo rises and falls with the natural rhetorical flow of storytelling. This is a song, and in this particular performance of this particular song, the rhetorical element is more important than the dance element.
When the beat speeds up during the course of a passage, we call it an accelerando, which means literally accelerating.
When the beat slows down during the course of a passage, we call it a ritardando, or ritard, which means literally slowing.
Our performance of a bird in a gilded cage is filled with accelerando and ritardando, as the performers take a very flexible rhetorical approach to the beat.
The term for such a free and flexible approach to the beat is called rubato.
Rubato means literally robbed time, as we steal from one beat by shortening it and give it to another beat by lengthening it, all in the name of lyric flexibility in order to create a performance in which the rhetorical element is more important than the dance element.
The Polish-born composer and pianist Frederick Chopin was famous for his rubato.
Ear witnesses to his piano playing in the 1830s and 40s talk constantly about his uncanny ability to actually make the piano sing as a result of his incredibly nuanced approach to dynamics, phrase, and tempo.
Take this Chopin, Mazzurca, and A minor I've got sitting on the piano, Opus 17, No. 4 of 1833 as an example.
A Mazzurca, like a waltz, is a three-step dance. Oh sure, I could play it like a dance.
Sure, we could play it like a dance, and in doing so miss entirely the expressive point of the piece.
The piece is about aching lyric melancholy. More than a dance, it is a song of regret. We must perform it with rubato, and in doing so bring out its vocality, its essentially rhetorical nature.
Music
Now that's what Chopin's Mazzurca and A minor, Opus 17, No. 4, is supposed to sound like with a liquid flexibility of beat that renders it much more song than dance.
We've one more bit of beat business before we can bring this lecture to a close.
Earlier in this lecture, we observed that in a given section of music, the beat, this smallest and most accessible of rhythmic elements, transmits a tremendous amount of musical and expressive information.
This is particularly true if, in a given passage of music, the beat appears to be missing altogether. I would wax philosophic for just a moment.
We Homo sapiens perceive movement through time not as an unmarked continuum, but rather as being rooted in small, fairly even divisions.
Now I speak not of the ticking of a clock, or of the hup-two of a Suza march, but rather of our own heartbeats, our own built-in metronomes for which the ticking of a clock is a metaphor and the steps in a march an analog.
My friends, if a composer really wants to create tension, and here we're talking about existential tension, or tension, mega-dislocation, what better way than by denying us that most essential, basic, and easily perceived element in any piece of music, meaning the beat?
Case in point. The overture to Richard Wagner's music drama Tristan und Isolde of 1859.
During the first act of the drama, with a little help from some non-prescription pharmaceuticals, Tristan and Isolde fall madly in love with each other.
They spend the remaining two and a half acts of the music drama vainly attempting to physically consummate that love.
At its heart, Tristan und Isolde is about unrequited love, about the frustrating inability to physically consummate an overwhelming passion about an itch that cannot be scratched.
How does Wagner make us, as an audience, feel that same unrequited urge, that unscratchable itch during his overture?
One of the ways he does it is by denying us any semblance of beat for the first two minutes plus.
Tristan und Isolde
Tristan und Isolde
Tristan und Isolde
Tristan und Isolde
Tristan und Isolde
Tristan und Isolde
Yeah, that'll make you itch a little bit at the beginning of a five-hour evening, won't it?
The overture was moving forward all the time, but my friends, it was moving forward out
of time, without any reference to a beat.
So when the music finally settles on something resembling a beat, a series of marked and perceivable
time divisions to which our bodies can finally move, the relief, momentary, though it might
be, is physically palpable to answer the question, if there is no beat during the first two minutes
of Wagner's overture to Tristan und Esolda, how is it notated, and how does the conductor
manage to keep the players together?
My friends, this is a case in which notation and perception are two very different things.
On paper, the music looks entirely normal, with rhythms and beats meticulously indicated,
but we are told to play the music lent-o, ever so slowly, and there are long rests with
signs called fermatas placed above them, fermatas that tell the conductor to pause for as long
as she'd like.
More than following the notated rhythms in their parts, the players are following the
conductor's baton, and that baton is telling them when to play and when not to play.
Think of it all as an orchestral rubato, one in which time is so stretched out that we
no longer perceive the beat so much as unrestricted temporal space.
When we return, meet her.
Thank you.
