Lecture 13, Melody Continued
Welcome back.
This is Lecture 13.
It is entitled Melody Continued, Review.
The bulk of Lecture 12 was dedicated to learning to distinguish between different types of
thematic melody.
The first type of thematic melody we examined is what is called word melody or what an ethnomusicologist
would call logogenic melody, a melody in which the words being sung are of overwhelming
importance and in which the melody itself is an outgrowth of the articulation and rise
and fall of the words themselves.
As examples of such melody, we listened to plain chant and early operatic recitative.
The second type of melody we examined is called vocal melody or so-called mellow-genic melody
in which words and music are in balance and of equal import.
As examples of vocal melody, we listened to Stephen Foster's song, Genie, with the light
brown hair, and Giuseppe Verdi's aria, La Dona Immobile, from the opera Rigoletto.
The third type of melody we examined is called vocally conceived instrumental melody, for
which we might most presumptuously coin the term instrogenic melody, an instrumental melody
that nevertheless betrays a vocal conception by its lyrical character.
As examples of such, we listened to melodies by Johann Sebastian Bach, Wolfgang Mozart,
Frederick Chopin, and Peter Tchaikovsky.
We then engaged in a discussion of motives and motivic repetition, sequence, and transformation.
Before moving on to instrumental melody, let's first apply the syntax of motive to a few of
those word melodies, vocal melodies, and vocally conceived instrumental melodies we've already
examined.
Word melody revisited.
Word melody, be it plain chant, recitative, or whatever, tends by definition not to feature
a clear and consistent motivic profile.
By definition, a word melody is derived entirely from the word, the text, melody in which such
purely musical elements as motivic repetition, sequence, and transformation are usually absent.
Let's re-hear Orpheus's response to the news of Eurydice's death from Perry's Eurydice
of 1600 once again.
This time through, I want us to focus entirely on the music, pitches, and rhythms, and I
want us to ask ourselves this key question.
If this was a piece of instrumental music without the words, would it make any sense unto itself?
Ok, if that was a piece of instrumental music, would it make any sense unto itself?
Well, sadly my friends, the answer is, at least in my opinion, no.
This music, this melody, is completely dependent upon the words for its meaning.
Expressively, everything comes from the word, and musically, everything is a product of
the contouring of the word, and it is a piece of instrumental music without the words.
This is a piece of instrumental music without the words, and it is a piece of instrumental
word, and musically, everything is a product of the contour and articulation of the word.
The melodic material by itself doesn't feature the sorts of structural elements that would
make it recognizable and memorable on its own, meaning motives and motivic repetition,
sequence, and transformation.
Typical of word melodies, Orpheus's response is what we call through-composed.
It changes as it goes, dependent entirely on its words to give it meaning and substance.
As opposed to vocal melody.
Vocal melody revisited.
Let's listen once again to the Duke of Mantua's La Donna Immobile from Act 3 of Giuseppe Verdi's
Regoletto.
Let's ask ourselves the same question.
Of its words does this music, does this melody, make sense unto itself, divorced from its words?
This is a piece of instrumental music without the words, and it is a piece of instrumental
Does this melody make sense unto itself?
What are you kidding?
It's only one of the most memorable melodies of all time, which rightly begs the question.
Why?
What's going on in La Donna Immobile that wasn't going on in Jacopo Perri's recitative?
This is what's going on.
One, the clarity of its small scale and large scale phrase structure.
On the small scale, the melody features short, even phrases that imbue it with crystalline
clarity, for example.
Another phrase.
Another phrase.
Another phrase.
These short phrases clump together into four large phrases, creating a large scale A, A,
B, C structure.
Phrase A, again.
Phrase A, repeat it.
Phrase B,
Phrase C.
Two, the second element that allows this melody to stand alone divorced from its words is
its crystal clear motivic usage, which gives its substance and meaning above and beyond
its words.
Verdi's basic motive is six notes in length and consists of three repeated notes,
followed by an upwards leap.
Let's hear the first four notes together then.
Followed by a downward step.
Followed by a downward sleep, which lands us on a note a whole step lower than that on
which we began.
Let's hear the whole motive.
This opening motive is then sequenced downwards.
The motive is then transformed, the leaps are eliminated, leaving only a downwards
stepping motive, which is then immediately sequenced downwards as well.
These four small scale phrases constitute the large scale phrase A, and they describe
a large scale descent of a major sixth, from the first note to the last.
Here's the first note of the melody, and here's the last note of the melody.
And then this entire phrase A is repeated.
Phrase B sees the opening sixth note motive transformed once again.
The upwards downwards leap is shifted to the end of the motive, and unlike the original
version of the motive, this one ends on the same note on which it began.
Back to back.
Here's the original motive from the beginning of the theme, and now the transformed motive
of phrase B.
In contrast to the large scale descent that marks the A phrases, Verdi sequences this
transformed version of motive B upwards.
Finally, in the fourth and final phrase, big phrase C, all that remains is the upwards
leap followed by downwards steps, which leads eventually to a closing erotic lick of such
grace that we're almost, almost willing to forgive the duke his transgressions.
Back to the assertion that Verdi's crystal clear motive usage contributes mightily to
his melody's memorability.
By building his melody on a single recognizable motive, and by then repeating, sequencing,
and progressively transforming that motive, Verdi's melody takes on a coherence and evolving
inner logic, a completeness all its own.
It doesn't need words to explain its meaning or existence.
It stands as a structure on its own.
Co-evolution.
The sort of purely musical logic we just observed in La Dona E. Mobile was the result of the
co-evolution of vocal music and instrumental music, a co-evolution that began during the
late 17th century.
There's a certain irony here, because while instrumental music originally evolved from
vocal models, it was the developing vocabulary of instrumental music that then leached back
into vocal music and in turn impacted hugely on the development of vocal melody.
With a couple of notable exceptions, the same composers who were writing operas and opera-like
religious music began composing instrumental music in the late 17th century.
In these early instrumental works, these composers employed techniques borrowed directly from
the opera house, like the harmonic accompaniment called basso continuo, as well as the
differentiation between regitative and aria, between real-time action music and stopped
time soliloquy music.
Among the first fruits of this opera-inspired instrumental experimentation was the invention
of the concerto during the 1670s.
At the same time, these composers of early instrumental music encountered a problem that
operatic practice could not solve, and that was a way to create abstract musical coherence
in the absence of words.
The solution was motivic manipulation, motivic repetition, sequence, and transformation.
My friends, it's cheap and easy to make fun of the instrumental music of such 17th century
composers as Alessandro Stoladella, Archangelo Corelli, Giuseppe Torelli, and Tomasso Albinoni,
to name but a few, with its endless sequences up and down and down and up and sideways and
backwards.
What we need to keep in mind is that this early instrumental music was also experimental music,
and its composers were intent on creating a syntax based on motivic manipulation that
would render their music coherent without the necessity of words.
It was a melodic syntax that the next generation of composers, which included such uber luminaries
as Johann Sebastian Bach, Antonio Vivaldi, George Frederick Handel, and George Philip
Telemann, would run with and build on exponentially.
Back then, to the assertion made just a few minutes ago, that the developing vocabulary
of early instrumental music and instrumental melody in particular impacted hugely on vocal
melody.
Such techniques as motivic repetition, sequence, and transformation quickly found their way
into vocal music, and like humankind and dogs from the late 17th century onward, vocal music
and instrumental music evolved together, each borrowing from the other in a constant symbiotic
feedback loop.
Please, let's indulge in a quick but vigorous motivic analysis of the principal melody of
the first movement of Tchaikovsky's Concerto for Violin in D major of 1878, which was one
of the thematic melodies we listened to in lecture 12 as an example of a vocally conceived
instrumental melody.
The point of this analysis is to make us aware of the degree to which motivic repetition,
sequence, and transformation characterizes and renders sensical this otherwise abstract
piece of art, this instrumental melody.
Let's hear it once again before we talk about it.
Let's hear it once again.
This lengthy thematic melody features two distinct motives which we will rather cleverly
refer to as motives one and two.
Motive one sounds like this.
This motive is immediately sequenced upwards by a step and transformed ever so slightly
from the beginning.
Motive two now appears.
It steps upwards and then falls back.
Next, motive two is embellished with triplets and sequenced downwards.
In its fourth and final iteration, motive two is further embellished as it is sequenced
upwards and let's be aware that the backwards fall that concludes the motive is preceded
by a dotted or long short rhythm.
Once again, motive two from its first appearance.
Finally, in a process called thematic liquidation, Tchaikovsky isolates the dotted rhythm and
backwards fall that characterized the very end of the last iteration of motive two and
sequencing it downwards brings this first large phrase of the theme to its conclusion.
It all makes perfect sense, a perfect marriage of beautiful motivic ideas superbly arrayed.
Let's hear it again.
Instrumental melody.
Finally my friends, we're prepared to discuss the fourth of our general melodic distinctions,
instrumental melody.
Principal melodies that exploit instrumental rather than vocal characteristics.
Principal melodies generally lacking the quality of lyricism.
Now, I'm completely cognizant of how subjective this distinction might be, but please remember,
these melodic classifications are not ironclad absolutes, but rather distinctions, distinctions
meant to help us distinguish between different sorts of thematic melodies.
For example, how might we distinguish between the following two thematic melodies?
First, the opening of the first movement of Mozart's symphony in G minor,
in G minor, C550 of 1788.
Instrumental melody.
Instrumental melody.
And now, the opening of the first movement of Beethoven's symphony number five in C minor,
Opus 67 of 1808.
Instrumental melody.
Instrumental melody.
My friends, on paper, these two principal melodies would seem to have much more in common than not.
Composed just 20 years apart, they are both first movement opening themes in minor mode symphonies.
They are roughly the same tempo, both of them display a clear, motific profile,
and by terrific coincidence, each of the excerpts we just heard was exactly 31 seconds in length.
But back to the question at hand, how might we distinguish between these two thematic melodies?
Mozart's melody for all of its G minor tinged angst is lyrical.
It is a tune. It is a vocally conceived melody.
Instrumental melody.
Conversely, Beethoven's melody is a mosaic, a cut and paste pastiche of four note motives,
each played after the entire orchestra plays the first two by a different group of instruments.
Instrumental melody.
Beethoven's melody, this motific pastiche, is many things, but lyrical, it is not.
You don't have to believe me. No, try singing it.
The point, Beethoven's is not a vocally conceived melody.
Rather, it is an instrumentally conceived melody, a melody inspired by and constructed for the orchestra.
Let's play this game again.
How might we distinguish between the following two thematic melodies?
First, the opening of the first movement of Mozart's piano sonata in C major, Cursal 545 of 1788.
Instrumental music.
And now, the opening of the first movement of Beethoven's piano sonata in C major, Op. 53, The Waldstein.
Instrumental music.
Instrumental music.
Again, on paper, these two principal melodies have more in common than not, composed just 16 years apart.
They are both first movement opening themes in C major piano sonatas.
But of course, it would be hard to imagine two more different sounding pieces of piano music.
And principal among those differences is the nature of their respective thematic melodies.
Mozart's thematic melody is as lyrical as they come, as tuneful and instrumental melody as there ever was.
Instrumental music.
Beethoven's thematic melody has nothing to do with lyricism.
It's about rhythm and propulsion, and is characterized by hammer-like repeated notes that treat the piano like a percussion instrument, like a multi-keyed drum set.
The E that begins Beethoven's theme is repeated 13 times before moving upwards.
Instrumental music.
The pitch D that follows when Beethoven sequences the entire opening phrase downward by a whole step is then repeated 14 times before moving upwards.
Instrumental music.
Beethoven's thematic melody is many things, my friends, but lyric, vocally conceived, it is not.
A brief Beethoven sidebar.
By using Beethoven's Fifth Symphony and the Waldstein piano sonata as examples of instrumentally conceived melody,
I have not meant to give the impression that Beethoven was incapable of writing lyrically.
On the contrary, his catalogue is filled to brimming with gorgeous lyric singing tunes.
Having said that, Beethoven was, at his core, a non-vocal style composer.
His songs, his religious and choral music, the finale of the Ninth Symphony, and his opera Fidelio notwithstanding.
He was a musical architect, and as such he generally preferred thematic melodies built from compact motives with which he could construct the remainder of the movement.
Thematic melodies more akin to the supply depot next to a construction site than finished self-standing tunes unto themselves.
More often than not, Beethoven's music is not about its themes per se, but rather what can be done with the motives that make up his themes.
His music is about evolution and development.
As opposed to Tchaikovsky, for example, whose music is about his long, gorgeous, vocally conceived thematic melodies.
Melodies that, once stated, become the point, the reason to be of a given movement.
But back to this idea of Beethoven as architect and builder, it's something we hear on the surface of his music.
There is a leanness, an angularity, a pureness, and power to his music that is, to a great degree, the result of his constructive, instrumental approach to melody and motivic development.
He was constitutionally averse to smarm, and melodic prettiness for its own sake held little interest for him.
When critics and audiences alike complained that Beethoven's music had no melody, which they did, they were obviously off the mark.
Beethoven's music has melody galore.
The real issue was that Beethoven's essential melodic impulse was instrumental, not vocal.
Just so, when critics and audiences complained that much of the music of the 20th and 21st centuries has no melody, it's the lack of vocally conceived melody they're unhappy about, not a lack of melody per se.
Some final words on these melodic distinctions and an exception.
One more time. These melodic distinctions, as we've examined them, word melody, vocal melody, vocally conceived instrumental melody, and instrumentally conceived melody, are useful in that they allow us to identify certain melodic characteristics and to make certain distinctions between different sorts of thematic melodies.
Perhaps the most glaring exception to these categories, as we've defined them, has to do with the assumption that all vocal music is by its nature vocally conceived.
In fact, there's lots of 20th and 21st century vocal music that is characterized by neither word melody nor vocal melody.
For example, in the expressionistic and experimental music of the 20th century, any number of composers pushed the voice way past pathogenic melody, logogenic melody, or mellogenic melody in order to explore emotional and expressive states that represent the deepest and often darkest recesses of the human psyche.
One of the single most important works of the 20th century is Arnold Schoenberg's Piero Lunare, composed in 1912. Scored for female voice and chamber ensemble, Piero Lunare sets 21 poems describing the trials, tribulations, and foibles of that white-faced rascal clown known variously as Piero, Punch, Pulcinella, and Petrusca.
In Piero Lunare, Schoenberg employs a vocal technique drawn directly from German cabaret music, something he called Sprechtstimme, or speech voice, a wonderfully strange, sing-songy technique that has nothing to do with lyricism but everything to do with complementing the weird nighttime stories and scenarios evoked by the poetry.
And please note, while we listen, neither does the vocal part behave like a recitative. Vocal articulation in Piero Lunare is a function of expressive effect and not an attempt to follow the rhythms and contour of spoken language.
We're going to hear two songs from Piero Lunare. The first one runs about a minute in length and the second one runs all of 15 seconds. We could talk about these songs for days, though obviously we will not. Instead, let's just wallow in the essentially non-lyrical use of the voice as it intones the fabulously bizarre poetry.
The first song we'll hear is entitled Volgarity. Here's the text.
Deep into the polished bald-pate, quite at ease, he puffs and draws his own genuine Turkish tobacco out of the bald-pate of Cassander.
Oh, wild poem, huh? Glad we're not Cassander. For our information, Cassander's agonized screaming is well depicted by the piccolo. Let's hear it and let's be especially aware, please, of the non-lyrical nature of the vocal part.
In the bald-pate, Cassander's head shines through the air and calls Piero. We're going to learn how to sing.
In the bald-pate, he puffs and draws his genuine Turkish tobacco out of the bald-pate of Cassander.
He puffs and draws his own genuine Turkish tobacco out of the bald-pate of Cassander.
He puffs and draws his own genuine Turkish tobacco out of the bald-pate of Cassander.
The haggard harlot with scrawny neck will be the last of his mistresses. In his brain, there sticks like a sharp nail. The haggard harlot with scrawny neck.
Thinness of pine tree with hanging pigtail. Lustily, she will embrace the rascal, the haggard harlot.
The haggard harlot with the scrawny neck who lustily embraces Piero is the gallows, her hanging pigtail, the noose, and the screeching piccolo that concludes this lightning-fast song to picks Piero swinging at the end of the rope.
Accompanimental melodies. All of the melodies we've discussed thus far in our melodic examination have been principal or thematic melodies, foreground music, if you will.
But one might rightly ask, especially if you're a second violinist, a violist, a bassist, or a second flutist, clarinetist, oboist, or bassoonist, or an English horn player, a French horn player, a trombonist, or a tuba player.
Hey, what about all the stuff I play, the counter melodies, the accompanimental parts, the inner voices, the bass lines, the stuff that supports and showcases the thematic melodies?
Oh, the gross injustice of it all. Behind every CEO, surgeon, managing partner, and executive director, there's a veritable army of unsung and usually underpaid support staff, from junior executives to janitors.
A support staff without which those big shots could not earn the big bucks and get all the glory.
Let us differentiate between four different types of support staff of accompanimental melodies. Baselines, inner voices, harmonic filler, and counter melodies.
Bass lines. Aside from its thematic melodies, the bass line is the most important melody line in any given piece of music. The bass line is literally the foundation of a musical entity.
In tonal music, the bass line and the shifting harmonies underlain by the bass line govern the other higher melody lines, be they thematic or accompanimental.
If thematic melody constitutes the musical foreground, then the bass line is what we would consider the musical middle ground.
For example, here's the bass line that underlies the opening theme of the first movement of Tchaikovsky's violin concerto. When heard by itself, it sounds downright poverty stricken.
Tchaikovsky's violin concerto.
Unless you're a structural engineer, looking at the foundation of a building is equally uninspiring.
But when we hear the bass line along with the thematic melody it supports, when we perceive the structure as a whole, well, the bass line's importance comes into sharp focus, as, like that foundation, it's holding up everything above it.
Intervoices and harmonic filler. In the musical background are those accompanimental parts that are built around articulating the harmony, either by playing clearly secondary melodies that outline harmonies like the cello part that accompanies the first theme of the first movement of the Tchaikovsky violin concerto.
Countermelodies. Countermelodies are secondary melodies that momentarily share the foreground with thematic melodies. For example, roughly half of the first movement of the Tchaikovsky violin concerto is the first movement of the Tchaikovsky violin concerto.
For example, roughly halfway through the first phrase of the first theme of the first movement of Tchaikovsky's violin concerto, the orchestral violins play a counter melody that echoes the theme being played by the solo violin.
Here's that counter melody heard first by itself.
Now let's hear that counter melody in context along with the thematic melody played by the solo violin.
My friends, being able to write and properly deploy a good counter melody is one of those things that separates the compositional amateur from the pro.
Good composers instinctively know when they need to leaven a principal thematic idea with a counter melody, one that complements the theme without distracting from it.
One more thing. We have one last bit of melodic material to cover before we bring this lecture to its close, and that is to define and demonstrate periodic melody versus continuous melody.
Periodic melody. A musical period is a self-enclosed section of music with a clear beginning, middle, and end. A musical sentence, as it were.
For example, the opening thematic melody of the first movement of Mozart's piano quartet in G minor describes a musical period and features then a periodic melody.
At no time were such crystalline musical periods cultivated to a greater degree than in the perfectly balanced antecedent consequent melodies of the classical era.
Like a sentence with a comma in the middle of it, an antecedent consequent melody is one in which the antecedent phrase ends on the dominant chord, a comma, and the consequent phrase ends on the tonic, thus bringing the phrase to its conclusion.
Let's hear the opening period from the first movement of Mozart's piano quartet in G minor again, but this time broken up into its antecedent and consequent phrases. First, the antecedent.
And now, please let us hear the consequent phrase.
As another example, let's hear the antecedent consequent thematic melodic period that begins Mozart's piano sonata in D major of 1789. First, the antecedent.
And now the subsequent consequent phrase.
Oh, this is fun. Let's do one more. Let's hear the antecedent consequent thematic melodic period that begins Mozart's symphony in C major, the Jupiter of 1788. Antecedent phrase.
And now the consequent phrase that follows.
It's just these sorts of antecedent consequent melodic periods that put the classic in the classical era, with its view of melody and melodic clarity as being an archetype for beauty and balance.
At the opposite end of the melodic spectrum was the 19th century composer, Richard Wagner, and his belief that melody was a metaphor for conscious and unconscious thought and feeling.
To that end, the melodic character of Wagner's music, and that of so many late 19th and early 20th century composers inspired by him, is almost continuous, with few, if any, breaks to slow its ongoing development.
And certainly, none of the sorts of antecedent consequent phrases so common in earlier times.
As an example of Wagner's continuous melody, non-periodic music, let's hear a couple of minutes of Siegfried's Rhein-Journey from the music drama Goethe-Demmerung. Continuous melody.
It's just these sorts of antecedent consequent melodic periods that put the classic in the classical era, with few, if any, breaks to slow its ongoing development.
It's just these sorts of antecedent consequent melodic periods that put the classic in the classical era, with few, if any, breaks to slow its ongoing development.
It's just these sorts of antecedent consequent melodic periods that put the classic in the classical era, with few, if any, breaks to slow its ongoing development.
It's just these sorts of antecedent consequent melodic periods that put the classic in the classical era, with few, if any, breaks to slow its ongoing development.
It's just these sorts of antecedent consequent melodic periods that put the classic in the classical era, with few, if any, breaks to slow its ongoing development.
It's just these sorts of antecedent consequent melodic periods that put the classic in the classical era, with few, if any, breaks to slow its ongoing development.
It's just these sorts of antecedent consequent melodic periods that put the classic in the classical era.
Look, that was not the best place in the world to fade out, but to tell you the truth, there are no such convenient moments, no natural breaks in this music.
That's what Wagner's continuous melody is all about.
Onward to texture and harmony. Thank you.
