Lecture 5 – Meter Part 1
Welcome back. This is Lecture 5. It is entitled, Meter Part 1.
We resume our exploration of the time aspect of music with meter.
Meter refers to how individual beats are grouped in a given passage of music.
There are four basic types of meter we will identify and learn to recognize.
Duple meter, triple meter, compound meter, and additive meter.
Accent.
The meter of a given section of music makes itself apparent through some sort of emphasis called an accent.
Such accents will usually occur regularly, most commonly creating patterns of two, three, or four beats.
When we hear accented beats occurring every two or four beats and thereby creating a pattern or meter of two or four,
we say that the music is in duple meter.
For example, Hector Berlioz's famous March to the Scaffold from the fourth movement of his symphony Fantastique of 1830.
One, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two.
When we hear accented beats occurring every three beats and thereby creating a pattern or meter of three,
we say the music is in triple meter.
For example, Johannes Brahms's Waltz Op. 39 No. 15 of 1865.
One, two, three, one, two, three, one, two, three, one, two, three, one, two, three, one, two, three, one, two, three.
One, two, three, one, two, three, one, two, three.
Now, it's a fallacy to assume that accented beats are perceived as being accented because they are louder.
Yes, in Berlioz's March to the Scaffold, the accented beats were slightly louder than the unaccented beats, something typical of a march.
But accentuation, meaning emphasis, can occur any number of different ways.
For example, in a Waltz, and this was true in the Brahms Waltz we just heard, the um in the um pa pa is typically heard on notes lower than the pa pa.
Um pa pa, um pa pa, um pa pa, um pa pa, um pa pa, um.
That registral isolation, the lower notes on um, serves to emphasize um, and thus we perceive it as being accented.
Accentuation can be a result of melodic phrase structure.
For example, the second movement of Haydn's Symphony number 94 of 1791 begins with a melody whose phrases are each four beats long.
As a result, we perceive the beat that falls at the beginning of each of those phrases as being emphasized or accented.
One, two, three, four, one, two, three, four, one, two, three, four, one, two, three, four.
However they are emphasized, we perceive these regularly accented beats as being the first beat of whatever metric unit we're hearing.
Therefore, we call this first accented beat the downbeat, because we feel in its emphasis a downward thrust into Mother Earth, into gravity central.
That's no metaphor. My friends, when we dance or tap our toes or march, we naturally thrust our weight downwards on the downbeat,
as if to physically anchor ourselves at this moment of greatest rhythmic weight.
Conversely, the beat that immediately precedes the downbeat is called the upbeat, for the obvious reason that it prepares the downward thrust that follows.
Learning to identify duple and triple meter.
My friends, sadly there's no science or theory to identifying meter.
We just practice and eventually, like the Crayola crayon maven, who can instantly identify that particular shade called wild blue yonder, we just know what meter we're in when we hear it.
The steps to identifying meter are as follows.
Step one, we find the beat.
When finding a beat, we do not think, reason, or try to figure it out.
On the contrary, we dance in place, we let go, we allow our bodies to tell us where the beat is.
Oh yes, I know, I know.
This is so antithetical to the sort of intellectual engagement we're accustomed to when we learn new stuff.
But this is music, not statistics, and very often learning something about music is about becoming conscious of something we instinctively knew already, like moving to a beat.
Step one then, in learning to identify duple and triple meter, find the beat.
Step two, and here we go again, I feel badly about this, I really do.
Step two is to feel around for emphasis, for accent, and in doing so sense whether the beats are being grouped in twos or fours, which would be duple meter, or threes, which would be triple meter.
Again, this is not an intellectual but rather a physical process.
It's about finding a comfortable beat and then allowing the beat to tell us how it is being grouped in twos, threes, or fours.
Look, my friends, before we start practicing unnecessary pep talk, I suggest a scenario.
You're at a wedding reception, the band plays the first dance, first the bride and her father, then the groom and his mother move on to the dance floor and begin to dance a waltz, a three step.
You and your partner walk on to the floor and, likewise, whether clumsily or gracefully, dance a three step.
Did anyone have to tell you that the piece was in triple meter and that the appropriate dance would be something involving three steps?
No, you felt it.
Next, the band strikes up a swing number.
Swing, by definition, is duple meter music.
You begin to step in groups of two and or four.
No one has to tell you that the music's in duple meter.
No, you just felt it.
And don't tell me you have two left feet.
Aside from Gerald Fleck in the movie Best in Show, I'd never seen anyone with two left feet, nor a pianist with two right hands, much as we'd all like to have two right hands.
But to the point, we've been listening to music our entire lives.
We've been hearing and moving and dancing to music in duple and triple meter our entire lives.
When we get to pitch and melody and tonality and harmony, we'll be talking about aspects of music that, likewise, we've been hearing our entire lives.
What we're doing in this course is not so much learning new stuff as, one, making ourselves consciously aware of musical aspects we've been intuitively aware of our entire lives.
And two, creating a vocabulary that allows us to observe and address these aspects in detail.
Practice makes perfect, duple meter.
All the following musical examples are in duple meter.
We will listen to each excerpt twice.
During the first listening, I will be uncharacteristically silent.
What I want us to do is, one, dance, find the beat, and two, feel around for accentuation.
Those accents will allow us to count the beats in groups of two or four.
For our purposes, it makes no difference which.
We will then hear each excerpt again, during which time I will clap what I consider the primary beat and will count out loud the meter.
We begin with the first movement of Johann Sebastian Bach's Branden-Birkenchater No. 2 and F Major of circa 1719.
Okay, let's count the Bach together.
I'm going to count it in four, and let's be aware of how truly four square this music is,
as instrumental solos and other such events line up exactly with the count of four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
one two three four one two three four one two three four one two three four one two three four
one two three four let's next hear the opening of the fourth and final movement of Mozart's
fabulous clarinet quintet of 1789 again first find the beat and then feel around for accentuation
we can comfortably count this music in either two or four depending upon whether we're
feeling a relatively fast beat or a relatively slow beat I'm going to forego the clapping this
time around and instead I'll first count in two and then in four with the understanding that either
way it's still duple meter one two one two one two one two one two one two three four one two
three four one two three four one two three four one two three four one two three four one two three
four while we're listening to clarinet quintets that is works for one clarinet and four strings
let's turn to the other great master work of the genre Johannes Brahms's clarinet quintet and
B minor of 1891 let's hear the opening of the third movement which is marked undontino meaning a
little bit faster than walking speed first find the beat then feel around my friends for accentuation
again we could count this in either two or four depending on
our mood and even more importantly depending on the performance as it is Brahms notated it in four
though again what's important is that we perceive duple meter one two three four one two three four
one two three four one two three four one two three four one two three four one two three four one
two three four one two three four one two three four one two three four one two three four one two
three four one more example of duple meter before we move on the opening of the fourth and final
movement of Tchaikovsky's symphony number four of 1877 Tchaikovsky indicates that this movement be
played allegro confuoco fast and with fire again first find the beat and don't be put off my
friends by the rests that appear here and there at the beginning of the excerpt once the beat is
established it continues non-stop just like our own heartbeats whether we're hearing music or silence
Tchaikovsky notated this in four but we are going to count it in two why because I'm feeling more
like two right now so here we go fast and with fire one two one two one two one two one two one two
one two one two one two one two one two one two one two one two one two one two one two one two
one two one two one two one two one two one two one two one two one two one two one two one two
one two one two one two one two one two one two one two one two one two one two one two one two
one two one two one two one two one two one one two one two one two one two one two second
One, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one.
An important point, one I would now reinforce.
Before we listened to the Tchaikovsky for the first time, I pointed out that a steady
beat is a continuum.
Once established, it continues as a non-stop given, as the basic rhythmic underpinning,
whether we're hearing music or silence.
We need to be clear on this because it's very important.
Once the beat and the meter are established, something that takes only a few seconds, we
sense their presence as a given until the composer alters them or stops them.
For example, count to four along with me and continue counting while I play at the piano.
One, two, three, four, one two three four, one two three four, one two three four, one two
three four, one two three four, one two three four, one two three four, one two three four,
one two three four, one two three four, one two three four.
Did the beat and meter stop during the silences in the music?
No, they did not.
On the contrary, once established, our bodies will continue to perceive, to resonate with,
whatever beat and meter have been established until a composer chooses to alter or stop
them entirely.
Triple meter Triple meter is, at its essence, a dance meter.
It is a fact that the overwhelming number of 17th, 18th and 19th century instrumental
compositions set in triple meter are based on triple meter dances.
Let this be the hook for our investigation of triple meter.
Let's examine movements, or entire compositions, based on triple meter dances.
The Sarabande, the Minuet, the Langler, the Mazurka, the Polonaise, and the Wolves.
Theater dances, the Sarabande.
We start, my friends, with the theme of what must be considered one of the greatest compositions
of all time, Johann Sebastian Bach's The Goldberg Variations of 1741.
The theme from which Bach will create 30 of the most miraculous variations ever conceived
is the Sarabande, a slow, stately dance in triple meter of Spanish origin.
Let's hear the first two phrases of the theme.
I will remain silent during the first phrase, and will count during the second phrase, please.
Let's feel the rocking sense of motion that is such a marked element of triple meter, particularly
at a slow tempo.
1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3,
Triple meter dances, the Minuet.
The stunning popularity and longevity of the Minuet still amazes us today.
It was the courtly three-step dance of choice for more than 150 years from the mid-17th
century through the early 19th century.
But in tempo and stately in mood, the Minuet is also the only Baroque-era dance to find
its way into the instrumental music of the Classical Era.
During the Classical Era, a Minuet appeared as the second or third movement of almost
every four-movement composition, placed there to offer a metric contrast with the duple
meter movements that typically surrounded it.
As an example, let's hear the opening of the third movement Minuet from Haydn's symphony
number 100 of 1794.
Once again, I'll remain silent during the first part of the excerpt, and we'll count
during the second part.
Then find the beat, feel for accentuation, then start counting threes.
1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1,
2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1.
Triple meter dances, the Landler.
The Landler is a slow to moderate triple meter dance of southern German and Austrian origin.
Originally a peasant dance, it became quite popular in the early 19th century in Germany
and Austria until it was replaced by the Waltz.
One of the charms of the Landler is that it never lost its peasant roots, so we should
expect a certain rusticity from any movement called a Landler, like the second movement
of Gustav Mahler's symphony number 1 of 1888.
Let's count this one together from the beginning.
1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1,
2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1,
2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1,
2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2,
3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1.
Triple meter dances, the Mazurka.
The Mazurka is a triple meter Polish folk dance from the province of Madsovia near Warsaw.
While many Polish composers composed Mazurkas, the shortlist of great Mazurkists has but
one name on it, Friedrich Chopin.
And while Chopin's 51 Mazurkas for solo piano exhibit a huge range of expressive character,
witness the lyric melancholy and not at all dance like Mazurka in A Minor we discussed
in lecture four, well they are all still nevertheless Mazurkas.
For a more dance like example we turn to Chopin's Mazurka in B-flat major, Opus 7 No. 1 of 1832.
Let's count it together.
Triple meter dances, the Polonaise.
Yet another triple meter Polish dance type that Chopin made his very own is the Polonaise.
Chopin's 16 Polonaises for piano number among them some of the most justly, popular and
memorable music ever composed, music that has become a national symbol for his native Poland.
We sample Chopin's Polonaise in A Major, Opus 40 No. 1.
The so-called military Polonaise composed in 1838.
We count together.
Triple meter dances, the Waltz.
We conclude this discussion of dance inspired triple meter music with the Waltz, a dance
that has become virtually synonymous with triple meter, yes rather annoyingly, triple
meter is often referred to simply as Waltz time, as if all the other triple meter dance
types we've discussed and others that we haven't discussed are nothing but musical
chopped liver.
In terms of longevity and popularity, the Waltz has bested even the minuet.
It has been the single most popular ballroom dance for the last 200 years and its popularity
shows no sign of waning.
The Waltz reached its zenith as a compositional genre in mid and late 19th century Vienna where
the estimable Strauss family, Johann Strauss Sr. and his son Johann Strauss II made the
Waltz the preeminent popular and concert music of its time.
Now of this father-son duo, it was Johann Strauss Jr. who was by far the greater composer.
He was in fact one of the greatest composers of the 19th century.
Yes, he wrote what is called in the literature light music, but his emperor Waltz, his tales
from the Vienna woods and his by the beautiful blue danube and the operetta deflator mouse
are for what they are creations of genius and mine is not a solitary opinion.
But curmudgeonly, Johannes Brahms worshipped the music of his friend Johann Strauss II
and said so at every opportunity.
Rickard Strauss, no relation to Johann, offered this appreciation later in his life and we
quote,
Of all the God gifted dispensers of joy, Johann Strauss Jr. is to me the most endearing.
In particular, I respect in Johann Strauss his originality, his innate gift.
At a time when the whole world around him was tending towards increased complexity, his
natural genius allowed him to create from the heart.
He seemed to me the last of those composers who worked from spontaneous inspiration.
I got to know and love his genius through the pianist Hans van Buleau, who had a beautifully
bound copy of the Strauss Waltzes.
He played them for me for an entire evening, for me alone an unforgettable evening of waltzes.
As for my own Rosen Cavalier waltzes, how could I have composed them without thinking
of the laughing genius of Vienna?
Unquote.
All right, no counting this time around my friends, let's just kick back and enjoy.
Johann Strauss II, the Waltz King, a bit of by the beautiful Blue Danube of 1867.
Johann Strauss Jr.'s waltzes were almost as beloved in the United States as they were
in Vienna.
A Viennese waltz craze swept America during the last years of the 19th and first years
of the 20th century, a craze that only came to an end in 1917 when the United States declared
war on Germany and the Austrian Empire.
It was a waltz craze that powerfully affected music being written in America, particularly
popular songs.
The so-called songs of the gay 90s, meaning the carefree and happy 1890s, there's no
sexual connotation intended in that phrase.
The songs of the gay 90s constitute a body of repertoire that's almost instantly recognizable.
And what almost all of these instantly recognizable songs have in common, like a bird in a gilded
cage, is that they are so-called waltz songs, songs set in triple meter.
What's remarkable is just how many of these waltz songs have attained an almost folk song
like status, a little waltz song medley for your listening pleasure.
To begin with John Palmer and Charles Ward's The Band Played On of 1895.
Trance the O'Cott, My Wild Irish Rose of 1899.
Daisy by Henry Daker, 1892.
Charles Lawler and James Blake's The Sidewalks of New York of 1894.
Warren Shields and M. George Evans in The Good Old Summertime of 1902.
Jeffy Canning's Rockabye Baby of 1886.
The next song has words by Jack Norworth and music by Albert von Tilzer.
Albert von Tilzer was the younger brother of Harry von Tilzer, who wrote A Bird in a
Gilded Cage.
Albert and Harry's real last name was gum, spelled G-U-M-M.
They were born to Jewish immigrant parents named Jacob and Sarah Gumbinski.
Tilzer was their mother's maiden name, the von, well, the von was their little attempt
to distance themselves from their humble ethnic beginnings, shall we say.
My friends, in those days, no one in the entertainment industry kept their real name, especially
if it was going to make them sound like some Yiddish or Greenhorn from the old country.
Just so, Israel Balinsky became Irving Berlin.
Jacob Gershiewicz became George Gershwin.
Aaron Kaplan became Aaron Copeland.
Oh, and it didn't end there.
In the generations that followed, Alan Kernigsberg became Woody Allen.
Betty Persky became Lauren Bacall.
Melvin Kaminsky became Mel Brooks.
Leonard Schneider became Lenny Bruce.
Bernie Schwartz became Tony Curtis.
Jack Cohen became Rodney Dangerfield.
Daniellovich Dempsky became Kirk Douglas.
Robert Zimmerman became Bob Dylan.
Eugene Horowitz became Michael Landon.
Joseph Levich became Jerry Lewis.
Wolf Marvin Garber became Bill Macy.
Winona Horowitz became Winona Ryder.
The list goes on, we will not.
Anyway, at the time Albert von Tilzer wrote the following Waltz song in 1908, he had never
even been to a baseball game.
It made no difference, the song has become an American Anthem.
Finally, let's hear what is certainly the best known American Waltz song of all time,
with music written in 1893 by the sisters Patty and Mildred Hill, a couple of school
teachers from Louisville, Kentucky.
A caveat.
Not all music will be characterized by meter.
Plainschant or so-called Gregorian chant, the liturgical music of the medieval Catholic
church is, for example, unmeasured.
Let's listen to a Plainschant setting of Thomas Aquinas' poem Pange Lingua Sing My Tongue,
a relatively late Plainschant, created around 1270.
Pange Lingua Sing My Tongue, a relatively late Plainschant, created around 1270.
Pange Lingua Sing My Tongue, a relatively late Plainschant, created around 1270.
Pange Lingua Sing My Tongue, a relatively late Plainschant, created around 1270.
Pange Lingua Sing My Tongue, a relatively late Plainschant, created around 1270.
The reasons behind the unmeasured nature of Plainschant are both practical and political.
First, the early church fathers held that the purpose of music was to uplift the soul
by intensifying prayer, meaning that in Plainschant, musical rhythms are strictly a function of
the words being set to music.
Second, a strong and patterned beat was perceived as being a function of dance, and dance, my
friends, was perceived as the devil's playground.
The church eventually shifted its dance on pulsed or measured music, what in Latin is
called musica mensurabilis, but it took a long time for that to happen.
Notating meter measures bar lines and time signatures.
Now, just because we're not relying on music notation in this course doesn't mean we won't
explain something of its evolution and how it works.
Let's consider this as the first installment of an investigation into musical notation.
Notating meter measures bar lines and time signatures.
It was during the 17th century, the 1600s, that a genuine instrumental musical tradition
truly began to develop.
Now, obviously, instrumental music had existed before the 17th century, primarily in the form
of dance music and arrangements of dance music, but a true instrumental tradition, one that
made a distinction between solo music, chamber music, and orchestral music, and one that
saw composers create music specifically for these evolving instrumental genres, did not
appear until the Baroque era, specifically the mid 1600s.
In order to facilitate the reading and notation of meter, measures or bars and bar lines came
into regular use during the mid 17th century.
Measures and bar lines were such a great idea that they became almost universal in instrumental
and vocal music by the late 17th century.
A measure or bar is a notational device for indicating one metric unit of music.
For example, let's say we're in triple meter.
Every metric unit of three beats equals one measure.
One measure in triple meter is three beats.
Here, I'll play four groups of triple meter.
We would say that that excerpt is four measures long, since there were four measures, four
units, four groups of triple meter.
On these lines, in terms of sheer number of measures, the longest movement of instrumental
music Mozart ever composed is the fourth movement of his string quintet in C major of 1787.
The movement is 537 measures long.
The movement is notated in two, meaning that there are two beats in each metric unit.
Therefore, the whole movement is 1074 beats in length, two beats times 537 measures.
Bar lines are a notational device.
They are the two vertical lines that enclose a measure that is one metric unit.
A time signature is a notational device that indicates the meter.
Time signatures look just like fractions, with one number written above another.
Appearance is not withstanding fractions, they are not.
The two numbers in a time signature tell us two very different things.
The top number tells us how many beats there are in each metric unit, in each measure,
and the bottom number tells us what sort of note gets a beat.
For example, let's say that the top number is three and the bottom number is four.
A meter we would therefore call three-four or three-quarter time.
The three on top tells us that there are three beats in each metric unit, that the meter is triple.
The bottom number, the four, tells us that a quarter note gets one beat.
Now this bottom number and the information it specifies that a quarter note gets a beat
is vital if one is reading the music, but it is almost entirely irrelevant if one is
simply listening to the music.
Whether it's a quarter note, a half note, an eighth note, or whatever note that gets
that beat, what's important for the listener is that we perceive three of them as making
up a metric unit, and therefore that we perceive triple meter.
So it's the top number in a time signature, the one that tells us how many beats are in
each metric unit, in each measure, that is for us, for now, the important number.
If that number is a two or a four, the music is in duple meter.
If that number is a three, dollars to donuts says the music is in triple meter, with the
exception of movements that are played so fast that we can't feel the threes as the
primary beat, something we'll talk about in the next lecture.
If that number on top is a five or a seven or a ten or an eleven, it means we are in
additive meter, which is, again, something we'll talk about in the next lecture.
I think it's time to bring this lecture to its conclusion.
When we resume, we will talk about metric consistency and continue our discussion of
meter.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
