Lecture 7.
Pitch and Mode, Part 1
Welcome back.
This is Lecture 7 and it is entitled Pitch and Mode, Part 1.
Music is sound in time or time defined by sound.
Having spent the previous three lectures talking about the time aspect of music, it's time
now to return to the sound aspect of music.
I will confess to you upfront that I've spent a lot of my own time trying to decide in exactly
what order to present the next seven lectures worth of material.
I'm a firm believer that good teaching is good storytelling and that every good story
has a beginning, middle, and end.
A lead story as well as a back story or two may be a little romantic interest, a surprise
along the way after which C major gets the girl and all the keys and modes, both major
and minor, live happily ever after.
Having acknowledged that this is how I'd like to be able to tell the story of pitch, I must
confess that this story, which includes the historical development of pitch collections,
also known as scales, intervals, mode, melody, texture, the concepts of consonance and dissonance,
and the overtone series, yes, this story is a most challenging one to tell in a coherent
linear fashion.
For example, to understand pitch collections or scales, we must first understand something
of the overtone series.
But to understand the importance of the overtone series in the development of tonality, we
must first know something about the historical development of musical texture.
And to understand texture, we've got to know something about the nature of melody, but
to understand melody, we've got to know something about pitch collections.
And now look, I've gone and confused myself.
The point.
As we move forward and encounter new information and master various listening skills, it will
be necessary to occasionally digress.
Crisscross, we speak and rethink previously covered material in the light of new material.
I know you're with me for the long haul.
So by the time we put a wrap on this course, everything should be in its proper place.
Onward.
Sound.
We are going to examine the actual sounds of music hierarchically, from the most general
to the specific.
Thus, we must begin by defining sound itself.
When we ask the average person, what is sound?
The answer we're most likely to receive is that sound is a wave.
Sound waves, right?
Immediately, we conjure up in our mind's eye waves and rays and beams of sound cresting
and shooting about all around us.
Incorrecto.
In reality, what we perceive as sound is the product of a concussion wave, the subtle
jostling of air molecules responding to tiny changes in air pressure that we perceive as
sound.
Let's check out the process.
I'm going to press a key on the piano.
That downward pressure is going to lever a felt-covered hammer upwards, where it will
strike a string, setting that string in motion.
That string will begin to vibrate in all sorts of complex patterns, which we'll discuss
in due time.
The vibrating string is at the far end of the piano in contact with a bridge, which itself
is connected to the soundboard of the piano.
The vibrating string induces the bridge to vibrate, and the bridge transmits those vibrations
to the soundboard of the piano, which will, as a result, also begin to vibrate.
I trust we all heard that sound.
We heard it because the air molecules up against the soundboard of the piano began to move
back and forth in sympathy with the vibrating soundboard.
Like dominoes falling outwards from a central source, the gazillions of molecules that make
up the air in the teaching company studio bumped one into the next, sending out a concussion
wave as the air pressure fluctuated.
It all happens very quickly, my friends.
The speed of sound at sea level is around 1,150 feet per second.
So if you're five feet away from the piano, the concussion wave, the fluctuation in air
pressure takes less than a two hundredth of a second to reach your ears, or, as the case
may be.
The diaphragm of the microphones recording the sound.
But for now, let's just assume that you're in the studio with me.
Let's contemplate for a moment our ears, nature's own radar dishes, which gather and
focus the concussion wave.
We hear binauraly.
That is, we've got two ears, unless, of course, you're Vincent Van Gogh, one on either side
of our heads, unless, of course, you're a painting by Picasso.
An arrangement that allows for directional hearing.
You see, since the fluctuation in air pressure that is the concussion wave will reach the
ear closer to the source of the sound a tiny bit of time before it reaches the other ear,
we're wired to interpret that differential as directional.
And we can therefore locate the source of the sound of the concussion wave of the fluctuation
in air pressure almost instantly.
Oh, it's most remarkable.
But we get ahead of ourselves.
The concussion wave, the fluctuation in air pressure induces that incredibly thin membrane
that is our eardrum to vibrate.
The vibrating eardrum, in turn, induces the three tiny bones in our middle ears, the hammer,
the anvil, and the stirrup bone to vibrate.
These bones, collectively called our ossicles, induce the viscous fluid in our inner ears
just a slash back and forth, which causes the basilar membrane, which is one of the
membranes that divides our inner ear in half, to vibrate, vibrations that are eventually
converted into electric impulses, which our brains interpret as the sound of a piano
coming from over there.
And please, that's just a single sound.
For a moment, let's contemplate the miracle of our hearing.
In the seemingly infinite complexity of the concussion waves, our ears are assaulted
by when listening to an 85-piece orchestra in a symphony hall, with each instrument contributing
its own unique sonic signature to the morass of jiggling air molecules in the hall.
Some of the concussion waves are received directly from the orchestra, while others
arrive at various later increments of time, having been reflected as they are off the
sides, rear, floor, and ceiling of the hall.
Even as our eardrums are being battered by this almost infinitely complex amount of vibration,
we are simultaneously aware of the idiot behind us crinkling her lozenge wrapper and the moron
next to us tapping his program against his knee, and the consumptive cretin somewhere
in the back of the theater, hacking away like the Marlboro man in a sandstorm, and the pinheaded
imbecile somewhere in front of us trying to turn off the ringer of her cell phone.
Somehow, through the interactive miracle of our ears and our brains, we interpret and
understand this tangle of fluctuating air pressure as representing the individual instrumental
voices that are collectively an orchestra, to say nothing of the various unwelcome noises
created by the nitwits around us.
If we wanted to, we could even look over at that really cute flute player sitting halfway
back on the stage and isolate her sound from the rest.
Well, no wonder my grandmother told me, never put anything in your ears smaller than a bread
box, a Q-tip being the exception.
Who wants to mess with such a delicate and extraordinary bit of apparatus?
And let's not forget, my friends, that there are creatures whose hearing leaves hours in
the dust, dogs, cats, owls, whales, and bats, to name but a few.
Anyway, it's all amazing.
Sound and its most perfect manifestation, music, is the very vibration of the world
around us.
Let's begin our investigation of sound by exploring the different sorts of sounds.
Noise.
We begin with what is perhaps the most general classification of sound, that being noise.
Noise is one of those words that has an armful of colloquial meanings, but as a musical term,
just one meaning.
Be forewarned, I'm going to smack my music stand.
Can we sing that sound?
No we can't.
My friends, smack something nearby.
Go ahead, only make sure that the object you smack is inanimate, and know your husband
or teenage son does not qualify motionless and seemingly comatose, though he may be.
Can you sing the sound your smack produced?
No you can't, and the reason why you can't is that the impact of your hand on whatever
object you struck produced so much sonic information that you simply cannot single out any particular
pitch to sing.
Let's approach this issue of noise, this issue of too much sonic information from another
angle.
For reasons we'll talk about in just a moment, when I press a single key on the piano, what's
produced is something called a single discrete pitch, a single discrete sound that we can
single out, identify, and sing.
We should all be able to sing that pitch.
Now I can press multiple different keys simultaneously, and providing I don't press too many at the
same time, we can still make out individual discrete pitches, and we can still sing them.
However my friends, there's a threshold past which our ears simply cannot single out individual
discrete pitches, a threshold at which we perceive instead an indistinguishable mass
of indistinguishable sound.
That's noise.
And as a result, we perceive instead the mass of sound itself.
The most extreme example of noise would be so-called white noise, or static.
Just as what we perceive as white is the simultaneous presence of all light spectra, so what we
call white noise is a sound made up of all, or nearly all, audible sounds.
Accepting experimental electronic music and middle school orchestras, we will generally
not hear white noise used in a musical context.
Noise instruments, percussion.
Obviously, not all noise is white noise.
My friends, we cannot sing the sound of a snare drum.
Though such sounds, unlike white noise, have the attributes of timbre and register.
We can, after all, tell the difference between a drum and a cymbal, a timbral difference,
and between high, medium, and low drums, a registral difference, for example.
As an example of various percussion instruments, I humbly offer an excerpt of a percussion
piece of my own composition entitled, It Don't Mean a Thing, for six percussionists
playing about 40 percussion instruments of various types, from timpani and a variety
of drums and cymbals to wood blocks, temple blocks, and brake drums.
My friends, a brake drum is just what it sounds like it is.
The round metal color from a truck or automobile wheel, on which the brake shoe rubs in order
to stop a vehicle.
Brake drums produce a brilliant ringing and metallic sound when struck with a hard mallet,
and the bigger the brake drum, the lower its sound.
For percussionists, the world is their instrument, and there's nothing percussionists enjoy more
than a trip to the junkyard in search of stuff they can hit.
Anyway, we're going to hear the closing minutes of the piece.
Frankly, more than enough to demonstrate that a large percussion ensemble can sound,
in its own way, quite orchestral in its variety of timbres and registers.
It Don't Mean a Thing of 1989.
It Don't Mean a Thing of 1989.
It Don't Mean a Thing of 1989.
It Don't Mean a Thing of 1989.
It Don't Mean a Thing of 1989.
It Don't Mean a Thing of 1989.
It Don't Mean a Thing of 1989.
Some noise sounds are really good, and we gain, I think, new insight into the vast and often
pleasing variety of sounds that constitute noise if we avoid using the words subjectively.
As opposed to, yes, my dictionary.
It's been a while since I quoted my Webster's collegiate, and I feel at this moment compelled
to do so, as its definition of noise is so subjective as to be genuinely comic, and we
quote,
Noise, a loud, confused, or senseless outcry, a sound that lacks agreeable musical quality,
or is noticeably loud, harsh, or discordant, unquote.
It's hard to imagine a more subjective definition.
One wonders if the person who coined that definition, perhaps Mr. Webster himself, was
living next door to a punk band that practiced in their garage, or perhaps a student bagpipe
player.
Onward, please, to pitched sounds.
Fundamental Frequency.
Some sounds exhibit a single fundamental frequency, what is called a discrete sound.
Put another way, a discrete sound, that is, a sound we can comfortably sing, is characterized
by a fundamental frequency, I explain.
When certain sorts of objects vibrate, a violin or piano string, for example, they wiggle
and wobble in all sorts of ways, something we'll discuss when we get to the overtone
series.
Having said that, the most important wobble is the one on the string's full length.
For example, this piano string is about 19 inches long.
If the piano is in tune, which it is, then when I press the appropriate key to strike
that string, that string will vibrate back and forth on its full length 440 times a second.
We would say then, that that string's fundamental frequency, how frequently it vibrates back
and forth on its full length when struck or plucked or bowed, is 440 times a second.
When we hear a sound with which we can sing along, meaning a discrete sound, what we are
singing along with is its fundamental frequency, that vibration occurring along the full length
of whatever object is vibrating.
Sing that sound.
When you sing that sound, your vocal cords square inside your larynx are also vibrating
on their full length 440 times a second, unless you're singing out of tune, which for students
of mine is frankly not a possibility.
So to review, any sound we can sing, a discrete sound, will by definition be characterized
by a clear and audible fundamental frequency, as it is that fundamental frequency that we
sing.
Pitch.
A pitch is a discrete sound, that is, a sound characterized by a fundamental frequency with
the attribute of timbre.
I repeat, a pitch is a discrete sound, that is, a sound characterized by a fundamental
frequency with the attribute of timbre.
I explain.
When we look inside a piano while it's being played, what we see are the hammers and dampers
moving up and down.
What we don't see are the strings actually vibrating.
The movements are too small and subtle.
But if viewed under a stroboscope, what we see is amazing.
The strings are not just wobbling and wiggling, they're actually dancing with a precision
that would put the rockettes to shame.
Aside from vibrating back and forth at its full length, a given string is also simultaneously
vibrating back and forth at exactly half of its length, and at a third of its length,
and at a quarter, fifth, and sixth of its length, and so forth.
These secondary vibrations also give off sounds, sounds that are higher than the fundamental
frequency, which makes sense as they are produced by smaller increments of the string.
These higher sounds given off by the secondary vibrations are called overtones, or harmonics,
and the number and intensity of these overtones goes a long way towards determining the timbre
of a given instrument, or voice, for that matter.
Hey, every pitched instrument in the orchestra can play an A.
But that's an A on a piano.
Clearly, the timbre of that A will vary tremendously depending upon what instrument is playing it.
That timbre difference is largely a product of an instrument's overtone signature, which
is in turn a product of the size of the instrument, what it's made of, and how it's played, and
a thousand and one other variables.
So, back to our definition of pitch.
A pitch is a discrete sound with the attribute of timbre, meaning a pitch is a discrete sound
played by an instrument or sung by a voice.
Note.
A note is a discrete sound, that is, a sound characterized by a fundamental frequency with
the attributes of timbre and duration.
In other words, a note is a pitch that can be notated, one that is sustained for a certain
specified amount of time.
Thus far in the course, the only elements of notation we've discussed are tempo markings,
dynamic markings, bar lines, and time signatures.
And while these are indeed important notational elements, they are not the primary elements
of music notation.
The primary elements of music notation are those that indicate sounds in time, meaning
pitch and duration.
In brief, my friends, pitches are notated on a five-line graph called a staff.
The higher the note head representing a pitch is placed on the staff, the higher it sounds.
The duration of such pitches, that is, for how long they are sustained, is indicated by
using hollow note heads or solid note heads, and by adding various stems to the note head
and flags to the stems.
A general rule of thumb regarding duration.
The more stuff attached to a note, the shorter its duration.
Back please to our definition of note.
It is incorrect then to say, I'm going to play a note on the piano unless that pitch
has a given duration.
Now look, I know this sounds like quibbling, but these are the sorts of words and distinctions
that separate the informed from the uninformed.
When I'm listening to a pre-concert talk and the speaker does not distinguish between
pitch and note, I get annoyed and I get twitchy, and I turn to my wife and I ask her why I
should believe that this person knows anything about 19th century French music if he can't
properly distinguish between pitch and note, at which point my wife will tell me to chill
and zip because she at least is listening.
But you get my point.
There are some words out there that when mispronounced and or misused, call into question entirely
the knowledge even the professionalism of the speaker.
How about the realtor who insists on calling herself a realtor?
We once interviewed a realtor who not only kept referring to herself as a realtor, but
also referred to houses that hadn't sold after a certain period of time as having an
astigmatism attached to them rather than having a stigma attached to them, an astigmatism,
my friends.
We did not hire that realtor.
On those same lines, I just love it when a jeweler says jewelry instead of jewelry.
When during a sports show, I love it when someone says athlete instead of athlete, and when
while listening to a pain relief medication ad, someone says arthritis instead of arthritis.
And let's not even talk about world leaders who say nuclear instead of nuclear to mispronounce
that word is just a bit scary.
Where were we?
Ah yes, note.
A note then is a notated pitch, a discrete sound with the attributes of timbre and duration.
Sidebar, concert A or A440.
The A above middle C on which we focused our explanation of pitch is indeed a very special
pitch called concert A. It is the pitch to which the instruments of the orchestra tune
immediately before a performance.
Well, who decided that?
It's a good question, one that has been the subject of books and dissertations.
We will be rather more brief in our answer.
My friends, it's a matter of anarchy versus order.
Under the heading of anarchy, I would tell you that the earliest surviving manual on
how to tune harpsichords dating from 1523 suggests that the starting pitch, a C from
which the other pitches would be tuned, could be placed as high or low as one wished.
Pitch anarchy, sonic chaos!
Yes indeed, according to the New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, quote,
the concept of a precise and universal relation between notation and actual pitch was alien
to most western musicians until the 18th century, unquote.
By Beethoven's Day, the early 19th century, concert A, the pitch to which the orchestra tuned,
was lower than it is today.
It hovered around a fundamental frequency of 430.
The difference between A430 and A440 might sound slight, but it's immediately apparent
if we compare performances of the same piece, one played by period instruments tuned to about
A430 and the other played by modern instruments tuned to A440.
A back-to-back comparison, please.
Beethoven's Symphony No. 3 of 1803, played first by a period orchestra conducted by our
good buddy conductor B, followed immediately by a modern orchestra conducted rather slowly,
if you recall, by our rather lugubrious friend conductor A.
Note that the pitch will be noticeably higher in the second modern orchestra version.
First, the period instrument recording in which A equals about 430.
And now a modern orchestra pitched at A440.
Let's hear that back-to-back one more time.
Again, A equals about 430.
And now a modern orchestra pitched at A equals 440.
Music
The growing orchestras and larger performance venues of the 19th century demanded bigger
and more sonorous stringed instruments and impulse that led to the invention of the
metal-harped piano as well. These larger stringed instruments were capable of supporting
greater string tension, and the strings increasingly made from steel as opposed to
gut were tightened and the pitch raised in order to make the instruments more piercing
and more brilliant. It was during the mid-19th century when industrial technology began
being applied to instrument construction that absolute pitch standards came into being.
In 1859, a French government commission recommended that A should be pitched at a
fundamental frequency of 435 cycles per second. In 1885, an international conference in Vienna
urged the universal adoption of this French standard, and it remained the most widely
used such pitch standard until the universal adoption of A equals 440 in the 20th century.
Sidebar continued. Perfect pitch.
A person who has perfect pitch is someone who, through some combination of genetic predisposition
and early environmental exposure, has memorized at a primal level A equals 440, and as a result
can identify instantly any pitch she hears. Oh, that's an F-sharp. Oh yes, that's a D.
That's a B natural. Oh wow, we think we wish we could do that. Well, in reality we should be
careful what we wish for. Having perfect pitch is great for parlor tricks, but a disaster
if you're listening to any music that's not tuned to A440, like a period performance pitched
at A equals 430, or much worse, any performance that's slightly out of tune. That will make
the person with perfect pitch squirm in agony just as the sentence, a realtor wearing jewelry
told me that a nuclear waste dump nearby gives this house an astigmatism like an athlete
with arthritis will make me squirm with agony. Sidebar over.
Pitch collections. Precisely what pitches to employ and how those pitches relate to one
other is a basic aspect of any musical language. We will find that the western pitch collections
of the last 400 years represent a balance between melody and harmony, a reconciliation of melodic
structures and harmonic structures based on the overtone series. Now that was quite a mouthful,
and I want to repeat it before we begin our exploration of pitch collections. We will find
that western pitch collections of the last 400 years represent a balance between melody
and harmony, a reconciliation of melodic structures and harmonic structures based on the overtone
series. Since approximately 1600, western music has overwhelmingly relied on three particular
sections, what we call major, minor, and the chromatic collections. First, let's clarify
our terminology by defining melody, harmony, and pitch collection. Melody. The term melody
describes any succession of sounds, any succession of sounds. It's as broad and non-subjective
a definition as we can imagine, and therefore it's the most useful. Melody then is the horizontal,
the linear aspect of music, as sounds usually in the form of notes, but not always follow
one another across some span of time. Harmony. The term harmony describes the sound and
relationship between pitches heard simultaneously, as sounding at the same time. Harmony then
describes the vertical aspect of music, the relationship between pitches occurring simultaneously.
Pitch collection. Despite its overwhelmingly common usage, the word scale is, from a conceptual
point of view, used incorrectly a good 99% of the time. The word scale is derived from the
Latin word for ladder. So when we say C major scale, what is implied is a stepwise ordering
of pitches, climbing up or climbing down. The word scale therefore cannot properly be used
to address a group or set of pitches in which no ordering is implied. That's where the word
collection comes in. By using the word collection, no stepwise ordering is implied. Instead, the word
collection addresses a group of pitches arrayed around a single tonal center or tonic pitch.
Thus, a C major collection means a collection of pitches in the major mode arrayed around the
pitch C. Now, I know this might sound like terminological nitpicking, but by using the
proper terminology, explanations, conceptualization, and comprehension will be much easier as we
progress through our examination of pitch. Trust me on this, please.
Building a pitch collection 101. Most of us, unless we played in a way too loud rock band for way
too long or stick our iPod earbuds halfway down our cochlea and then blast that sucker, most of us
can hear sounds that range from a fundamental frequency of about 20 vibrations or cycles per
second to about 20,000 cycles per second. It's a range of about 10 octaves, octave being a term
we'll define in a moment. A large pipe organ can cover that entire 10 octave range. A modern piano
covers a bit more than seven octaves. For our information, our 10 octave, 20 to 20,000 cycle
range of hearing is not terribly impressive when compared to the animal kingdom as a whole.
According to Douglas Giancoli, writing in his physics principles with applications, dogs can hear
sounds as high as 50,000 cycles and bats can detect frequencies as high as 100,000 cycles.
However, even if we're not bats, we can still hear for all intents and purposes an infinite number
of pitches. Just think of a siren moving through every possible pitch from 20 to 20,000 cycles and you'll
understand what I mean. However, all the evidence would seem to indicate that we as a species are not
equipped to deal musically with such an infinite range of pitch possibilities. So any given musical
culture must come up with a pitch collection or group of pitch collections that serves its collective
expressive and aesthetic needs. Different cultures have invented and employed different pitch collections.
From the five pitch collection traditionally used in Japanese music to the 12 pitch collection
currently used in Western music to the 17 pitch collection used in some Arab musics to the 43
pitch collection created by the 20th century American composer, guru, crackpot and prophet, Harry
Parch, to name just a few. What these and other pitch collections all have in common is the primacy of the
interval called an octave. Interval. An interval is the relationship between any two pitches. Again, an
interval is the relationship between any two pitches. The interval of an octave. The interval of an octave
is, for music on this planet, the speed of light, the wall, the barrier past which we do not pass and which all
terrestrial musical cultures have thus far at least acknowledged as the essential building block of their
pitch systems. That's a statement to get everyone's attention. I'm going to play at the piano two pitches
and octave apart. My question for all of us is the sound they create together a consonance that is do the pitches blend
together or is it a dissonance that is do they not seem to blend together? Well, it's hard to tell I even play two
different pitches now, isn't it? I'll play them again. Whoa, big time blend, yes? In fact, those two pitches blend together so
much that we don't really perceive them as being two different pitches at all. Just the same pitch, one higher than the
other, one lower than the other, as opposed to, for example, these two pitches. No blend there, those are two different pitches
for sure. Back then to this intervalic miracle that is the octave. The first Westerner to quantify just what an octave was
was the Greek mathematician, philosopher and teacher Pythagoras. In 531 BCE, that is before the common or Christian era,
Pythagoras emigrated from the Greek island of Samos to the southern Italian port city of what today is called Crotone
in Calabria along the Gulf of Toronto. It was there in Crotone, as it was then known, that Pythagoras founded a school of
philosophy and religion. The essential doctrine of his school was a belief in the importance of numbers as a guide to the
interpretation of the world. One of the things that had led Pythagoras to believe in the importance of numbers as a guide to
the interpretation of the world was his discovery that basic numerical ratios corresponded to basic blended musical intervals.
Here's what he did. Intent on determining what progressively complex numerical ratios actually sounded like,
Pythagoras built something called a monocord, a fancy name for a single piece of string, a monocord, tightly strung between two ends.
For our demonstration purposes, our monocord will be this low pitch on the piano.
Pythagoras began at the beginning by asking himself what a one-to-one ratio actually sounded like. He plucked the string,
and then he plucked it again.
My friends, that's what a one-to-one ratio sounds like. It's, it's why it's exactly the same sound.
It's a relationship called a unison, unison, meaning one sound. The next step was to divide the string exactly in half,
and compare the sound produced by half the string to the original, and in doing so, hear what a two-to-one ratio sounds like.
Well, here's what a two-to-one ratio sounds like. Here's the original string,
and here's the pitch produced when we play half the string.
When we play those two pitches together, they blend together seamlessly.
What Pythagoras realized and continued to realize was that the simpler the numerical ratio between vibrating bodies,
the more blended, and therefore, the more consonant the sounds created by those vibrating bodies.
This perception, the simpler and more basic, the numerical ratio between vibrating bodies, the more consonant they sound,
had profound meaning for Pythagoras and his fellow Greeks, who came to view music as the sonic manifestation of cosmic order.
When we return, we'll pick back up with the octave and the sonic brick wall it represents in the creation of pitch systems. Thank you.
