Welcome back. This is lecture two and it is entitled Tamber Continued. Please my friends,
some review. The phrase music theory is a misnomer. It implies that there is a rationally
explicable scientific basis to music. This is only partially true and we will discuss
the acoustical bases of western music in lectures seven and eight when we tackle the
subject of the overtone series. But precisely how the overtone series has manifested itself
in the instruments, pitch collections or scales, melodies, harmonic systems and historical
styles of western music is entirely cultural. Cultural phenomena that together constitute
the syntax of a varied, complex and extremely flexible language. Our approach to this language
of music is an admittedly limited one since the nature of a course like this one precludes
me from teaching and using musical notation. But as we discussed in lecture one, this is
a blessing in disguise because it forces us to use our ears. Learning to perceive the
musical syntax with our ears is an infinitely more useful skill than simply learning to
recognize musical constructs on paper. With our eyes, no. Better to be able to hear what
we want to hear. With our ears thus properly informed, we can apply what we've learned
to almost any piece of music in almost any style. Oh, I just love books and workbooks
on music history and theory that are filled with charts and music notation and photos
of musical instruments, but because of the limits imposed by their medium, not a note
of music is actually heard. That's like a cooking class without food or a wine tasting
without wine. It is a waste of time. A picture might be worth a thousand words, but when
it comes to music, a musical excerpt is worth a thousand pictures. On this, you may quote
me. We return to our exploration of timbre, instruments and instrumental color, that sonic
element that gives voice to the musical language. Plucked Strings. There is no more ancient
and enduring family of musical instruments than the plucked strings. From the lyre of
Orpheus to Jimi Hendrix's Fender Stratocaster plucked stringed instruments have, for thousands
of years, been the portable instruments of choice for bards, troubadours, minstrels and
rockers, not to mention those idealized angels in heaven who sure as heck aren't playing trombones.
Speaking of angels in heaven, let's hear a bit of the slow movement of Mozart's Concerto
for Flute and Harp of 1778. While we listen to this excerpt, let's be aware of its three
primary instrumental timbres and how magically these timbres contrast and combine. The sweet,
pure, sustained sound of the flute, the glowing, magical, plucked sound of the harp and the smooth,
homogeneous sound of the string orchestra in the accompaniment.
I would suggest that the magic of that music springs from two sources. One is from Mozart's
imagination. My friends, the man couldn't write a bad piece of music even if he held a gun to his
schnauzer's head. The second source of the magic lies with the instruments themselves, the amazing,
almost unworldly combination of instrumental timbres that Mozart employs and how he combines and
contrasts those timbres. Two harp-oriented tidbits before we move on. One, the harp is the
ancestral instrument of both the harpsichord and the piano. Remember that next time someone
demeans the harp by referring to it as ear candy or as a bouquet instrument as it often is. Second,
the harp is the answer to a great musical trivia question. Name the only modern orchestral
instrument that is of Western European origin? Yep, it's the harp, which in its present form
evolved from a Celtic instrument. That's right, the violin family, the brass, and woodwind
instruments all evolved from Middle Eastern, Central Asian, or North African ancestors. Well,
who would have thought? The woodwinds. Virtually every modern type of wind instrument is part of an
extended SATB or soprano-alto-tenor-based family of instruments. For example, from high to low,
the flute family consists of the piccolo, the standard flute, which we just heard, an alto flute,
and a bass flute, the latter being a mammoth instrument that requires lungs the size of foundry
bellows to play. The double reed family consists of the standard oboe, the English horn, the bassoon,
and the contrabassoon. Finally, the clarinet family consists of the sopranino clarinet,
the familiar soprano clarinet and b-flat, an alto clarinet, and a bass clarinet. One at a time,
the flute family. The standard flute is, like the violin, an instrument capable of astonishing
clarity, agility, and brilliance. The other most commonly heard member of the flute family is the
piccolo, the full name of which is flauto piccolo. It's Italian for little flute. Yes, small it is,
but don't ever, ever let its size fool you. A piccolo in the hands of a professional can bleed
you like no other instrument, this side of a scalpel, which is, I would point out, rather small
as well. Oh, I must tell you a true story. My wife is a professional flute player who specializes
on the piccolo. After we first moved in together, I had the opportunity to hear her practice the
piccolo for the first time. Despite the fact that she was downstairs at one end of the house,
and I was upstairs at the other end of the house, the intensity of the sound was,
well, it was excruciating. I could feel it in my teeth. I could feel it behind my eyes.
I could feel it in my knees. So I went downstairs to the room in which she was practicing. She
put down her piccolo. I asked, how can you play that thing and not go deaf? She said, huh? I began
to ask the question for a second time when she popped the earplugs out of her ears. Just like
that, she'd answered my question. Piccolo players wear earplugs to protect themselves
from their own instruments. Sadly, the rest of us are not usually so equipped. Just wanted to share
that with you. For sheer piercing power and brilliance, the upper octave of a piccolo cannot
be covered by any sound on this planet, accepting perhaps a large scale volcanic eruption. And
even that's a maybe. And while the piccolo is often used to reinforce the flute or the violins,
it's at its best when it's cut free to do its own thing, soaring above the band and demonstrating
an agility that is second to no other instrument. As an example, let's hear what just has to be
the most famous piccolo solo in the repertoire, the stratospheric piccolo obligato from John
Philip Seusser's The Stars and Stripes Forever of 1896.
The double-read family. The double-read instruments, the oboe, English horn, bassoon, and contrabassoon,
are really, really hard to play. The mouthpiece consists of two tiny pieces of cane that are
bound together in such a way as to leave an extremely small space between them. In order
to get the two reeds to vibrate together, you must grasp this tiny mouthpiece tightly between
your lips and blow for all your worth. You blow until your eyes begin to bulge, until your nasal
passages inflate like balloons and your brain gets pushed back against your skull case. Migraines,
blurred vision, hey, they come with the territory, my friends. Double-read players learn to play
through the pain. Pain. It's a word often associated with the personalities of oboe players in
particular, no disrespect intended. It is, however, one of those chicken or egg questions.
Are overly fastidious, anal-retentive people attracted to the oboe because of its technical
difficulty and its nasal, arguably, whiny sound? Or do the technical demands and the sound of the
oboe turn oboists into overly fastidious, anal-retentives? The oboe and the English horn.
The word oboe is Italian for the French word obois, H-A-U-T-B-O-I-S, obois, which means literally
high wood. The oboe produces a bright, pungent, nasal tone, and the piercing quality of its sound
makes it ideal for tuning the other instruments of the orchestra before a performance.
Now, in order to be complete and to avoid getting myself into any more trouble with my
oboeist friends than I already have, I'm honor-bound to mention that there is, indeed,
an entire oboe family of instruments. That family, from the top down, consists of the oboe,
the oboe d'amore, what the Germans called the libous oboe, the English horn, the baritone oboe,
and the hecklephone, or bass oboe. As the oboe d'amore, the baritone oboe, and the hecklephone
are rarely used and are not, therefore, considered standard orchestral instruments,
we will, sadly for now, bypass them. The alto instrument of the double-reed family is
the English horn, which is pitched roughly five scale steps below the oboe. One of the great
mysteries of life, along with the ongoing commercial success of cheese whiz and the acting career of
Sylvester Stallone, is precisely why the English horn is called the English horn. It is neither of
English origin nor is it a horn, that is, it isn't evolved from an instrument made from an animal's
horn. Both the oboe and the English horn evolved from an instrument called a sham, a generic
variety of double-reed instrument characterized by a reedy and rustic sound, a sound best sampled
outdoors. Historically, both the oboe and the English horn had been used to evoke just the sort of
earthy, pastoral melancholy associated with their ancestral sham. As an example of the oboe,
the English horn and the sort of pastoral setting with which they are associated,
we turn to the beginning of the third movement of Berlioz's Symphony Fantastique of 1830,
an opening described by Berlioz as consisting of two shepherds piping a shepherd's song
in dialogue. The first shepherd is portrayed by the lower English horn, the second by a distant
and higher oboe. Let's hear this duet.
The bassoon and the contra bassoon. A question I've been asked more than once,
if there's such a thing as a base un, shouldn't there also be other members of the un family,
like a sopra un and an alto un? The answer is no. The bassoon and its ancestors have always been
low instruments. Now, having said that, once upon a time there was a tenor instrument called,
yes, yes, yes, a tenor un. However, seeing that no one has actually composed for the tenor un since
the mid 1700s, we can't really consider it as being a viable orchestral instrument. For our
information, the word bassoon is simply an augmentation of the word basso, which is Italian
for bass, as in a bass double reed. The bassoon is three instruments in one, dark and heavy in
its lower register, clear and sonorous in its middle register, reedy and intense in its upper
register, and lyric penetrating and flexible in all its registers. Among the greatest orchestral
examples of the bassoon in its lyric reedy and intense upper register is the bassoon solo
that begins Igor Stravinsky's The Rite of Spring of 1912.
The bassoon is a big instrument. My friends, you need a long tube in order to go down as
low as a bassoon can go. So the instrument is folded back over itself in order to be able to
accommodate its great length. Now, from a standpoint of sheer size, even more impressive is the contra
or double bassoon, which is folded over itself several times. The contra bassoon is the lowest
instrument in the orchestra, and its function in the woodwind section is analogous to that
of the double basses for the strings, providing the foundation for the entire section.
Let's hear the opening of Mozart's Sonato for Bassoon and Cello in B-flat major,
Cursial 292, played here by two contra bassoons. Instrumentally, my friends, this is as low as you
can go.
Oh please, is the contra bassoon
not a fantastic sounding instrument? Oh, I wish I had the nerve to write a piece for Piccolo and
contra bassoon. Talk about Tweety Pie meets Godzilla. A little contra bassoon trivia. There are two
different types of contra bassoon, the regular orchestral model and the compact opera model.
You see, the orchestral model is so darned big that it will actually stick out of the orchestra pit
in an opera house, and thus bobbing around it would cause a terrific distraction for the audience.
So there's also a compact model, the so-called opera model contra bassoon, made for use in
pit orchestras. I thought you'd like to know that. The clarinet family. We'll talk about an
extended family. The clarinets are the Brady Bunch of the instrumental world. From high to low,
here are the clarinets that are currently, currently in use. The Sopranino clarinet in A-flat,
the Soprano clarinet in E-flat, the clarinet in C, the clarinet in B-flat, what we'd consider
the standard clarinet. The clarinet in A, the Alto clarinet in E-flat, the Basset horn in F,
the Bass clarinet in B-flat, the Contra Alto clarinet in E-flat, and the Contra Bass clarinet
in B-flat. We might hear all or nearly all of those clarinets in a big concert band or a big
marching band, where their mellow, fluid, and homogeneous tone from top to bottom makes them
an excellent substitute for the strings. However, for the purposes of standard orchestral music,
which is the arbitrary limit I've placed on what is already a lengthy exploration of instrumental
timbre, for the purposes of standard orchestral music, we need to be aware of three members of
the clarinet family. The Sopranino clarinet, the standard Soprano clarinet in B-flat,
and the Bass clarinet in B-flat. Sidebar, transposing instruments. Contra Bass clarinet in
B-flat, Basset horn in F, Soprano clarinet in E-flat, what do these key designations mean?
Well, it's a very good question. These key designations indicate that these are transposing
instruments, which means that their notated pitches are different from the pitches that
actually sound when they play. Now, let's explain by starting at the beginning. Most instruments,
keyboards, and strings, for example, are what we call non-transposing instruments in concert pitch.
When they play a middle C, the pitch that sounds is a middle C. Well, that makes sense, right?
A player sees a C written on a page, she plays a C on her instrument, and the pitch that sounds
is what's called a concert C. But this is not always the case. For example, when the English horn,
which is a transposing instrument pitched in F, reads that same middle C, the actual pitch that
sounds is an F, five steps below that concert C, and here's why. Show me an English horn player,
and I'll show you a musician whose original instrument was the oboe. The oboe is a non-transposing
instrument pitched in C. When an oboe plays a C, it sounds as a C. Now, in order to make the
instruments of the oboe family as easy to play as possible, they all use pretty much the same
fingering. Oh, it makes great sense, doesn't it? That way, someone trained on the oboe can play any
of the instruments of the oboe family, from the English horn to the hecklephone, without having
to learn all new fingerings. Except, except when you finger a C on an English horn, which is longer
than an oboe, the actual sound that's produced is going to be five scale steps lower than the C
an oboe would produce with that same fingering. Thus, if a piece of music is in the key of C,
and we want the English horn to be in the same key, we need to actually notate its part five steps
higher than a C in the key of G. And therefore, when the English horn plays the part written in G,
it will sound five steps lower in the key of C. The point. We want to be able to use more or less
the same fingerings for all the different trumpets, for all the different clarinets, for all the
different saxophones, and so forth. And by using transposing parts, a player of any particular
family of instruments need only learn one set of fingerings to be able to play them all. What this
means is that when we look at a score that includes both transposing and non-transposing
instruments, we'll see any number of different key signatures as the transposing instruments
will not be notated in the same keys as the non-transposing instruments. Yes, it's confusing.
Just be glad, my friends, that you don't have to sit down at a piano and read an orchestral score
with four or five different key signatures among the 20 or 25 different instrumental parts.
That is as nasty as finding gristle in your cream of wheat. Back to the clarinet family.
Clarinet transpositions are based on the soprano clarinet in C, an instrument that,
like the oboe, is non-transposing and pitched in concert C. The clarinet in C was used fairly
commonly in the 18th and 19th centuries, although it's rarely heard today. The standard clarinet
today is the soprano clarinet in B-flat, which is slightly longer and has a warmer,
rounder tone than the clarinet in C. Let's sample a B-flat clarinet. Like all the clarinets,
it is a single reed instrument, employing a wide, thin, spatula-shaped piece of cane
fitted against a mouthpiece called a beak. That thin, wide, flexible reed allows clarinetists to
make their instruments sing with a nuance and vocality equaled only by the violin and the cello.
Let's hear the opening of the first movement of Johannes Brahms' ineffably beautiful quintet
for clarinet and strings in B-minor of 1891. The clarinet seems virtually to breathe as it sings
its part. Please be aware of the special qualities of the clarinet's three registers,
all on display in the following excerpt. The rich warmth of its low or shallow moe register,
the round mellowness of its middle register, and the gentle almost flute-like sweetness of its upper
or clarino register.
Let's hear the opening of the second movement of Johannes Brahms' ineffably beautiful quintet.
Owing to the width and flexibility of the reed, clarinetists can do the most amazing things
with the sound of the clarinet. They can make it growl, bark, bend, and yes, even slide,
the most famous example of which being the two-and-one-half octave upward slide or glissando
that begins George Gershwin's Rhapsody in Blue of 1924. I would tell you how that marvelous glissando
came to be. Gershwin composed the rhapsody for a society orchestra led by a band leader named
Paul Whiteman. Gershwin's job was to deliver a piano score, which was to be orchestrated
by a gentleman named Ferde Groffet. Gershwin wrote the opening as an ascending scale,
but the orchestrator, Ferde Groffet, knew that the clarinetist in the Whiteman band,
a guy named Russ Gorman, could play the most amazing glissandi, the likes of which few
clarinetists could play at the time. Playing to Gorman's strength, the opening was scored as a
clarinet glissando, and now any clarinetist worth his or her salt can play that glissando,
that slide that begins the Rhapsody in Blue. The sopranino clarinet, while not exactly a
commonly heard instrument, is nevertheless heard often enough that it deserves to be demonstrated
here, if only to hear how different its shrill and piercing timbre is from its larger and infinitely
more mellow sibling in B-flat. Let's hear the famous sopranino clarinet solo from the fifth
movement of Hector Berlioz's Symphony Fantastique. According to the story of the piece, the sopranino
clarinet and the obscene jig that it plays represents the former lover of the hero of the
piece, whom the hero murdered in a drug-induced hallucination before the beginning of the fourth
movement, and who has here in the fifth movement returned as a gnarled and evil witch. Don't even
ask. Let's just hear it.
Talk about the perfect instrument with the perfect instrumental timbre for the expressive job.
My friends, that's the third musical example we've drawn from Berlioz's Symphony Fantastique
since we began this exploration of timbre, and that begs a little discussion. Should we want to,
we could have drawn pretty much every one of our timbre examples from Berlioz's music.
He was a fascinating character, an over-the-top romantic freakazoid, a writer and critic of
extraordinary wit and intelligence, and a composer of some of the most outlandish music ever put to
paper. Unique among major composers, Berlioz could hardly play any instrument at all. Oh sure,
he could strum a few chords on a guitar and blow a melody on a flute, but please, by professional
standards, he was, when it came to playing a musical instrument, nearly illiterate.
Except. Except when it came to the orchestra. Berlioz played the orchestra the way Liszt
played the piano, like a virtuoso. He heard, he imagined music through the medium of the
orchestra itself. Berlioz was, very simply, the most original, adventurous and innovative
orchestrator to his time. His use of instruments and instrumental combinations became a model
for every generation that followed him, and his treaties on orchestration has been considered
a must-read for composers and conductors since its original publication in 1843.
There's one last clarinet to sample before we move on, and that's the fabulous bass clarinet
in B-flat, an instrument that combines the vocality and agility of a soprano clarinet
with the range of a Russian basso singer. Let's hear the opening of the same magnificent Bach
Chacon and D minor for violin that we heard in lecture one, now arranged for bass clarinet.
Before we depart the winds, we've two more bits of timbre-inspired business. First,
an apologia concerning the saxophone family, and second, we must sample that most delicate
and refined of all chamber music genres, the wind quintet. Regarding the saxophones,
the saxophone family of instruments was invented by a Belgian named Adolf Saxe
for use in 19th century French military bands. Like the clarinet family, the saxophones employ
a single read. French marching bands notwithstanding, the saxophone family has found its true niche
in jazz. Unfortunately, we will not presently investigate the saxophone family of instruments
because it's not part of the standard orchestral core. For this, I do apologize.
The wind quintet. I trust hearing a little wind quintet music will help to assuage our pain over
my cavalier treatment of the saxophone family. What a string quartet is for string players,
so a wind quintet is for wind players, the preeminent chamber combination involving wind
instruments. The standard wind quintet consists of a flute, oboe, clarinet, bassoon, and French horn.
Now look, I know the French horn is a brass instrument, and that we haven't yet talked
about the brass, but we will soon enough. And I tell you now that the French horn offers
an intermediate timbre between the wind and brass choirs, one that reconciles them to each other,
meaning that the horn is as timbrely comfortable in the company of wind instruments as it is
among brass instruments. What makes a wind quintet so special for the listener
and such a challenge for a composer is its amazing variety of individual instrumental timbres,
and the vast number of combinations of timbres those five instruments together can make.
In this, the wind quintet is the polar opposite of the string quartet, where a string quartet
is about the blend of homogeneous instruments all drawn from the same instrumental family.
A wind quintet is a rainbow of different timbres that somehow must be united into a timbral hole
greater than its parts. We turn to Carl Nielsen's magnificent wind quintet of 1922.
We're going to hear the gorgeous chorale-like theme that begins the fourth and final movement.
DYNAMICS
DYNAMICS. Oh, I feel another sidebar coming on, one that will take us to the conclusion
of this lecture. This sidebar deals with the relative volume, that is, the relative loud
and soft in music, something called dynamics. There are two basic categories of dynamics
with which we must be conversant. Fixed dynamics and graded dynamics. The terminology associated
with both categories is Italian simply because when these terms became standard during the 18th
century, Italian was considered the international language of music. Fixed dynamics. A fixed dynamic
marking is one that indicates a single, unchanging level of volume until another dynamic marking
appears to change the first. Fixed dynamics are arrayed around the two polarities of loud
and soft, or properly, forte, meaning literally an Italian, strong, powerful, and robust,
and piano, meaning literally, softly, quietly, and gently. In music notation, forte and piano
are usually indicated respectively with an italics letter F, meaning forte, loud,
and an italics letter P, meaning piano, softly. Now, my friends, like everything in life,
loud and soft, forte and piano are relative terms. My son Samuel is at the age of 16,
about 5 foot 11 in height. For a member of my family, this makes him huge. But compared
to the magnificent Shaquille O'Neal, all 7 foot 1 inch, 340 pounds of him, my kid's not tall at all.
Again, everything's relative, including the concepts of loud and soft. For example, Beethoven
begins his Piano Sonata in C minor, Op. 13, the so-called Pathetique Sonata, with a fat and juicy
C minor chord marked forte. The next event is marked Piano.
Now, back to that opening chord. It's clear that Beethoven wants to create a sense of contrast,
perhaps even conflict, between the opening chord and the twitching echo that follows it.
As such, it's very tempting indeed to want to exaggerate the dynamics, to really wail
into that opening chord and pull way back on the material that follows.
Then again, from an interpretive point of view, I might be tempted to reduce the dynamic contrast
between these two events, and in doing so, create a sense of connection between them.
Well, which of these versions is correct? I would tell you that they are both correct.
Dynamics are relative and are subject to the interpretive idiosyncrasies of the performer.
With the understanding that dynamics are relative and subject to a degree of interpretive whim,
let's fill out the nomenclature. Lying between forte and piano are mezzo forte,
which means literally middle or sort of loud, and mezzo piano, which means middle or sort of soft.
My friends, the Italian mezzo means half or middle, and we encounter it constantly.
The Italian word for noon, mezzo giorno, means literally middle day. The Italian for midnight,
mezzo notte, means literally middle night. A mezzo soprano is a female voice,
midway between a soprano and an alto. In a concert hall or opera house, the mezzanine
is the intermediate floor between the ground floor and the balcony. And if you're having a day
that in English you would call just so-so, in Italian you'd say mezzo mezzo. Back to dynamics.
In music notation, mezzo piano is indicated as the letters mp in italics, and mezzo forte as
mf in italics. Yes, mf meant something different when I was growing up as well,
but not here, my friends, not now. If we want to indicate that something should be played
very loud, we'd notate two italic letter fs, ff, which is identified with the Italian superlative
fortissimo, or addingissimo to any Italian word immediately doubles the impact of the word.
Hey, try this at home, score some points. Hey, baby, you are like Ginchissimo. How about a
chississimo? Three fs, fortissimo would be very, very loud. Four fs, fortissimo would be very,
very, very loud, and beyond that you're wasting your fs unless you want a performer to destroy
her instrument trying to play what you've indicated. Likewise, very quiet pianissimo
would be notated with two p's, very, very quiet pianississimo with three p's and so forth.
Graded dynamics. Graded dynamic markings are those used to indicate getting progressively
louder or softer. The word crescendo means to get louder. The words decrescendo and diminuendo
mean to get softer. For our information, crescendo is the gerund form of the Italian verb cresciere,
which means to grow or increase. Decrescendo and diminuendo are the gerund forms of respectively
to get smaller and to diminish. In musical notation, a crescendo is indicated either by the
word itself, the abbreviation crash, or what's called an expanding hairpin, a small wedge that
opens up in the direction of the crescendo. Likewise, a decrescendo or diminuendo will
be indicated either by the words themselves, the abbreviations decres or dim, or by a contracting
hairpin, a wedge that closes in the direction of the decrescendo. Our vocabulary grows. When we
return, we'll conclude our discussion of instrumental timbre with the brass, percussion, and the changing
face of the orchestra. Thank you.
