Lecture 10 Tonality, Key Signature, and the Circle of Fiths
Welcome back.
This is Lecture 10 and it is entitled Tonality, Key Signature, and the Circle of Fiths.
Tonality and Key.
Most generally defined, the word tonality refers to a tendency for a certain pitch and
or a certain harmony to become the gravitational center of a given section of music.
We call that gravitational center, be it a single pitch or a harmony, the tonic, a word
as we have discussed, best thought of as a contraction of the phrase tonal center.
In this context, the word key refers to a specific tonality, a tonality named for a
specific pitch.
The name of a key specifies two things, the tonic pitch in a given section of music and
what sort of collection is built atop that pitch.
For example, if we say that a section of music is in the key of C major, we're specifying
one, the botanic pitch is a C, and two, that a major collection is built atop that C.
If we say that a section of music is in the key of F sharp minor, we're specifying one,
the botanic pitch is an F sharp, and two, that a minor collection has been built atop
that F sharp.
Back please to the word tonality.
The sort of pitch gravity we associate with the word tonality can be achieved in a number
of different ways as a product of melodic implication, harmonic resolution, or via assertion
one at a time.
Melodic implication, tonality can be a product of melodic implication in which the sum total
of the relationships within a melody clearly highlight the tonic pitch, which becomes a
point of rest and release, the gravitational center of the melody.
More often than not, this is made explicitly clear when at the end of a phrase or section
of music, a melody will come to rest on the tonic pitch.
For example, the opening phrase of Thomas of Cheleno's Dorian mode setting of the DSEA.
At the conclusion of the following excerpt, my friends, let's all sing the tonic pitch
together.
There's no science here, just sing what seems to be the tonal center of this opening phrase.
And we sing this pitch, which is the final pitch of that phrase and is indeed the tonic
pitch of this particular piece.
Again, that was an example of tonality via melodic implication.
Next, tonality via harmonic resolution.
Another way pitch gravity can be asserted is harmonically through the use of chords
that are the product of a system called the tonal system.
A harmony or chord is the simultaneous sounding of three or more different pitches and the
movement or progression from chord to chord constitutes the art of tonal harmony.
Something will tackle in lectures 14 through 16.
To the point, as we discussed in lecture 9, the two most important pitches in any diatonic
collection are the tonic and dominant pitches, the first and fifth pitches of any diatonic
collection.
By extension, the two most important chords or harmonies in a diatonic collection are
those built on the tonic and dominant pitches, the tonic chord and the dominant chord, abbreviated,
by the way, in musical shorthand, as Roman numerals 1 and 5.
The tonic chord, in which the tonic pitch is the basis or root of the chord, represents
rest and resolution.
The dominant chord, the so-called chord of tension, in which the dominant pitch is the
basis or root of the chord, represents unrest and irresolution.
There is no sure way to establish an irrefutably powerful sense of tonal gravity than to simply
play the harmonic progression 5, 1 in any given key.
Those two chords and the tension and resolution they represent define tonal gravity in tonal
music.
In lecture 9, we observed that the chromatic collection allows for the creation of 12 different
major collections and 12 different minor collections.
Let's extend that statement in light of the present discussion.
The chromatic collection allows for the creation of 12 different major keys and 12 different
minor keys.
I'm going to play a series of dominant to tonic or 5, 1 progressions in a bunch of different
major and minor keys, with each progression redirecting the tonal gravity to a new key.
After each progression, let's pause long enough to sing the new tonic that's been created
in our ears by that particular progression.
Each of these progressions will stand as an example of tonality via harmonic resolution.
Here we go.
After each progression, let's sing the tonic.
That's the tonic that's stuck in our ears right now.
The next.
And that's the tonic that's in our ears.
That's the tonic that should be in our ears.
That's the tonic that should be in our ears.
That's the tonic that should be in our ears.
One more.
That sounds like a tonic to me.
We are discussing methods by which pitch gravity can be established in a given passage of music.
The third method is referred to as tonality via assertion, in which a single pitch or
harmony is sustained and or repeated for so long that it becomes, by sheer dint of its
assertion, the gravitational center in a given section of music.
Let's hear two very different examples of tonality via assertion.
The first comes from Johann Sebastian Bach's Takata and F major for organ, composed sometime
between 1708 and 1717.
The magnificent opening of the Takata is underlain by a single massive low F, which
is sustained for roughly a minute.
This low note is played on the organ's pedal board, something that looks like a gigantic
keyboard, one that's played by the organist's feet.
My friends, when we watch a pipe organist play, we usually only see him from the waist
up, playing the organ's upper keyboards or manuals with his hands.
Unless we're in the loft with the organist, we will not see the pedal board or the amazing
dance going on while the organist plays that pedal board with his slippered feet.
Playing a pipe organist in action is like watching Fred Astaire, legs and feet, arms
and hands are in constant motion.
If you have trouble walking and chewing gum at the same time, well, don't even think
about taking up the organ.
Back to the Bach.
Borrowing a term from organ nomenclature, such a long sustained pitch, whether played
by an organ or an orchestra, is called a pedal tone, a pedal point, or simply a pedal.
The massive pedal tone in the bass during the first minute of Bach's Takata and F major
asserts in no uncertain terms the pitch F into our ears, please, a beautiful example
of tonality by assertion.
At
the other end of the musical historical spectrum is Igor Stravinsky's The Rite of Spring of
1912, a piece filled to brimming with examples of tonality via assertion by means of pedal
tones or short melodic ideas that are simply repeated over and over again.
For example, there's the famous chord of the dance of the adolescence that is repeated
almost nonstop a total of two hundred and twelve times.
This chord batters itself into our ears like a pile driver, and as such, we know that it
represents the tonal center of this passage.
There they are, the basic ways to create a sense of tonal gravity via melodic implication,
harmonic resolution, and assertion.
To our great credit, my friends, we have stopped short of tonality via absence.
As idiotic a term as any I've ever heard, one first brought to my attention nearly thirty
years ago by a fellow graduate student who will mercifully remain nameless.
We were analyzing a piano piece by the American composer Roger Sessions when this self-inflated
mediocrity self-importantly declared that the piece was in the key of B. We, the students
closed our eyes and shook our heads.
Our professor, Andrew Embry, who'd been a student of Sessions and who knew the piece
that we were analyzing as well as if he had composed it himself was, well, he was clearly
intrigued.
Well, Mr. X, on what do you base your assertion?
X replied, well, since B is the only pitch that's not heard in the piece, it is therefore
in the key of B via absence, which makes about as much sense as I am he as you are he and
you are me and we are all together.
Anyway, Professor Embry closed his eyes and shook his head, and that was the end of that.
Now obviously, not all music will feature such gravitational centers.
Indeed, many early and mid-20th century composers went out of their way to avoid creating any
sense of pitch gravity.
The so-called atonal music that they produced is something of a misnomer because true atonality
is in reality almost impossible to achieve.
Certain pitches, the highest, the lowest, the first to be heard and the last to be heard,
will almost inevitably stick out whether a composer wants them to or not.
So atonality is as much an attitude as it is a musical reality, an attitude that will
see a composer purposely avoid doing those things that might otherwise create a sense
of pitch gravity.
Now look, we're all aware that it's for such ostensibly atonal music that general audiences
reserve their greatest fear in loathing.
We are admittedly creatures of gravity, and without the absolute and universal reference
gravity provides, our lives and our music can become very difficult to negotiate.
Nevertheless, there are some great composers of so-called atonal music, composers like
Arnold Schoenberg, Anton Weber, Milton Babbitt, Karlheinz Stockhausen and Pierre Boulez, composers
whose music I could no more live without than the abstract art of Willem de Kooning, Franz
Klein, Jackson Pollock or Robert Motherwell.
As an example of such music, let's hear a wonderfully engaging and whimsical little
masterwork of the genre, Milton Babbitt's Minute Waltz or three-quarter plus minus one-eighth
of 1977.
The circle of fifths and key signatures.
To review, the so-called circle of fifths is the closed loop that results by moving
up or down for that matter by perfect fifths in a well or equal tempered tuning.
After moving through all twelve different pitches of the chromatic collection, the circle is
closed with the arrival back to the starting point, meaning the original pitch.
Sometimes a picture is indeed worth a thousand words and I would direct your attention to
the first of the circle of fifths charts in your course booklet.
I would describe what we see.
There is a circle and a raid around the outside of the circle like the twelve hours of a clock
are the twelve different pitches of the chromatic collection.
The pitch C is at twelve o'clock.
Moving clockwise, each hour represents another upwards perfect fifth.
The pitch G, a perfect fifth above C, is at one o'clock.
D, a perfect fifth above G, is at two o'clock, A is at three o'clock, E is at four o'clock,
B is at five o'clock, F sharp, and its inharmonic equivalent, G flat, is at six o'clock.
B flat is at seven o'clock, A flat is at eight o'clock, E flat at nine o'clock, B flat
at ten o'clock, F at eleven o'clock, and then we're back to C.
Now please, to state be obvious, if we had moved around the circle in a counterclockwise
direction, we would be moving by downward fifths.
Either way, we would arrive back at C after having moved through the twelve different pitches
of the chromatic collection.
All in all, the circle of fifths is a fabulous visual tool for helping us to understand key
signatures as well as the relationships between different keys.
A key signature is a notational device that tells us what key we're in.
Written across the staff at the very beginning of a movement immediately before the time
signature, the key signature tells us exactly which pitches to play and therefore what key
we're in.
Key signatures, the major keys.
We turn now to the second of our circle of fifths chart.
I would describe what we see.
As before, the twelve pitches of the chromatic have been plotted around the circle in a manner
corresponding to the hours on a clock.
But now an additional element has been added, sharps, and flats.
Again, let's start at the top at twelve o'clock with the pitch C.
The key of C major has no sharps or flats as we've discussed.
It consists only of natural pitches, the seven different white keys on a piano keyboard.
Consequently, on this circle of fifths chart, there are no sharps or flats within the wedge
that represents the key of C major.
Moving clockwise to the right in what we call the sharp direction, the next pitch at one
o'clock is a G. The key of G major has one sharp in it, an F sharp.
Consequently, there is one sharp in the wedge that represents the key of G major.
We continue moving clockwise or to the sharp side of the circle.
The next pitch is a D at two o'clock.
The key of D major has two sharps in it, an F sharp and a C sharp.
Consequently, there are two sharps in the wedge that represents the key of D major.
Next comes the pitch A at three o'clock.
The key of A major has three sharps in it, F sharp, C sharp, and G sharp.
Next comes the pitch E at four o'clock.
The key of E major has four sharps in it, F sharp, C sharp, G sharp, and D sharp.
Next comes the pitch B at five o'clock.
The key of B major has five sharps in it, F sharp, C sharp, G sharp, D sharp, and A sharp.
Finally, for now, halfway around the circle at six o'clock lies the pitch F sharp.
The key of F sharp major has six sharps in it, F sharp, C sharp, G sharp, D sharp, A sharp,
and E sharp.
Quick timeout, some observations.
Observation number one.
If you haven't already noticed, please be aware that as sharps are added to key signatures,
and by the way, the same thing will also be true for flats.
They are cumulative and not random.
The key of G major has one sharp, an F sharp.
The key of D major has two sharps, an F sharp and a C sharp.
The key of A major has three sharps, an F sharp, a C sharp, and a G sharp.
The key of E major has four sharps, an F sharp, a C sharp, a G sharp, and a D sharp.
The key of B major has five sharps, F sharp, C sharp, G sharp, D sharp, and now an A sharp.
And finally, the key of F sharp major has six sharps.
Yes, F sharp, C sharp, G sharp, D sharp, A sharp, and now an E sharp.
Cumulative, not random.
Observation number two.
Not only are the sharps cumulative, but each new sharp is a perfect fifth above the previous
sharp.
Again, the key of G major has one sharp, an F sharp.
The key of D major has two sharps, an F sharp and a C sharp.
C sharp lies a perfect fifth above an F sharp.
The key of A major has three sharps, F sharp, C sharp, G sharp, G sharp lies a perfect fifth
above C sharp.
The key of E major has four sharps, F sharp, C sharp, G sharp, and D sharp.
D sharp lies a perfect fifth above the G sharp.
The key of B major has five sharps, F sharp, C sharp, G sharp, D sharp and A sharp.
A sharp lies a perfect fifth above the D sharp.
And the key of F sharp major has six sharps, F sharp, C sharp, G sharp, D sharp, A sharp,
an E sharp, and E sharp lies a perfect fifth above an A sharp.
Again, F-sharp, C-sharp, G-sharp, D-sharp, A-sharp, E-sharp.
The order of the sharps also represents a movement by perfect fifths of its own, starting
on the F-sharp.
Oh, my friends, it is amazing, and it will continue to be, I think, a source of ongoing
amazement, the degree to which the perfect fifth, the sonic manifestation of a three-to-two
ratio, lies at the heart of western music, and has done so for thousands of years.
Back to the top of the circle of fifths to twelve o'clock to C major, that key with no
sharps or flats.
Let's now move counterclockwise to the left by downward perfect fifths in what we call
the flat direction of the circle.
The pitch of perfect fifth below C is an F at eleven o'clock.
The key of F major has one flat in it, a B-flat, and consequently there is one flat
in the wedge that represents the key of F major.
At ten o'clock is the key of B-flat major, which has two flats in it, a B-flat, and an
E-flat.
At nine o'clock is the key of E-flat major, which has three flats in it, a B-flat and
E-flat, and an A-flat.
At eight o'clock is the key of A-flat major, which has four flats in it, B-flat, E-flat,
A-flat, and D-flat.
At seven o'clock is the key of D-flat major, which has five flats in it, B-flat, E-flat,
A-flat, D-flat, and G-flat, and finally at six o'clock is the key of G-flat major,
which has six flats, B-flat, E-flat, A-flat, D-flat, G-flat, and now a C-flat.
The same two observations apply to the flat keys
that applied to the sharp keys.
One, the flats are cumulative,
and two, each new flat is a perfect fifth now
below the previous flat.
The motion from B-flat down to E-flat down to A-flat
down to D-flat down to G-flat down to C-flat
describes a movement of fifths,
of perfect fifths of its own.
The minor keys.
Before returning to the circle of fifths,
a little modal review.
As you recall, what we call the major and minor collections
are also known as, respectively,
the Ionian mode and the Aeolian mode.
As we define these diatonic modes back in lecture eight,
an Ionian mode, or major collection,
encompasses the white keys on the piano from C to C.
And the Aeolian mode, or minor collection,
encompasses the white keys on a piano from an A to an A.
What this means, then, is that both C major and A minor
have the same key signature, no sharps or flats.
We would observe that the tonic pitch of A minor,
the pitch A, lies three semitones,
or a minor third, below the tonic pitch of C major,
the pitch C.
Let us extrapolate from this
to extremely important pieces of total information.
One, certain major and minor keys
will share the same key signature.
Two, these key signatures sharing major and minor keys
will lie a minor third apart.
The related minor key will lie a minor third below
the related major key as A minor
lies a minor third below C major.
Or, if you prefer, the related major key
will lie a minor third above the related minor key
as C major lies a minor third above A minor.
I would invite you to take a look
at the circle of fifths chart number three,
which is the same as the circle of fifths chart number two,
but with the minor keys now added as well.
The key of C major at 12 o'clock
now shares its pie wedge with the key of A minor.
Moving clockwise to the right or to the sharp side,
we see that G major and E minor share the same key signature.
That is one sharp and F sharp.
D major and B minor share the same key signature.
Two sharps, an F sharp and a C sharp.
A major and F sharp minor share the same key signature.
E major and C sharp minor share the same key signature.
And so on.
Relative major and minor.
Major and minor keys that share the same key signature
are called relative keys.
For example, A minor is the relative minor of C major.
Conversely, C major is the relative major of A minor.
This might sound a bit confusing, but really it isn't.
Just remember, major and minor keys
that share the same key signature
have by definition the same pitches.
That's as closely related as any key can be to another key.
Therefore, we call them relative, meaning related keys.
A little exercise, please,
to be executed without looking
at the circle of fifths chart number three.
If any given relative minor key
lies a minor third below its relative major key,
let's pick a major key and then figure out
its relative minor.
For example, what is the relative minor of E flat major?
We know that the relative minor of E flat major
lies a minor third below E flat.
So starting on E flat, let's just count a third downward.
E, D, C.
Okay, so the relative minor of E flat major
will be some sort of C.
What kind of C is a minor third below an E flat?
A C sharp, a C natural, or a C flat?
Since a minor third is three semitones in width,
let's just step downwards three semitones from an E flat.
From E flat down to a D is one semitone.
From D down to a D flat is two semitones.
From D flat down to a C natural is three semitones,
a minor third.
So the relative minor of E flat major is C minor.
C minor will have the same key signature as E flat major.
Three flats, a B flat, an E flat, and an A flat.
Parallel major and minor.
Relative major and minor are those major and minor keys
that share the same pitches but have a different tonic.
Parallel major and minor are those major and minor keys
that share the same tonic but have a different key signature.
For example, C major and C minor.
Obviously, the two collections have the same tonic pitch,
the pitch C.
The key of C major consists entirely of white keys,
naturals, it has no sharps and flats.
But as we just moments ago observed regarding C minor,
it has three flats in its key signature,
B flat, E flat, and A flat.
Therefore, C major and C minor have only four
of their seven different pitches in common.
Thus, they are called parallel major and minor
because they share the same tonic pitch,
in this case, a C.
Closely related keys.
All of this brings us to an extremely important topic
that of closely and in a few minutes,
distantly related keys.
We say that keys are related to each other
based on how many pitches they have in common with each other.
Any given key has three other keys
that are considered as being closely related to it.
They are the two like keys that lie on either side of it
in the circle of fifths and it's relative major or minor.
Now, I'll explain.
As our first example, let's start with good old
and trusty C major.
And it's three closely related keys.
The two like keys, that is the two major keys
on either side of C major in the circle of fifths
are G major to the right on the sharp side
and F major to the left on the flat side.
The keys of C major and G major
have six of their seven pitches in common.
The only difference between C major and G major
is the pitch F, which is natural in C major
and sharp in G major.
Likewise, the keys of C major and F major
have six of their seven pitches in common.
The only difference between them is the pitch B,
which is natural in C major and flat in F major.
The other closely related key to C major is A minor.
Which, as we have discussed, has virtually
the same pitches as C major.
The three closely related keys to C major are then
G major, F major, and A minor,
those keys that have the most pitches in common
with C major.
Again, any given key has three other keys
that are considered as being closely related to it.
The two like keys on either side of the circle of fifths
and its relative major or minor.
Let's use B minor as our next example.
What are the three closely related keys to B minor?
The two like keys, that is, the two minor keys
on either side of B minor in the circle of fifths
are F sharp minor to the right or sharp side
and E minor to the left on the flat side.
The relative major of B minor, the key located
a minor third above it with which it shares
the same key signature, is D major.
The three closely related keys to B minor are then
F sharp minor, E minor, and D major.
Distantly related keys.
The further away any two keys are on the circle of fifths,
the fewer pitches they will have in common
and therefore, the more distantly related they are.
The most distantly related keys are those six hours apart,
those keys on opposite sides of the circle.
Such keys will only have one of their seven pitches in common
and are as distantly related
as any two diatonic collections can be.
For example, the keys of C major and F sharp major.
C major is at 12 o'clock on the circle.
And F sharp major is at six o'clock on the circle.
C major and F sharp major have only one pitch in common,
the pitch B.
Another example of most distantly related keys
would be the keys of E flat major and A major
with E flat major at nine o'clock on the circle
and A major at three o'clock.
E flat major and A major have only one pitch in common,
the pitch D, diabolus in musica.
One more incredibly interesting thing before we move on.
These most distantly related keys,
those keys on opposite sides of the circle of fifths
have tonic pitches the interval of a tritone away
from each other.
Please, a little review.
An interval is the distance between any two pitches.
The simpler the mathematical ratio between two pitches,
the more consonant, the more stable
we perceive that interval as being.
The octave, a two to one ratio,
the fifth, a three to two ratio,
and the fourth, a four to three ratio
were perceived by the ancients as being so consonant
that they came to be called the perfect intervals.
For our information, there's no such thing
as a major or minor octave, fifth, or fourth.
Either they're perfect or they're not,
at which time they are called either augmented or diminished.
Now, we'll return to intervals in our next lecture.
Suffice it for now that the octave, fifth, and fourth
are the mathematically simplest,
most consonant intervals in our sonic universe.
At the other end of the spectrum,
at the other end of the intervallic world lies the tritone.
An augmented fourth or diminished fifth
depending upon how you spell it,
which is the single most dissonant,
least stable interval in the tonal system.
And to prove that point, I'll play an octave.
Does this need to go anywhere?
Does this sound unstable?
Does it need to resolve?
Talk about solid as a rock.
That octave doesn't need to go anywhere.
How about this perfect fifth?
Like a rock, consonant as it can be.
How about this tritone, this interval made up
of six semitones or three whole steps,
and thus its nickname, a tri or three tone.
Hello, does that interval need to go somewhere?
Is that interval stable and complete unto itself?
Does that interval need to resolve?
You bet it does.
In tonal music, the tritone is the ultimate dissonance.
It's two pitches representing a ratio of 45 to 32.
It is as inherently unstable as nitroglycerin
strapped to a belly dancer,
and go somewhere resolved, it must.
During the Middle Ages, the tritone
with its extraordinary dissonance
and palpable sense of tension and urgency
was dubbed Diabolus in Musica, the devil's music,
and its use in melodies and harmonies
were actually prohibited.
It is a fascinating interval.
At six semitones, the tritone divides the 12 semitones
of the octave exactly in half,
and that division of the octave is reflected
by the location of pitches a tritone away from each other
on the circle of fifths.
Pitches a tritone away from each other
will be at exactly opposite ends of the circle.
Back then, to the statement that triggered
this discussion of the tritone,
the most distantly related keys,
those keys on opposite sides of the circle of fifths,
have tonic pitches a tritone away from each other.
If a composer uses key areas a tritone apart
in close proximity, the effect will be striking,
to say the least, and if a composer should use key areas
a tritone apart simultaneously,
the effect will be spectacular,
as Igor Stravinsky does in scene two
of his ballet, Petrushka, of 1911.
Scene one of Petrushka takes place
in St. Petersburg's Admiralty Square
during Shrove Tide Fair, the Russian Mardi Gras,
sometime during the 1830s.
This first scene is filled with hustle and bustle,
as is its music, and the Russian popular and folk songs
that Stravinsky quotes, ground this scene
in a kind of folkloric celebratory mood.
Among the very many things happening on stage
during this first scene is a puppet show.
During the second scene, entitled Shea,
or House of Petrushka, we find ourselves
magically transported into the world of the puppets
themselves.
Stravinsky's music for this second scene
is brilliantly conceived.
It features, simultaneously, two keys, a tritone apart,
C major and F sharp major.
For example.
The effect is superb.
Not only does Stravinsky's music project
the weirdness of the scene, and described perfectly
Petrushka's jerky puppet-like motions,
but the biconality depicts, as well,
the bipolarity of Petrushka's personality.
He is a puppet with the heart of a man.
He is a puppet with the heart of a man.
He is a puppet with the heart of a man.
He is a puppet with the heart of a man.
He is a puppet with the heart of a man.
He is a puppet with the heart of a man.
He is a puppet with the heart of a man.
He is a puppet with the heart of a man.
He is a puppet with the heart of a man.
He is a puppet with the heart of a man.
He is a puppet with the heart of a man.
He is a puppet with the heart of a man.
He is a puppet with the heart of a man.
He is a puppet with the heart of a man.
He is a puppet with the heart of a man.
He is a puppet with the heart of a man.
Now that is fabulous music.
But of course it's also experimental avant-garde music from the early 20th century
and not an example of the sort of traditional tritone usage
will be witnessed to in the music of the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries,
a period referred to as the era of common practice.
Traditional common practice harmonic procedures
treat a harmony containing a tritone
as an unstable dissonance that needs to resolve.
Let's do a little exercise.
I'm going to play two chords.
One of them contains a tritone within it
and as a result it is dissonant and unstable
and it therefore wants to resolve.
The other chord will not contain a tritone
and is therefore dissonant, stable and happy not to go anywhere.
Which of the two chords, chord I or chord II contains the tritone?
Here we go.
Chord I, chord II, again chord I,
chord II.
The unstable chord, the chord that wants to resolve
the chord that contains within it a tritone,
was chord number two.
And now I've resolved it.
Let's play that game again.
Which of the following two chords is the chord
with the tritone contained within it?
Which is the unstable chord, the one that wants to resolve?
Chord I, chord II, again chord I, chord II.
The unstable chord, the one that contained the tritone,
the one that wanted to resolve, is chord number one.
And resolve it we have.
We'll talk lots more about these tritone containing dissonances
called dominant seventh chords in lecture 15.
But for now, it's onward to intervals.
Thank you.
