Lecture 14 – Texture and Harmony, Part 1
Welcome back.
This is Lecture 14, and it is entitled, Texture and Harmony, Part 1 – Texture.
Here in music refers to the number of different melodies present in a given section of music
and the relationship between those melodies.
There are four basic musical textures, monophony in its adjectival form being monophonic as
in a monophonic texture, polyphony or a polyphonic texture, homophony or a homophonic texture,
and heterophony or a heterophonic texture.
Monophony, polyphony, homophony, heterophony, okay, one at a time.
Monophony, monophony, literally my friends, the word means one sound.
A monophonic texture consists of a single unaccompanied melody line.
The classic example of a monophonic musical texture is that of plain chant or so-called
Gregorian chant.
The liturgical music of the medieval church.
Truth in advertising, it's called plain chant because it is indeed plain, unadorned
and unaccompanied.
As an example, we return to Padre Wipo's Victime Pascale of circa 1040.
Polyphony, polyphony, literally the word means many sounds.
A polyphonic texture consists of two or more simultaneous melodies, each of equal importance.
Synonymous with the words polyphony and polyphonic are the words counterpoint and contrapuntal.
The word counterpoint is an anglicization of the two Latin words contra meaning against
and punctum meaning note, which together mean literally note against note.
There are two basic types of polyphony, imitative polyphony and non-imitative polyphony.
Imitative polyphony, an imitative polyphonic texture is one in which the constituent melodic
parts play or sing the same or nearly the same melody in such a way as to overlap with
each other.
For example, in a cannon or round, like row, row, row your boat, or Frejaca, the constituent
voices all sing exactly the same tune, but my friend's not at exactly the same time,
so that at any given moment two or more different pitches are being heard.
A cannon or round, like row, row, row your boat, is an example of strict imitative polyphony.
Immitative polyphony in which the voices imitate each other exactly.
Most imitative polyphony is of the non-strict variety, meaning that the voices will indeed
imitate each other, but not exactly, so that they do not get caught in the circular dog
chasing its tail feedback loop characteristic of most strict imitative polyphony.
As an example of non-strict imitative polyphony, let's hear Johann Sebastian Bach's two-part
or two-voice invention, an F major for keyboard, of Circa 1723.
The two parts, top and bottom, right hand and left hand, imitate each other, but not
exactly, and as a result, the piece is free to go wherever Bach wants it to go, unleashed
as it is from the requirements of strict imitation.
The first part of the second part of the second part of the second part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the third part of the
Non-imitative polyphony.
A non-imitative polyphonic texture is one in which two or more different melodies of equal importance are heard simultaneously.
Non-imitative polyphony is unusual and when it is used, it will usually be reserved for a climactic moment, at which point, for example, various themes previously heard in the composition might come back to be heard simultaneously.
As an example of non-imitative polyphony, we will turn to a genre of music that is virtually
defined by the sound of non-imitative polyphony, and that is New Orleans Jazz.
Please my friends, do not call it Dixieland.
Rightly or wrongly, the term Dixieland Jazz came to be associated with white bands that
imitated and banked off music created by African American musicians.
This is not a PC thing, it's just a matter of fairness, as the term New Orleans Jazz
is inclusive in a way Dixieland Jazz is not.
Anyway, New Orleans Jazz is characterized by group improvisation, group improvisation
that is an example of non-imitative polyphony.
Let's hear the opening of King Oliver's Alligator Hop.
While a cornet plays the thematic melody, a clarinet and the trombone will weave their
improvised melody lines under, over and around that theme, creating in effect a wonderful
bit of three-part non-imitative polyphony.
Let's hear the opening of King Oliver's Alligator Hop.
Let's hear the opening of King Oliver's Alligator Hop.
Homophony, homophony, literally the word means alike or blended sounds.
A homophonic texture is one in which we perceive a single principal melodic part, while all
the other parts are perceived as being accompanimental.
That accompaniment can be as minimal as a simple baseline, as in the opening of Mozart's
Variations on Avoudir et Girmaman, Cursal 265 of 1782.
That accompaniment can be a chordal harmonization of the principal melody, as in the beginning
of Beethoven's Piano Sonata in C Minor, Op. 13, the Pathetique of 1799.
Or that accompaniment can feature a counter melody, as in this wonderful and justly famous
passage from the fourth movement of Beethoven's Symphony No. 9, during which the Ode to Joy
theme, played by the violas and cellos, is underlain by a rich and singing line in the
basses and is further accompanied by a counter melody in the bassoons.
Finally, it's entirely possible, and not at all unusual, to have a hybrid texture consisting
of both homophonic and polyphonic elements.
For example, let's jump back to the alligator hop.
Even as the cornet, clarinet and trombone are playing their characteristically New Orleans
style non-imitative polyphony, they are being accompanied by a banjo, bass and drum.
Let's hear another example of a polyphonic episode supported by a homophonic style accompaniment.
We turn to the development section of the fourth and final movement of Mozart's G Minor
Symphony of 1788.
About halfway through the development section, the strings engage in an incredibly dramatic
passage in four-part imitative polyphony, during which they are accompanied by the winds and
horns, which play long sustained notes that fill in the harmonies.
Heterophony Heterophony, literally the word means other or
different sounds.
A heterophonic texture can be understood in two ways.
One, as a texture in which the different parts are perceived as creating a single composite
melody, as in much Indonesian gamelan music, or two, as a texture in which we hear a melody
accompanied by an ornamented version of itself, as in much near and far eastern vocal music.
As I'm sure you've gathered by these definitions, heterophony is not a texture encountered
with any regularity in western music, so we will regretfully bid a fine farewell to
heterophony for the remainder of this course.
Decisions, decisions, a historical perspective.
The oldest of the musical textures we've examined, obviously, is monophony.
All you need is one person with something to sing about, and you've got a monophonic
texture.
It wasn't until the 10th and 11th centuries that western musicians, and I'm not quite
sure we would want to call them composers, not yet, began experimenting with two-part
polyphony, primarily by adding a second voice to a pre-existing plain chant.
This seemingly simple act changed the nature of western music forever.
You see, by adding that second voice, these proto-composers had to make decisions for
which there were no precedents in earlier medieval music, or, for that matter, in ancient
music either.
The decisions?
How should the two melodic parts be related, intervallically?
That is, what intervals should govern the harmonic relationship between the two simultaneous
voices?
As an example, let's take a bit of plain chant.
Hallelujah.
The righteous shall flourish like a palm tree.
I'm going to play this plain chant at the piano for you.
Now, let's add a second voice to this plain chant, and in doing so, we'll observe the
sorts of decisions the earliest creators of composed polyphony had to deal with.
Okay?
Decision number one, we will add our new voice above the plain chant, because that's what
the earliest polyphonists tended to do.
Decision number two, in order that the new voice be able to articulate the words of the
plain chant with the same degree of clarity as the plain chant voice itself, the new voice
will move in rhythmic lockstep with the plain chant.
Decision number three, and this is the big decision.
What harmonic intervals should define the relationship between the two voices?
Okay?
How about, let's say, seconds and sevenths?
That is, what if we add a new voice above the first, using intervals of first seconds,
like this?
Well, you don't like that?
Okay.
How about intervals of a seventh?
That doesn't sound very good either.
But why doesn't that sound good?
Are we simply being subjective here?
By what standard should we declare that harmonically adding new voices a second and seventh away
from the original plain chant sounds awful?
By what standard?
The answer?
By the standards of the overtone series.
Seconds and sevenths are dissonant harmonic intervals.
The complexity of the ratios they represent preclude them from blending and the unreleaved
dissonance level of non-stop seconds and sevenths is simply too fatiguing, too hard
on the ears for us to be able to listen to them for too long.
So back to decision number three.
What harmonic intervals did the early polyphonists choose to employ between the two voices?
They used the perfect intervals, unisons, octaves, fifths and fourths, with just the
slightest smattering of thirds and sixths thrown into the mix.
I'm going to play a polyphonic setting of Alleluia Justus Utpalma that dates to around
eleven hundred.
Once more, here's the original plain chant.
Here's the new melody, first played by itself.
And finally, here are the two voices combined.
I'm going to play that again, and one at a time I'm going to identify each of the harmonic
intervals.
That starts with a perfect octave, perfect fifth, perfect fifth, perfect octave, perfect
fourth, perfect fourth, perfect fifth, perfect fifth, perfect fourth, minor third, perfect
octave, major sixth, perfect fifth, major sixth, octave, octave.
This polyphonic music grew in importance and complexity during the twelfth, thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries, so the harmonic relationship between the constituent polyphonic
voices became likewise more complex.
Dissident harmonic intervals, when they occurred, came to be resolved to more consonant intervals.
Phrases and larger sections of music came to rest on unisons or octaves, and then the
great leap.
During the late twelfth and thirteenth centuries, composers, and yes, we will now call them composers,
began experimenting with three voice polyphonic textures, and by the fourteenth century, four
voice polyphonic textures.
Oh, decisions, decisions.
Dear friends, if we are to perceive a piece of music as having three or four independent
voices, then at any given moment, those three or four voices are going to need to be articulating
more than two different pitches.
As a reminder, the two voice polyphonic works of the tenth and eleventh centuries employed
a harmonic palette based primarily on the perfect intervals, the perfect consonances,
unisons, octaves, fifths, and fourths.
The big decision in adding a third voice, a third simultaneous pitch, what intervallic
relationships might be exploited that would still be considered consonant by the standards
of the day?
Once again, the answer lies with the overtone series.
As we all now know, the unison, octave, perfect fifth, and perfect fourth represent the first
four partials of the overtone series.
The next intervals to appear in the overtone series, the major third and the minor third,
are also considered consonances.
Having said that, thirds are more complex sounds than the perfect intervals, and we
perceive that complexity as richness and a fullness that is, frankly, more voluptuous
than anything we hear in a perfect interval.
Look, let's compare this octave to a major third.
Oh, comparing an octave to a major third is like comparing a glass of water to a 1982
Bordeaux.
The third is so much richer and so much more satisfying.
So, back to the point.
The major third and minor third represent, respectively, the fifth and sixth partials
of the overtone series.
If we play as a simultaneity, as a chord, the first six partials of the overtone series
starting on a C, this is what we get.
Let's listen.
First partial, the unison C.
Second partial, the octave, another C.
Third partial, the perfect fifth, a G.
Fourth partial, a perfect fourth, another C.
The fifth partial, a major third, an E.
And the sixth partial, a minor third, another G.
Play them all together, and what do you get?
You get something called a major triad, the basic building block of the western tonal
harmonic system, coordinating the three and four musical parts or voices of late medieval
and early Renaissance polyphony, gave birth to the musical art slash science of harmony,
and in the process to what we now call the tonal system, the triad.
By definition, a triad consists of three different pitches, tri, as in three ad.
By definition, a triad in its basic or root position will consist of two thirds, one stacked
upon the other.
There are four types or qualities of these triads, the major triad, which we just heard,
the major triad being the simultaneous sounding of the first six partials of the overtone
series, the minor triad, the diminished triad, and the augmented triad.
Let's talk about the major triad some more.
Let's return to the C major triad we assembled just moments ago from the first six partials
of the overtone series.
The pitches in a C major triad are counting up from the bottom in what is called root position,
a C, an E, and a G.
Thus, this C major triad consists of a major third on the bottom, in this case, a C up
to an E, with a minor third stacked on top, in this case, an E up to a G, with the distance
between the root and top pitch, in this case, from a C up to a G being a perfect fifth.
All right, extrapolating globally.
A major triad in root position will, by definition, consist of a major third between the root
and the middle pitch of the triad, and a minor third between the middle pitch and the top
pitch of the triad, with the distance between the root and the top pitch being a perfect
fifth.
There are twelve possible major triads.
We can build one on any one of the twelve different pitches of the chromatic collection.
C major, D flat or C sharp major, D major, E flat major, E major, F major, F sharp or
G flat major, G major, A flat major, A major, B flat major, B major, back to C major.
The minor triad.
A minor triad reverses the order of thirds as witnessed in a major triad.
The pitches in a C minor triad, counting up from the bottom, or the root of the chord,
are a C, an E flat, a minor third above that C, and a G, a major third above that E flat.
So, a C minor triad consists of a minor third on the bottom, in this case, a C to an E flat,
with a major third stacked on top, in this case, an E flat to a G.
With the distance between the root and the top pitch, in this case, from a C to a G, being
a perfect fifth.
Extrapolating globally.
A minor triad in root position will, by definition, consist of a minor third between the root
and the middle pitch of the triad, a major third between the middle pitch and top pitch
of the triad, with the distance between the root and the top pitch being a perfect fifth.
There are twelve possible minor triads.
We can build one on any one of the twelve pitches of the chromatic collection.
C minor, D flat or C sharp minor, D minor, E flat minor, E minor, F minor, F sharp or
G flat minor, G minor, A flat minor, A minor, B flat minor, B minor, and then back to C
minor.
Consonance.
My friends, major and minor triads contain only consonant intervals in their root positions,
thirds and fifths, and are therefore perceived as consonant chords, consonant harmonies,
and as such, a given passage of music can come to a convincing conclusion on either a
minor triad or a major triad.
The diminished triad.
A diminished triad consists of two minor thirds, one stacked upon the others.
The pitches in a C diminished triad, counting up from the root of the chord, are a C, an
E flat, a minor third above that C, and a G flat, a minor third above that E flat.
The distance between the root and top pitch of a diminished triad, in this case, a C to
a G flat, is a diminished fifth, also known as a tritone.
Strapolating globally, a diminished triad will by definition consist of two minor thirds,
one stacked atop the other, with the distance between the root and the top pitch being a
diminished fifth, a tritone.
There are twelve possible diminished triads.
We can build one on any one of the twelve pitches of the chromatic collection.
And then back to where we started.
The augmented triad.
An augmented triad consists of two major thirds stacked one atop the other.
The pitches in a C augmented triad, counting up from the root of the chord, are a C, an
E, a major third above that C, and a G sharp, a major third above that E.
The distance between the root and the top pitch of an augmented triad, in this case,
between a C and a G sharp, is an augmented fifth.
Strapolating globally, an augmented triad will by definition consist of two major thirds,
stacked one atop the other, with the distance between the root and the top pitch being an
augmented fifth.
Due to the symmetrical nature of the augmented triad, there are only four possible augmented
triads.
You're just going to have to trust me on this.
Dissonance.
Diminished and augmented triads both contain dissonant intervals.
In the case of a diminished triad, a tritone.
In the case of an augmented triad, an augmented fifth.
As such, both diminished and augmented triads are considered dissonances, and will internal
harmony be considered chords of tension that need to resolve.
Composed homophony.
Major and minor triads, or major and minor chords, began to appear in English music as
early as the 13th century, and were common harmonic coin across Western Europe by the
15th century.
It was during the 15th century, the early Renaissance, that the first composed homophony
appeared.
Music in which chords and the motion from chord to chord, called a progression, were,
by and of themselves, interesting and sophisticated enough to provide a coherent musical accompaniment
to a principal melodic part.
Homophony continued to evolve side by side with polyphony through the 16th century, and
it saw its first great flowering with the invention of opera in and around the year 1600.
But both 15th and 16th century homophony and polyphony had in common, was the growing reliance
on triadic harmony, that is, the tonal system of harmonic tension and rest, for coordinating
melodic parts and organizing large scale form and structure.
Some parameters.
Clearly, an in-depth examination of the development of the tonal harmonic system from its birth
in the 15th century through its unfortunate but unavoidable demise in the 20th century
is far beyond the scope of this course.
So rather than examine the tonal system historically, we're going to cut to the chase and observe
it as a finished product, as a syntax that with historical variation dominated Western
music for nearly 500 years.
We'll spend the remainder of this lecture talking a bit more about triads, and then
very importantly, voice leading.
Triads Redux.
We have already identified the four major types or qualities of triads, major, minor,
diminished, and augmented.
Of the four types, major and minor are by far the most common.
Let's examine what sorts of triads naturally occur in both major and minor collections.
Let's do the major collection first.
For demonstration purposes, we will use the key of C major.
The triad built on the tonic pitch of a major collection, a triad called the tonic triad
or the one chord, is a major triad in the key of C, C, E, G.
The triad built on the second degree of a major collection, a triad called the supertonic,
as in above the tonic, or the two chord, is a minor triad in the key of C, D, F, A.
The triad built on the third degree of a major collection, a triad called the mediant, because
it's halfway between the tonic and dominant pitches, or the three chord is a minor triad.
In the key of C, E, G, B.
The triad built on the fourth degree of a major collection, a triad called the subdominant,
or the four chord, is a major triad in the key of C, F, A, C.
The triad built on the fifth degree of a major collection, a triad called the dominant, or
the five chord, is a major triad.
Again in the key of C, it's a G, B, and a D.
The triad built on the sixth degree of a major collection, a triad called the submediant,
or the sixth chord, is a minor triad in the key of C, A, C, E.
Lastly, the triad built on the seventh degree of a major collection, a triad called the
leading tone triad, for reasons we'll discuss in our next lecture, or the seven chord, is
a diminished triad.
In the key of C major, it's a B, D, and an F.
In a major collection then, there are three naturally occurring major triads, one, four,
and five, the tonic, subdominant, and dominant.
There are three naturally occurring minor triads, on two, three, and six, the supertonic,
mediant, and submediant, and one naturally occurring diminished triad, on the seven,
the leading tone triad.
In any given minor key, and here we're talking about the Aeolian mode, a collection also
known as natural minor, the tonic, or one chord, is minor.
Using C minor as an example, the tonic triad is spelled C, E-flat, G.
The two chord in a minor collection is diminished, again using C minor as an example, D, F, A-flat.
The three chord in a minor collection is major in C minor, E-flat, G, B-flat.
The four chord in a minor collection is minor in C minor, F, A-flat, C.
The five chord in a minor collection is minor in C minor, G, B-flat, D.
The six chord in a minor collection is major in the key of C minor, it's an A-flat, C,
E-flat.
And the seven chord in a minor collection is also a major chord in the key of C minor,
B-flat, D, F.
In natural minor then, there are three naturally occurring minor triads, one, four, and five,
the tonic, subdominant, and dominant.
Three naturally occurring major triads, three, six, and seven, the mediant, sub-mediant,
leading tone triads, and one naturally occurring diminished triad, the two, the super tonic
triad.
Inversions.
Now my friends, to this point of our discussion, all the triads we have examined have been
in root position, that is, with the pitch on which the chord is based being the lowest
pitch.
In the case of C major and the C major triad, the C being the lowest pitch.
It's our C, and we've been stacking the other pitches atop.
However, in practical reality, any of the three pitches that make up a triad can be
the lowest pitch, and conversely, any of the three pitches can be the highest pitch.
A triad in first inversion is one in which the third degree of the chord, in the case
of a C major triad, the pitch E, is in the bass.
There's our E. I'll put it down an octave.
Such first inversion triads are also called 6-3 chords, because the intervallic distance
between the bass pitch and the upper chord tones is a sixth and a third, thus 6-3.
A triad in second inversion is one in which the fifth degree of the chord, in the case
of a C major triad, the pitch G, is in the bass.
Second inversion triads are also known as 6-4 chords, because the intervallic distance
between the bass pitch and the upper chord tones is a sixth and a fourth.
Why use inversions?
Why not just use chords in their root positions?
Well, I'll demonstrate why.
I'm going to play you a progression consisting of the following chords, all in root position.
Tonic, dominant, tonic, super tonic, tonic, dominant, tonic.
It's a 1-5-1, 2-1-5-1 progression.
Let me play that for you.
That series of chords played in root position yields this unbelievably clunky bass line.
That bass line and the parallel motion that bass line creates along with the soprano
line is about as musical as the campfire scene from Mel Brooks's Blazing Saddles.
However, if we invert some of those chords, we can create a bass line that's as smooth
and musical as the soprano voice, which yields a bass line, a genuine bass melody that sounds
like this.
Chords allow for good voice leading, and now even as we prepare to move deeper still into
the subject of harmony, an especially important statement.
Harmony is indivisible from melody, again, harmony is indivisible from melody.
These pitch simultaneities, these harmonies, these chords that we talk about when we discuss
harmony, don't in fact exist as entities unto themselves.
For example, we will never hear this or anything like it in a piece of tonal music.
We won't hear that.
Harmony is indivisible from melody.
Progressions of chords must connect to each other melodically if they're going to make
any sense.
Maintaining melodic connections between chords is called voice leading, and nothing, my friends,
not being thin or rich or young or beautiful, nothing is as important as good voice leading.
Let's take the disembodied series of chords I just played, and let's connect them so that
each of the constituent voices of the chords, soprano, alto, tenor and bass, connect to
create four distinct melody lines.
Voice leading is at once both the art of connecting chords melodically and coordinating melodies
harmonically.
Again, voice leading is both the art of connecting chords melodically and coordinating melodies
harmonically.
Truly, harmony is indivisible from melody.
Sidebar, Johann Sebastian Bach's chorale harmonizations.
The Bible, the Encyclopedia Britannica, the unabridged Oxford English Dictionary of four
voice writing is Johann Sebastian Bach's chorale harmonizations.
The chorale is the congregational hymn of the Lutheran Church, of which Bach was a member
born in bread.
These chorales are melodies set to religious texts, melodies that come from a wide variety
of sources.
Some were adapted from the Catholic liturgy, some were taken from popular songs, and many
were written in the years following the Protestant Reformation by Lutheran churchmen, including
Martin Luther himself.
Except for six years spent at the court at Curtin between 1717 and 1723, Bach spent his
entire career working for the Lutheran Church in some capacity or another, as an organist,
composer, choir, conductor, teacher, and so forth.
Among his many duties was to harmonize in four parts the Lutheran hymn melodies for
chorale singing.
It was a job that pretty much every Lutheran canter or music director was expected to do.
A canter would no more use someone else's chorale harmonizations than a minister would
read someone else's sermons.
By definition, a chorale harmonization is homophonic in texture.
The principal theme, the pre-existing hymn melody, is heard in the soprano voice, while
the lower three voices provide a proper harmonic accompaniment to that hymn melody.
Six chorale harmonizations, of which there are 371 in my Riemann Schneider edition, are
among the great masterworks of western art.
They display a virtually perfect balance between harmonic imagination and voice leading.
As an example, we turn to the chorale, Oh Hauptwahlblut und Wunden, Oh Sacred Head Now Wounded.
The melody, composed by Hans Leo Hassler, sometime in the late 16th century, began its
life as a popular song entitled, My Peace of Mind is Shattered by a Tender Maiden's
Charms.
By 1600, the first of a number of sacred verses had been added to Hassler's melody.
Clearly Bach loved this melody.
In Bach's epical St. Matthew Passion, the melody appears five times, each time reharmonized
in a different key.
Here's the first phrase of Hassler's melody.
Let's hear Bach's harmonization of that phrase, and let's be aware that in order to ensure
maximum melodic connectivity between adjacent harmonies, here and there Bach adds what are
called passing tones, scale steps that connect adjacent chord tones.
Let's hear the harmonization of this first phrase as Bach composed it, passing tones
and all.
Indescribably beautiful, yes, and a perfect balance between harmonic richness and melodic
motion as well.
To see the voice leading between the harmonies ensures that accompanimental, though they
may be, each of the three lower voices has a distinctly lyric character unto itself.
The sort of voice leading we hear in Bach's chorale harmonizations is a perfect balance
between melodic flow and harmonic progression, a perfect example of the fact that harmony
is indivisible from melody.
Sidebar and lecture finni.
Thank you.
