Lecture 11, Intervals, Revisited and Expanded
Welcome back. This is Lecture 11 and it is entitled,
Intervals, Revisited and Expanded
Interval to review
An interval is the relationship between any two pitches.
Intervalic relationships run the gamut from the most simple to the most complex,
the degree of simplicity and complexity being a function of how much or how little the pitches blend,
which is in turn perceived as consonance or dissonance as stability or instability.
The simplest, most consonant and most stable interval is that of an octave.
Interval
The most complex, dissonant and unstable interval is that of a tritone.
The ancient Greeks defined intervals in terms of the numerical ratio between two vibrating bodies
and indeed, as we have discussed and will continue to discuss,
the phenomena of blended and non-blended intervals of consonance and dissonance is rooted in physical reality.
Increasingly complex numerical ratios between vibrating bodies yield increasingly complex intervalic relationships.
Intervals are named using ordinal numbers, seconds, thirds, fourths, fifths and so forth.
The exceptions are the eighth, which as we are now all aware is called an octave,
and a first, which is called a unison or sometimes a prime.
There are two different categories of intervals, the perfect intervals and the major and minor intervals.
As we have discussed, the perfect intervals are the unison, octave, fifth and fourth.
Intervals that represent, respectively, the ratios of one to one, two to one, three to two and four to three.
Pythagoras called them the perfect intervals because they were the primary intervals,
the most basic intervals to emerge from his research on ratios and their sonic manifestation.
As we have discussed, these perfect intervals, particularly the octave and the fifth,
form the very basis of the western pitch system and have done so for thousands of years.
If a unison, octave, fifth or fourth is not perfect, if it is a semitone lower or higher,
then we call it, respectively, either a diminished interval, for example, a diminished fifth,
or an augmented interval, for example, an augmented fourth.
The major and minor intervals are all the rest, seconds, thirds, sixths and sevenths,
and they are identified as being either larger or smaller, as major or minor,
and in certain extreme circumstances, augmented, meaning extra large or diminished, meaning extra small.
Identifying intervals.
When we identify an interval, we're actually providing two different pieces of information,
like a noun preceded by a modifying adjective.
An interval is identified by both its name, a fourth, a sixth or a third, for example,
and its modifier, that is, what sort of fourth, sixth or third it might be,
perfect, major or minor, augmented or diminished.
First, let's learn how to identify the name, the size of an interval.
As usual, it will be easiest to begin this process in the key of C major, that is,
using just the white keys on a piano keyboard.
When identifying the name, that is, the size of an interval, the first pitch counts as one.
For now, for the sake of ease, we're going to only count upwards,
so counting upwards from middle C to the D directly above it is, C is one, and D is two.
So from C up to D is some sort of second, one, two.
Let's count from C upwards to E, C is one, D is two, and E is three.
So from C up to E is some sort of third, C, D, E, one, two, three, a third.
From C up to an F, C, D, E, F, one, two, three, four, from C up to an F is some sort of fourth.
From C upwards to a G is some sort of fifth.
From C up to an A, C, D, E, F, G, A, one, two, three, four, five, six is some sort of sixth.
And from C up to a B, C, D, E, F, G, A, B, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven is some sort of seventh.
From C up to C is an octave, and that's where we'll stop for now.
We'll talk about compound intervals, ninths, tenths, elevenths, and so forth in a few minutes.
For now, it's time for the modifiers, the adjectives.
It's time to identify the various kinds of seconds, thirds, fourths, fifths, sixths, and sevenths.
For this, my friends, we must count semitones.
We return to our image of a piano keyboard.
We've also provided a chart in your course booklets that identifies how many semitones make up each interval.
Something to keep in mind, when naming intervals as we just did, the first pitch counts as one.
However, counting semitones is different.
When we count semitones, we're counting distance.
We're talking about the modifying term now, major, minor, perfect, augmented, or diminished.
So when we count semitones in order to figure out the modifier, we start our count on the first semitone above our starting pitch.
It's much clearer once we actually begin the process, and we begin with seconds.
We said that from C to D was some sort of second.
From C up to a D-flat is the distance of one semitone.
From C up to a D-flat is a minor second.
Remember, the word minor means little or small.
A minor second, which is the same thing as a semitone, is the smallest interval available in the equal tempered tuning system.
For our information, if the interval had been spelled as a C up to a C-sharp, it would have been called by the seemingly oxymoronic name of an augmented unison.
It's best just to think of it as a minor second.
There are 12 different minor seconds possible in an equal tempered tuning.
We can start on any one of the 12 different pitches of the chromatic and play a minor second above it.
For example, C up to D-flat, C-sharp up to D, D up to E-flat, D-sharp up to E, E up to F, and so forth.
When we hear music with a lot of semitones in its melodic and or harmonic profile, we often describe that music as being chromatic.
For example, the fourth and final movement of Mozart's string quartet in A major, C464 of 1785, is characterized by just such a chromatic principal theme,
a theme characterized by three falling minor seconds.
Let's hear the opening of the movement, and let's be aware of the chromatic nature of the thematic material,
dominated as it is by these descending minor seconds or semitones.
Here we can see the chromatic nature of the thematic material.
We can see the chromatic nature of the thematic material.
We can see the chromatic nature of the thematic material.
We can see the chromatic nature of the thematic material.
We can see the chromatic nature of the thematic material.
We can see the chromatic nature of the thematic material.
We can see the chromatic nature of the thematic material.
We can see the chromatic nature of the thematic material.
We can see the chromatic nature of the thematic material.
We can see the chromatic nature of the thematic material.
篇
Speaking of minor seconds, one of the oldest musical cliches in the book
is a bass line descending in minor seconds,
a descending gesture that for hundreds of years
has represented death.
Hey, you want to evoke impending doom, gloom,
or a Raiders' game?
Use a bass line descending in minor seconds.
Instant sackcloth and mourning.
Let's hear the dismal funeral march that
concludes the first movement of Gustav Mahler's Symphony
number two of 1894.
The movement, set in the key of C minor,
ends with a huge two-octave chromatic descent,
that is, descending semitones, descending minor seconds,
as the casket bearing Mahler's erstwhile hero
is lowered into the grave.
During the funeral march, let's pay special attention
to the descending minor seconds in the bass.
The first movement, set in the key of C minor,
ends with a huge two-octave chromatic descent,
that is, descending semitones, descending minor seconds,
as the casket bearing Mahler's first movement,
ends with a huge two-octave chromatic descent,
that is, descending semitones, descending minor seconds,
as the casket bearing Mahler's first movement,
ends with a huge two-octave chromatic descent,
that is, descending semitones, descending minor seconds,
as the casket bearing Mahler's first movement,
ends with a huge two-octave chromatic descent,
that is, descending semitones, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
descending minor seconds, descending minor seconds,
Well, that'll certainly brighten up everyone's day, yes?
We've been talking about the interval of a second.
As we've just discussed, the interval C up to D flat,
the distance of one semitone
is a minor second.
From C to D, a white note, D, or D natural,
the distance of two semitones is a major second.
Let's count that distance.
From C up to a D flat, semitone,
from D flat up to D, another semitone,
two semitones is a major second.
Again, we are reminded that in this context,
the word major means larger.
And yes, a major second is a semitone wider,
a semitone larger than a minor second.
Here's a minor second,
and here's a major second.
Again, a minor second,
a major second.
A major second is also known as a whole tone.
There are 12 different major seconds possible
in a well or equal-tempered tuning.
We can start on any one of the 12 different pitches
of the chromatic and play a major second above it.
For example, C up to D, C sharp up to D sharp,
D up to E, E flat up to F, E up to F sharp,
F up to G, and so forth.
Sidebar, the whole tone collection.
There's a very interesting pitch collection
that we will on occasion run into,
particularly in the music of the 20th century,
something called a whole tone collection
or a whole tone scale.
Just as a chromatic collection
divides the octave into 12 equal segments,
and a chromatic scale ascends and descends
by minor seconds or semitones,
so a whole tone collection divides the octave
into six equal segments,
and a whole tone scale ascends and descends
by major seconds or whole tones.
Let's hear a whole tone scale.
As I play it, I'll count the number of different pitches.
One, two, three, four, five, six,
and then back to where we started, one.
The scale I just played consisted of six consecutive
major seconds or whole tones before returning
to the C on which it started.
C, D, E, F sharp, G sharp, A sharp, C.
C, D, E, F sharp, G sharp, A sharp, C.
Now my friends, given the way I just spelled that scale,
the final two pitches were an A sharp moving up to a C.
Even though that is indeed the distance of two semitones,
A sharp up to B is one semitone,
B up to C, two semitones,
A sharp to C, two semitones.
Even though that is the distance of two semitones,
the interval from an A sharp to a C
is not technically a major second.
And why not?
Because the distance between an A and a C
is some sort of third.
A, B, C, one, two, three, a third.
What sort of third consists of only two semitones
when a minor third consists of three semitones?
A third consisting of only two semitones
is called a diminished third.
Generally speaking, a diminished third,
like an augmented octave and other such fringe intervals,
is more a notational construct than an aural event.
That is, when we actually hear a diminished third,
A sharp to C, for example.
What we hear is a major second, a whole tone,
and only under the most extraordinary musical circumstances
would we ever, by ear, identify that interval
as being a diminished third.
My friends, we've talked about this before.
What is notated on a page does not always correspond
to what we actually hear.
Please back to the whole tone collection.
The sound of a whole tone collection is very exotic,
lacking as it does any perfect fifths or fourths.
A whole tone collection is devoid
of any sense of harmonic urgency,
and instead projects a sort of blurred wash of sound.
It's a sound the French composer Claude Debussy,
who lived from 1862 to 1918, was particularly enamored with,
and he used the whole tone collection
to great effect in his music.
For example, Prelude number two,
from his first book of piano Preludes composed in 1910,
is a study of just how much mileage he can get out
of a whole tone collection.
It's a Prelude entitled Veils,
and Debussy uses the blurred sound
of the whole tone collection most effectively.
Let's just hear the very beginning of this piece.
mechanics.
I would also point out that if you're familiar with the jazz pianist Thelonious Monk, you'll
hear him play whole-tone scales constantly, like nervously pulling on your ear or playing
with your glasses or mumbling um, ah, or saying such phrases as, the truth of the matter is,
or in point of fact, Monk's whole-tone scales are a delaying tactic, handy bits of musical
fill stuck into the mix while he tries to figure out what to play next.
That's cool.
It's cool.
We all do it.
Let's just be aware that what Monk's playing when he does those things are whole-tone scales.
Melodic versus harmonic intervals.
One last point regarding the interval of a second, both major and minor, before we move
on.
The pitches of an interval can be heard two ways.
The pitches of an interval can be heard in succession, one after the other, which is called
a melodic interval, or they can be heard simultaneously, which is called a harmonic interval.
With the exception of the tritone, we do not perceive intervals heard in succession.
That is, melodic intervals as being either consonant or dissonant.
But when intervals are heard simultaneously, harmonically, well, that's an entirely different
ball game.
When we hear two pitches simultaneously, the relationship between their ratios, that is,
whether they blend together or do not blend together, is put into high relief.
A minor second, for example.
When we hear a minor second melodically, we are not consciously aware of dissonance or
consonance, just the movement of pitches up or down through time.
But if we hear a minor second harmonically, the complexity of the ratio behind the interval
is put into high relief, and from our information, that ratio is a 16 to 15.
And the result is something that sounds unstable and unresolved.
In a word, a dissonance.
In tonal music, that harmonic interval wants to resolve, my friends.
It wants to go somewhere.
Likewise major seconds, when heard melodically, are as smooth as silk jockey shorts.
But major seconds, when heard harmonically, likewise produce a dissonance, that is, a
sound that wants to resolve.
And now that will resolve.
We say then that seconds, both major and minor seconds, are harmonically dissonant intervals.
Thirds.
We return finally, and for the last time, I promise, to the corporate Pythagoras and
his monocord.
We need to pick up where we left off and generate a couple more ratios so that we might see
what intervals follow the perfect intervals of octave, fifth, and fourth.
By way of review, the sonic manifestation of a one to one ratio is something called a unison.
One sound, one pitch, one idea, the same idea, played twice.
The sonic manifestation of a two to one ratio is an octave.
The original string, and half the string vibrating exactly twice as fast as the original, creating
an octave.
The sonic manifestation of a three to two ratio is a perfect fifth.
Half the string, compared to one third of the string.
The sonic manifestation of a four to three ratio is a perfect fourth.
One third of the string, compared to one quarter of the string.
Okay, that's where we left off.
Let's continue the process.
We next divide the string into fifths and compare the sound created by one fifth of
the string to that created by one quarter, one fourth of the string, thereby creating
the sonic equivalent of a five to four ratio.
Here my friends, as a reminder, is one quarter of the string, and here's the sound created
by one fifth of the string.
One quarter of the string, one fifth of the string.
Let's hear those pitches together.
That my friends, is a major third, an interval four semitones in width.
In the case of what I just played, a C up to an E.
Finally, we divide the string into sixths and compare the sound created by one sixth
of the string to that created by one fifth of the string, thereby creating the sonic
equivalent of a six to five ratio.
Here's one fifth of the string, and here's the sound created by one sixth of the string.
Again one fifth of the string, one sixth of the string.
Let's hear those pitches together.
That my friends, is a minor third, an interval three semitones in width, an E up to a G given
the pitches that I just played.
These then are the first partials or overtones of the overtone or harmonic series.
In order of increasing complexity, the unison, octave, perfect fifth, perfect fourth, major
third, and minor third.
When we say that certain instruments, like a bugle for example, are only capable of
playing the pitches of a single harmonic series, these are the pitches and these are the intervals
that we're referring to.
Starting on the lowest pitch, what's known as the instrument's pedal pitch, a bugle
player by blowing with ever greater intensity into his mouthpiece can play an octave above
that pedal pitch, then a fifth above that, a fourth above that, a major third above that,
and a minor third above that.
Any higher is frankly extremely difficult, meaning that most bugle music is limited to
six pitches, the first six partials of the overtone series.
For example, the bugle call known as taps employs the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth
partial of the overtone series, outlining the intervals of a perfect fourth, a major
third, and a minor third.
I would play taps and you'll excuse me for identifying the intervals while I play.
So perfect fourth, perfect fourth, major third, perfect fourth, major third, perfect fourth,
major third, perfect fourth, major third, major third, minor third, minor third, major
third, perfect fourth, perfect fourth.
For our information, there's a very famous piece of music that begins by outlining an
order of increasing complexity, the first six intervals of the harmonic series.
Yes, yes, yes.
This piece begins with a low C played in unison by the bass instruments.
The next pitch we hear is an octave above this opening C.
The next pitch we hear is a G, a perfect fifth above that octave C.
The next pitch we hear is a C, a perfect fourth above that G.
Finally, the next two pitches we hear create first a major third, and then a minor third
above that C.
Let's hear it.
The elemental, irreducible simplicity of the harmonic series used to illustrate virtually
the beginning of time, the coming of the light.
The next pitch we hear is a C, a perfect fifth above that octave C.
The next pitch we hear is a C, a perfect fifth above that octave C.
We discussed the semitonal makeup of major and minor thirds in lecture eight, when we
discussed whether the third scale degree of a diatonic mode represented a major or a minor
third above the tonic pitch of that mode.
To read this, we need to discuss the semitonal makeup of major and minor thirds in lecture
eight, when we discussed whether the third scale degree of a diatonic mode represented
a major or a minor third above the tonic pitch of that mode.
To review, a major third is four semitones in width, starting on a C to a C sharp is
one, to a D is two, to a D sharp is three, to an E natural is four, four semitones.
A minor third is three semitones in width, starting on a C to a C sharp is one semitone,
to a D natural is two semitones, to an E flat three semitones.
We will discuss the interval of a third in much greater detail when we get to harmony,
because major and minor thirds are the intervallic building blocks of the chords that lie at
the heart of the tonal harmonic system.
Like major and minor seconds, there are twelve different major thirds and twelve different
minor thirds. We can build a major or minor third starting on any one of the twelve different
pitches of the chromatic collection.
Unlike major and minor seconds, major and minor thirds are consonant harmonic intervals,
as there is enough blend between their constituent pitches to create a sense of stability. A
major third played harmonically, a minor third played harmonically, a major third
played harmonically, stable intervals that do not need to resolve.
Fourths and fifths. We've already spent a significant amount of time talking about perfect
fourths, fifths and tritones. Let's add a little more information to the mix and then
move on.
A perfect fourth is five semitones in width. A perfect fifth is seven semitones in width.
As we have already observed, the perfect intervals do not come into different flavors
in major and minor, like the other intervals. Instead, when perfect intervals are modified,
we say they are either augmented, that is widened by a semitone, or diminished, that
is narrowed by a semitone.
This is not just a matter of nomenclature, my friends. Augmented and diminished perfect
intervals are not the same thing as major and minor, and here's why. A major second
and a minor second both sound like seconds. Here's a major second, and here's a minor
second. They both sound like seconds, a big one and a small one. Conversely, an augmented
unison is not a separate identifiable interval of its own because it's the same intervalic
distance as a minor second. Well, 99.99% of the time we're going to perceive it. We're
going to hear an augmented unison as a minor second. On those same lines, a perfect fifth
sounds like a perfect fifth. But unless it's contained within an extremely unusual harmony
called an augmented chord, we generally do not perceive the augmented fifth as being
a separate, identifiable interval of its own. Rather, since it's the same intervalic distance
as a minor sixth, 99.99% of the time, we're going to perceive it as a minor sixth. We're
going to perceive it as a minor sixth. We're going to perceive it as a minor sixth. We're
going to perceive it as a minor sixth. Again, let's compare. Here's an augmented fifth.
Here's a minor sixth. When using our ears, we're going to hear that interval as a minor
sixth because the augmented fifth is very unusual, very rarely used. So there's no reason
to hear it as an augmented fifth. Once again, what's written on the page often does not
correspond with what we hear with our ears. Likewise, a perfect fourth sounds like a perfect
fourth. But a diminished fourth is the same intervalic distance as a major third. So again,
99.99% of the time, we will hear such an interval as a major third. Here's a diminished fourth,
my friends. Here's a major third. It's the same interval. I can assure you that in real
music, in real time, if we hear this, we'll almost always identify it as a major third.
Which brings us to the interval six semitones in width, which is spelled as either a diminished
fifth or an augmented fourth. In reality, it sounds like neither a fifth nor a fourth.
Rather, this intervalic distance of six semitones sounds like a tritone. The single most unstable
interval in the chromatic collection, an interval that is considered both a harmonic and a melodic
dissonance. Yes, a tritone will be notated as either a diminished fifth or an augmented
fourth, but the reason why we call it a tritone is that it is so dissonant and so harmonically
unstable that it stands alone as something unto itself. There are twelve different perfect
fourths and perfect fifths possible in the chromatic collection. Unlike all the other
intervals, there are only six different tritones possible in the chromatic collection, and here's
why. A tritone is six semitones in width. Starting with a C, let's build a tritone on each
pitch of the chromatic collection and let's see what happens, alright? Tritone one, a C
up to an F-sharp, tritone two, a C-sharp up to a G, tritone three, a D up to a G-sharp, tritone
tritone two, a C-sharp up to a G, tritone three, a D up to a G-sharp, tritone four, a D-sharp
up to an A, tritone five and E up to an A-sharp, tritone six and F up to a B.
Now, the next tritone, what would be the seventh tritone is an F-sharp up to a C.
My friends, those two pitches, F-sharp and C, should sound familiar. They are the pitches
we began with when we built the first of our tritones starting on a C up to an F-sharp.
Again, here's the first tritone we played.
And here's the seventh tritone we played, an F-sharp up to a C.
Let's hear them back to back again, C up to F-sharp, F-sharp up to C.
Question. Are those different tritones or the same tritone in inversion? That is, with
the order of the pitches reversed.
It's the same tritone, my friends. And thus, the six tritones we would build on the remaining
six pitches of the chromatic collection duplicate the tritones we built on the first six pitches
of the chromatic collection. There are then only six different tritones possible in the
chromatic collection. Isn't that amazing? The tritone, the most dissonant interval in our
chromatic universe, is self-duplicating, just like the octave which itself is the most
consonant interval in our chromatic universe. You see, since a tritone divides the octave
in half, and a tritone stacked upon itself adds up to an octave, we don't perceive those
two complementary tritones as being different, but rather, we perceive them as being the
same, just with the pitches reversed. In terms of stability and instability, the octave
and the tritone are the polar opposites, the alpha and omega that define the extremes of
consonants and dissonance in western music. And yet, moving from any one pitch up or down
by two consecutive tritones, C up to F sharp and then F sharp up to C, produces an octave.
Wow! The octave, the most stable interval in our harmonic universe, divides in half into
two complementary tritones, the most dissonant interval in our harmonic universe. Just in
case our heads aren't swimming enough with all this tritone-related information, here's
something else to consider. Any given major key contains only one tritone. It's the
interval between the fourth and seventh scale degrees. In the key of C major, for example,
the tritone occurs between an F, the fourth scale degree, and a B, the seventh scale
degree. Now, because there are twelve different major keys and only six different tritones,
the tritones are doubled up. The same tritone will serve two different major keys. So what
major key does C major share a tritone with? The answer? The key of F sharp major. The
major key farthest away from C major. The major key, a tritone away from C major. My friends,
keys, a tritone apart, will share the same tritone. For our information, in F sharp major,
the tritone occurs between B, which is the fourth degree of F sharp major, and E sharp,
which is n harmonic with F, which is the seventh degree of F sharp major. Dang! Don't we just
love the chromatic collection? The metaphors, it presents us with are endless. The end is
the beginning. The beginning is the end. Opposites unite into singularities, and singularities
become opposites. All points are connected within the continuum. It's a fantastic system.
Sixths. We return to our keyboard and the pitch C. From C up to A flat, the distance of
eight semitones is a minor sixth. And from C to A natural, the distance of nine semitones
is a major sixth. The sixth, both major and minor, because of the blend they exhibit when
heard harmonically, are defined as being consonant harmonic intervals. Seventh. From C to B flat,
the distance of ten semitones is a minor seventh. And from C to A B natural, the distance of
eleven semitones is a major seventh. Sevenths, major and minor exhibit almost no blend whatsoever,
and are defined as being dissonant harmonic intervals. Complimentary intervals. Back to the tritone
for a moment. We say that the tritone is its own complement in that two tritones stack one
atop the next equals an octave. Six semitones plus six semitones equals twelve semitones,
an octave. All right, big important stuff now. On those same lines, each interval has a complement.
That is, a related interval that when combined adds up to an octave. There are four families
of intervals defined by their complements. Complimentary intervalic family number one is
the tritone. A tritone plus a tritone. Six semitones plus six semitones equals an octave,
equals twelve semitones. A tritone is its own complement. Two tritones stack one atop the next
equals an octave. Tritones are perceived as being dissonant harmonically.
Complimentary intervalic family number two, the perfect fourth and the perfect fifth. Add them
together and you get an octave. For example, starting on a C, a perfect fifth above a C
is a G, and a perfect fourth above that G brings us back to C, or another way to think about
it. A perfect fifth below a C is an F, a perfect fourth above that same C is also an F. Any
way you add them up, any way you stack them, a perfect fourth at five semitones in width
plus a perfect fifth stacked upon it at seven semitones in width equals an octave, twelve
semitones in width. This intervallic family is perceived as being harmonically consonant.
Complimentary intervallic family number three, thirds and sixths. Think piano keyboard, C
up to E flat, a minor third is three semitones in width. From that E flat up to the next C
is nine semitones, a major sixth. Thus, a minor third and a major sixth are complementary
intervals. Together, they add up to an octave. Likewise, a major third for semitones in width
and a minor sixth, eight semitones in width are complementary intervals. Together, they
add up to an octave. The intervallic family of thirds and sixths is perceived as being
harmonically consonant. Finally, complementary intervallic family number four, seconds and
sevenths. From a C up to a D flat, a minor second is one semitone in width. From that D
flat now all the way up to the next C is eleven semitones, a major seventh. Thus, a minor
second and a major seventh are complementary intervals. Together, they add up to an octave.
Likewise, a major second to semitones in width and a minor seventh, ten semitones in width
are complementary intervals. Together, they add up to an octave to twelve semitones. The
intervallic family of seconds and sevenths is perceived as being harmonically dissonant.
Compound intervals, one last intervallic topic. Compound intervals are those intervals that
are more than an octave in width, ninths, tenths, elevenths and twelfths. These intervals
are called compound because they consist of an octave plus a smaller interval. For example,
a ninth is nothing but an octave, an eighth, right? Plus a second. A major ninth above
a C, for example, is simply the D, an octave and a major second above a C. A minor ninth
would be the D flat, an octave and a minor second above that C. A tenth is an octave
plus a third, an eleventh an octave plus a fourth, and a twelfth an octave plus a fifth.
Compound intervals are rarely used outside of jazz harmony and analysis because the nomenclature
is frankly unnecessarily confusing. It's much easier to say an octave and a minor sixth above
a given pitch than to say a minor thirteenth above a given pitch. Let's stop here. Thank you.
Thank you.
