Welcome back, this is lecture 12, it is entitled simply, Melody.
Some welcome information I think, it's time for us to coast a bit and to put what we've
learned about pitch and pitch collections, intervals and the circle of fifths to practical
use in an exploration of that single most important aspect of music, melody.
I knew you'd be pleased to hear that, definitions.
In lecture 7, we define melody as simply as possible, as any succession of sounds.
That's still my favorite definition of melody because it precludes nothing and includes
everything from the songs of children at play to the Italian opera theater, from West African
drumming to North Indian ragas, from the inchoate shrieks of heavy metal to the infinite sweetness
of a mother's lullaby, from the songs of birds and cicadas to those of the humpback whale.
Having said all of that, it's time to augment our definition of melody and for that we turn
to Alexander Ringer, former chair of musicology at the University of Illinois at Champaign,
Urbana, who writes in admirable academies, not to worry my friends, I speak academic
and will translate, in the New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians and we quote, melody
as defined by sounds arranged in time in accordance with given cultural conventions and constraints,
represents a universal human phenomenon, traceable to prehistoric times.
While in some cultures, rhythmic considerations may have taken precedence over melodic expression
as in parts of Africa, primary concerns with melody have been related more specifically
to verbal and in some instances, pre-verbal modes of social intercourse.
While the exact causal relationships between melody and language remain to be established,
the broad cultural bases of logogenic melody are no longer in question, unquote, OK, translation.
While the fundamental relationship between language and music has yet to be fully identified,
the fact that every human culture has created logogenic music, that is, some sort of word-based
folk music cannot be disputed, OK, back to you, Professor Ringer, quote.
The most universal instance of pitch modification is, needless to say, the infant's first cry
and recent research in infant behavior has shown to what extent pitch differentiated,
pre-verbal utterances are employed systematically and effectively by infants to communicate
physiological needs as well as affective states.
If natural phenomena, such as birdsong and other animal communication, are any indication
at all, it should be possible in time to arrive at a meaningful understanding of the evolutionary
continuum from pathogenic to logogenic forms of pitched vocal behavior, unquote.
Again, we translate, my friends, we are hard-wired to sing.
We are hard-wired to use pitched sounds as a means of communication.
And there is a traceable continuum from an infant's instinctive, pre-verbal pathogenic
musical communication to purposeful, verbal, logogenic musical communication.
You will forgive me, the longish quote, and my editorial translation.
Every now and then, I feel the need to let someone else tell you something important
so that you'll know that these ideas are not my own, but are generally understood truths.
The particular truth, just presented, we are hard-wired to sing.
We are hard-wired to make music.
Etymology.
The word melody is a contraction of two Greek words, mellos, which means tune, and oide,
as in the word ode, meaning words sung or lyric verse.
The word melody in this sense clearly refers to song, that is, a combination of music and
words in its highest manifestation.
Oh, goody, another term.
If pathogenic music is so-called pre-verbal music in which pure sound is dominant, and
logogenic is music in which the word is dominant, then mellogenic or mellos-born music is that
in which the melodic and verbal aspects are of equal import, as in opera arias and art
song.
It was during the Middle Ages that the Latin word melodia came into common use, and assumed
the specifically musical meaning that it retains to this day, and a succession of sounds.
Theme.
Before we jump into our examination of melody, there's a word we must properly define, and
that word is theme.
We usually understand a theme to be the principal melodic idea of a given section or movement
of music.
A thematic melody, like a thematic idea, is a melodic idea that becomes a premise, a
topic, an idea, and or argument.
It becomes the essential subject matter in a piece or section of music.
Having said that, we should be aware that a theme is often something other than a melody.
For example, a theme can be a rhythm, as in the second movement of Beethoven's string
quartet, opus 59, number one, in F major of 1806.
A theme can be a harmony, as in the dance of the adolescence from the Rite of Spring,
Stravinsky.
A theme can be a harmony, as in the second movement of Beethoven's string quartet,
opus 59, number one, in F major of 1806.
My friends, a theme can be almost nothing at all.
John Cage's famous Four Minutes and 33 Seconds consist entirely of silence.
Whatever sounds are heard in the chorus of that endless Four Minutes and 33 Seconds are
made by the increasingly fidgety audience itself, and the cascade of thoughts inside the audience
members' heads.
As they question the validity of the piece, think about what they expected, and in doing
so, contemplate the very nature of music, which is, of course, exactly what the theme
of the piece was intended to be in the first place.
I would humbly suggest that an updated performance of Four Minutes and 33 Seconds begin by asking
all the members of the audience to turn on their cell phones.
For Four Minutes and 33 Seconds, the piece would consist Chinese water torture-like
of waiting for the next phone to ring, just a suggestion.
Anyway, a theme can be just about anything, including a melody, and for the remainder
of this lecture and the next, we will be discussing thematic melodies.
Distinctions The core of our melodic investigation will
be built around perceiving four different types of thematic melody.
Let us endeavor to draw not dogmatic, but general distinctions between word melody, vocal melody,
vocally conceived instrumental melody, and instrumental melody.
We begin with word melody.
A word melody would be one in which the actual melody itself, pitches and rhythms, is entirely
a product of, and secondary to, the words being sung.
A melody in which pitches and rhythms are strictly a function of the articulation and
rise and fall of the words being sung.
For our first two examples of word melody, we turn to plain chant, or so-called Gregorian
chant, the unaccompanied liturgical music of the medieval church.
Taken together, medieval plain chant constitutes the single largest body of repertoire in the
entire western musical tradition.
We start with a Psalm tone, or monotone plain chant.
We're going to hear a setting of Psalm 110, Dixit Dominus Domino male.
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand.
This particular setting would have been sung at Vespers, the office or ceremony that celebrated
sunset on the feast of the nativity of our Lord, on Christmas Day.
As monotone plain chants go, this one is pretty ornate.
Nevertheless, the great bulk of the Psalm is set on the pitch A, the B-flat directly
above it, and the G directly below it.
Those three pitches constitute the great bulk of pitch material in the following Psalm tone.
Rhythmic articulation and change of pitch are strictly a function of the text itself.
Everything in this music grows from and serves the word.
Rhythmic articulation and change of pitch are strictly a function of the text itself.
Rhythmic articulation and change of pitch are strictly a function of the text itself.
Rhythmic articulation and change of pitch are strictly a function of the text itself.
Let's listen to another plain chant, this one with a considerably
more active melody, again though an example of word melody.
From the solemn mass of Easter Day, we're going to hear a setting of a poem entitled
Victime Pascale, Laudice Imolant Cristiani, to the Pascal or Passover Victim, Let Christians
Offer Songs of Praise.
The poem and its musical setting are credited to a Burgundian priest named Whippo, who served
as chaplain to the Holy Roman emperors Conrad and Henry III during the first half of the
11th century.
Set in Dorian mode, it's an absolutely gorgeous plain chant, and one of only five medieval
plain chants that have been retained in the liturgy.
Despite its relatively active melodic profile, rhythmic articulation and pitch contour in
Victime Pascale are still strictly a function of the text of the words of the poem.
Let's listen to another plain chant, this one with a considerably more active melody,
with a considerably more active melody, again though an example of word melody.
Let's listen to another plain chant, this one with a considerably more active melody,
again though an example of word melody.
Renaissance vocal music, which accounts for the overwhelming bulk of the music created
between 1400 and 1600, was preeminently about the word.
Whether we're discussing religious music like motets and masses, or secular music like
frottolas and madrigals, Renaissance composers and audiences believed that it was only through
the word that ideas and feelings could be communicated.
Likewise, early opera consisted pretty much entirely of word melody.
The Florentines, who invented opera in the last years of the 16th century, believed that
they were recreating in modern guise the theatrical art of the ancient Greeks, an art they believed
had been sung, or at least chanted.
The early Florentine operas were called Dramy per Musica, dramas with music, a designation
that clearly indicates that drama, the word, came first and music second.
We're going to sample a bit of the oldest opera to have come down to us, Jacopo Perri's
Eurydice, based on the legend of Orpheus and Eurydice, first produced in 1600.
Let's listen to what is, without a doubt, the single most dramatic soliloquy in the
entire opera, Orpheus' response to the news that his bride-to-be, the Nymphet Eurydice,
is deader than disco.
His announcement that he himself will go to the underworld and seek the release of his
beloved nymph.
This passage, indeed, the entire opera, is composed in a style that has come to be known
as recitativ, or dramatic recitation, a sort of speech-song in which the rhythms of the
melody and rise and fall of the voice are tied completely to the articulation and expressive
meaning of the words.
The words Orpheus sings in translation,
I do not weep, nor do I sigh, O my dear Eurydice, for I am unable to sigh to weep.
O my corpse, O my heart, O my hope, O peace, O life, alas, who has taken you from me, who
has taken you away, alas, where have you gone?
Soon you will see that it was not in vain that you dying called to me, your lover.
I am not far away, I come, O dear life, O dear death.
O my dear Eurydice, for I am unable to sigh to weep, O my heart, O my hope, O peace,
O life, alas, who has taken you from me, who has taken you from me, where have you gone?
Soon you will see that it was not in vain that you dying called to me, your lover.
Again as a reminder, we have been listening to word melody.
A word melody is a melody in which pitches and rhythms are strictly a function of the
articulation and rise and fall of the words being sung.
Let us now move on to vocal melody.
Historically and spiritually, melody springs from the voice, although the vocal associations
of melody transcend just vocal music.
After all, we talk about the voices of musical instruments, and we often identify the individual
melodic parts in instrumental compositions as being voices.
Having said all of that, I want us to conceptualize this second category of melody, vocal melody,
as melody created for the human voice, in which words and music are in something approaching
equal balance, melody in which the words tell a story or describe an emotional state, while
the music deepens, crystallizes, and intensifies the meaning of the words far beyond the power
of the words themselves.
Vocal melody and opera.
The invention of opera around the year 1600 changed pretty much everything musical in
the western world.
Opera was increasingly not just about the words, but increasingly about the feelings
beneath and indeed beyond the word.
The 17th century was a great age of opera and experimentation, and among the operatic
experiments of the time was the cultivation of the new sort of melody that deepened and
crystallized the expressive meaning, the emotions beneath the words, a sort of melody
that in terms of its contour, its phrase structure, and its harmonic structure made musical sense
unto itself, a sort of melody that could even stand alone if it had to without its words.
The sort of melody we're talking about here is a tune, a very special sort of melody,
one with a distinct beginning, middle, and end, one with a melodic contour or profile
distinct enough to imbue it with genuine memorability.
The pleas, ditties, airs, and jingles, in other words, songs, had existed since the beginning
of musical time, compact, memorable melodies attached to simple words that expressed basic
emotions and moods.
What we're talking about here, apropos of the opera house, is something much more.
We're talking about a cultivation and intensification of song to a level completely new in European
music.
By the mid 17th century, this cultivation led to the invention of the aria, a self-contained
composition for the solo voice that occurred in a dramatic work such as an opera, oratorio,
or cantata.
The aria became one of the two basic elements of operatic dramaturgy.
Recitatives, word melodies, were used to express real-time events like dialogue and action.
Arias, vocal melodies, became the operatic equivalent of a theatrical soliloquy, moments
of emotional reflection during which real-time stops and the inner life and emotions of a
character stand revealed.
The sort of music composers of late 17th and 18th century opera created for these arias
went far beyond the troubadour songs of the 14th century, or the lute accompanied English
songs of the late 16th century to name just a couple of earlier song traditions.
The music written for these opera arias created an entirely new melodic vocabulary, one that
described a world of emotion and feeling that up to that point in time only lyric poetry
had been capable of addressing.
It was a new and enriched melodic vocabulary that ultimately suffused every genre of music
from opera and song to instrumental music as well and indeed will talk about vocally
inspired instrumental melody in a moment.
But first, a couple of examples of vocal melody, music in which the words and the music are
of equal conceptual import, in which the music itself deepens the meaning of and feeling
beneath the words.
We turn to two contemporary vocal works for male singers, works in which the singers
extol the women in their lives, two very different works by two very different composers almost
certainly unknown to each other, working simultaneously, a continent apart in two very different genres
of music, and yet the expressive power of their music in general and their vocal melodies
in particular remain among the most treasured in the western canon.
We refer here to Stephen Foster, 1826 to 1864, and Giuseppe Verdi, 1813 to 1901.
Foster wrote, I Dream of Genie with the light brown hair in 1854.
The achingly gentle, utterly ethereal quality of its melody both illustrates and intensifies
the dreamlike soft focus sentiment of its text.
I Dream of Genie with the light brown hair, born like a vapor on the soft summer air.
I Dream of Genie with the light brown hair, born like a vapor on the summer air.
I see her tripping where the bright streams play, happy as the daisies that dance on her way.
Many were the wild notes her merry voice would bore, many were the blind birds that followed them all.
I Dream of Genie with the light brown hair, floating like a vapor on the soft summer air.
Giuseppe Verdi completed the opera Regoletto based on a story by Vicar Hugo in 1851.
Three years before Stephen Foster wrote Genie with the light brown hair.
The villain of Verdi's opera is the Duke of Mantua, a debauched, amoral, womanizing, rich party boy
who date rapes a lovely and chaste young lady named Gilda, who just happens to be the beloved daughter of the Duke's hunchbacked court jester, Regoletto.
Regoletto, driven mad with rage, plots the Duke's assassination.
Flu machinations way too complicated to even attempt to explain here and now.
It is not the Duke, but rather Regoletto's precious Gilda who ends up looking like a bayonet practice dummy, and not the Duke, bummer Gilda.
To the musical point, not long after the beginning of the third and final act, the Duke, this paragon of swagger and male horny toadness, sings the aria that lays out his essential world view with admirable clarity and candor.
These are the words in translation, of course.
Woman is fickle, like a feather in the wind.
She'll change her words and her thoughts, always a lovable and pretty face, but full of deceit, whether laughing or crying.
The man who believes her or confides in her is made miserable, his heart broken, and yet one who never drinks love from that breast can never be completely happy.
All right, my friends, the Duke is not a complicated man, and Verdi's direct and earthy music fits him like the tight t-shirts and gold chains he wears when he goes out slumming.
Woman is fickle, like a feather in the wind.
She'll change her words and her thoughts, always a lovable and pretty face, but full of deceit, whether laughing or crying.
Woman is fickle, like a feather in the wind.
She'll change her words and her thoughts, always a lovable and pretty face, but full of deceit, whether laughing or crying.
She'll change her words and her thoughts, always a lovable and pretty face, but full of deceit, whether laughing or crying.
She'll change her words and her thoughts, always a lovable and pretty face, but full of deceit, whether laughing or crying.
Woman is fickle, like a feather in the wind.
She'll change her words and her thoughts, always a lovable and pretty face, but full of deceit, whether laughing or crying.
Woman is fickle, like a feather in the wind.
She'll change her words and her thoughts, always a lovable and pretty face, but full of deceit.
A vocal melody, music in which the words and the music are of equal import, in which the music deepens the meaning of and feelings beneath the words.
Vocally conceived instrumental melody.
As we have discussed, the great tradition of instrumental music as we know it today, orchestral music, chamber music, and solo music, and such genres as overture, symphony, concerto, the string quartet, fugue, and the sonata, began to flower only during the Baroque era, during the 17th century.
Paradoxically, more than any other single factor, it was the invention of opera that led to the explosion of instrumental music in the 17th century, and here's why.
The dramatic situations portrayed on the opera stage forced composers to experiment with musical materials that could, on their own, create expressive states of light and dark, joy and despair, and everything in between.
Opera laid the foundation for the evolution of instrumental music by expanding hugely the expressive, melodic, and harmonic vocabulary available to composers.
Once established by the late 17th century, instrumental music developed on a path of its own making, although the great bulk of instrumental melody composed to around 1900 continued to betray its vocal ancestry.
By definition, a vocally conceived instrumental melody is one that displays a melodic quality called lyricism, that is, a melody that at some basic, primal level has the quality of vocality, of song.
The adjectives lyric or lyrical refer directly to the lyre, that most common instrument of the ancient Greek world.
The musical lexicographer Nicholas Slonimski defines the word lyric as, and we quote, pertaining to or proper for the lyre, or for accompaniment on or by the lyre, hence, adapted for singing, unquote.
Now, this does not mean that all vocally conceived instrumental melodies can actually be sung by all people, but we know lyricism that is vocally conceived melody when we hear it.
There's a rise and fall of phrase and a sense of breath in such a melody that has its analog in our own breathing. Let's do some listening and you'll hear exactly what I'm talking about.
One of the very many things that makes the music of Johann Sebastian Bach so special is its synthesis of what were considered the three great European musical traditions of the early 18th century.
The lyricism of the Italian tradition, the profundity and craft of the German tradition, and the predilection for dance, music, embellishment and wind instruments that collectively constituted the French tradition.
Let's hear Bach at his lyric, Italian at best. The second movement air from his orchestral suite number three in D major of circa 1731.
My friends, a brilliant example of instrumental music vocally conceived.
The second movement air from his orchestral suite number three in D major of circa 1731.
The second movement air from his orchestral suite number three in D major of circa 1731.
Wolfgang Mozart was almost unfailingly lyric in his conception of melody. The voice in its purest, most ideal sense was never far from the front of his mind.
In support of that statement and for your listening pleasure, a rather novel version of the third movement of Mozart's piano sonata in A major, Cursal 331, a sonata composed sometime between 1781 and 1783.
The second movement air from his orchestral suite number three in D major of circa 1731.
The second movement air from his orchestral suite number three in D major of circa 1731.
The second movement air from his orchestral suite number three in D major of circa 1731.
No one ever made the piano, a construct of wood, steel and felt actually breathe, actually sing better than the great Polish born composer Frederick Chopin who lived from 1810 to 1840.
We joined Chopin's impromptu number four in C sharp minor opus 66 of 1835 in progress about one minute in with a theme of such stunning lyricism that it is literally a song without words.
The second movement air from his orchestral suite number three in D major of circa 1731.
It should come as no surprise that Chopin's number one favorite composer was Wolfgang Mozart, something Chopin shared in common with the Russian composer Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky who lived from 1840 to 1893.
Like Chopin and Mozart before him, Tchaikovsky's music is overtly lyric.
As an example, let's hear the first theme from the first movement of Tchaikovsky's violin concerto in D major opus 35 of 1878.
My friends, this is not merely the violin as solo instrument, oh no, this is the violin as diva, as prima donna.
The second movement of Tchaikovsky's violin concerto in C sharp minor opus 35 in progress about one minute in with a theme of such stunning lyricism that it is literally a song without words.
The second movement of Tchaikovsky's violin concerto in C sharp minor opus 35 in progress about one minute in with a theme of such stunning lyricism that it is literally a song without words.
The third movement of Tchaikovsky's violin concerto in C sharp minor opus 35 in progress about one minute in with a theme of such stunning lyricism that it is literally a song without words.
Now look, I'd be most content to spend the remainder of this course playing you vocally conceived instrumental melodies.
But we need to move on to our fourth and final melodic type, instrumental melody, but before we can move on, we've got some vocabulary building to do.
Motive, repetition, and sequence. The building blocks of most thematic melodies are compact melodic ideas called motives or motifs if you're given to a certain linguistic hoity-toyiness.
By definition, a motive is a brief succession of notes out of which a larger melody grows through the processes of repetition, sequence, and transformation.
Motives have constituted the skeletal underpinning of most melodies since the late 17th century, and repetition, transformation, and sequence together comprise the syntax of motific manipulation.
As an example of this syntax, let's take a look at and listen to the first theme of the first movement of Beethoven's Symphony No. 5 of 1808, a theme that wears its motives the way a lobster wears its skeleton right on the surface.
Okay, a little analysis intended only to reveal Beethoven's motific usage, that is, how he employs motific repetition, sequence, and transformation.
To construct that theme, Beethoven's motive consists of four notes, three fast repeated notes, followed by a longer note, a third below.
Had Beethoven chosen to repeat the motive verbatim, the opening of the movement would have sounded like this.
But of course, Beethoven didn't choose to merely repeat the motive verbatim, but rather, he sequences it downwards.
A sequence is the repetition of a motive at a higher or lower pitch level. This is what Beethoven actually did.
We call that second version of the motive a sequence because it repeats the original motive on different pitches, in this case, at a lower pitch level.
Indeed, as the theme proceeds, Beethoven continues to sequence the motive.
Now something different happens. The B-man ever so slightly transforms or alters the motive. Instead of three fast repeated notes followed by a longer lower note, he alternates three fast notes that first step down and then up to the fourth and longer note.
And thus Beethoven proceeds, sequencing an ever so slightly transforming the motive for the remainder of the theme.
A hierarchy of pitch. Let's think hierarchically for a moment. A hierarchy of pitch, one that leads from the single pitch to a full blown thematic melody.
At the smallest level, there is what amounts to a sonic subatomic particle, a single pitch. That pitch is imbued with timbre and duration to create a note. Let's think of a note as a sonic atom.
Small numbers of notes clump together to form motives, musical molecules. Lastly, motives are repeated, sequenced and metamorphosed to create a melody, a genuine musical substance. Thank you.
