Lecture 15, Harmony, Part 2, Function, Tendency, and Dominance
Welcome back. This is Lecture 15, and it is entitled Harmony, Part 2, Function, Tendency, and Dominance.
My friends, you'll forgive me if I wax lyric for a moment or two.
As we have discussed, melody, the horizontal aspect of music, springs from the voice.
Certainly, the first melody instrument was the voice. Almost as certainly, we first experienced melody from the voice of a mother, or father, or some other caregiver.
And the first time we actually made melody ourselves was, likewise, with our voices, when we sang as children.
If melody springs from the voice, then rhythm springs from the body. A clearly perceived beat activates our bodies and makes us want to coordinate our movements with those of the beat.
Any casuals band knows that whatever it plays, folks have got to be able to dance to it.
Any smart advertiser knows that a great jingle will engage not just the listener's mind with the product, but her body as well.
Every clever propagandist knows that the more overwhelmingly magnificent and march-like the music, the more likely one will be able to make large groups of people not just move in lockstep, but perhaps even think and act in lockstep as well.
When we discussed rhythm, I referred to all of these manifestations, these physical manifestations of rhythm, as being manifestations of dance.
If melody springs from the voice and rhythm from the body, then harmony springs from the mind.
The harmonic techniques with which a composer organizes and coordinates the multiple simultaneous melodies of polyphony or accompanimental parts in homophony,
demands a level of knowledge and craft that goes far beyond the more instinctive musical elements of song and dance, of voice and body.
The harmonic system that dominated western music for roughly 500 years is generally referred to as functional tonality.
Though this tonal system continued to evolve and change over that period, there are certain ground line aspects of functional tonality that remained consistent across that span.
Chief among these ground line aspects is that the functional tonal system creates individual tonal centers, individual keys that become points of departure and return during the course of a piece of music.
These key areas are established, departed from and returned to through a process of harmonic motion, which is itself a product of something called harmonic function.
This lecture will discuss the roles, the functions played by various harmonies, and will focus on harmonies that play a dominant function,
the leading tone triad, the dominant seventh chord, and the diminished seventh chord.
Along the way, we'll also tackle melodic and harmonic minor, two variants of the minor mode that allow for dominant function in minor.
Harmonic function.
In various other teaching company courses, I've referred to the tonal harmonic system as a metaphor for our very lives and environment.
I would beg your indulgence if I repeat myself, because spiritually and intellectually, the tonal system resonates with primal meaning,
and if the following was worth saying once, then I humbly submit, it's worth saying again.
The tonal system is a magnificent metaphor.
At its essence, it is about complementary opposites.
The complementary opposites that balance and frame our very existence, rise and fall, tension and release, activity and inactivity,
struggle and repose, the turmoil of life, and the eternal rest of death.
At the heart of the tonal system are two pitches and the harmonies or chords built atop those pitches.
In any given key, one of those pitches and harmonies represents rest, and the other represents tension.
By way of review, if we say that we are in the key of C major, it means that we perceive the pitch C as the tonal center,
as the tonic pitch, and the major triad built atop the pitch C as the tonic chord.
In the key of C, the pitch C and the root position triad built above the pitch C represents rest, release and repose.
Of course, these words are relative, they only have meaning relative to unrest, unrelease, non-repose.
The so-called pitch and chord of tension, the polar opposite, the omega to the tonic's alpha, is the pitch and harmony
that lies a perfect fifth above a given tonic pitch.
In the key of C, that is the pitch G, and the harmony built atop the pitch G.
By way of review, in the key of C, the pitch G is called the dominant pitch, and the chord built upon a G,
the dominant chord, is the chord of tension.
It is a dissonance, and it seeks release and repose by resolving to the tonic, in this case, to a C chord.
Now, we have talked extensively about the primal power of the perfect fifth,
and the degree to which the perfect fifth is the intervallic building block of the western musical system.
Nowhere is the power of the perfect fifth more apparent than in the relationship between any given tonic chord,
which represents rest, and its dominant chord, which represents tension.
Obviously, there's more to the tonal harmonic system than just rest and tension, although at its most basic level,
that is indeed exactly what it is all about.
The function then of a tonic triad is to represent and articulate the gravitational center of a given section of music,
and, in doing so, create rest and repose.
The function of a dominant chord is to create tension and suspension in anticipation of resolution to the tonic chord.
The seventh chord.
There's another type of chord we now need to add to our repertoire, one we've been listening to,
but one we have not yet identified or discussed, and that is a seventh chord.
A seventh chord is one in which an additional third is stacked upon a triad,
creating a chord that consists of four different pitches and spans the width of a seventh.
As a reminder, a C major triad consists of a C, an E, and a G.
To create a C major seventh chord, we simply add the pitch a major third above the G.
The pitch is a B.
All of it together yielding this chord, a C major seventh chord.
Again, the chord is called a seventh chord because the distance between the root of the chord, the C,
to the top pitch of the chord, in this case, a B, is the interval of a seventh.
It's called a major seventh chord because it consists of a major triad plus a major third.
In traditional functional tonality, seventh chords, because of the seventh between the root and the top pitch,
are considered as dissonances.
Now, for our information, this is not true in jazz harmony, in which the seventh chord is the basic consonant harmonic unit.
Unfortunately, jazz theory will have to wait for another course, for now, apropos of traditional functional tonality.
We're going to talk about those seventh chords that play a dominant function,
the dominant seventh chord, the diminished seventh chord, and the half-diminished seventh chord.
However, before we can talk about these dominant function seventh chords,
we must first revisit the leading tone triad as it occurs in the major mode, that is, the diminished triad.
The diminished triad.
In lecture 14, we identified what sorts, what qualities of triads occur naturally in a major collection.
We observed that the triads built on the tonic, subdominant, and dominant pitches, on I, IV, and V, are all major triads,
and those built on the supertonic, mediant, and sub-mediant, on II, III, and VI, are all minor triads.
The odd triad out is the one built on the leading tone, or seventh degree, of any major scale.
That triad is diminished in quality.
It consists of two minor thirds stacked atop each other and spans a diminished fifth, a tritone in width.
Here's the triad built upon the seventh degree of a C major collection, a B-diminished triad,
consisting of the pitches B, D, and F.
A diminished triad, because it outlines that most unstable of all intervals, the tritone, is perceived as an extreme dissonance.
It cannot stand by itself, rather it must resolve.
How and to where this tritone resolves?
My friends, is one of the little miracles of tonal harmony.
Using the piano keyboard as a visual aid, let's observe the tritone that marks the outer pitches of the leading tone triad in C major, a B and an F.
This tritone and the leading tone triad, it outlines, wants to resolve inward by a semitone to the lower two pitches of a C major triad, to a C and an E.
The B of the tritone wants to resolve upwards by a semitone to a C, and the F of the tritone wants to resolve a semitone downwards to an E. Listen.
If we flip the tritone over and put the F below the B, it sounds like this.
Now the tritone wants to resolve outwards by semitone again to an E and a C.
Okay, let's take a step back for a moment and review what we've just observed.
One, in any given major collection, and we'll talk about minor in a few minutes, in any given major collection, there is but one tritone between any of its constituent pitches.
And that is the tritone formed between the fourth and seventh scale degrees.
In the case of C major, between an F, the fourth degree of a C major collection, and the B, the seventh degree of a C major collection.
Two, that tritone wants to resolve by a semitone to the lower two pitches of a C major triad, a C and an E.
Therefore, we say that a leading tone triad has a dominant function, because like the dominant chord, the chord of tension, the leading tone triad wants to resolve to the tonic triad.
Now, back again to this leading tone triad, this diminished triad.
The dissonance level of this tritone-dominated triad is terrific.
Medieval theorists didn't call the tritone the devil's interval for nothing.
However, in another one of the many little miracles that together constitute functional tonality, we can incorporate the extremely unstable leading tone triad into a frankly much more useful harmony.
Again, picture that leading tone triad in the key of C on a piano keyboard, a B, D and an F.
Let's add one more pitch below that chord.
We're going to give it a new root by adding the G below the B, creating a chord consisting of a G, a B, a D,
and an F.
Put it all together and we get this.
We have just created the dominant seventh chord of the key of C.
A seventh chord built on the dominant pitch of G that contains within it the leading tone triad.
A dominant seventh chord consists of a major triad, in this case a G major triad,
with a minor third added above, in this case an F natural,
when we combine the descending perfect fifth of a dominant to tonic progression
with the resolution of the tritone incorporated into the dominant seventh chord to a tonic chord,
we get what is the most familiar and powerful of all harmonic progressions in tonal music.
When in lecture 10, I played a series of dominant to tonic resolutions in order to demonstrate how we could make virtually any one of the 12 pitches of the chromatic sound like a tonic,
what I was doing was in fact playing dominant seventh chords to tonic resolutions.
I would play something like that again.
Since there is only one tritone in any given major key, again we'll talk about minor in a moment,
and since that tritone is part of a dominant seventh chord, there is only one dominant seventh chord in any major key,
and thus any given key is defined by its dominant seventh chord and its resolution to the tonic.
The leading tone. The function of the seventh scale degree of a major collection is quite specialized.
The seventh degree is called the leading tone because it wants desperately to resolve upwards by a semitone to the tonic pitch.
My friends like a golf ball sitting on the very lip of a hole wobbling, leaning, wanting desperately to submit to gravity and fall in.
So the leading tone perched but a semitone away from the tonic pitch desperately wants to acknowledge tonal gravity and fall upwards to the tonic.
Now this doesn't mean that every time we hear the seventh degree of a collection, that seventh degree has to move upwards to the tonic.
However, what it does mean is that the leading tone has a tendency, a propensity, an inclination, a desire to resolve upwards to the tonic.
Melodic minor and harmonic minor.
Melodic and harmonic minor are topics that we might very well have discussed as early as lecture 10, though I do believe that by putting them off until now,
we are better equipped to understand what they are and why they evolved.
A little review.
As we just observed, the distance in a major collection between the seventh scale degree or leading tone and the tonic pitch above it is but a semitone.
That semitone distance creates tendency, a desire on the part of the leading tone to resolve upwards.
It is a tendency intensified in order of magnitude when the leading tone and the tonic pitch are incorporated respectively into a dominant chord and a tonic chord.
However, in Aeolian mode, or what's also called natural minor, there is a whole step between the leading tone and the tonic pitch directly above it.
That whole step between the leading tone and tonic in natural minor creates almost no harmonic tendency whatsoever.
In natural minor, the progression from the dominant chord to the tonic chord from five to one is about as dramatic as plucking your eyebrows,
unless you're Leonid Brezhnev or Edward Teller, at which time such plucking amounts to an amputation.
Anyway, here's a dominant to tonic progression in major.
And here's what the same progression sounds like in natural minor.
My friends, that progression, which for the record is called a modal cadence, has almost no urgency to it at all.
It's as if that golf ball, to which we referred a couple of minutes ago, stopped five feet short of the cup.
In terms of tendency, in terms of harmonic tension and resolution, the Aeolian mode, natural minor, poses a problem.
And it's a problem that was recognized as far back as the late 14th and early 15th centuries.
That problem, the whole step between the leading tone and the tonic of a minor collection creates almost no harmonic tendency,
no drama, no oomph, and no need to resolve.
So, to the question that was first asked in the late 14th century, how might we imbue the minor mode with harmonic tendency?
The solution lay in altering, in raising the leading tone in a minor collection,
so that the distance between the leading tone and the tonic pitch directly above it is indeed only one semitone.
As a result, we are in actuality now blessed with three different forms of minor, each to be deployed when the occasion demands.
Natural minor, melodic minor, and harmonic minor, one at a time.
Natural minor.
Natural minor, what we know as the Aeolian mode, is the sort of minor we've been discussing to this point of the course.
A collection which, compared to major, has a lowered third, sixth, and seventh degree.
Natural minor, or Aeolian mode, is a great collection for use in plain chant and other music in which melodic and harmonic tendency are not just unimportant,
but often antithetical to the meditative spirit of the music.
However, we will rarely, if ever, hear pure natural minor used in music after the 15th century.
Melodic minor.
Melodic minor is that form of minor that evolved for use in tonal melodies.
It is the most commonly used form of minor.
Melodic minor is actually two collections in one.
Here's how it works.
If a melody line is descending by step from the tonic pitch down to the dominant pitch, then the seventh and sixth degrees will be lowered, just as they are in natural minor.
Again.
However, if the melody line is ascending by step from the dominant pitch to the tonic pitch, the sixth and seventh degrees will be raised, as in major, so that the leading tone is just a semi-tone distant from the tonic.
Let's hear, please, an ascending melodic minor collection.
Again.
Down, then up.
Let's hear a melodic minor collection.
Note that in both versions, the third degree of the collection is minor.
It's the sixth and seventh degrees that change depending upon the direction of the melodic material.
Descending.
Ascending.
Again, descending.
Ascending.
The fourth movement, March to the Scaffold of Berlioz's Symphony Fantastique, begins with a theme that consists almost entirely of a falling, then rising, G melodic minor collection.
Here's how the theme begins, with a descending melodic minor collection, which is, in reality, the same thing as a descending natural minor collection.
The second movement, March to the Scaffold of Berlioz's Symphony Fantastique, begins with a minor scale.
The third movement, March to the Scaffold of Berlioz's Symphony Fantastique, begins with a minor scale.
About 30 seconds later, Berlioz inverts this theme in pizzicato upper strings, at which
time we hear an ascending melodic minor collection, a question worth asking. If the
point of this whole melodic minor thing is to raise the seventh degree, the leading tone
of a minor collection, and in doing so, put it within a semitone of the tonic, why bother
raising the sixth degree of the collection as well? Why not just raise the leading tone
and call it a day? It's a good question, and here's the answer. Because. Because of the
augmented second. That was really helpful, wasn't it?
We demonstrate, please, using C melodic minor as an example. In C minor, the lowered or minor
sixth degree is an A-flat. The raised leading tone is a B-natural. The intervallic distance
between an A-flat and a B-natural is three semitones. From an A-flat, the minor sixth
to an A-natural is one semitone. From an A-natural to a B-flat is two semitones. And from a B-flat
to a B-natural, a raised leading tone is three semitones. Now usually, we would call an interval
that's three semitones in width, a minor third. However, my friends, we're counting between
adjacent scale steps here from some sort of A to some sort of B. So this is an interval
of a second. A second, one semitone wider than a major second. An augmented second.
As scale steps go, an augmented second is awkward to sing, extremely weepy and schmerzy
in mood, and vaguely Eastern European in sound. Let me play you a C minor scale, and I want
you to hear what it would sound like if we had a minor sixth degree, but a raised leading
tone, and as a result, an augmented second. We hear that schmerzy kind of sound. Sing
enough augmented seconds, and you too can sound like Tevia, the milkman from Fiddler
on the roof as well. But to the point, the sound of an augmented second is extremely
exotic, and while it might work nicely for evoking a central or Eastern European ambiance,
it's not the sort of interval that, say, a French composer like Hector Berlioz is going
to want to plug into his symphony fantastique. So in ascending melodic minor, ascending
melodic minor, going up, the sixth degree is also raised in order to avoid the augmented
second that would otherwise occur between a lowered sixth and a raised leading tone.
Harmonic minor. Harmonic minor is a procedure, really, more than a specific construct like
natural and melodic minor. Harmonic minor refers to the harmonic treatment of the dominant
chord and the leading tone in minor. Again, I explain. In natural minor, the dominant
triad, the triad built on the fifth degree of a collection, is a minor triad. That's
because the third degree of the dominant triad, its middle pitch, a pitch that also happens
to be the leading tone, is lowered. In C minor, for example, the dominant triad is
spelled Gbbd. As we've discussed, that Bb, that lowered leading tone, is about as useful
in a piece of tonal music as a screen door on a research submersible. The solution? Raise
the leading tone to a B natural whenever it is part of a dominant chord. What this means
then is that in a piece of music written in C minor, for example, we'll see a natural
sign next to every B that's part of a dominant chord.
Without raised leading tones, the harmonic tension and resolution that are the essential
elements of functional tonality would be impossible to create. Melodic minor and harmonic minor
are techniques that allow us to raise the leading tone in minor without altering the
dark expressive color that is the essence of the minor mode. Seventh chords revisited.
Before moving on to the last of our dominant function seventh chords, let us first properly
identify the intervallic structure of the five different types, the five qualities of
seventh chords, the major seventh chord, the minor seventh chord, the dominant seventh
chord, the diminished seventh chord, and the half diminished seventh chord. Major seventh
chord. A major seventh chord consists of a major triad with a major third stacked on
top. There's a major triad and now I'll add a major third on top. The dominant seventh
chord. A dominant seventh chord consists of a major triad with a minor third stacked on
top. There's our major triad and now I'll add a minor third on top. A minor seventh
chord. A minor seventh chord consists of a minor triad with a minor third stacked on top.
There's a minor triad. And now I'll put a minor third above that. A half diminished
seventh chord. A half diminished seventh chord consists of a diminished triad with a major
third stacked on top. First I would play a diminished triad. And now I will add a major
third above that. And finally a diminished seventh chord. A diminished seventh chord
consists of a diminished triad with a minor third stacked on top. Essentially three minor
thirds, one stacked atop the next. Here's a diminished triad. And now a minor third
above that. As we observed earlier in traditional tonal harmonic practice, all seventh chords
are considered as being dissonances. And in practical application, 99% of seventh chords
that we will encounter in traditional tonal practice are those seventh chords that play
a dominant function. The dominant seventh chord, the diminished seventh chord, and the
half diminished seventh chord. Alright my friends, hide the kids. It's time to talk
about the diminished seventh chord. Yes, the diminished seventh chord is literally the
most dissonant harmony, the most unstable harmony in the traditional tonal lexicon.
The diminished seventh chord comes by its dissonance honestly, as it contains not one,
but two tritones. Check it out. Let's spell out a C diminished seventh chord starting
on a C. Here's our C, an E flat, a G flat, and a B double flat, which is the same pitch
as an A. Between the root of the chord, the C, and the fifth of the chord, the G flat,
is a tritone. And between the third of the chord, the E flat, and the seventh of the
chord, the B double flat, is another tritone. Altogether, it's a harmony as unstable as
yours truly on inline skates. For our information, any given diminished seventh chord can resolve
to eight different keys depending upon which tritone resolves and in what direction. For
example, the C diminished seven we just heard can resolve the D flat major or D flat minor.
Next we'll resolve it to D flat major. Now to D flat minor. Or it can resolve to G major
or G minor. First G major. Now to G minor. Or it can resolve to B flat major or B flat
minor. First B flat major. B flat minor. Or it can resolve to E major or E minor. First
to E major. Now to E minor. That, my friends, is a level of harmonic instability of dissonance
that's unique in the syntax of tonal music. Because it can resolve to so many different
keys, composers will often use diminished seventh chords to affect sudden shift on a
dime modulations to entirely unexpected keys, something we'll talk about in the next lecture.
The diminished seventh chord as a dominant function chord. The most common use of the
diminished seventh chord is as a leading tone seventh chord in minor that plays a dominant
function. That is, a seventh chord built on a raised leading tone of a minor key. For
example, in the key of C minor, the raised leading tone is a B natural. The root position
diminished seventh chord built on that B natural consists of the pitches B natural, naturally,
D, F, and finally an A flat. All together, this B diminished seventh chord plays a dominant
function in C harmonic minor by resolving to a C minor triad. The leading tone B in
the bass resolves upwards by a semitone to C. The D and F of the B diminished seventh
chord converge on an E flat, the third of a C minor triad. And the top pitch of the
B diminished seventh chord resolves downwards by a semitone from an A flat to a G, the G
being the fifth of a C minor triad. Now, some of you might be asking, well, why bother
with this raised leading tone diminished seventh chord in the first place? If a composer wants
a dominant function chord, why not just use a dominant seventh chord? Well, the answer
because sometimes a composer will want the dissonant bite and the intensity that only
a diminished seventh chord can create. For example, Beethoven begins his piano sonata
in C minor, opus 10 number one of circa 1798 with a stark bristling theme that alternates
harmonically between a tonic C minor triad and a raised leading tone diminished seventh
chord. The main reason why the theme sounds so stark and bristling is because Beethoven
alternates harmonically between a tonic C minor triad and a raised leading tone diminished
seventh chord. It isn't until the very end of the opening statement of the theme that
Beethoven finally uses a dominant seventh chord that resolves to the tonic. Let's go
through the first 22 measures of the movement. Oh, so slowly, while I point out its harmonic
underpinning, we begin with a tonic triad C minor. And now a raised leading tone diminished
seventh chord. Diminished seventh chord resolves to tonic.
Diminished seventh chord resolves to tonic. Diminished seventh chord resolves to tonic.
Diminished seventh chord tonic, diminished seventh chord.
Another raised leading tone diminished seventh chord. Tonic, another raised leading tone
the 7th chord, and finally a dominant chord, tonic. Now let's hear that
thematic opening in real time, during which its gritty, stark, and bristling
character will stand in high, expressive relief.
Because a diminished 7th chord can resolve to so many different keys, it
lacks any tonal identity of its own. It's not like a dominant 7th chord that
once played anticipates powerfully its own resolution. My friends, just by
hearing a dominant 7th chord, we know precisely where it's supposed to resolve.
But a diminished 7th chord lacks any such identity. Do we know? Can we know
where that diminished 7th chord is going to resolve? No, we do not. We never really
know where a diminished 7th chord is going to resolve, until it does resolve.
Now that's as far as we're going to go in this lecture. When we return, we'll put
these issues of function, tendency, and dominance to work, as we conclude this
course with an exploration of cadence, progression, and modulation. Thank you.
