Lecture 8, Pitch and Mode, Part 2
Welcome back, everyone. This is Lecture 8. It is entitled, Pitch and Mode, Part 2.
Building a pitch collection, revisit it.
When we left off in Lecture 7, we were discussing the interval of an octave as the essential intervallic building block of pitch systems on this particular planet.
The first Westerner to quantify just what an octave was and why it was so special was the Greek mathematician, philosopher and teacher Pythagoras,
who lived between about 582 BCE and 507 BCE.
What Pythagoras discovered was that the simpler the numerical ratio between vibrating bodies, the more blended and therefore the more consonant the sounds created by those vibrating bodies.
This perception, the simpler the numerical ratio between vibrating bodies, the more consonant the sound had profound meaning for Pythagoras and his fellow Greeks,
who came to view music as the sonic manifestation of cosmic order.
Pythagoras discovered that the simplest of all non-replicating numerical ratios, a 2 to 1 ratio, created the simplest of all intervallic relationships, one that we today call an octave.
Pythagoras took a string and plucked it.
He then divided that original string in half and plucked half the string.
In doing so, he created a sound relationship, an interval that is the sonic manifestation of a 2 to 1 ratio.
In creating this interval, Pythagoras became aware of the amazing paradox represented by pitches that describe a 2 to 1 ratio.
They blend together so profoundly that they don't sound like two different pitches, but rather they sound like higher and lower versions of the same pitch.
The Brick Wall
Before we began discussing Pythagoras in Lecture 7, we observed that while different cultures have invented all sorts of pitch collections, what these various pitch collections all have in common is the primacy of the octave.
It all has to do with something called octave duplication.
My friends, when creating a pitch collection, any given culture has got two choices.
Choice number one is to divide each successive octave up and down into an entirely different set of pitches.
I'll play you something like that on the piano, a long upwards scale in which the pitch collection changes from octave to octave.
Music
Now, cool as that might sound when played as a scale, let's consider what would happen if, for example, a man and a woman attempted to sing happy birthday using a pitch collection like that one.
Unless the woman is a former East German shot putter, and unless the man is wearing leather slacks that haven't gotten wet, have dried in the sun, they will be singing an octave apart, the woman an octave higher than the man.
This, then, is what their performance is going to sound like if they use different pitch collections in each octave.
Music
On those same lines, imagine what it would sound like if an orchestra or chorus were playing or singing in such a way that adjacent octaves each utilized an entirely different set of pitches.
Even for a modernist like myself, it would sound utterly random at best, awful at worst.
We were talking about the brick wall, the octave, and the two choices any given culture has got when creating a pitch collection.
Choice one is to divide each successive octave into an entirely different set of pitches.
Choice two is to divide a given octave into a single set of pitches that is then duplicated above and below in higher and lower octaves.
Thus, anything being sung or played in one octave will be sung or played on the same pitches in any other octave.
Using such a system of octave duplication, our duet performance of Happy Birthday would sound like this.
Music
The same pitches, just an octave apart. A most different story, don't we think? Indeed.
The pitch collection on which Happy Birthday is based sees the octave divided into seven different pitches.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven.
And then the duplicate, the octave above the first pitch, back to one.
And those same pitches are duplicated in every other octave above and below.
As it turns out, virtually every musical culture on the planet has chosen this course to divide the octave into some collection of pitches and then to duplicate those pitches in higher and lower octaves.
At the time the word octave was coined, the western pitch system consisted of seven different pitches, what we might think of as the white keys on the piano.
In this seven-pitch system, the word octave represents the eight pitches from any one pitch to its duplicate located eight pitches above or eight pitches below.
The chromatic collection.
We're going to require a visual tool for talking about pitch collections, a visual tool with which I trust we're all at least passingly familiar, and that is a piano keyboard.
An image of a keyboard with pitch names attached can be found in your course booklets.
The chromatic collection, that pitch collection that represents all the pitches on a modern keyboard, is a product of thousands of years of musical evolution.
And we'll address the chromatic collection in greater detail when we discuss its evolution in just a couple of lectures.
For now, let's just make some observations.
Observation one.
The word chromatic comes from the Greek chromaticos, meaning color or coloration.
Let's think of the chromatic collection as the complete palette of pitches available in western music.
Observation two.
The chromatic collection divides the octave into twelve equal segments.
I would count those segments as I play a chromatic scale.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, and back to where we started.
Observation three.
The distance between the adjacent pitches of the chromatic collection is called a semitone or a half step.
So adjacent pitches in the chromatic collection are called semitones or half steps.
Pitch names.
Looking at a keyboard, we are immediately struck by the arrangement of white keys and black keys,
and groups of two black keys alternate with groups of three black keys.
The pitch C, which we are going to use as our starting point in this investigation, is the white key located immediately below,
meaning to the left of any group of two black keys.
There are seven different white keys on the piano.
I would play them and name them as we go.
C, D, E, F, G, A, B, and back to C.
Sidebar. Two questions.
Why are the pitches named for letters, and why do we always seem to start these discussions on the pitch called C,
rather than on the pitch named after the first letter of the alphabet, the A?
Good questions, my friends. Good questions.
Right, question one. German and Germanic language speaking cultures generally use letters to identify the pitches,
because it's clear, clean, and easy to remember.
In romance language speaking cultures, the pitches are identified by what are called solfege symbols.
C, D, E, F, G, A, B, and then back to C.
Question two. Why, in discussions just like this one, do we typically start on the pitch C and not with the pitch A?
And on those same lines, if C is so important, why wasn't it called A in the first place?
Alright, to answer that question, we must get slightly ahead of ourselves, but that's okay.
Historically, the pitch we call A was the more important pitch,
as the white keys on a piano from an A to an A constitute a minor collection,
and when played as a scale, a minor scale.
A, D, C, D, E, F, G, A.
That scale, that minor mode or minor collection is a much older construct than the major mode or major collection.
The reason why we generally use a major collection as a starting point in an exploration such as this
is a reflection of the growing importance of major over the last 400 years,
and the reason why we use C major is because it consists entirely of white keys on the piano
and is therefore easier to visualize than any other major collection.
We will, I promise, talk lots more about the nature and history of both the major and minor collections
before the end of this lecture, but for now, sidebar over, back please to pitch names.
The black keys on the keyboard are collectively known and notated as accidentals,
either sharps or flats depending upon what key we are in.
The black key immediately above that is to the upper right of any white key is called a sharp of that white key.
Therefore, the black key immediately above or to the right of a C is called a C sharp.
The black key immediately above or to the right of an A would be called an A sharp.
Conversely, the black key immediately below that is to the left of any white key is called a flat of that white key.
Therefore, the black key immediately below a D is called a D flat.
The black key immediately below a B is called a B flat and so forth.
Now obviously, there is some ambiguity here because a C sharp and a D flat are the same key on the piano
and sound as the same pitch when played.
We say that C sharp and D flat are in harmonic tones.
They sound the same, but will be spelled as one pitch or the other depending upon whether we're in a key that uses flats
or a key that uses sharps, all of which I'll explain when we get to key signatures in lecture 10.
Back to the chromatic collection.
Very little western music uses all 12 pitches of the chromatic collection all the time
and the music that does dates from about 1910.
For literally thousands of years, western music was characterized rather by pitch collections consisting of seven different pitches.
It is these seven pitch collections which include among them the major and minor collections
as well as the so-called church modes that now demand our attention.
Diatonic collections.
These seven pitch collections are called diatonic collections.
The word diatonic is Greek and it means proceeding by whole tones.
The diatonic collections that the ancient Greeks studied and codified came into existence long before the Greeks began to study them.
As usual with music, theory and codification pretty much always follow practice.
So these are ancient, ancient modes.
Here's our diatonic game plan.
We will first define exactly what constitutes a diatonic collection.
We'll then explore the intervalla content of diatonic collections,
identifying the different types of diatonic collections or modes as they are often called,
and finish up this lecture by examining the two most important diatonic collections, major and minor.
My friends, a caveat as we begin.
I'm going to play all our musical examples on a modern piano using a tuning system that's only been standard since the 1850s.
Obviously, we're not going to be hearing the nuances of pitch that the ancient Greeks or medieval theorists
or the musicians of the Renaissance Baroque or Classical eras would have heard.
Well, you know what? That's OK.
We work with the tools we have, meaning a modern piano.
Besides, my lyre is in the shop.
Diatonic collection defined.
A diatonic collection is one that divides the octave into seven different pitches.
The intervalla content of adjacent pitches in a diatonic collection will consist by definition of five whole tones and two semitones.
Now, as an example of a diatonic collection, we return to our faithful and trusty C major collection.
This is the white keys on a piano contained within octave C's.
Played as a scale, it sounds like this.
Let's examine, please, as an example of a diatonic collection, the intervallic makeup of this particular collection.
As an example of a diatonic collection in general, and a major collection in particular, please, we return to our image of a piano keyboard.
The tonic pitch.
A new and very important word before we start.
Since the pitch C is the parent pitch of this particular collection, and since, therefore, the C will be the first pitch in a scalar presentation of this collection,
we call the C the tonic pitch.
Think of the word tonic as a contraction of the phrase tonal center, tone, center, toneic.
In C major, the pitch C is the tonic.
As a reminder, we observed that the chromatic collection divides the octave into 12 different pitches, and that adjacent pitches in a chromatic scale are a semitone or half step apart.
So, onto the intervallic makeup of a C major collection, the white keys on a piano from C to C.
We start on the tonic pitch, a C.
Moving upwards, how many semitones is it from the C to the second pitch of the collection, a white key D?
We count.
From C upwards to a C sharp, that is the black key directly above the C, is the distance of one semitone, and from that black key C sharp upwards to the white key D is another semitone.
So, the pitch D lies two semitones or one whole tone above the pitch C.
A reminder, we are examining the intervallic makeup of a C major collection as an example of a diatonic collection in general, and a major collection in particular.
Okay, what is the distance from the second pitch of a C major collection, a D, to the third pitch, an E?
Using the keyboard as our visual guide, we count.
From D up to the black key D sharp directly above it is one semitone, and from that black key D sharp to the white key E directly above it is another semitone.
From D to E, from the second to third pitches or scale degrees of a C major collection is two semitones or another whole tone.
Okay, we continue.
What's the distance from the E, the third pitch or third scale degree of a C major collection, to an F, the fourth pitch or fourth scale degree of a C major collection?
E up to F.
It is, my friends, a semitone, as there is no black key between an E and an F on a piano keyboard.
Now look, this drives a lot of people nuts.
Yo, if it's a whole tone from a white key C to a white key D, and a whole tone from a white key D to a white key E, then why isn't it a whole tone from a white key E to a white key F?
Because it isn't a whole tone.
It isn't a whole step.
It's a semitone.
We cannot let our eyes lead our ears just because both an E and an F are white keys on a piano doesn't mean that they are a whole tone apart.
The interval, the sonic distance between an E and an F is the same sonic distance as that between a C and a C sharp or an A and an A sharp or a D and a D sharp.
It's a semitone.
E and F are adjacent pitches in the chromatic collection, and they sound a semitone apart.
Period.
We continue our examination of the intervallic makeup of a C major collection as an example of a diatonic collection in general and a major collection in particular.
From the F, the fourth scale degree of a C major collection to a G, the fifth scale degree of a C major collection is two semitones or a whole step.
From the G to the A, the sixth scale degree of a C major collection is again two semitones or a whole step.
From the A to the B, B being the seventh scale degree of a C major collection, is again two semitones or a whole step.
Finally, from B up to C is a semitone.
There is no black key between a B and a C, so it sounds like a semitone.
Let's put it all together.
The intervallic makeup of this C major scale, that is the distance from C to D, D to E, E to F, F to G, G to A, A to B, and B back to C is whole tone, whole tone, semitone.
That semitone is from E to the F, whole tone, whole tone, whole tone, semitone.
That final semitone is from the B up to the C.
In the analytical and theoretical literature, in which a whole tone is abbreviated with the letter T, meaning tone, and a semitone with the letter S, this means that adjacent pitches in a major collection describe an intervallic makeup of T, T, S, T, T, T, S.
Now we return to our definition of a diatonic collection, a seven pitch division of the octave that will feature, by definition, five whole tones and two semitones.
The major collection we just defined features five whole tones and two semitones.
The diatonic collections are modes.
Mode is another word for diatonic collection.
The word collection, as we've already discussed, is another and I think better word for a group of pitches that is all too frequently described as a scale.
Now please, we're not going to talk about the modes as they existed in either the ancient or medieval world.
Such a discussion is as arcane, complex, and in regards to ancient practice as speculative, a musical discussion as any that exists and it goes far beyond what we're trying to achieve here in a listener's guide to music theory.
Instead, we will discuss the modes, the various diatonic collections, as they are understood today.
As we understand them today, there are seven different modes, seven different diatonic collections, each one starting and ending on one of the seven pitches represented by the seven white keys on the piano.
Originally, these modes came into existence when the octave was divided into just seven different pitches, more or less the seven white keys on the piano.
So once again, we'll use the seven white keys of the piano as a visual aid in learning the seven modes.
We start with the Ionian mode.
My friends, we've already discussed the Ionian mode in great detail.
Better known as a major collection, the Ionian mode encompasses the white keys on the piano from C to C and has an intervallic profile of T, T, S, T, T, T, S, tone, tone, semi-tone, tone, tone, tone, semi-tone, whole tone, whole tone, semi-tone, whole tone, whole tone, whole tone, semi-tone.
Under the heading of, we'll talk lots more about this in due time.
We would nevertheless point out that the Ionian mode is a bright and brilliant sounding collection, something largely due to the major third, the distance of four semi-tones between the tonic and third degree of the collection.
Again, we'll get back to this before the end of the lecture, but let's go on.
We need to identify all seven of these diatonic modes.
The second of these modes is the Dorian mode.
The Dorian mode is an ancient and hallowed pitch collection as much of the repertoire of plain chant or so-called Gregorian chant is set in Dorian mode.
Darker and much more austere than the Ionian mode, for reasons we'll discuss in a few minutes.
Dorian mode encompasses the white keys on the piano from D to D and has an intervallic profile of T, S, T, T, T, S, T.
As a scale, the Dorian mode sounds like this.
Let's hear the somber, serious sound of Dorian mode in action in this singing of Thomas of Cello and O's plain chant trope, D, S, I, R, the day of wrath of circa 1225.
The dark, somber sound of Dorian mode is largely due to the minor third,
the distance of three semitones between the tonic and third degree of the collection.
Mode number three, Phrygian mode.
The Phrygian mode encompasses the white keys of the piano from E to E and has an intervallic profile of S, T, T, T, S, T, T.
That intervallic profile might not mean a whole heck of a lot when I simply say it, but it's going to sound very familiar when I play it.
There's a stereotypically Spanish sound, a distinctly Andalusian sound to Phrygian mode.
It's the semitone between the tonic and the second scale degree of the mode and the whole tone between the tonic and seventh scale degree of the mode that give the Phrygian mode its characteristically Spanish feel.
Ole! Andalusia, my friends, is the southernmost region of Spain. Its capital is Seville.
The name Andalusia is derived from the Arabic Al-Andalus, which referred specifically to that part of the Iberian Peninsula that was ruled by Muslims for 800 years until 1492.
The North African Moorish occupation profoundly influenced Andalusian culture and nowhere is that influence more apparent than an Andalusian flamenco song and dance.
Music that combines Andalusia's Greek, Phoenician and Iberian heritage with that of North Africa and Arabia.
The characteristic modal sound of this head-spinningly diverse music is that of the Phrygian mode.
Lydian mode. Lydian mode encompasses the white keys on the piano from F to F. The Lydian mode is a bright and brilliant collection with an intervalic profile of TTTSTTS.
The brightness and brilliance of the Lydian mode is largely due to the major third, the distance of four semitones between the tonic and third degree of the collection.
Let's hear a little Lydian mode, please.
Again, under the heading of TMI, too much information, I would tell you that the Lydian mode is of limited musical use in tonal music because of something called a raised or augmented fourth.
The fourth scale degree of Lydian mode is what we call an augmented fourth or a tritone above the tonic rather than an interval called a perfect fourth.
Let's focus for a moment on this augmented fourth.
This augmented fourth between the tonic and fourth degrees of the mode imbue the Lydian mode with a peculiar sort of sound and generally puts it outside the pale of harmonic usage as harmonic usage developed in the 15th and 16th centuries.
Look, I told you that that was too much information, but assuming you listened to this course more than once, it will make lots of sense in light of what we will discuss in later lectures.
Meanwhile, we move on to the fifth of our modes to the Mixolydian mode.
Mixolydian mode encompasses the white keys on the piano from a G to a G.
Like the Ionian mode and the Lydian mode, the Mixolydian mode is a bright mode as a result of the major third, the distance of four semitones between the tonic and third degrees of the collection.
Overall, the Mixolydian mode has an intervallic profile of TTS, TTS, T.
The sixth of our modes is the Aeolian mode.
Aeolian mode encompasses the white keys on a piano from an A to an A.
Like Dorian mode, it is dark and somber in character with a minor third between its tonic and third degree.
Its intervallic profile is TST, TST, T.
Along with the Ionian mode, which, as we observed, is better known as the major collection, the Aeolian mode is the most familiar diatonic collection to modern listeners.
My friends, we know it as the minor collection or as the minor mode.
With certain important modifications, which we'll talk about in lecture 15, the minor collection, or minor mode, has been ubiquitous in western music for the last 400 years.
As an example of its darkness and sobriety, let's hear the opening of the second movement, Funeral March, from Beethoven's Symphony No. 3 of 1803.
The second movement, Funeral March, from Beethoven's Symphony No. 3 of 1803.
The second movement, Funeral March, from Beethoven's Symphony No. 3 of 1803.
The second movement, Funeral March, from Beethoven's Symphony No. 3 of 1803.
Funeral March, from Beethoven's Symphony No. 3 of 1803.
Funeral March, from Beethoven's Symphony No. 3 of 1803.
Funeral March, from Beethoven's Symphony No. 3 of 1803.
Funeral March, from Beethoven's Symphony No. 3 of 1803.
Funeral March, from Beethoven's Symphony No. 3 of 1803.
Funeral March, from Beethoven's Symphony No. 3 of 1803.
The seventh and last of our modes is the Locrian mode.
The Locrian mode encompasses the white keys on the piano from a B to a B, and is dark and quite dissonant in tone, with an intervallic profile of S-T-T, S-T-T-T. It sounds like this.
Music
More TMI, my friends, more too much information.
The Locrian mode is almost never used because of the diminished fifth or tritone that lies between the tonic and fifth scale degree of the mode.
As we will learn in Lecture 9, the second most important pitch in any diatonic collection after the first or tonic pitch is the one that lies an interval of a perfect fifth above that tonic.
Well, the fifth degree of a Locrian mode does not lie a perfect fifth above the tonic, but rather a diminished fifth. It's a semitone smaller than a perfect fifth.
Let me demonstrate that. Here's what a perfect fifth would sound like above the tonic of a Locrian mode.
Music
But of course, a Locrian mode does not have that perfect fifth. It has a diminished fifth that sounds like this.
Music
Yeah, from a tonal harmonic standpoint, this diminished fifth renders the Locrian mode almost useless.
Like the silent gh in words like fight, blight, might, and hate as in Ashbury, we know that the Locrian mode is there, but accepting some applications in jazz very little if any music is actually set in Locrian mode.
Again, this will make much more sense in light of information to come in future lectures. This I promise.
One last thing before we start putting all this modal stuff together.
The names by which we presently identify the diatonic modes, Ionian, Dorian, Phrygian, and so forth, were coined in the ancient world, but were misapplied and misinterpreted during the early Middle Ages.
It was a case of mistaken identity, unwittingly perpetrated by the music theorists and practitioners of the early church.
You see, these good people read and studied what ancient texts said about music, ancient texts that became the basis of their own research and theorizing.
Unfortunately, the problem was that these early medieval theorists had not a single decipherable note of ancient music available to them.
So when it came to actually applying the ancient texts to the modes as they understood them, they were truly in the dark, operating on a wing and a prayer.
Aristotle, writing in his book Politics, noted that, and we quote Aristotle,
The musical modes differ essentially from one another, and those who hear them are differently affected by each.
Some of them make men sad and grave, like the so-called Mixolydian.
Others enfeeble the mind, another again produces a moderate and settled temper, which appears to be the peculiar effect of the Dorian, and the Phrygian inspires enthusiasm, unquote.
Look, today we would never consider the relatively bright Mixolydian mode with its major third between the tonic and third scale degree as being sad and grave,
and the cultural differences between ourselves and the ancient Greeks notwithstanding, neither would they.
The medieval theorists misapplied the names, and it's a case of mistaken identity that has stuck.
Alright, putting mode all together.
The seven diatonic collections, or modes, constitute the very backbone of pitch material in western music from the ancient world through the early to mid-20th century.
Let's hear them again, back to back.
The Ionian mode.
The Dorian mode.
The Phrygian mode.
The Lydian mode.
The Mixolydian mode.
The Aeolian mode.
And the Locrian mode.
By the 1600s, the number of modes in common use had been reduced to two, the Ionian mode and the Aeolian mode, what came to be known as, respectively, major and minor.
Major and minor properly defined.
The words major and minor often cause some confusion in their application to music.
It's not the words themselves, but rather our contemporary usage that has rendered the meaning of major and minor confusing.
Look, today, the words major and minor have taken on subjective meaning.
The word major is used to describe something we deem as being of overriding importance, while the word minor usually describes something of lesser import.
This subjective usage has nothing to do with what major and minor mean as musical terms.
As musical terms, major and minor come from middle English words based on the Latin mayor and minor, meaning, respectively, larger and smaller.
For example, as in the constellations, ursa major and ursa minor, big bear and little bear.
Let's illustrate the musical usage of major and minor using the seven diatonic modes, and in doing so, clarify our earlier observations regarding the relative brightness or darkness of the modes.
As we observed previously, Ionian mode, or the major mode, Lydian mode and Mixolydian mode are relatively bright in character, and Dorian mode, Phrygian mode, Aeolian mode, or the minor mode, and Locrian mode are relatively dark in character.
Let me explain why, and in doing so, anticipate the exploration of intervals that will dominate our next lecture.
More than any other factor, my friends, it is the third scale degree of each of these modes that determines its relative brightness or darkness.
Let's start with the Ionian mode, or the major collection, the white keys on the piano from C to C.
Let's count how many semitones distant the third degree of the collection, the pitch E, is from the tonic, the pitch C.
Counting upwards from C to C sharp is one semitone, from C sharp to D is two semitones, from D to D sharp is three semitones, and finally from D sharp to E is four semitones.
So, the third degree of an Ionian mode is four semitones above the tonic or first pitch, and I would tell you that the same thing is true of a Lydian mode and a Mixolydian mode.
The third degree of each of these brighter sounding modes is also located four semitones above the tonic or first pitch.
Let's do the same thing now with an Aeolian or minor mode, the white keys on the piano from an A to an A.
Counting upwards from A to A sharp is one semitone, from A sharp to B is two semitones, and from B to C, C being the third degree of an Aeolian mode starting on A is three semitones.
And I would tell you the same thing is true of a Dorian mode, a Phrygian mode, and a Locrian mode. The third degree of each of these modes is also located three semitones above the tonic pitch.
Because it spans three upwards scale steps, the distance from the tonic to the third pitch of each mode is called the interval, the distance of a third.
Some of the thirds we've just examined, the ones from the brighter modes, are at four semitones in width, bigger, wider than the ones from the darker modes, which are three semitones in width.
Borrowing from Latin nomenclature, where major means larger and minor means smaller, the thirds that are four semitones in width are called major thirds, and the thirds that are three semitones in width are called minor thirds.
The third degree of any diatonic collection or mode is called the color tone, and now we can see why. If that third degree or color tone is a major third above the tonic, the mode will have a brighter color.
If it is a minor third above the tonic, the mode will have a darker color.
Conclusions and review
We will talk lots more about major and minor collections and intervals when we return, but first my friends, a quick review of what we've covered in these last two lectures.
What we perceive as sound is the result of a concussion wave, tiny fluctuations in air pressure.
Our hearing apparatus, though admittedly inferior when compared to some animals, is nevertheless wonderfully sensitive, and our ability to sort out and comprehend incredibly complex combinations of sounds is nothing short of amazing.
A noise sound is one in which there is so much acoustical information present that it is impossible for us to perceive any particular fundamental pitch.
A discrete sound is a sound that features a single perceivable fundamental frequency. A discrete sound is one that we can sing.
A pitch is a discrete sound with the attribute of timbre. A note is a pitch that has a specific duration.
The acoustic distance between any two pitches is called an interval.
The interval of an octave, the distance of eight oct of white keys on the piano, is the most basic interval in our universe, a sonic manifestation of a two to one ratio.
Different cultures divide the octave up into various collections of pitches which are then duplicated in higher and lower octaves.
For literally thousands of years, Western culture divided the octave into seven different pitches, into pitch collections called diatonic collections or diatonic modes.
By around the year 1600, two of these seven diatonic modes had become preeminent, the Ionian mode which became known as the major mode or major collection, and the Aeolian mode which became known as the minor mode or minor collection.
More than any other single pitch, it is the third degree of a diatonic collection, the so-called color tone, that imbues the collection with either a sense of brightness or darkness.
In the major mode, that third degree is four semitones or a major third above the tonic.
In the minor mode, that third degree is three semitones or a minor third above the tonic.
Lots of information, much of it very complex, but we will keep working and keep explaining as we move forward. Thank you.
