Welcome to the Origin Science Scholars Program of the Institute for the Science of Origins.
The Institute is a partnership of Case Western Reserve University,
the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, and Idea Stream.
The Fall 2014 Origin Science Scholars Lectures are presented with the assistance
of the Segal Lifelong Learning Program, the College of Arts and Sciences, and MediaVision.
Tonight, we are very pleased to be here at the Tinkham-Ville University Center
on the campus of Case Western Reserve University
for our third lecture in this Fall 2014 series,
The Origins of Life from Geochemistry to Biochemistry, with Dr. Nita Sahai.
Dr. Sahai is Ohio Research Scholar and Professor
in the Department of Polymer Science at the University of Akron.
She is a fellow of the Maneurological Society of America
and was the distinguished lecturer of that society for 2013-2014.
Her research on the origins of life, which is a small part of what she does,
is supported by the Simons Foundation, and we are very pleased to have her joining us here tonight.
One of the most fundamental and profound questions that all human societies have asked,
from prehistory to now, is where did we come from?
What is our relationship to nature, to the earth and stars and animals and plants?
And in many mythologies, in fact, various creatures are represented as part animal,
part human, and sometimes even part plant.
So somehow this is reflecting the human mind's intuitive understanding
that really there's no difference between all these living creatures
and that they are interconnected to the different earth, etc.
There are other approaches that have obviously been taken to try and address this question of our origins.
Metaphysical, philosophical, and scientific approaches.
So today what I'd like to do is present one of the scientific approaches to this question
about the origins of life and the relationship to how life began on earth from a planet
that was primarily or only rocks and minerals, atmospheric gases.
How that came to become a planet completely inhabited by all forms of life
found in every possible ecological niche that has been looked at to date.
In other words, the transition from geochemistry to biochemistry.
So the presentation is divided into three parts.
In the first part, what I'd like to address is habitability
What are the environmental conditions under which life can actually emerge and evolve?
What is the geological history of the earth from the time it was formed?
How did these environments evolve over time and support the origin of life?
And are there other places beyond earth where life might at least have the possibility of originating?
After that, we'll get into what one might call life.
What is the basic definition? What's the minimal definition, the minimal characteristics of all living cells?
Wouldn't it be amazing if you could actually self-assemble from the bottom up one of these basic cell-like entities?
So this would be called a proto-cell, a minimal proto-cell.
You start with simple organic compounds that are known to have been present.
They've found in meteorites, they've found in the spectra of stars.
They were presumably present on early earth.
How do you go from these simple compounds to the more complex polymers,
longer versions of these compounds, which then self-assemble into a unit that we would call a cell?
People have been trying to do this in the lab for 40, 50 years or more.
And some progress has been made, but this is still obviously an outstanding question,
which is why I'm outstanding here.
So then we pose the central question of what is the main problem of getting life started,
whether in reality or in the lab.
And this is where the issue of whether genes came first,
that is to reproduce and pass your genetic information to the next generation.
Did that appear first? Or did metabolism appear first?
That is to say the energy reactions you need to create energy to keep your cells alive.
So it's this chicken and egg issue.
At the end, at the third part of the talk, what I'll say is,
try to introduce the idea of could minerals have possibly played a role
in these different steps that would lead up to the assembly of this minimal protocell?
Could minerals have actually played a role of enzymes before enzymes existed, before life existed?
And we'll go even one step further and say,
could these different portions, different parts of these origins of life molecules
have actually worked together synergistically to help each other polymerize,
become more complex and self-assemble?
So that's the layout of the presentation.
Before getting started, there are two points I'd like to make.
In terms of understanding early Earth history,
we actually have a record in the isotopic and elemental compositions
of the minerals and rocks that are found on Earth, the very ancient ones.
So we can interpret those from a geochemical standpoint
and actually have a feel for what the conditions were on early Earth.
We can't, however, go back in time and figure out actually
what the organic chemistry reactions were that led to the first cells.
We can't really go back in or we can't, in the lab, with any complete certainty,
do these reactions and say, this is how life began.
All we can do is come up with plausible reactions under early Earth conditions
that would lead to something like a protocell.
So everything is taken with a grain of salt.
It's just so that, so long as it follows logic and is plausible under early Earth conditions,
then we say this is a potential root to a protocell.
And there might have been many, which is why, one of the reasons why it's called the origins in plural of life,
rather than the origin of life.
Okay, so with that introduction, let's get started on the first part.
What kind of environments existed on early Earth and could support the emergence of life?
So a quick timeline of early Earth history.
The Earth is 4.56 billion years old, giga-anum GA.
So along with the solar system and other planets, this is where the Earth began.
Very early in Earth history, you had the formation of the core and the moon.
And by around 4.4 billion years ago, liquid water had already started to be stable on the surface of the Earth.
Before that, it was too hot.
But the Earth had cooled down enough that liquid water existed by 4.4 billion years ago.
And we know this because of the oxygen isotopic composition of a particular single crystal of zircon.
This is a few micron in size found in Western Australia.
It's the oldest piece of rock or mineral ever known.
This is very important because it means that very early in Earth history, organisms could have at least the molecules that are stable.
The organic molecules have started evolving.
Further on, at about 4 billion years, we have the evidence of the oldest rock rather than just a piece of a mineral.
And this is consistent with continental crust.
This is important because before this, we only had oceanic crust.
At about 3.8 billion years ago, you have the first isotopic evidence, again, in the rocks, the carbon isotope evidence,
and sulfur isotope evidence telling you that life may have originated by then.
And then by 3.5 billion years ago, you have full-blown bacterial fossils in the rock.
And they look just like modern bacteria.
So the period of interest really is from about 4.4 billion years ago to, say, about 3.5, by which time modern life has already evolved.
So really, it's even earlier. It's like in this area.
And then the rest of it is just details, right?
So there was no oxygen on early Earth.
The cyanobacteria produced oxygen, and there was an increase in oxygen at about 2 billion years ago.
That was the first time when there was enough energy for eukaryotes to evolve.
These are multicellular organisms, which is what we are.
And after that, the first fossils, all of the trilobites, everything from the Cambrian, et cetera, the dinosaurs,
all of that is only in the last half a billion years of Earth history.
So we only really have hand fossils in the last half a billion years before that there are only microscope bacterial fossils.
All right, so this is a picture of the Hadean Earth.
This is the first 200 million years when it was hot meteorites were still impacting from the early formation of the solar system.
A lot of energy being delivered, completely inhospitable, no oxygen in the atmosphere.
By about 4.4 billion years, the Earth had cooled enough that liquid water could exist on the Earth.
But even then, it was about 80, 90 degrees Celsius.
Hot, but okay, it's liquid water.
So there would have been different sorts of environments, as you can see here.
There's still volcanic gases being put out, pretty noxious ones.
There's hot waters. There's some land, some crust.
But you could imagine life starting.
It's called cool early Earth because compared to the Hadean, it's cool.
But if you compare it to today, 30 degrees Celsius, you would say it's hot.
So bacteria, if they could evolve here, would be called thermophiles, what like high temperature.
Further down in the Archaean era, from 4.1 to 3.9 billion years,
this is where that continental crustal rock has evolved.
Important because now you can start having fresh water rather than only oceanic crust and ocean water.
This is a picture from Iceland.
And by 3.5 billion years, here's the first bacterial fossil found by Bill Schopp also in western Australia.
And you can see how similar it is to a modern cyanobacterium.
All of this is an atmosphere that has no oxygen.
Oxygen, as I showed you before, only arose at about 2.5 billion years
when the cyanobacteria had produced enough oxygen that it accumulated in the atmosphere.
Okay, so we've looked at different potential geochemical environments, the evolution of the Earth.
Now let's talk about what could life have evolved in any or all of these environments.
So this is a phylogenetic tree of life as we know it today.
There are three main branches.
There are bacteria, which are unicellular organisms.
There are archaea, which are also unicellular organisms, but they have some features.
Most features like bacteria, some features like the other organisms called eukarya.
Eukarya are multicellular, we're all eukaryotes.
Sorry for the small font, but it doesn't really matter.
The point here is that among all these branches, or at least the earliest branches of life, bacteria and archaea,
there are these organisms like thermotoga, aquafex.
These are bacteria that are thermophiles.
They love living in warm waters.
Similarly, the archaea have a lot of, in general, called extremophiles.
They like extreme environmental conditions.
They live in acidic environments.
They live in high temperature, high pressure.
You core into the earth and you can bring them up.
They live in ice, psychrophiles.
So they live in salt conditions, helophiles.
So basically these are the earliest rooted near the origin of life.
These are the earliest organisms, so you can see that they do like extreme conditions.
What we're interested in is way before even these branches developed,
the earliest minimal cell-like creature called a protocell.
So let's look at some of these actual geochemical environments we've been talking about.
Maybe you've all heard of deep sea hydrothermal vents.
These are putting out sulphidic, highly reduced oxygen-free water, very hot, like 375 degrees Celsius, very acidic.
And immediately it mixes with the bottom waters of the ocean, which are at 4 degrees Celsius, oxygenated, neutral pH.
So there's a beautiful gradient of chemistry as well as temperature.
And all kinds of organisms from bacteria up to muscles have been found living in these completely light-free, right?
There's no light in there.
And these are iron-sulfide minerals, these dark minerals.
There would have been plenty of iron-sulfides on early earth.
We know this from various geochemical evidence.
Okay, here are some bacteria cultured from these deep sea vents.
It doesn't matter what they are.
The main point is that there are different kinds that have been cultured.
Done by NOAA, funded by NOAA, always put up national funding agencies, your tax dollars at work.
All right, that's one kind of cultured bacteria.
Here's another.
So the one bacterium says, I must say I prefer Verdi's Don Carlos to La Traviata.
The other says, I concur, but what of Aida?
So clearly they have been cultured from La Scala.
And they have wine, most excellent.
Here are some modern, continuing with the journey of modern geochemical environments.
Here's a volcanic lake in Java.
Highly sulfurous gases are being put out.
It's acidic.
Acidophiles would live there.
This is Spotted Lake in Canada, alkaline pH, all kinds of sulfate minerals.
Here is an ice core from the Arctic.
Zero degrees.
You would find psychrophiles living in here.
Plus you have to dig core in deep so there might be pH of files, bacteria that like temperature.
I mean pressure.
Sorry, so there are multiple environments where bacteria live today and that we have seen existed on early Earth.
Well, what about other worlds then?
Here's an image of Mars.
You can see that at the South Pole, there's ice present.
And here are some images taken by the landers on Mars.
You can see alluvial fans.
This is where water running down a steep slope then enters the plane and it deposits all its sediment in a wide area.
There are also these circular, spherical iron oxide minerals that are found on Mars.
And they look very similar on Mars and on Earth.
So can you tell me which one is Mars and which one is Earth?
Any guess?
You have a 50% chance, you know.
Left is Earth, right is Mars.
All right, good guy.
So what does it mean?
Basically it means that there was liquid water on Mars at some point.
Even now there are some images that show potential seasonal changes in perhaps formation of ice and melting of ice.
I'm out of town, I'll take you about three more minutes to finish this segment.
So potentially there were environments on early Martian history,
capable of supporting the origin of life.
How about a few other solid worlds away from the Earth and Mars?
Europa, which is the moon of Jupiter, was discovered by Galileo Galilei.
And here are images again taken from a beautiful national agency, NASA.
What it sees is an icy world.
You see the surface of the crust of Europa and it basically has huge ice rocks, water ice.
And some of these rafts are as much as 13 kilometers across.
Those are the crevasses you're seeing in the ice just like you would see on a glacier.
The spectroscopy from the spacecraft also tells us that there is water, liquid water below this icy crust,
and that it is a briny, salty water.
And this is the artist's rendition of the information.
So here is a potential environment for life.
Similarly, Titan, which is a moon of Saturn, discovered by Christiane Huygens,
shows it orbiting Saturn.
It has an atmosphere that is rich in organic compounds and nitrogen.
This is important because then you can start synthesizing potentially longer, more complex organic molecules.
And here's the surface of Titan. It also looks very Earth-like, right?
So from this little survey, what I want to say is that there are many environments on which Earth is found today.
So there's no reason to doubt that life may have originated in many different environments on early Earth
and potentially elsewhere on the planet.
It's also important to recognize that life evolved, potentially evolved very early in Earth history.
So there was a lot of time available to become a protocell, to become a full bacterium
by the time 3.5 gigaannum showed up.
Okay, so I'll stop with that and welcome questions.
I'm confused.
What you're suggesting is that there was a spontaneous type of growth of bacterium because of the water, the warmth.
What have we found for meteorites?
Is there any evidence of bacterial growth in those?
Right. So what I'm suggesting is that on early Earth,
if you look at, in fact, meteorites have been studied and there's a great question that anticipates part 3 of the presentation.
So a ton of organic molecules have been isolated from meteorites.
Simple ones like amino acids, single-chain amphiphiles, up to things that are so big that they're essentially like tar.
When you put them in water, they form insoluble aggregates. They don't even dissolve.
And interestingly, the amino acids are even chiral.
The left-handed are enriched over the right-handed.
So yes, organic molecules exist.
When you look at the spectra of stars out there, there are organic molecules in the spectra.
So organic molecules exist in space.
They might even have been delivered on early Earth by all this meteorite bombardment.
And you might say, well, at such high temperatures as it's passing through the atmosphere and getting frictionally heated, how do they survive?
Well, the surface gets altered, but the inside core of the meteorite remains at low temperature, so these organic molecules can survive.
I don't know whether you could have life on meteorites or on other stars.
The only example we have is of Earth.
So what we have to go on when we're, at least what I feel comfortable going on, is the one example that we know about.
And the point I was trying to make is that you don't necessarily have to have low temperature, like 25 degrees Celsius water,
to make these organic molecules stable, to self-assemble them into a cell-like entity.
They might even have happened. Some of the reactions are favored at high temperature or at low pH or whatever.
On the slide you showed with the tree, the three domains of life and the protocell at the bottom.
It looked as if there were kind of roots leading to that protocell.
Was that intentional? Is that to reflect the origins of life?
Yeah, all of the above.
So if you look for, you know, go on Google and say phylogenetic tree of life,
the most commonly accepted one is, you know, there's this one last universal common ancestor, Luca,
and then everything else sprouts out from there.
But then people have found a lot of lateral gene transfer among bacteria.
And so, you know, what came first, what came second is hard to really pin down to a root.
So one of the ways to represent it is multiple roots.
And we don't really know which organism came earliest, hence origins.
The other way people, some people don't even want to put a tree up.
You know, they just put the phylogenetic thing in sort of a circle where there's no beginning and really no ending.
So, yeah. Thank you.
Thank you for joining us.
You've been watching Dr. Nitha Sahai of the University of Akron discussing the habitability of the Earth from a geochemical perspective.
For more information on the Origin Science Scholars Program, including a full video archive,
please visit the institute's website at www.case.edu.org.
In the next part of the talk, Dr. Sahai will discuss the central problem of understanding the origin of life,
the coordinated emergence of metabolism, replication, and the cell membrane.
Now, back to the talk.
All right. So now what is this life that we're talking about and what's the problem that we're trying to address?
So these basic components that I spoke about that you need for a minimal cell that all life forms we know about share
is that you have a membrane, obviously, to define what is a unit cell.
You have to have heritable, mutable genes.
So this comes back to your question, sir, about whether the units you described are the life or not.
It's not enough to have genetic information transferred from one generation to another.
It has to have an ability to make an error in that copying.
So you have mutations that can ultimately lead to evolution.
Otherwise, it's just like you keep making multiple copies from one generation to the other.
It's kind of boring.
All right. Then you have to have metabolic cycles.
These are the proteins and other kinds of enzymes.
Enzymes are subclassive proteins that make up your body collagen,
the most common protein in your body in skin and in cartilage and everywhere pretty much in your body.
That's a non-enzymatic protein.
It's a structural protein.
There are enzymatic proteins that are basically catalysts.
They help speed up reactions to make complex polymers out of single monomers.
Monomers are small molecular units that when connected together, linked,
it becomes like a daisy chain and it makes a longer version that's called a polymer.
And those polymers can then fold and get into all kinds of structures
that then allow these proteins with structure to interact with other proteins
or other kinds of molecules and create a reaction,
building more complex molecules that is called anabolism when we're building molecules to support our body
and catabolism, which is the opposite when we burn these complex molecules to release energy.
So that's what we're doing, metabolism, we're constantly doing.
So for photosynthesis, for example, the plants are taking carbon dioxide and water from the atmosphere,
converting it into carbohydrates and releasing oxygen in the process.
And then when they respire, it's the opposite.
So if one could build a synthetic protocell, how cool would that be, right?
Now, it's hard enough to build one under awkward conditions,
but one needs to be able to build this under actual environmental conditions.
So you need the membrane boundary, you need to get material in and out of it,
you need to have a molecule like DNA shown in that double helix there,
which is capable of replication and mutation.
And in all forms of life, the formation of DNA is catalyzed by enzyme proteins.
These monomers called nucleotides have to be enzymatically converted into the long polymer of DNA.
Enzyme is important.
And you have to have enzymes, again, to catalyze the reactions that drive metabolism.
So metabolism is nothing but catalyzed, enzyme-catalyzed energy transfer reactions that go in cycles.
So put up the example of photosynthesis and respiration there.
Assuming that you're a photosynthetic bacterium, for example,
you would have this enzyme embedded in the membrane.
It requires light, which I've shown with that lightning bolt.
And there's a redox reaction, a reduction-oxidation reaction,
which basically is what metabolism leads to.
But in each case, you need to have proteins.
Even this mass transport in and out requires specific proteins in the membrane
that allow these things to go in and out to get in the food that you need and to put out the waste products.
So in each case, you need proteins, you need enzymes, which are a subclass of proteins,
and you need the genetic material.
How to get all of this assembled from simple monomeric starting compounds?
I don't know if you can see this, but these are other reasons to study fluids inside cells.
A Connecticut man was recently arrested for carrying a stick of dynamite in his checked baggage on a flight back from Brazil.
Here are some other items that have passed through airport security recently.
July 24th, Houston to New York.
Unauthorized liquids cleverly hidden within the passengers' cell membranes.
July 28th, I love this one.
Portland, Oregon to Topeka, Kansas.
16 pounds of science textbooks.
Kansas, right?
Washington, D.C. to Darfur, Hope.
Sydney, Australia to Los Angeles to Russell Crow.
And last but not least, London to New York.
A few Muslim people may have slipped through with intact dignity.
Yeah, this is from The Onion, 2006, which is published out of Madison, Wisconsin.
It's a satirical newspaper in case you didn't know.
I think it was somewhere in the Middle East some years ago,
read one of these headlines and actually thought it was real.
And there was some major demonstration or something in that country.
All right, so getting back to the main problem, as I talked about before,
you have the genetic molecule, DNA, and it produces enzymes.
Again, the enzymes are needed to produce the DNA.
Okay, so you need one to produce the other.
And so you have this issue of which came first, replication or metabolism,
the enzymes being what catalyze metabolism.
He doesn't look too happy this chicken, he's like concerned.
Actually, assembling a proto-cell is even more complicated than that
because biology doesn't just go from DNA to protein.
There's an intermediate step.
All right, so DNA actually first transcribes to RNA.
It involves the use of enzymes.
And then RNA translates that genetic code to the proteins, including enzymes.
And again, that step involves enzymes.
So there's this very complex process in modern life, DNA to RNA to protein.
These proteins, again, as I said, could be involved in regenerating DNA,
or they could be enzymatic proteins which are then involved in metabolic cycles.
So it would be nice to make a cell that has all these functions,
but it turns out that DNA is actually too complex a molecule to imagine
that it got started from scratch on its own.
First of all, it has a double helix, a specific nucleotide that is in its structure
is very complex or synthesized without enzymes.
And so there is this hypothesis that RNA may have preceded DNA as the genetic material.
It has exactly the same, it has the helix structure, but it's a single helix.
It's not double, so it's easier to replicate.
It carries information, it can carry genetic information the same as DNA
because three out of the four nucleotides are the same,
and the fourth one is almost identical.
So RNA surely has the ability to carry genetic information,
but a couple of decades ago it was also found, a big revelation,
that RNA can also, some RNAs can also play catalytic roles, so they can behave like enzymes.
So it's possible then that RNA might have played both roles as a genetic molecule
as well as a catalytic molecule, and this is called the RNA world hypothesis.
This is an example of one of these enzymes or catalytic RNAs, it's called a ribozyme.
It's called a hammerhead because in its structure,
you can see that there is this fold here, and people imagine the hammerhead shark
when they saw the structure.
So people have tried to make these RNA polymers,
starting with the nucleotide monomers, oligomerize them, make them a little longer chain,
ultimately get them long enough to be able to fold and have functionality.
So what they've done is they've started with these nucleotides of RNA,
changed the pH, changed the temperature, added salt, removed salt,
all kinds of environmental conditions to try and form RNAs that are long enough to have functionality.
So they've been successful up to a point, you get oligomers that are a few tens of 20 to 40 to 50 nucleotides long,
but these don't really fold well enough to give you any real catalytic functionality.
So then people have then looked at, okay, forget about the pH and the temperature and blah blah,
let's look at other molecules that are involved in life and see if they can catalyze RNA formation.
So remember we talked about lipids that make the membrane of the cell.
How about, couldn't lipids have potentially catalyzed the polymerization of RNA?
So in the last, is it five, six years or so?
Then people have found that if you start with these RNA nucleotide monomers shown here schematically
and add lipids, lipid molecules, they actually catalyze the formation of RNA into oligomers.
As I said before, these are just long chains of these monomers linked together.
But, all right, good, excellent.
But are they long enough to actually become a functional RNA?
I put up an example of a ribose switch here and it turns out, sadly, no.
All right, well, what else can we do here?
People have also looked at peptide-catalyzed RNA polymerization.
So you start with RNA nucleotides.
As before, you add peptides.
So what is a peptide?
We've talked about proteins, enzymes, et cetera.
Proteins are made up, are themselves, polymers.
In the case of proteins, the building block, the monomer, are amino acids.
So you take amino acids, you link them in a chain, that's called a peptide.
You link them in a big chain, that's called a protein.
So you start with a peptide, which is an amino acid polymer.
This catalyzes these nucleotide monomers to form an oligomer.
So this has been done, also very cool.
Again, is it actually possible to make these RNA oligomers long enough for functionality and, sadly, no?
I missed this.
Glenn, there is still one red object.
I had beautiful red font in my slides, and I was told I have to remove them.
All right, so now what to do?
People believe that RNA may have played both genetic and metabolic roles.
Wonderful.
However, has RNA actually been replicated without enzymes today?
What do you think?
Another red line.
Has monomer polymerization actually yielded enzymes?
No.
So being a geochemist, I'm actually trained as a geochemist, have no biochemistry background.
As I said, when you get a PhD, you can do all sorts of things, legally.
So what was there in early Earth before RNA and what not?
Minerals, right?
What could minerals have done?
So to summarize this section, we talked about what are the minimal components of a cell, of all living organisms.
You have the genetic molecule, you have the molecules needed for metabolism, and you have the lipids that make up the membrane.
The big question is which came first, the genetic molecule or the catalytic molecule?
Because of the complexity of making DNA, people believe that RNA preceded DNA, and also many RNAs are known to have catalytic functions,
so that supports the idea.
But again, neither self-replicating nor catalytic RNAs have been synthesized in the lab.
So this is where we propose maybe that minerals might have played a role in catalyzing RNA nucleotide polymerization to form actual functional RNAs.
With DNA, they've been able to backtrack humanity to various parts of the world.
Can they do that with smaller DNA to backtrack on bacteria where it kind of ended up or started?
I mean, they can figure that out with human DNA.
Obviously, they can do it with smaller sections.
Right, so that's where that phylogenetic tree I put up there.
It's actually based on ribosomal RNA rather than DNA, but that's exactly how they get to that.
And deciding where, you know, at what point in time these different bacteria and archaea and whatnot branched off, that's a bit tricky.
There's some guesswork there as to how much time passes for a certain amount of evolution to happen, and based on that, it's a relative scale.
So why I like geology is you have isotopes and you get absolute ages.
But yes, essentially, that's what they're doing to figure out how old the bacteria are.
I remember reading Robert Hazen's, I think it was called Genesis from the mid-2000s.
He was pretty enthusiastic about clays as being kind of a substrate to create RNA.
Is that idea kind of not popular anymore?
No, no, it's popular. And actually, it was Ferris at Ron Salaire who first showed this.
He showed polymerization of RNA nucleotides on clays in 1992.
All right, great.
And so they've repeated these experiments multiple times, improved upon them.
Leslie Orgo has shown polymerization of amino acids into peptides on specific clays on certain calcium phosphate mineral hydroxyapatite, the mineral in our teeth and bones.
On pyrite, iron sulfide, which is that black mineral that comes out of hydrothermal vents.
So yeah, I mean, those ideas, in fact, that's where we're going next.
Thank you.
Yeah, so Bob Hazen also has this idea of mineral evolution.
Bob Hazen is a mineralogist at the GWIS lab in D.C., the geophysical lab.
Everybody's, every paper gets into nature and science there.
So my old post-doctoral advisor used to call it the GWIS lab.
So he has this idea that as the earth was evolving, different kinds of minerals could be formed under those conditions.
And so when you look at, if you look at a planet like Mars, say, and you see certain types of minerals, you might then interpret under what conditions those minerals were formed and kind of back figure out the evolution of that planet.
So he calls that mineral evolution and it's gotten a bit of mileage.
I hope you've been enjoying the Origin Science Scholars Program with Dr. Nitha Sahai of the University of Akron and a fellow of the Institute for the Science of Origins.
Dr. Sahai was the 2013-14 distinguished lecturer of the Mineralogical Society of America.
In the second part of our talk, we learned about the chicken and egg problem of the origin of life, which came first, replication or metabolism.
In our final segment, Dr. Sahai will discuss the central role that minerals may have played in the origins of life.
Now, back to our talk.
What good minerals have done to help this whole process?
Good minerals have acted as not only prebiotic enzymes to catalyze reactions, but to potentially even as reactants.
So remember we talked about synthesizing a protocell where you had an enzyme playing catalyzing RNA,
oligomerization, other enzymes catalyzing metabolic reactions.
So here we have a mineral.
There's minerals everywhere, presumably these molecule self-assembled at the water-mineral interface.
Most bacteria live at the mineral-water interface.
So could contact of these lipid membranes with minerals have somehow the mineral surface chemistry?
Could it have affected the stability of the membrane, either promoted it or disrupted it?
Before enzymes, before biology-created enzymes, could specific minerals have promoted the polymerization of RNA nucleotides into a proper functional RNA molecule?
So this is where the work of Ferris comes in.
Could minerals like iron sulfide have played the role of enzymes that promote catalysis in these redox reactions across the membrane, such as photosynthesis?
Why iron sulfide?
Well, for one thing, when you look at the enzyme, just as an example, that's used in photosynthesis, it's in the membrane,
and the very active core of that enzyme contains an iron sulfide cluster.
And so this harkens back to early Earth where iron sulfide was one of the most common minerals.
Remember the hydrothermal vent putting out all those black iron sulfide minerals?
Early Earth was hot and volcanic, and there was no oxygen in the atmosphere.
So the sulfide couldn't get oxidized to sulfate. It stuck around the sulfide.
So that's one good reason.
So it's in the core of enzymes.
It was present on early Earth, and when you shine light on it at a certain wavelength, an electron is ejected and a hole,
so-called hole, is created in that structure.
That's called a photocatalytic mineral.
Titania, TiO2, is a similar mineral.
If you've heard of quantum dots, they're similar.
So when you shine light on a mineral, same thing with the enzymes, and you get a separation of an electron and a hole,
which is a positively charged entity, then those, the enzyme and the hole, can participate in this redox reaction.
They're the ones that drive that redox reaction.
So this is a good candidate for this sort of prebiotic catalytic mineral.
Okay, so before I show how minerals might have been involved in this RNA oligomerization,
let me give a quick recap of what we talked about in the previous section.
Without the minerals in the previous section, we spoke about RNA polymerization of nucleotide monomers being catalyzed by lipids,
by little amino acid peptides, and now we're going to talk about what about minerals.
So indeed, RNA nucleotides have been polymerized using clay, particularly a clay mineral called Montmorillonite.
And eventually the idea is for this RNA oligomer to be polymerized into a long enough polymer that it can fold and become a functional RNA such as a ribose switch.
Exactly the same cartoon as we saw where we had a lip, we had a lipid or a peptide in here instead of a clay.
So here are our data from Ferris's work published in Nature in 96, I believe.
Really bad image, I'm sorry, but basically, how to put this?
These are bands of molecules that have been separated on a vertical column filled with a gel.
And so based on how big the molecule is, what its molecular weight is, it's going to settle out like this.
The heaviest ones will elute the last.
And so you've got the longest ones here that are about 30 nucleotides in length.
And you can see that the shorter the oligomer, the more of it it's formed, it's a darker band.
And as you get longer and longer oligomers, the bands become lighter and lighter, which means that there's less and less of them.
So it is possible to get up to 50 or 80 of these oligonucleotides polymerized on clay,
but as you go beyond even a dimer, a trimer, a pentamer, the concentrations become vanishingly small.
So even though you might get 50 edemers, very small concentrations, that's one problem.
And secondly, these are not really that large enough to give you functional activity.
So there is potential here to explore this reaction.
Why is it only Montmorillonite clay? What other clays? What is the structure of that Montmorillonite that might be helping this oligomerization reaction?
What other minerals can we study that may have the similar sort of reactivity?
There are tens of hundreds of thousands of minerals.
So from the geochemist's mineralogist point of view, maybe you can bring an educated guesstimate of how the structure is affecting this reaction,
rather than, you know, playing with 100 million, not 100 million, but several thousand minerals.
What about mineral catalyzed peptide polymerization?
Again, the amino acids of the monomers, they have been shown to be polymerized into small oligomers that are called peptides,
on both, on clay, on hydroxyapatite, and on iron-sulfide minerals.
But again, long enough to have enzymatic activity? No.
So this leads us, this is sad, but lipids can polymerize or oligomerize RNA, peptides can oligomerize RNA, clays can oligomerize RNA.
So how about if you just put them all in one big pot?
So one of the limitations of these studies is that they're done under very clean conditions.
You have two components interacting with each other, and you see what effect they have, and somebody else does two other components.
Well, we know how messy the environment is, right?
So how about if you have a multi-component soup, the actual Darwinian soup, rather than a little clean experiment?
So this idea is synergism between the three different catalysts that have been shown to promote RNA oligomerization,
those three catalysts being minerals, amino acids, and lipids.
So interestingly, lipids are what make up the membrane, amino acids are what make up the peptides.
So here you've got the building blocks of what eventually become the three components of life are all interacting with each other and the clay.
So a lot of this thinking and this entire figure was made by my postdoc, Hussein Qadur, here, so it's all his glory.
So this is prebiotic chemistry.
This is where Stanley Miller kind of experiments would have come about when you start with ammonia and carbon dioxide
and very simple inorganic molecules go through some heavy organic chemistry
and make these simple organic molecules such as lipids and nucleotide monomers and amino acids.
And of course the clays are around in the environment.
So this is called prebiotic chemistry.
Then we're proposing that you have this synergism in the three catalytic parts,
the clays, the lipids, and the amino acids, and they're helping to oligomerize the nucleotides of RNA
and form these short RNA oligomers as well as they're helping each other.
So you also start forming these short peptides.
These lipids are self-assembling into vesicles.
I'll come to that in a couple of minutes.
What is a vesicle?
Further synergism between these, these are, what is synergism?
So when you have one catalyst, let's say you only have the clay catalyzing RNA polymerization,
or you only have the lipid catalyzing RNA polymerization.
When you put the lipid and the clay together, the net catalytic effect should be greater than the sum of the two alone.
So that's synergism.
Of course there's no guarantee that's what's going to happen.
They might actually have antagonistic interactions or no interactions at all.
So Sain is very optimistic.
He's an optimistic man.
And I support optimism, so therefore.
All right, so, okay, so now we've got these oligomers.
You know, up to here, people have done different things already.
Now we envisage this lipid vesicle forming and enclosing these short RNAs and short peptides and clays.
And you end up interacting all of these inside.
So here's a, here's a, is this a, yeah, this is an RNA oligomer interacting with the clay.
These clays, by the way, are layered structures.
I'll show you that in a second.
That's why they're shown like this.
You also have little peptides interacting here with the clay, etc.
So the idea of encapsulating them in the cell membrane is that you're bringing about a concentration effect.
So there's more possibility of these interactions to happen.
And of course it needs to be semi-permeable, as we said, mass in and mass out.
So this is where these short oligomers and both RNA and peptides are now helping each other in a mutual way
to form the more complex functional molecules such as ribosomes.
So what is, what is this mutualism here?
So we all know about symbiosis, right?
Mutualism is a kind of symbiosis where both the partners actually benefit from the interaction.
There are other kinds of symbiosis like parasitism, where only one organism is benefiting at the expense of another.
So in this idea of mutualism, by having these guys interacting with each other closely,
they're able to actually help each other in becoming longer, more complex, having folding and function.
So that they're then able to recognize one molecule can recognize another
and form these sorts of complex RNA ligand molecules that have catalytic activity.
So that's called molecular recognition.
So this is about 20 years of worth of work that is in this image that we still need to start on.
Okay, this is the concept we're putting forward in our lab.
We've just submitted a paper, invited paper in this journal called Life.
So, but this is the pie in the sky, you know.
I'll win the Nobel Prize if I can do this, or Hussain will.
We have an experimental setup that we think can start to explore some of these hypothetical things, you know.
There's this, I'm sure you all know the story about the Greeks, right?
They were great philosophers and also mathematicians.
So they're sitting around wondering how many teeth are in a horse's mouth, right?
So some guy figures out the geometry of a horse's mouth and what's the volume and, you know,
what's the size of one tooth and how many can you fit in there.
And the other guy says, no, this species of horse is a different geometry.
And besides that, you consider the ass and the, you know, the donkey.
And so this kid comes along, this little four or five year old kid.
And he says, well, how about we just open the mouth of the horse and count them, right?
So it had more than 32 teeth.
So, you know, it's nice to put up these images and we can hypothesize as much as we want,
but we need to do this in the lab.
And this is a huge task.
There are four nucleotides.
There are 20 amino acids.
There could be a few lipids that we could involve, several clays and other minerals.
So it's a combinatorial nightmare.
And we need to use intelligent, not intelligent design.
We need to use our knowledge.
Sorry?
We need to carefully select which nucleotides to start with,
which amino acids and minerals based on our knowledge of the structure
and reactivity of these components.
And we will also screen a large, still have a large number of interactions to screen.
So just to give you an idea of what these minerals look like,
how much time do I have left?
Two minutes.
Brilliant.
All right.
So I've been talking about clays and sulfides and whatnot.
In hand sample, this is what a clay looks like.
Actually, clays are pretty cruddy looking.
I picked one which has a nice pretty pink sheet on it.
So this is a hand sample.
Here's a one centimeter scale bar.
When you look at it in the scanning electron microscope,
here you have a 6.67 micron scale bar.
Don't ask me why that number, but okay.
This is six and a half microns.
You can see this plate-like or sheet-like structure that this clay has.
All right.
So that's where we were showing those clays with those horizontal sheets.
This is Montmorillonite.
I want to ask, when I was a student, a geochemistry student,
undergrad in India, I needed to learn the stoichiometry,
the chemical composition of all the minerals.
So it's an alumino-silicate mineral.
It's structure, you know, just like organic molecules.
You have a carbon backbone.
And then all the other is details.
So most of the minerals on the earth are alumino-silicates.
They're made of aluminum and silicate.
And you have, these are negatively charged ions,
and then they're balanced by positively charged ions.
And it has waters of hydration.
And it's found in all environments, continents, oceans, everywhere.
Here's the iron sulfide we've been talking about.
This would have been abundant on early earth.
This beautiful structure here has been formed
at a high temperature and pressure deep inside the earth,
where nucleation and growth of a crystal is slow
and you can get big, beautiful crystals.
When you grow it at room temperature,
you get these much smaller crystals.
Here's a 10-micron scale bar.
But still, still, still, the amazing thing.
You can see the facets, the little, little crystalline facets here,
little crystals making up these big framboids.
And here is silica, you know, the aero gel,
whatever the stuff you put in your shoes so they don't stink.
That's silica, SiO2, sand grains.
That's all silica.
So to quickly have maybe two minutes more, or a minute.
So where do these, some of these organic pre-starting monomers come from?
So as I was saying, there are specific types of meteorites
called carbonaceous chondrites.
They're rich in organic molecules, not all meteorites are like this.
And people have extracted amino acids, complex poly-aromatic hydrocarbons,
and the lipid molecules, which when you put them in water,
they form these vesicles that start looking like cell membranes.
So what are these lipid molecules that self-assemble into a vesicle?
Each molecule, just like we have monomers of nucleotides and amino acids,
you have these so-called monomers of lipids.
They have a hydrophobic CH2-CH2 long carbon chain, which doesn't dissolve in water,
and a head group consisting of carboxylic acid, which is negatively charged with likes water.
So this is called an amphiphilic molecule.
Part of it likes water, part of it doesn't like water.
When you stick it in water, the tails, which are hydrophobic,
would rather interact with each other than with the water,
and the head groups would rather interact with water.
So they self-assemble into this sort of a bilayer.
This is a slice through a sphere that would actually form a sphere.
Inside here is what would be the intracellular region,
and out here is what would be the extracellular region.
So just like we got lipids from meteorites to self-assemble into these vesicles,
like this is amazing.
You can buy lipids from Sigma Aldrich,
and they will also self-assemble into these vesicles.
And you can see the scale bar here is 10 micron as well as here.
So they're very similar in size. Bacteria are around the same size.
All right, so what? All right. Can minerals,
you remember we talked about the mineral in contact with the membrane,
does it help make the membrane or disrupt the membrane?
So we've looked at it with two of these common mineral silica and montmorillonite.
When you put 50 milligrams per ml of silica in contact with lipids,
here you can see these vesicles that have formed from the lipids,
and I don't know if you can see the little black dots in there,
those are the silica.
So you do see vesicles in the presence of silica.
You do the same thing in the presence of montmorillonite.
You form these big fat hunking aggregates of the clay,
and you don't see these beautiful vesicles in this case.
So silica is helping the vesicles form,
at least it's not destabilizing the vesicles.
The montmorillonite is not quite so friendly.
Here's a movie, you might be interested to see,
these vesicles are, again, here are the black dots,
which are the silica particles,
and here you can see all these lipid vesicles,
cell-like entities moving along.
And, if we can advance it a bit,
we can also, you can see that it appears that there are a few layers of these vesicles.
Basically you're looking at different planes of focus under the microscope,
and here Hussein has changed the focus, the plane of focus,
and you can see that at different levels you still have these vesicles
and the minerals, and things look pretty happy.
All right?
All right, so the last slide.
These lipid molecules self-assemble into these vesicles,
only when the number of these lipid molecules reaches a critical value.
When there's a high enough concentration of them at some critical value,
these individual molecules form this vesicle.
That's called a critical vesicle concentration.
So, when you have this particular lipid, it doesn't matter, some kind of lipid,
and you increase its concentration from 0 to 60 millimolar,
and you look at, you look at what's the absorbance of light in that suspension.
So, when you have a single molecule, it's, the solution is pretty clear.
Once you form these self-assembled vesicles,
then it's going to start looking murky,
and the absorption of light is going to be different in that system.
So, we're looking at the absorbance of light here as a function of concentration of the lipid.
When there's no mineral, you can see that there's a sudden increase in this absorbance
at around 12 millimolar.
So, this is the critical vesicle concentration in the absence of mineral.
Now, when you put the silica in here,
you can see that these vesicles are forming at a much lower concentration of 5 millimolar.
Supporting the video, we just saw that the vesicles are present
when you have silica in the system,
and conversely with the montmorillonite clay,
the sudden jump in the absorbance reflecting the formation of vesicles
occurs at a higher concentration, 20 millimolar,
compared to the control system where there was no mineral.
So, that's also consistent with the video.
So, just to wrap up then,
we've just looked at the potential effects of minerals on the stability of the membrane.
We've talked about synergism and mutualism between different minerals,
informing both the genetic molecule as well as the enzymes.
And I'll wrap up here.
Life evolved early in Earth history.
To date, neither the RNA nor the enzymes have been shown to form one without the other.
Minerals can catalyze the formation of peptides and RNA to short ones,
just as lipids can and other things can.
Why don't we put them all together in a multi-component pot
and see whether there is mutualistic and synergistic interactions between them
to yield actual functional molecules?
So, you know, here's the Hadean Earth, just minerals, rocks, gases,
meteorites hitting it, a big moon right next to the Earth,
completely abiotic.
And here's a picture of Earth rise taken from the moon, looking back at Earth.
There's water there and a completely biotic world.
So, just want to acknowledge my collaborators and my amazing group of students.
Hussein here, Dr. Poonam Dalai there in the audience here.
Denise was an undergrad from Puerto Rico this summer.
She's no longer in our group.
The other people in my group are Dr. Jujun Xu, Zichu Wang, Wei Long Zhao,
he's here in the audience, Dr. Sean Feng Zhao and Steve Mancosi.
These other folks are working on how mineral hydroxyapatite interacts with protein to form bone.
So, that's the other part of my research.
Funding from NSF, amazing organization,
and a private foundation called the Simons Foundation.
Thank you.
This lecture is part of the Origins Science Scholars Program
of the Institute for the Science of Origins.
The institute is a partnership of Case Western Reserve University,
the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, and Idea Stream.
The fall 2014 Origins Science Scholars Lectures are presented with the assistance
of the Segal Lifelong Learning Program, the College of Arts and Sciences, and MediaVision.
For more information on the Origins Science Scholars Program, including a full video archive,
please visit the institute's website at www.case.edu.org.
