In some cases, even tinged with the beginning of social Darwinism and racism, although more
of that would come after 1870, in two extremely important historical processes that we call
quote-unquote the unification of Italy and the unification of Germany.
Now what they have in common is that they're not really total unifications.
The unification of Italy between the late 1850s and 1870-71 was far more the expansion
of the most powerful sector of Italy, Piedmont in the north, than it was the unification
of the rest of the peninsula.
You have the Piedmontization of Italy more than the unification of Italy, and the same
was even more true with respect to Germany in which what occurred in the 1860s was the
Prussian expansion over the rest of Germany and the exclusion of Austria, which had been
a historic part of Germany from that domain so that the expansion of Piedmont took place
also against Austria in northern Italy, Prussia against Austria in Germany, and of Prussia
very much also defeating France.
The North German Confederation, Prussia writ large, defeats France in the Franco-Prussian
War in 1870, 1871, creating the most important new political reality in the entire 19th century,
the creation of a German state.
I want to say a modern German state, but it was modern in some ways and very unmodern
in other ways, and that will be a subject also of an entire discussion.
Now these things were made possible, these changes by the defeat of Russia in the Crimean
War between 1853 and 1856, which is another representation of what importance modernization
meant, because Britain and France defeated Russia in Russia's own territory, in the tip
of Russia's own territory in the Crimean, in the Black Sea, because their technology
allowed them to get their troops there more efficiently and to have their people more
mobilized and self-conscious and aware than Tsarist Russia's capability would allow because
of the poor development of its railroads, the extent of its space, and the fact that the
people were not integrated into society in a deep way as they already were becoming integrated
into French and British society.
Removing Russia from stabilizing Central Europe and also somewhat England because England
or Great Britain also didn't do all that well in the Crimean War and entered into a reformist
time period, the liberal bookend in the West and the conservative bookend in the East were
partly removed during that 1850, 1870 era, but especially in the 1860s when statesmen
who were willing to take risks in Italy, in France, and in Germany could make their mark
without Russia behaving as a policeman or without British political intervention as
well.
We proceed to the last phase of the long 19th century, the last segment, 1871 to 1914.
It's a long period, it's a somewhat integrated period, but we're going to divide it in half
for the purposes of teaching, even though that's partly artificial.
We'll divide it in half and first offer several overview lectures and topical lectures followed
by a series of domestic lectures dealing with the internal development of all of the great
powers, and thereafter we will enter into a detailed, intense discussion of the diplomacy
from 1870 to 1914, including the new European imperialism leading toward the origins and
then the impact of World War I, which almost all historians agree was the greatest tragedy
in modern European history, putting an end to a period of general optimism and considerable
progress through a process of industrial mass military slaughter.
In this time period, there is a lot of carryover from the 1850, 1870 era, and again, it's the
same characters coming back to haunt us.
This age saw an even further expansion and deepening and spreading of the Industrial Revolution
and of all of its implications.
It saw the expansion of a harsher, more exclusivist, social Darwinian form of nationalism often
tinged with racialism as well.
It saw modern urbanization, metropolises really developing, industrial capitalism and socialism,
mass society, the decline of a more tolerant liberal attitude that marked a lot of the
19th century, expanded feminism, the cultural determination of modern science, a religion
of its own, and a revolt against some of its extreme rational implications, and even the
beginning of a more leisure-oriented society with football teams or soccer and Europe football
and even basketball teams invented in the United States.
And we'll cover that in some detail state by state.
Then we'll proceed to the origins and impact of World War I, 1870 to 1914.
