These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university-level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
As our catalog or website, imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes
a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled The Long 19th Century, European History from 1789 to 1917, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Robert Wiener.
Professor Wiener is the Thomas Roy and Loura Forrest Jones Professor of History at Lafayette
College.
He received his B.E.A. from Temple University and a Hebrew Teaching Certificate from Gratz
Hebrew College.
He received his M.A. and P.H.D. from Rutgers University.
Since joining the faculty of Lafayette College in 1969, Professor Wiener has taught a wide
range of courses in the fields of modern European history and modern Jewish history.
He also serves as a Jewish chaplain and was Director of Contemporary Civilization at the
Reconstructionist Revinical College for eight years.
Professor Wiener has published a number of articles and commentaries on both modern European
history and modern Jewish history.
He is also an award-winning teacher.
Professor Wiener has received five Student Government Awards for Superior Teaching and
several Institutional Awards for Teaching, Service and Leadership.
He is the recipient of the Lafayette College Marquis Distinguished Teaching Award.
Professor Wiener prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a timeline, glossary, biographical
notes and bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
