While modernity itself is a subjective concept,
leading scholars disagree both on its components
and when they came to predominate either separately or collectively.
Most would agree that Europe became increasingly modern during this era
and that modernization has a general series of overall components.
In the long run, economic modernization,
which was spurred most intensely by the Industrial Revolution,
which began in late 18th century Great Britain
and finally reached Russia toward the end of the 19th century,
that economic modernization was the most powerful force
because it got down most deeply to the average person when it occurred.
Among the major effects of the Industrial Revolution
were increased productivity, new technologies, urbanization,
new relationships between classes, genders, states, increasing education,
transportation and communications, revolutions, general secularization,
modern nationalism of a mass kind,
which requires a level of literacy that's only possible with some sort of Industrial Revolution,
the expansion of a world economic structure and its integration
based more on the whims of Europe
and the zenith of European power worldwide.
Political modernization was at first spurred most radically
by the French Revolution and the Napoleonic era.
In some respect, the French Revolution and the Napoleonic era
was the second half of the midwives of modern European history,
the French Revolution, the Industrial Revolution,
the major catalysts of modern European history.
Among the most important results of the 1789-1815 era
were the further definition and spread of modern political ideologies
such as liberalism, democracy, socialism, a more modern conservatism,
as well as the clearer and further definition and spread of nationalism itself.
And nationalism became during the course of the 19th century
actually the most powerful secular religion of the age,
especially in the second half of the 19th century.
Moreover, revolution itself gained legitimacy as a means to achieve change.
Further threatening the status quo.
The combined impact of what was viewed as the successful revolt of the American colonies
without all the radicalism of the French Revolution,
but for others the even more radical success of the French Revolution
gave revolution a legitimacy of its own.
In fact, it left a myth that cast a very, very large shadow
over the whole first half of the 19th century and even beyond.
That shadow was a shadow of fear for conservatives
and a shadow of hope frequently for Democrats, radicals and socialists
and in many cases even for moderate liberals.
And soon in another commentary we'll define 19th century liberalism more carefully
because it's very different from the 20th century variety,
more a mixture of liberalism and conservatism.
19th century liberalism has a texture all of its own.
During this process, not only did the masses first enter history in a self-conscious manner,
but the process included women and previously excluded minorities as well.
The process included urban workers, the process included peasants,
the integration of mass society and modern states through increasing state centralization
and efficiency was spurred by the energy of the French Revolution
and the passion and nationalism of the French Revolution
and even more so made possible by the new technology and power of the Industrial Revolution.
In other words, Louis XIV and the 17th century had a very hard time knowing what was going on
in most of France because he couldn't get there quickly.
But anyone in the late 19th century in a modernized society
knew better what was going on in the societies in which they lived.
Mass culture and mass society are also implications of the French and Industrial Revolutions
and are central to the concept of modernity itself.
For an example, if an 18th century scholar thinks that modernity
happened more directly during the course of the 18th century and many do,
most 19th century scholars will not agree to that because the peasants are not included
until the end of the 19th century and the majority of the population is still composed of peasants
who were illiterate in the 18th century and only began to become more literate
in the most modernized states during the course of the second half of the 19th century.
