Although Europeans initially predominated in this process of modernization,
not only did European outposts such as the United States take part in it,
but as well, non-European states such as Japan underwent some of the same basic kinds of changes
in the context of modernization.
Coming into contact with Europe willingly or by force inherently leads to cultural exchange,
technological exchange, economic exchange, and modernization.
Now here, Europeanists and world historians sometimes have different emphasis
because Europeanists tend to see the process as being more euro-dominant
whereas many world historians emphasize even more so
the flow and exchange of cultures between different peoples,
even between the weaker non-European societies to the stronger European societies
and one has to find a middle ground between these two overall ways of viewing reality.
Now I think you've probably caught on by now, this material is complicated.
This material is deeply complicated and our understanding of it among historians
is changing while I'm standing in front of you.
That's the way history works.
It is constantly changing otherwise, it wouldn't be an exciting enterprise
and what makes it exciting is having to continuously update, relearn, and rethink
that's what keeps us vital.
Fortunately however, the long 19th century can easily be divided into a series of components
which make sense and importantly for us which also make it much easier to convey,
teach, analyze, and comprehend the material.
The first section, 1789 to 1848 or so, is usually known as the Age of Revolution.
As already indicated, the most important immediate forces during this time period
were derived from the French Revolution and Napoleonic Era
and all of their manifestations and from the Industrial Revolution
already underway in Great Britain, certainly by 1780 and some would even say as early as 1760.
However, the Industrial Revolution does not spread in any serious way to parts of western Europe
and then central Europe until 1830 or so in Belgium and France and the 1840s
in some segments of central Europe and northern Italy
so that although the Industrial Revolution already is having a very significant material
and political and social and cultural effect in Great Britain between 1760 and 1850,
it is only beginning to have that effect on the continent in a more apparent way after 1830
and because of that, the most important emphasis in this 1789-1850 period
is the impact of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Era.
The post-Napoleonic Era, known as the Era of Metternich from 1815 to 1848
which brought the French Revolution and the reign of Napoleon to a close
and attempted to re-establish the old order as much as it possibly could, always with difficulty
but with some success at first.
This post-Napoleonic Era came to an end with the revolutions of 1848 and 1849
which serve as a very, very useful transition to the next historical era
and which really do represent a turning point in European history of some substance
and here we can see that change begins to become at least between the post-1850 and pre-1850 era,
change begins to become even more powerful than continuity.
The reason for this, as we'll talk about in more detail in another set of comments,
the reason for this is that after 1850, above all, this era saw the spread of that industrial revolution,
sometimes called the Second Industrial Revolution in more dramatic ways
with more state intervention and guidance in Western Europe and in Central Europe and in Northern Italy
leading to some dramatic change, to a radical increase in productivity, to the growth in cities,
to different cultural norms and all of the rest and moreover, the failure or the incomplete success
and predominantly failure of the revolutions of 1848, 1849 also combined with the power
and obvious nature of the material forces in the industrial revolution
led people to look elsewhere and led many revolutionaries to call it quits to go underground,
to enter a business, to change professions, to go live in England or to go live in the United States where it was safer.
So the 1850, 1870 era has a different texture of its own.
However, one of the other things that makes this the case is the increased spread of nationalism
during this time period.
