During the second half of the 18th century, mainly in the low countries and in Great Britain,
an agrarian revolution also was underway, yielding surplus food supplies really for the first time
and making possible even greater urban growth.
Rotation of crops, the use of nitrogen fixating crops,
made it possible to produce more food, making possible an expansion of the population,
making possible a redistribution of the population, which is one of the hallmarks of modernity.
Around 1760 to 1780 in Great Britain, a process later known by historians as the first industrial revolution
was already underway, replete with all kinds of implications, far-reaching implications,
misunderstood at the time, but very, very real.
Economic change brought increasing social change, especially in the highly variegated group known as the middle class,
or the middle class is plural as some historians tend to view them.
And again, generally speaking, the more economic development, the larger the middle class,
the larger the middle class, the more economic development.
With increased economic dynamism and competition both within states and between states,
states were becoming more centralized and more efficient.
A number of 18th century rulers known as enlightened despots realized that the state was more than their expanded person.
And again, I've indicated that Frederick the Great said, I am the first servant of the state.
They surely were enlightened primarily in terms of seeking efficiency, but also sometimes even of seeking greater toleration.
But let's put this in a context.
Enlightened Frederick the Great in Prussia and enlightened Catherine the Great in Russia
increased serfdom in their areas because they needed the support of the nobility.
And the best way to gain the support of the nobility was to give the nobility more power over their peasants or serfs.
And so enlightened leaders for self-interest could even make traditional patterns more deeply rooted.
The cumulative impact of these economic and cultural changes beginning during the Renaissance,
continuing during the Reformation, very much moving forward during the Scientific Revolution,
which produced natural laws of the physical universe and began to also produce the belief that there were natural laws
that governed the human condition, human society, such as the natural laws that lock John Locke,
the late 17th century British philosopher, saw life, liberty and property as natural laws.
They come from nature, they are inalienable, they can't be taken away, they are inbred in us.
Produced a rich cultural fluorescence and synthesis in the 18th century, generally known as the Enlightenment.
And in many, many respects the Enlightenment was the popularization and the further spread of the peak thinking
of the great, the greats of the 17th century Scientific Revolution.
Most enlightened thinkers, and this becomes very interesting, were their aristocrats, clergy,
or members of the middle class, believed that governments existed for the purpose of the governed.
I think that's worth repeating.
Enlightened thinkers were found among the aristocrats and among the clergy who had the wealth and time to think.
And of course enlightened thinkers were found among an expanding middle class.
But progressives during the Enlightenment believed that the purpose of government was the governed.
That states should function because of utility.
Secondly, they believed that the method of government should be efficiency.
In other words, they were pragmatic, more pragmatic in nature.
And lastly, coming from the impact of the Scientific Revolution and from such basic treatises as John Locke's essay on religious toleration,
these thinkers increasingly believed that states should be tolerant.
