The Reformation led to an enhanced power of secular princes over the church and over their subjects.
It challenged many traditional cultural assumptions, at least for a while.
Ironically, some of those people who were rebelling against the authority of the Catholic Church
then subjected others to the authority of one branch or another of the Protestant churches.
In the beginning of the Reformation, there was still only one truth,
and everyone was simply trying to see what that truth was.
It would not be until later that people would begin to be comfortable with multiple truths
and tolerating others whose truth was different than one's own truth.
The fact that neither the Catholics nor the Protestants could destroy the others
and overwhelmingly predominated made possible over time the beginning out of necessity
and then out of belief of concepts of toleration and understanding of multiple truths.
That became all the more prevalent during the Scientific Revolution of the 17th century,
sometimes also known as the Age of Reason.
The Scientific Revolution was a time period in which the scientific method,
a process of learning, a feeling of empowerment based on reason and experimentation,
hypothesis, synthesis, first gave an enlarged group of individuals
who took part in a world scientific community based mainly in Europe,
in fact based overwhelmingly in Europe, a sense that they were moving forward
and that in fact that they had gone beyond the ancients.
Even during the Renaissance, people always looked backward toward the ancients for wisdom.
The scientists of the 17th century recognized that they were revising the ancients doing better
and that education, learning, reason, a scientific method could lead to progress
and that the future would be better than the past through education.
By the 18th century, the forces of change were increasingly more numerous
and increasingly more important.
This was a time period of accelerating change
and clearly it was a time period of economic change as well.
And in fact we'll begin to emphasize at this point in our comments
those areas of European civilization which looked forward toward change
rather than backward toward continuity and stability
and I want to make it clear that I'm not using terms like forward and backward
as value judgments but simply statements as to where the basic processes were pointing.
In the 18th century, the forces of change were numerous and increasingly important.
This was clearly evident in the area of economic change,
especially in Western Europe and even more so in the states of Great Britain and Holland and France
where expanding international empires had already begun to be very much a factor
in economic development and economic growth.
Commerce was expanding and commerce itself was becoming the greatest source of new fluid wealth.
Land was the basic source of the largest quantity of wealth
but commerce, commercial capitalism was the greatest source of new usable fluid wealth
and wherever commerce was expanding, merchant capitalists were expanding as well
and a larger middle class was developing.
And as the rule of thumb generally speaking, the larger the middle class
the more prevalent the economic change and development that occurs.
