Lecture 2, The Legacy of the Past, The Old Regime
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
In our first encounter, we talked about the whole nature of the long 19th century from 1789 to 1917 and why it's treated as such.
And we emphasized above all the themes of continuity and change and modernization.
Today, we're going to be speaking about the old regime or the Ancien regime as it was known in that time.
And the purpose of these comments is to give us an even greater appreciation of what life was like before the French and industrial revolutions as a point of comparison between the early modern period,
even in its most developed phase in the 18th century and Europe after the French and the industrial revolutions.
In many respects, the 18th century was still very, very much of a transformed medieval society or at most an early modern society.
And in the first part of these comments today, I'm going to be emphasizing forces of continuity, forces of stability.
Europe's economic structure was still overwhelmingly agrarian in nature and scarcity of food was common.
Life was still nasty and brutal and short, as Thomas Hobbes had said in the 17th century.
Most farming was still subsistence in nature based around some kind of localized menorial economy.
And the most serious problems that the overwhelming majority of people faced were limited crop yields and natural disasters.
Hunger and even starvation were realities for large segments of the population everywhere, even in the most developed civilizations.
As a result of this, Europe's social structure was also quite traditional.
Most European societies were divided into legal castes known as estates.
The first estate was the clergy. The second was the aristocracy or the nobility.
The third usually comprised everyone else, the peasantry, urban workers, the middle class.
In all the larger societies, even the most well-developed, the overwhelming majority of people were peasants.
And that's why the society is so much a transformed medieval society.
75% of the people in Great Britain were still peasants.
97% or so in Russia were peasants, and they are the ones whose lives were most difficult.
In most areas, even in Western Europe, remnants of feudal obligations remained.
While the overwhelming majority of peasants in Central and Eastern Europe were serfs, a system of obligation and bondage, much like slavery in the United States.
And that still existed until 1848 in parts of Prussia and in the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and until 1861 to 1863 in the Russian Empire.
Both the clergy and the aristocracy comprised small segments of the population, usually less than 5% each, and were bound by different obligations, laws, privileges, customs.
And there was enormous difference between the upper clergy and the upper aristocracy, generally intermingled, and all of the rest of society.
The middle classes, part of the Third Estate, were also a small group, although they were growing in size and in importance in Western Europe.
While wealth was increasingly important, greater status and access to wealth still came from the accident of birth rather than from accomplishment or merit.
Europe's political structure was also rather traditional in nature.
Most states were sovereign and territorial, but not yet truly national in nature.
What that means is that a locus of authority known as sovereignty resided in each given territory.
But they were not yet nation states, for the most part.
The majority of people who lived in these societies were subjects rather than citizens.
And most of the states were also very proprietary.
