The purpose of the government was utility, the method of government should be efficiency,
and the spirit of government should be toleration.
Most enlightened thinkers, in fact almost all of them, believe that progress was possible, desirable.
And that all institutions and traditions were subject to rational scrutiny, whether it was the king or the Bible.
And that rational scrutiny and education could bring greater happiness to more people.
So that even when many members of the Enlightenment still believed in monarchy,
they believed that monarchy existed to serve the greater good rather than just to serve the general interests of the monarch.
As a rule of thumb, the states and societies of Western Europe had changed more than those of Central Europe.
Again, not in all areas, but as a rule of thumb, and still more than those of Eastern Europe.
And the same was basically true between the areas of Northern Europe and the areas of Southern Europe,
even within areas that would later become states so that in Italy, Northern Italy was much more well developed than Southern Italy,
just as it is, in fact, today.
Moreover, the highly competitive and often warring states were aware that they existed in a European state system
with an implicit balance of power, or a balance of power whose main purpose was to prevent what they called universal monarchy,
and what we might call hegemony, the overwhelming power of any one state to affect the rest at its will.
By the second half of the 18th century, there were five recognized great powers.
Great Britain, France, Prussia, Austria, and Russia.
Great Britain and France in the West, Prussia and Austria in the Middle, and Russia in the East.
On the eve of the French Revolution, England or Great Britain more properly was the most dynamic European power,
indeed the greatest world power, with an empire that equaled or surpassed Rome's.
England's strength was based largely on a trilogy of commerce, colonies, and sea power.
And just think about the meaning of those words, commerce, colonies, and sea power, what they represent and what they don't represent.
And Britain had clearly bested France in the most important colonial wars of the 18th century, even though France took sweet revenge during the American Revolution, fortunately for us.
France was often known as the Grand Nation, the great nation was the strongest continental power who had largely dominated the continent militarily and culturally since the age of Louis XIV.
Indeed, most of the German aristocracy and the Austrian and even the Russian aristocracy preferred to speak French rather than their own languages, which tells you something about the lack of a deep-seated nationalism at that time.
France was more than twice as large as Great Britain in population, and on the eve of the French Revolution, even though England had more colonies and more commerce and more sea power,
France being so much larger was roughly equivalent in global productivity with Great Britain.
The Austrian Empire, whose Habsburg ruler was still the head of a nearly meaningless structure of 330 plus largely Germanic states known as the Holy Roman Empire, Voltaire said it was not Holy, not Roman, and not an empire.
The Austrian Empire was the historic counterweight to France in the West and the historic counterweight to the Ottoman Empire in the East. That was quite a burden to bear, balancing France out in the West and the Ottoman Empire, which was still powerful in the East.
But now we have a geography lesson and also, sadly and tragically, a lesson of what not to do in three successive partitions of Poland in conjunction with Prussia and Russia.
