Only in France did one segment of the middle class, known henceforth and forever, as the
Jacobins, introduce full male democracy, male suffrage, even at times tinged with state
socialism in order to save the revolution from internal and external enemies.
There were conservative counter revolutions within France and a war between the French
and a number of their neighbors who were against the revolution.
These Jacobins sought to harness the power of the masses for the first time really in
European and indeed in world history, not because they were inherently so much more
radical to begin with, but because they felt they needed to move further in that direction
to give the masses a stake so the revolution as a whole could survive.
Indeed also, only the French Revolution was succeeded by a Napoleon who spread many of
its fundamental ideas and concepts, expanding them, further developing the centralized power
of the state, promulgating laws in his code even as he broke those laws when he wished
to because he ruled as a dictator and as a conqueror.
But the core ideas, especially of the first phase of the French Revolution, were not lost
and they remained there even at the end of the Napoleonic reign.
Moreover, unlike the Americans, the colonists who were indeed living on the moon in terms
of their isolation, the French saw their revolution even initially in universalistic terms for
export and especially under Napoleon, its armies set out to revolutionize the world.
Its ideas actually did so wherever the armies went, the ideas did follow.
By 1815, with the final defeat of Napoleon, not only had many of the structures of the
ASEAN regime been uprooted or severely challenged and tested, but a series of modern political
ideologies and concepts had taken form, creating much of the political vocabulary of the modern
world, our world even.
Now, we start with one of the tougher ones because the most important prevalent ideology
in the early 19th century and indeed after the French Revolution was 19th century liberalism.
And here Americans get hung up because in the 20th century in America, liberalism means
more government, not less government.
So let's emphasize and keep in mind throughout the entire realm of this course that 19th
century liberalism was different.
19th century liberalism is somewhat like 20th century conservatism because 19th century liberalism
believed that that government governs best, which governs least.
Government was seen by 19th century liberals as negative and only to be used when necessary
because the economic philosophy of 19th century liberalism was less a fair economics.
Coming from Adam Smith, the invisible hand, remove government power, let the economy
flow, have free trade, and it would all work out as we all searched for our own individual
self-interest.
However, what made 19th century liberalism moderately radical for its time is that 19th
century liberals believed in promulgated constitutions, basic civil rights, limited
male suffrage, limited male right to vote based on property, how much taxes you paid,
and sometimes on education, careers open to talent rather than birth.
In other words, on some level equality of opportunity, 19th century liberals believed
in the primacy of private property and limited government.
We called it life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
John Locke called it life, liberty, and property.
Our understanding of the pursuit of happiness was our right to pursue property unhindered
by government, by excessive government.
