This industrial revolution made possible comparatively unlimited levels of productivity once it really got underway,
partially freeing humankind from the harsh whims of nature.
For example, by 1840, Great Britain was producing more iron and utilizing more steam power than the rest of Europe combined,
whereas in 1789, the global productivity of France and Great Britain had been about even.
With industrialism came significant accelerating changes in virtually every area of life, including urbanization, wider education,
and the entire social structure of society.
In fact, one of the things that you might want to do after this lecture at some point, if you have nothing else to do one evening,
is just take a blank piece of paper and write the word industrialism on it and diagram the impact of an industrial revolution anywhere if it really gets underway.
What are the implications of industrialism anywhere when it happens?
Since industrialism was also synonymous on some level with power and especially with military power,
all of the great powers were forced to come to terms with it like it or not.
For example, I mentioned in one of the earlier lectures that Russia was defeated by Britain and France in the 1850s because Russia had not industrialized.
After that defeat, they began to try to figure out how they could better industrialized.
When they did not do it very well at the end of the 19th century, they were defeated once again by Japan, which again had learned how to industrialize.
After that defeat, you better believe they turned their attention to learning better how to industrialize.
Why, what didn't they like about industrializing?
Industrialization implicitly uproots traditional society, makes the middle class more important, and the aristocrats comparatively less important.
If a society is based on the power of nobles and aristocrats, industrialization inherently eats away at the whole foundations of society, the power structure, and many of the basic beliefs.
Globally, the Industrial Revolution had deep impact on politics, ideas, culture at a whole, always challenging traditional patterns of society.
Although the impact of the French Revolution on the continent was greater than the Industrial Revolution prior to 1848,
by the middle of the century, the balance was beginning to shift.
Thereafter, their combined impact increasingly challenged an undermined traditional society, ushering in a modern, urban, industrial civilization wherever they really took deep root.
In two later volumes, The Age of Capital and The Age of Empire, Habsbaum details the continuation of this process throughout the rest of Europe,
first from 1850 to 1870, and then from 1870, or actually 1873 to 1914, and in fact the rest of the world, either by European migration, European imperialism, or both,
eventually leading to an era of anti-colonial revolutions as well following World War I.
The ideas of the French Revolution and the material forces of the Industrial Revolution were transferred worldwide, disrupting traditional patterns of life as they had done in Europe.
After several generations of European domination, in many of these colonial areas, native elites and the masses used adapted European ideas and material power combined with their own cultural norms against European domination,
much as the European middle class and masses had done in Europe a century or more earlier against their aristocrats and kings.
