Secondly, and this 19th century liberalism had a model during the French Revolution,
the Constitution of 1791.
But secondly, as the French Revolution went through phases, and we'll trace those phases
in excruciating detail next time.
But secondly came democracy or radicalism.
We call it democracy.
In Europe it was usually called radicalism.
It shared many of the concepts of the liberals, promulgated laws, civil rights, etc.
But favored universal male suffrage, especially once the French Revolution decreed a levé
en masse.
Universal military conscription, okay?
When did the 18-year-olds get the right to vote in the United States?
When they went to Vietnam, you have the right to die for your country, you have the right
to vote for your government.
So universal male suffrage, ironically, when I was a student, it was simply called universal
suffrage.
It was understood it was male suffrage.
But we have to remember it was universal male suffrage.
The Democrats also allowed for more state action, not as a positive good necessarily,
but when it was necessary.
Eminent property was important and central, but it could give way to the wider communal
good as with the concept of eminent domain.
So that during the more radical phase of the French Revolution associated with the Constitution
of 1793, universal male suffrage, you did have the fixing of prices and wages, universal
military conscription, much more state action, because the revolutionaries, the Jacobins
feared that being attacked from the inside by conservative counter-revolutionaries, being
attacked from the outside by the Austrians, the Prussians and others, they needed to harness
and mobilize the power of the state, the power of the masses to maintain and win the revolution
and spread it further.
And they took the risk and they did so.
The liberalism is most associated with the late 17th century ideas of John Locke and
the 18th century ideas of Montesquieu in France.
The Democratic ideas are more associated with Jean-Jacques Rousseau, whose social contract
in 1762 became one of the most important books of the 18th century.
Going even further to the left, although it was not a powerful force during the French
Revolution, was an early form of socialism, embryonic.
Just as during the 17th century English revolutions, embryonic socialist ideas were expressed,
they were also expressed during the course of the French Revolution as well.
Socialists believed in freedom of speech and freedom of thought and freedom of the individual.
It's just that they saw economic necessity as coming prior to political necessity, these
early socialists.
As the right to eat, for example, is being more important than the right to vote, they
were more egalitarian, including in the economic realm.
In reaction to these three ideas, all of which were viewed as radical and subversive by all
those who opposed the revolution, either during it or thereafter.
A more modern, utilitarian, pragmatic form of conservatism emerged.
In reaction to the revolution, joining divine right monarchy with the pragmatic reasons why
conservatism in and of itself was better for everybody.
The most powerful statement of that was Edmund Burke's reflections on the French Revolution
written in 1790.
At first, Burke was kind of glad when he saw the outbreak of the French Revolution.
After all, the French were just doing what the English had done a hundred years earlier,
and that just showed that they had good taste.
But once the revolution began to attack the monarchy, Burke got very, very, very anxious,
and he created the most powerful statement of modern, pragmatic conservatism in the late
18th century and indeed for most of the 19th century and thereafter.
Burke saw society as a contract between the living, the dead, and those yet to be born.
And if you made radical changes and you uprooted any particular aspect of society, what would
happen is chaos and increasing misery for everyone.
Now.
