The flight and capture of the royal family in June 1791 raised further questions about
the possibility of coping and compromising with the monarchy, especially in the face
of counter-revolution conservative and Catholic counter-revolution, unfortunately, and the
external opposition of the nations on France's borders.
The mostly bourgeois members of the Legislative Assembly, who convened in October 1791, took
stronger measures against priests who wouldn't take the oath, and nobles who fled from France
increasingly taking all of their property, and declared war against Austria in April
1792, and finally abolished the monarchy in August of 1792, ushering in yet another phase
or another segment in this revolutionary turmoil.
The second equally complicated phase between September 1792 and July 1794 saw the further
radicalization of the revolution, expanded foreign war, and Maximilian Robespierre's
reign of terror, internal counter-revolution, foreign war initially being lost by France,
urban and rural masses being active continuously because food was still short and the currency
was still depreciating terribly, revolts against the regime pushed all of the revolutionary
emphasis further.
France now found itself at war with Austria, Prussia, Holland and Britain, and they weren't
doing well.
In this context, the king was tried and executed in January of 1793, actually dying with more
strength and with more dignity than he had lived.
However, in the face of all of these internal problems, a more democratic constitution of
1793 was adopted under the pressure of the now dominant group of Jacobin radicals proclaiming
universal male suffrage, the right to work, wouldn't we like to have that, the right to
subsistence and even to the right to rebel against tyranny.
In other words, the Jacobins understood and they were middle class and they did respect
property, but they understood that the power of the French people, the power of the revolution
had to be harnessed or the revolution would unravel and fail.
Faced with internal civil war and the Vendée especially, foreign defeat, severe inflation,
and shortages, Robespierre came to dominate the newly established Committee of Public
Safety and to take even more radical and extreme measures to defend the revolution and to defeat
France's internal and external enemies.
And in doing so, Robespierre suspended the constitution.
If we will defend the revolution, then we will defend civil liberties and tragically,
they did defeat internal enemies, the loss, I've seen numbers of between 100,000 and even
a quarter of a million in the internal counter-revolutionary votes.
I've seen numbers as high as 40,000 on the guillotine of people who had lost their heads,
including a number of people who did so for no reason whatsoever, people who were actually
part of the revolution but in some way disagreed with Robespierre, it got out of control.
The Jacobin era got out of control even though it was in support of democracy and even though
it was in support of the French nation and even though it was successful militarily and
even though it harnessed the power of the nation more completely than any regime had
ever done probably in history, it just got out of control.
And as it is said, sometimes the revolution began to devour its own children.
At that point, no one knew who was safe because with the guillotine functioning at such a
rapid pace, who would be next?
During this time period, state centralization was expanded even further as the power of Paris
over the rest of France was expanded and centralization occurred in lots of ways.
A variety of revolutionary cultural manifestations, the cult of the supreme being, a new system
of months was introduced.
New forms of drafts became popular.
During this time period, ironically, with extreme male democracy came the suppression
of women's organizations and women's right to be part of that revolutionary enterprise
even though they had played a dramatic role more than once and affected the outcome and
claimed their rights in written and oral meetings just as the men had done, declaration of the
rights of women and men.
