In Habsburg's words, war and debt broke the back of the monarchy.
Furthermore, both Louis the 15th and Louis the 16th, through their person, their policies
and their behavior, encouraged French elites to challenge their absolutist claims to authority
and divine right rule because there didn't seem to be much divine about their behavior.
Louis the 15th, even in a Parisian society that was not bashful about sex, Louis the
15th scandalized society with his behavior and his mistresses and even the political
power that some of his mistresses seemed to have.
Louis the 16th seemed at first to be impotent and his wife, the Austrian princess Marie
Antoinette, carried on.
The French didn't like either of these extremes and this also took away from the legitimacy
and the weight of the monarchy which just wasn't taken quite as seriously enough anymore.
Manors were brought to a head in 1787 when an assembly of notables were called to discuss
taxes on the aristocrats and clergy.
And they refused to do so without sharing authority in some manner with the monarchy
and they suggested that the estates general which had not met, a kind of parliament which
had not met since 1614, should be called.
This confrontation is often known as the pre-revolution or the aristocratic or feudal reaction or
even the first phase of the revolution.
And the deadlock and the bankruptcy forced the king to summon the estates general.
However this occurred at the same time, unfortunately for the regime, of a dramatic agrarian crisis,
food shortages which pushed peasants into the city with unemployment, turmoil and other
words before the outbreak of the French Revolution, people were hurting, workers were hurting,
artisans were hurting, peasants were hurting and the same thing would occur before 1848
in the revolutions and the same would occur before the Russian Revolution.
In other words there was an immediate additional burden of economic hardship on the masses
while at the same time there was a burden of political incapacity between the elites
and the monarchy and what finally happens is that that political incapacity spreads within
the elites as well.
The people as a whole are asked to devise a list of grievances, cahiers de dolience.
And those cahiers tell us clearly what the state of France was at that time.
They give us an excellent view of the time.
But that view shows us also how different groups wanted different things.
The clergy wanted the estates general to meet but they wanted to assure the predominance
of Catholicism as the exclusive public religion of the state.
The nobility wanted to make sure that the estates would meet but they wanted more power
for themselves as well and much of the rest of the nations increasingly wanted recognition
of the fact that they did represent the majority of the nation.
That was brought to a boiling point and a head by a powerful pamphlet written by a cleric
the Abbey C.S. on the eve of the revolution.
What is the third estate?
C.S. said dramatically and inflammatory the third estate is the nation.
What are the rest if they're not willing to join the third estate essentially there are
parasites on the nation and the die was cast.
The die was further cast because the decision had to be made over how would the estates
meet.
Would they meet as they had done in 1614 in which the two upper estates could overwhelm
and out vote the third estate or would they meet together in which some of the liberal
aristocrats and some of the liberal clergy joining the third estate would enable the
third estate which after all represented 95, 97% of France to out vote the aristocrats
and clergy in a more liberal constitutional regime.
That issue brought matters to a boiling point and that issue is why in 1789 the French Revolution
really began to get out of control.
Now owing to a series of complex forces including the king's weakness, increasing class and
ideological conflict even more so, continued economic distress both in terms of food and
in terms of runaway inflation, financial instability, painful decisions concerning the future role
of the church in France.
