Lecture 4 The French Revolution
Good morning. Having encountered E. J. Hobbesbaum in our last commentary with his wonderful
book The Age of Revolution, 1789 to 1848, we now take a step backward and talk about
the French Revolution itself, the first part of this era, basically from 1789 to 1799 when
Napoleon Bonaparte came in the power and ended that segment of the French Revolution.
Although scholars assign different weight to the causes of the French Revolution, and
we'll deal with the causes first in some detail, and that weight and the description
of those causes changes about every twenty years, most would agree that they were multiple
in nature. One area always presented by scholars is the impact of the Enlightenment, whose
most powerful proponents lived in France. A long time ago, it tended to be conservative
scholars who criticized the Enlightenment for eating away at the structures of the old
regime by criticizing its basic institutions. Great philosophers such as Montesquieu, Voltaire,
and Rousseau and many others, critiqued established institutions and traditions, including the
aristocracy, even the church, and the functioning of the monarchy, with a clear sense that improvements
were both possible and necessary. These ideas, and many similar ones, were given focus in
the mammoth efforts of editors D. Rowan Dallenbeer, whose multi-volume encyclopedia appeared
between 1751 and 1777. More recently, once again, emphasizing the impact of ideas in
setting the preconditions for the revolution, even if they weren't the absolute immediate
causes, a newer generation of scholars have studied how the ideas of the Enlightenment,
in fact, were also spread more broadly via various forms of elite culture, salons and
reading rooms, and even popular culture in pamphleteers and in oral tradition in an age
of a somewhat larger middle class and somewhat expanded literacy. Ironically, even members
of the aristocracy and clergy were affected by the potentially incendiary forms of thought,
as were members of the middle classes, or the bourgeois, and many of the urban common
folk. In fact, many members of the aristocracy used the ideas of the Enlightenment to attempt
to get the monarch to share power with them, not recognizing that they were beginning to
dig their own graves. An earlier generation of Marxist scholars,
and there are still scholars who see things this way, stressed the contradiction between
the growing commercial bourgeois, fluid economy, capitalist economy of 18th century France,
and the constraints placed on it by the aristocratic control of the state from the top down with
the monarchy in charge. That is to say that one class was predominating over another newer
growing class preventing it from getting its part of the pie. Scholars today emphasize
more the commonality between the aristocrats and the upper middle class in terms of self-interest,
economic concern, and even ideas. However, both of these groups were concerned that their
elements of more modern economic orientation were simply not being supported in any rational
way by the economic structure of the old regime and the monarchy, and all wanted some say
in determining the kind of economic policy that the regime would pursue. In other words,
even when one has an economic cause, the emphasis is in some ways even more political than economic
because it's the political manifestation of it that becomes more powerful. However, at
the last moment on the very eve of the revolution, the aristocracy and the bourgeoisie did head
to a collision over who would have more of a say in determining what the actual policy
would be in determination with the monarch.
