Following the execution of thousands of real and purported enemies of the revolution and
republican victories both against foreign opponents and numerous internal rebellions,
Robespierre and his closest allies were overthrown, and the Jacobins themselves were executed
by the same means by which they had executed their enemies imagined or real during July
1794.
During a traditional year known as the Thermadorian Reaction, in the late summer of 1794 to the
fall of 1795, a five-person directory was established, and it governed in place between
November 1795 and 1799.
The directory represented a return to the moderate constitutional phase of the revolution.
It represented the search for order, it represented the search for stability internally, however
at the same time there was increasing cynicism, there was increasing corruption, there was
increasing jockeying for power.
Most of the severe controls that had been put into place during the Jacobin era, including
wage and price controls, were abandoned.
A constitution was issued, the constitution of 1795, somewhat like the constitution of
1791, except that now the directory replaced the monarchy as the executive part of the
government.
Many other popular mechanisms of expression, including the Jacobin clubs themselves and
any other workers' organizations or any other feminist groups were suppressed, censorship
was reintroduced, an increased police presence was there, increasingly the army and its new
heroes were used not only to do battle with France's foreign foes, but used to maintain
order itself, order against internal enemies, order against any manifestations of domestic
discontent or rebellion either from the left, those who really preferred the 1793 variety,
or from the right returning emigre nobles or clergy who still wanted to have the whole
thing unravel.
The directory provided a relatively competent government and did establish a certain level
of stability.
It did establish a certain number of newer cultural institutions and schools that reflected
the major social gains of the revolution, especially those of the middle class.
However, continued war, now more for foreign conquest and more traditional than really
on behalf of the revolution, continued political disunity, jockeying for power, corruption,
cynicism led to a decline in the legitimacy of the directory and made possible the meteoric
rise and power of France's young and by then most popular general Napoleon Bonaparte.
Ironically, he was called into play by our old friend Abby Cies who had written What
is the Third Estate in 1789, helping to spark the revolution itself.
Cies brought in Bonaparte as part of a triumvirate, the council in 1799, they overthrew the directory.
Cies thought he would teach Bonaparte, few people ever taught Bonaparte, he devoured
them and he devoured them easily.
And we will turn to him both for the positive and for the negative in our next series of
comments.
Thank you.
