Urban and rural violence that broke out increasingly all over both on the part of pro-revolutionaries
and anti-revolutionaries, and foreign wars among the European powers who didn't like
anything that was happening in France, wanted it to stop, wanted to preserve the monarchy
because what was done to the king of France could be done to them just as easily.
This forced the revolution to unfold in a series of phases between 1789 and 1799.
Each phase had its own leadership elite, each phase had its own accomplishments, each
phase had its own set of failures or excesses, and each phase had its own distinct tone, cultural
included, even dress, music, art.
The first phase, lasting roughly between 1789 and 1792, saw an uneasy balance between
an increasingly weakened monarch and an increasingly more powerful legislature known first as
the National Assembly, and then later as the Legislative Assembly, in which the representatives
of the three estates sat together, at least in theory, which meant, after a brief period
of time, some liberal aristocrats, some liberal clerics, and the middle class sat together.
The overwhelming majority of people came from the Third Estate, obviously.
They had a number of famous hallmarks that many people remember from high school or college.
The tennis court oath in June of 1789 when the Third Estate refuses to abandon until
it achieves its goals.
The storming of the Bastille by urban artisans in Paris.
The great fear in the countryside in the summer of 1789 in which peasants burn manner rolls
and tax rolls and records execute some nobility, and even the women of Paris going to Versailles
to bring the king, the baker, and the baker's wife and the baker's kid back to Paris where
they could do the business of the people rather than their own funny business in Versailles.
Now think for a minute what these hallmarks represent.
The entrance of the middle class, the entrance of peasants, the entrance of urban artisans,
and the action of women, all different groups that were part of the nation.
Between 1789 and 1791, the main remnants of feudalism were destroyed, and a constitutional
monarchy was established.
The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen in August 1789, somewhat more
radical and universalist than our recently issued Bill of Rights.
These first gains in the revolution, including the emancipation of Protestants and then the
emancipation of Jews, including careers open to talent, including a constitutional monarchy,
promulgated law, trial by jury, these were reflected in the Constitution of 1791.
In 19th century liberal terms, this was a moderate liberal constitution, something like
what the British had themselves.
And indeed many people feel that this was by far the most important, the most positive
of the revolution, and the core of this in fact did really survive even the rest of the
revolution and even Napoleon himself.
The confiscation of church property in the civil constitution of the clergy requiring
the clergy to take a loyalty oath to the revolution and the nation deeply divided Catholics and
left a bitter legacy of church state conflict that lasted in France even until after World
War II and is finally seemingly becoming just something of the past, thankfully.
Indeed, I remember seeing masses in France on television in which Catholic priests urged
their parishioners to go out and find people who were different, Protestants, Jews, Muslims,
and to get to know them because they were all part of France.
And these programs brought tears to my eyes.
The suppression of guilds and the prohibition of workers organizations signified support
for a capitalist economy while giving only male taxpayers the right to vote indicated
the limited and the moderate nature of the changes foreseen.
