During this early segment of his rule, Bonaparte consolidated a number of the moderate gains
of the revolution, and he also healed some of its worst tensions, and he continued to
expand the power and the efficiency of the state, if only that had been what his real
person was. France was making gains. Napoleon oversaw the implementation and the acceptance
by plebiscite of a constitution with a strong executive and a complicated set of three chambers.
The Council of State was the most important, its members were chosen by him, and it was
the main action body where laws were proposed and formulated often with his participation.
This is one of the things that not everyone is aware of when thinking about Napoleon.
We always see him on horseback, but he was also a workhorse himself, and he took an active
part in the debates dealing with important issues and also would be very, very conscious
of detail as well. Although maintaining the possibility and the reality of quote unquote
careers open to talent, one of the main gains of the revolution, especially for the middle
class, Napoleon accepted and promoted highly competent individuals from all political backgrounds,
including royalists, including royalists who had emigrated and returned, and he encouraged
real debate as long as his primacy was uncontested.
Powerful and effective, prefects were appointed in each of France's departments, further centralizing
power in Paris and strengthened by an effective police presence as well. And the name Fouché
as the head of the police is a name that was feared, just as the name Talleyrand as the
brilliant foreign minister is a name that continues to be respected. And one of the things that
Napoleon was able to do is to get people like Fouché and Talleyrand to serve him as they
had served others and would continue to serve others after him. Very importantly, because
France was a Catholic country. A Concordot with a Papacy was reached in July of 1801,
and that was one of the legacies of the revolution that was most destabilizing and troubling.
This was able to appease most Catholics while still establishing the better part of state
control over the church with Catholicism being now the religion of the majority of Frenchmen.
The state would nominate the bishop, the pope would invest the bishop. Now, the issue of
religion brings up the whole sense of Napoleon, who himself was very, very much a skeptic,
but a skeptic who had big plans for the role of religion in society, because as he said,
I see in religion not the mysteries of the heaven, but the mysteries of the social order
on earth. Without religion, one would have anarchy. And it was this opportunistic and
utilitarian attitude toward religion that also was so true to so many other things that
were part of his makeup. Gaines made by Protestants and Jews, both very small minorities during
the first years of the revolution, were also maintained.
Turning to the financial structure and one of the issues that had plagued the revolution
during most of its time prior to that point was inflation and financial instability. A
semi-private bank of France was established in 1800 and France's currency was stabilized
by 1803, ending for a time the economic instability that had characterized many of the previous
years. Now, to compare that with Great Britain, Great Britain already had a semi-private bank
in the 1690s that worked on stabilizing its currency as much as was possible. But of course,
with greater technology, through the 18th century, it was easier to do this as well.
