Between 1808 and 1812, French predominance began to unravel, even though Napoleon still
won many decisive victories and continued to annex more territory.
The peninsula war, France's conquest of Portugal and Spain in 1808 became an open soar.
When the French introduced into Spain things like ending the Inquisition and ending particular
rights for nobles and ending the particular place of the church, this was so much contrary
to Spanish cultural acceptance that they rebelled.
And they rebelled effectively.
350,000 soldiers still could not destroy the Spanish guerrilla nationalist movement supported
by British money and then by British soldiers.
And this is where Wellington learned how to be a commander, a real commander in action.
Nationalist reactions against French imperialism became even more prominent in parts of Germany
while military and other reforms in Prussia better prepared Prussia for the next round
of conflict and names like Stein and Hardenburg and Scharnhorst and Gnisonal have become these
very, very powerful German names as nationalism is spread and reform is spread in Prussia
and elsewhere in Germany as well.
In other words, one of the things about the French armies and the Napoleonic armies that
forced the pace of change is if the surrounding states didn't copy some of their procedures
and reforms and offer something to their own people even if only temporarily, they could
not compete.
They could not garner the passions of their own people without doing what the French were
doing at the same time and even afterwards when they tried to take back many of those
gains that had been made, it was in the memory bank and it could never be totally rolled
back.
Even with further defeats of Austria at Vagram in 1809 followed by the French annexation
of the Netherlands and even more German territory, things continued to be resented.
These exactions and taxations and billeting were resented including in France.
It was simply going on too long, too much of the same thing.
He just didn't know when to stop.
The continental system was leaking all over including through Russia and Russia was now
ready for another round of conflict.
Seemingly more irascible and divorced from reality, throwing caution to the wind, Napoleon
gambled on the destruction of Russia again in order to finally bring Britain to heel
this time going too far.
There are different estimates on the size of the Grand Army and there are different
estimates over how many people actually returned to Paris when it was defeated.
Some say it was 600,000 plus, others say it was 700,000 but it was a huge army that invaded
Russia from Warsaw in June of 1812, tattered remnants returned to France months later,
some say 40,000 troops survived, some say a larger number of men survived but they were
tattered and in terrible disarray by December of the same year, defeated by General Summer,
even more by General Winter, General Space and the Russians and the burning of Moscow.
It seems the Russians set Moscow to fire preventing the French from having respite there.
This is the first time the man was really put to flight in the field.
Sensing the possibility of finally defeating Napoleon, the more battle tested Russians
and Prussians and Austrians and British now cooperated more effectively in the final campaigns
ending Napoleon's dominance and again this is one of the things that Napoleon was able
to do, he was able to divide them to reach treaty separately with them so that they would
get the best deal they could get while they could leaving others in the lurch.
This time they had come to realize he has to be stopped and the only way to do it is
for all of us to do it together and hang in until the very end and this is what they did.
Severely outnumbered, Napoleon was badly defeated in the Battle of the Nations, Leipzig in October
of 1813.
