France continued to be relatively prosperous, as most of Napoleon's battles were still paid for by Francis' neighbors,
including forced and voluntary recruiting into the French army.
Now, you wonder how could Napoleon have fought most of the rest of the Europe, sometimes all at once,
and one of the ways he did it is by recruiting others.
If Adolf Hitler had had that same wisdom, I really shudder to think of what he could have accomplished.
If he had been willing to recruit Poles and Ukrainians and turn them against Russians,
instead of subduing them and mistreating them immediately, I don't even want to go there.
Although Admiral Nelson's second decisive victory at Trafalgar in October of 1805,
and as he lay dying, he kept on repeating, I have done my duty.
I have done my duty, and he knew his duty was to save England,
prevented a French invasion of Great Britain.
Still, Napoleon achieved his greatest military victories in the next several years
against Austria and Russia and Prussia at this time.
He combined daring, speed, a vision that allowed him to see the whole battlefield,
massing forces and concentrating them at the enemy's weakness, outflanking them,
moving in secret, using his artillery, and very, very importantly, enormous courage,
standing in the front of the battlefield sometimes, or just behind, in front of his men,
and they knew he was there, and they knew he was with them, at least still, during these earlier periods.
We can go back to something he had said to his troops in 1796, just to get a sense of the vocabulary he used.
Soldiers in two weeks, you have won six victories, you have made 15,000 prisoners,
you have killed or wounded more than 10,000 men, deprived of everything, you have accomplished everything,
you have won battles without cannon, negotiated rivers without bridges,
made forced marches without shoes, encamped without brandy, and often without bread.
The man knew how to speak to his troops, even if he would abuse them by overusing them from this point on.
Napoleon defeated the Austrians at Ulm in 1805.
He further crushed the Austro-Russian army at Austerlitz in December of 1805.
He defeated the Prussians at Jena and Auerstadt in 1806.
He followed that up at the Battle of Friedland against the Russians in 1807,
and then he dictated, in concert with Alexander I, the peace of Tilsit,
which marked French predominance over all of western and central Europe,
allowing the Russians their predominance over eastern Europe.
And the reason I'm emphasizing the geography, because again, every extension of French power
is an extension of French ideas and French procedures.
France annexed much territory, created satellite states
that were mostly governed by Napoleon's brothers and other relatives,
which allowed Napoleon to withdraw much of the map of Europe.
Significantly in 1805 and in 1806, twice he redrew the map of Germany,
reducing the number of states from over 300 to about 19,
followed by the abolition of by then the meaningless Holy Roman Empire.
And without realizing it, by reducing the number of German states,
he would be preparing the way for later German unification at France's discomputure.
But of course, that's not how he thought history was going to proceed.
Still, even at the peak of his power during this time period,
the continental system he set up in 1806 to exclude British goods from Europe
and make Britain accept French dominance was troubling,
unenforceable and raised problems throughout Europe, including in France.
He had to try to beat England economically since without a fleet that was strong enough,
he could not invade her. He would gladly have done so.
He would have preferred to have done so if he could have created a fleet sufficient to do so.
It might have been wise for him to have taken some time and done that as well,
rather than to have attacked Russia later.
But again, that's another story and Adolf Hitler was to make the same mistake 140 years later.
