But by the end of the century, they had put this in their past, as it turned out, establishing a stable political system.
There was general acceptance on the part of a broad spectrum of opinion of Britain's basic institutions,
including, and sometimes even especially, shared governance, constitutional monarchy.
Government was relatively cheap and relatively inapprucive, yet it favored policies conducive to all levels of economic expansion from agriculture to commerce and manufacturing.
The series of enclosure laws during the 18th century, for example, made possible the development of larger farms under the control of aristocrats,
not pleasing the tenant farmers or the other day laborers who were pushed off the common lands, but eventually making possible greater productivity and work for almost everyone.
There was a high level of trust in the stability and in the durability of the system, and by the 18th century there was even a belief in British exceptionalism.
She had defeated the Spanish at the end of the 16th century, she had defeated the Dutch at the end of the 17th century,
and during the course of the 18th century, she defeated the French primarily as well, especially in areas relating to navy and commerce and colonies.
With the establishment of a private national bank of England in 1694, there occurred greater acceptance of universal low-level taxation
because the economy was stable basically and a sense that the national debt was guaranteed by the nation's elites collectively,
and therefore Britain's financial and banking structure was comparatively well-developed in sound.
The Dutch had achieved a similar circumstance, and both the Dutts and the Brits could get loans about half of the interest of what the French government was forced to pay for loans
or other French business enterprises would pay for loans.
Britain's national success was based on a trilogy of commerce and colonies and seapower.
Commerce, colonies and seapower, all giving her economic advantages in an interrelated way and all giving her inducements for further development.
Britain's colonial and commercial preeminence, which were closely connected, gave her excess capital for investment.
It also gave her markets and sources of raw material.
Capital, markets, raw material, three of the main things needed for industry.
There was a different kind of attitude in England, even on the part of the elites.
Trade in Britain conferred status as the 18th century novelist Daniel Defoe said, trade in England makes gentlemen in most parts of the world,
an aristocrat would not touch trade and didn't really want to work for money, but rather inherited wealth.
The British aristocrats were not above earning more money and expanding their wealth by labor even.
Alright, not physical labor, but labor.
Not only did Great Britain have a relatively large and diverse and growing middle class,
but there was greater social mobility and intercourse among the wealthy elites, including even many of the aristocrats.
Naval supremacy protected British commerce, protected Britain from invasion,
and also protected her against having to maintain continental style, expensive and dangerous standing armies.
Dangerous because the king can use those armies if the commanders are loyal to him against the parliament and against the achieved acceptance of shared governance.
And it also cost less.
As with the Low Countries, Britain experienced a moderate agrarian revolution in the 18th century as well, with names like Turnips Townsend being remembered.
