The British began to even investigate this as early as 1815 in parliamentary conditions or rather in parliamentary committees.
One investigation went this way as a young Elizabeth Bentley was queried.
What age are you? 23. Where do you live? Leads.
What time did you begin work at the factory when I was six years old?
What were your hours of labor in the mill from five in the morning until nine at night?
What time were you allowed for meals? 40 minutes at noon.
Did they keep you constantly on your feet? Yes, there are so many frames and they run so quick.
Your labor is very excessive. Yes, you have not time for anything.
Suppose you flagged a little or were late, what would they do? Strap us or beat us.
And they're in the habit of strapping those who are last in their work? Yes.
Constantly? Yes. Girls and boys? Yes. Have you ever been strapped? Yes.
Severely? Yes. And it continued and continued.
But at least the British began to ask those questions as early as 1815.
And what we have to remember in terms of this particular industrial process is that this was the first.
And the firsts are always more difficult because there was no past tense.
There was no history. And we also have to remember that subsistence level rural life was not pretty
and could never be pretty because it was based on the whims of nature.
So without some kind of industrial mechanized agrarian productivity,
most people lived on the brink of starvation and would always live on the brink of starvation.
By the second quarter of the 19th century, British working and living conditions began to improve somewhat.
And they certainly would do so after most workers obtained the right to vote in 1867
and increasingly joined unions as well.
Religious and humanitarian and political reform efforts also played central roles in ameliorating conditions.
For example, in 1843, William J. Fox made a speech to the anti-corn league.
Now Fox was a radical and he was a friend of Bentham and a friend of John Stuart Mill.
And he was making a speech that helped in the end destroy the corn laws
and make possible free trade and grain which lowered the price of food for these very workers.
So he's not an apologist for any of this industrial development.
But he talked about machinery at the same time in this speech to this crowd of people
and he said the following, when machinery is employed in manufacturer, what is the natural result?
Production is cheaper.
Goods, apparel of various kinds are brought to market at a lower rate.
The use of it is diffused more extensively in society.
People have enjoyments and accommodation which they did not possess.
The demand has increased and this again reacts upon production.
More hands are employed and in the natural course of things there is found to be more work, more wages and more enjoyment.
It can't be clearer than that.
And what happened is that issues like this were not only debated outside of parliament in civil society
by tribunes of the people but they were debated in parliament as well after the meeting of commissions
leading to a series of regulatory legislation from the early 1830s throughout the whole rest of the century.
For example, the debates over factory laws in 1846 and 1847.
Thomas Babington Macaulay who earlier had championed voting rights for the middle class and for some workers
talking about child labor laws concerning women and children.
Remember that is contrary to laissez-faire, that is contrary to government non-intervention which was like a religion.
So they're criticizing their own religion in a sense, their own secular religion.
Is there a single gentleman so zealous for the principles of free trade as to admit that he might consent to the restriction
of commercial transactions when higher and other considerations are concerned?
Or?
