By 1850, nearly half of the largest 10 cities in Europe were in Britain, those new industrial cities.
And by 1850, Britain was also already 50% urban.
The only other state in that category was Belgium, not surprisingly,
which became the second industrializing power in the 1830s while France was only 25% urban
and would not become 50% urban until either right before or right after World War I, 1914 to 1918.
In as much as the collective uprootedness and instability of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic years,
may have retarded the Industrial Revolution on the continent, while accelerating it in Britain.
By 1815, Britain was clearly the workshop and the financial center of the world.
Although the long-term impact of the Industrial Revolution or revolutions, because it is a continuous process,
led to a better standard of living for most Europeans, this was probably not true until the second half of the 19th century.
Even if the process created more middling level jobs, brutal living conditions for most workers were terrible
and almost totally in an almost totally unregulated system until the 1830s, and even then the regulation was insufficient and not applied.
When some unions finally began to form in the 1830s, the union laws finally having facilitated that when the Combination Acts
preventing unions were finally repealed in 1824, and when more public attention was given to the horrendous situation of workers
and most particularly to women and children who were more easily manipulated and forced to work under grueling conditions with less resistance than men.
In many cases, some of the men used to break machinery, the Luddites, especially artisans, sometimes even in an organized fashion,
and sometimes even during the Napoleonic Wars themselves.
So many of these tasks, especially in textiles, could be more easily done by women and children.
In fact, as one apologist for this early industrial process said,
Andrew Yure, it is almost impossible to get children adjusted to the timing and constraints and discipline of the factory system once they enter puberty.
So it's much better to deal with them when they are six and seven years old.
In fact, he said further,
The main difficulty above all was in training human beings to renounce their disultery habit of work and to identify themselves with the unswerving regularity of complex automation.
That doesn't sound like much fun.
Even if the quantity of living conditions may have improved somewhat for some people, the quality of life probably declined at first.
Separation of family members probably increased.
Communal support structure is probably declined, and adjusting to the tempo of machine labor and the growing ubiquitousness of the clock must have been extremely difficult.
Even some of the hardest critics of early industrial society still ring true today, such as Karl Marx.
Capitalism came into the world steeped in mire from top to toe and oozing blood from every poor.
Or the Hammons who studied the Industrial Revolution in the earlier 20th century who said the curse of Midas was on this society.
