Lecture 6, The First Industrial Revolution, 1760 to 1850.
Having spent the last two sessions together, considering the rebellious and then militarily
dominant French, we're going to turn today to an equally important and indeed perhaps
an even more important event in human history or process in human history, and turn our
attention to the British who, during the second half of the 18th century, became involved
in a process known as the Industrial Revolution or the First Industrial Revolution, the classical
Industrial Revolution, the British Industrial Revolution, which then spread to the rest
of Europe after the 1830s and the second half of the 19th century, and which our friend
Eric Habsbaum has called probably the most important event in world history at any rate
since the invention of agriculture and cities, meaning it's pretty darn important.
Although the Industrial Revolution, which can be traced to late 18th century Britain,
was more of a process than a historical event or even a series of events, it was to be the
most powerful force of historical change in modern history.
Essentially involving the replacement of tools by machines with built-in guidance and energy,
this long-term revolution made possible previously undreamt of levels of productivity.
Eventually mostly in large factories, in large cities, new with collective dramatic impact
on almost every aspect of society.
Rappetting these changes were revolutions in transportation and communications, rapid
urbanization, growing and then mass literacy, a changed class structure, a greatly changed
class structure over time, and during the second half of the 19th century, even higher
standards of living for most who lived in industrialized societies, including the working
class and peasants.
Industrialism also made possible the gradual process of national integration, including
most citizens, in modern nation states.
It made possible radical changes in European and the global balance of power.
It made possible industrial warfare.
It made possible mostly European control over the greater part of the globe until after
World War II joined at the end of the 19th century by the newer non-European industrial
powers of the United States and Japan.
Although scholars disagree over the precise conjuncture of forces that caused or made
possible this acceleration of industrial productivity in late 18th century Great Britain from, say,
1760 to 1780 or so, many seeming preconditions were more prominent there than anywhere else,
and scholars debate this.
And now have come to realize that some of those preconditions, in fact, many of them
were also present in places such as areas of China or areas of India, but not in the
same entire conjuncture as occurred in Great Britain at that time.
Probably small in size and having had a successful political revolution in the late 17th century,
the so-called Glorious Revolution of 1688, Britain was relatively well-governed and politically
stable.
And again, this is very, very ironic because in the 17th century, the English were looked
down upon as revolutionaries, people who engaged in terrible civil war, and then murdered their
king, regicides.
