Sometimes they occurred in spasms with increasing range, 1820 in the early 1820s, somewhat limited,
1830 in the early 1830s, even more widespread, Les Miserables, Victor Hugo, comes from a
riot that actually took place in Lyon, second city of France in the early 1830s, and especially
in 1848 known as the springtime of the peoples in which riots, rebellions, revolution broke
out in almost all of the major cities on the continent in western and central Europe,
although not in Russia and not in England.
Although most of these riots, rebellions, strikes, protests, gatherings were repressed
and sometimes severely, there were a number of major successes between 1815 and 1848 for
the forces of change.
Greece gained independence from the Ottoman Empire during the 1820s in its rebellion,
formally accepted in 1832.
Now, Greece, Athens, Athens, freedom, the Olympics, the Ottoman Empire.
The powers were caught in the bind there because they wanted the stability of the Ottoman Empire.
They didn't want it destabilized, that could be dangerous.
But the Greeks were Christian, the Ottomans were Muslim, the Greeks were the source of
western identity, the Muslims were not, the Ottomans were not, so the populace supported
the Greeks.
Belgium, mainly Catholic, gained independence from Holland, mainly Protestant in 1830, formally
guaranteed in 1839, and let us remember that Protestant and Catholic mattered a lot in
the 19th century.
A number of Latin American nations, as I've already indicated, gained independence from
the Spanish Empire in the 1820s and from the Portuguese Empire was, well, the mammoth state
of Brazil.
The classic and best example of an intelligent avoidance of violent revolution and the co-opting
of the middle class was obviously the British Reform Bill of 1832, although it was preceded
by some violence as well.
The king actually threatened to create more peers if the House of Lords wouldn't pass
the bill, and the great historian, parliamentarian, Macaulay got up and said, we drive over to
the forces of revolution, those who we keep out of power.
In other words, let's co-opt members of the middle class, they will become members of
order and not members of revolution, push them in a corner, don't give them their due,
no taxation without representation, you're going to cause a revolution.
The British learned how to do without that problem, even though there was still plenty
of violence in British society.
There were a number of other major themes and tendencies during this era that were extremely,
extremely important and kindly for us historians.
It was an age in which the humanities and especially philosophy and history were held
in great esteem.
Ideas were held to be extremely important.
A time of Kant and Goethe in the earlier period of Hegel and many, many others, a time in
which the power of ideas was held to be really significant.
This also comes from the ideas that were represented during the French Revolution and the Napoleonic
era and that were also widely dispersed throughout the Romantic era that predominated and that
post-Napoleonic time period as well.
The age even saw the development of a number of early utopian socialist theories, such
as those of Charles Fourier, Henri de Saint-Simon, Louis Blanc, Robert Owen in Great Britain
and the early anarchism of Pierre-Joseph Prudant.
In his pamphlet, What is Property?
Property is theft, he said.
Now let's stop for a minute here.
Who gave us the idea that these people were utopian?
None other than Uncle Karl, Karl Marx.
Why were they utopian?
Because they weren't bloodthirsty.
They didn't understand that there had to be a class struggle.
They didn't understand that there had to be violence.
Some of them thought that persuasion would work.
Some of them thought that you could communicate with the capitalists and humanitarians.
Some of them thought you could form unions.
Some of them thought you could form cooperatives.
They don't sound all that utopian to me, although there would be violence to be sure, but not
the kind that Marx thought was absolutely essential.
As we will see later, Marx had a good streak of utopianism in his thinking and his worldview
as well.
