In contrast, there was also a widespread religious revival during this era.
There was the pietism in Germany throughout the German states.
There was the spread of Methodism or Wesleyanism in Great Britain.
Some scholars even think that the spread of Methodism or Wesleyanism helped prevent revolution in England because it absorbed so much of the pain and suffering, hopes, aspirations of the poor and even lower middle class.
In that sense, Marx wasn't totally wrong. Religion can function as the opiate of the masses to the extent that people who are deeply religious and who believe that they have to suffer through their human condition and suffering in this world because the better world is to come,
that can lead people to put off going after changes that maybe they should be going after.
And even more basically, those religious opportunities can simply give people a sense of belonging and joining unions also gives people a sense of belonging, but a different kind of sense of belonging.
So that religious revivalism also occurred within the domain of Protestantism and also within the domain of Catholicism as well.
Catholicism did recover powerfully from the revolutionary and the Napoleonic era, especially associated with the forces of order.
And there were liberal Catholic thinkers very prominent during this time period as well.
All of these tendencies were generally related to the dominant romantic tone of the epic, also evident in literature, in art and in music.
Now scholars disagree as to whether or not there actually was a romantic movement.
And the reason they're able to do so is they indicate that so many different members of that so-called movement had different areas of intentionality and of concentration.
So that for example, sometimes the romantic movement is associated with emotion, spontaneity, a return to nature, past oriented especially the medieval epics,
Brothers Grimm, Folktales, some emphasize its anti-rationalist or anti-enlightenment stress, at least in the sense that the enlightenment had been so mechanistic that the romantics rejected the man machine element of the enlightenment.
Now most romantics did not share all of those particular qualities, although those qualities run throughout the movement through many of its more important representatives.
However, what most scholars do agree is that during this era, there was such a thing as a romantic tone.
There was a striving to create new ways of viewing reality, new systems of thought out of the collapse of the old through the French Revolution.
There was a desire to bridge the gap between the real and the ideal, between man's aspirations and man's limitations and suffering.
The 1815 to 1848 was also an age of frustration in which constitutionalists and liberal nationalist aspirations and expectations were dashed by the powers that be,
in which expectations for the possibility of achieving immediate and direct change outran the possibility of actually achieving that change against the forces of order.
Until the mid-1840s, this time period was also a time period of general economic improvement and of the gradual spread of industrial advances to parts of western and central Europe.
These advances were still disruptive, leading to urban growth and tensions, especially on the part of artisans and many others, among the real urban poor.
Severe agrarian depression from crop failures in 1846 and 1847, which actually had begun in Ireland tragically in 1845, led to an urban recession as well,
placing many areas of society in a real situation of overload ripe for rebellion and violence.
In February of 1848, as the saying goes, Paris sneezed and the rest of Europe caught a cold. The revolutions of 1848 had begun.
We'll turn to them next time. Thank you.
