Lecture 7 The Era of Metternich, 1815-1848
Having put the great Napoleon to rest, although he's still going to jump forward and disturb
our dreams for a moment or two this morning, and having also considered the Industrial Revolution
that was taking place in Britain parallel to the time period we're going to discuss today,
we now turn to what is usually called Restoration Europe, or sometimes simply just the Era of
Metternich between 1815 and 1848.
The Congress of Vienna, which met from November 1814 to June 1815, and the settlement it created
served as a dividing line between the Revolutionary Era and the Era of the Restoration.
Dominated by Prince Clemens von Metternich of Austria, and to a lesser extent by Count
Robert Casselray of Great Britain, and also occasionally by Alexander I of Russia, the
Great Powers sought to restore the old order as much as was possible, using the principles
of legitimacy, compensation, and balance in order to assure stability and preserve the
peace.
And they used those principles advisedly, discarding them when it was in their interest, to do so.
Their most important goals were to prevent the revival of French expansionism and revolution,
to preserve a general balance of power in Europe, and to prevent the outbreak of further
revolutions and wars intimately connected as they were.
By 1815, almost everyone understood implicitly how closely tied was war and revolution, and
how revolutionary actually was war as a human experience.
Although there were many tensions and fears among the victorious powers, including the
seemingly justifiable fear that Russia could now replace France as the new Hegemon, the
new dominant power, generally intelligent decision making and an understandable desire
for peace and stability often prevailed.
And Metternich was a master at that, as also was Prince Talleyrand, who was representing
France and who helped rehabilitate France in an essential manner in the balance of power,
playing an active role in the negotiations.
Indeed, the meeting at Vienna is sometimes compared to the meetings at Versailles an
entire hundred years later to show how much more intelligently it was done at Vienna than
later at Versailles, although the Napoleonic Wars and World War I were two totally different
kind of human experiences.
Talleyrand did serve many masters, including the revolution and Napoleon, and he basically
was a wily and brilliant diplomat, one of the true greats of the age.
Although France gave up additional territory following Napoleon's hundred days, he comes
back to haunt us, accepting the lesser boundary that was its in 1789, rather than the more
expanded boundary of the Revolution of 1792.
The peace of Paris was not punic in nature, especially when it concerned France.
Although there was an Allied occupation for three years, the Allied troops left by 1818.
And shortly thereafter, France joined the post-war concert of Europe and the Congress
system, including the Holy Alliance, championed by somewhat mystic and somewhat more romantic
Tsar Alexander I of Russia, to which the British were not willing to agree.
Although there were tensions, the four initial great powers, Great Britain, Russia, Austria
and Prussia, found ways to compromise and to divide the spoils of war in a reasonable
way, at least to them, and at least in terms of immediate stability.
