Remembering the impact of 1789, remembering the wars, the powers had no interest in going at one another again.
These were people who still remembered the past. Incredibly, they had lived long enough to do so, and that's not where they wanted to go.
Not even the generals.
Still, the overall impact of the events and even of the failures of these revolutions was profound.
The revolutions did lead to the replacement of many key traditional leaders in areas, states, which were most affected by those revolutions in France, in Austria, in Prussia,
and even in Italy. The newer leaders were less attuned to establish ways of governing internally and less committed to the concert of Europe.
These were not people who remembered the wars of Napoleon and the wars of the French Revolution, and especially with Metternich Gaughan.
A vacuum was there, and the vacuum was filled by a new generation of people who turned out to be very intense, powerful, action-oriented statespeople known as Real Potitechers,
who favored realism in politics. They were like Frederick the Great, if dupe we must, let us be the greatest of all scoundrels.
They were not wedded to the concert of Europe. What did the concert of Europe mean to Napoleon? It meant a lack of his legitimacy.
What did the concert of Europe mean to Bismarck or to Kavor in Prussia or Piedmont later?
These were people for whom the ends justified the means, and war itself was not all that great of a risk.
The next era would be a totally different era under the leadership of this new group of younger people who took power after the elders went into a band
during the revolutions of 1848, and even the new monarchs were prepared to take greater risks.
Moreover, adding to this risk-taking intensification was the fact that intensified and exacerbated nationalist feelings, both between states,
and now more dangerously even between peoples was also a part of this revolution of 1848, and all of the violence and mayhem associated with putting down the revolutions all over the core of Europe,
except for Great Britain and except for Russia. Russia had a rebellion in Poland, but not in Russia proper, and Great Britain sat this one out,
because they had already reformed enough that they could sit this one out. Many Italian and German patriots were incensed with Austria's behavior.
That's clear in Italy because Italy was reoccupied, northern Italy was reoccupied by the Austrian forces, and the old elites returned,
and traditional regimes were set up once again, but the same was true with respect to Prussia, in which many Prussian liberals looked at the Austrian quashing,
and even more Prussian nationalists and other German nationalists looked at the Austrian quashing of a wider union with the support of Russia of all things as being very, very negative.
British and French liberals were clearly upset with Russia and with Austria. British liberals did not cotton to the Russian playing of the policemen of Europe,
putting down a great liberal patriot such as Kasuth in Hungary, while Napoleon III was especially incensed with the Russians who refused to recognize him as an emperor.
They refused to recognize his legitimacy whatsoever, and he knew that if they had had their druthers, and if they had been able to march across Europe with the Prussians and or the Austrians to put down a Napoleon in Paris, they would have been glad to do so.
Intagonisms between Germans and Slavs were also exacerbated, while Hungarians still wanted independence from Austria in one form or in another.
