Lecture 8 The Revolutions of 1848
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
Let's begin Lecture 8 with a direct historiographic confrontation.
One great historian, GM Trevelyan, says the following about the Revolutions of 1848.
1848 was the turning point at which modern history failed to turn.
Another great historian, Hans Rothfels, says virtually exactly the opposite.
Failure or not, 1848 was a genuine turning point.
Now, what did they mean exactly?
Trevelyan was a liberal.
1848 is sometimes known as the spring times of the people, with great hopes and great expectations.
What he meant is that European history should have turned for the better,
and since it failed to turn, in some ways it turned for the worst.
And that's what Rothfels implicitly understood.
Turning point or not, 1848 indeed had a dramatic, dramatic impact.
The Revolutions, which broke out in many areas of Western and Central Europe during the early months of 1848,
had a number of causes, and now we're talking about causes that are clear,
rather than preconditions, as with the French Revolution of 1789.
A number of participants, especially in the states of Italy and Germany,
but also large ethnic minorities in the Austrian Empire, such as Hungarians or Czechs or Poles,
had both nationalist and constitutionalist issues that had been long suppressed.
In France, the issues were more political, constitutional,
but also social in nature, demonstrating the further leftist adventure that France had taken
with all of those utopian socialists, and we could name a number of others as well.
And the French example also had some national implications,
but in a different way than in the Austrian Empire or in Germany or in Italy.
That is to say that the regime of Louis Philippe from 1830 to 1848 just wasn't very exciting to French nationalists,
and when Louis Philippe brought back Napoleon's ashes and put them in the Anvalides,
what he did is bring attention to the deficit he shared when compared with Napoleon as a nationalist,
and this upset a number of French people as well.
A growing number of middle class individuals in expanding urban areas also sought careers open to talent.
They wanted better jobs.
In Central Europe, feudalism or feudal remnants still rankled large sections of the peasantry, this human bondage.
And then there was agrarian depression in 1846 and 1847 on the continent, which led to urban recession as well.
This exacerbated a host of grievances and brought them to a boiling point.
Faced with these concerns, political elites in most areas were minimally insensitive, unimaginative,
and surprisingly unprepared for the sort of outbreaks that occurred following the signal given by Paris in the end of February 1848.
Indeed, the great French liberal constitutionalist to Tocqueville before 1848 on the eve of the revolution said publicly,
France is a nation that is bored.
Can't you feel the breath of revolution in the air?
The overall legacy of 1789, both in the minds of revolutionaries and their opponents, was often decisive.
The revolutions of 1848 generally developed in three phases, and we have just considered its causes, we will consider its course,
and then we will consider its impact.
During the first phase from February to May, many revolutions appeared to be successful,
and initially obtained major concessions from terrified monarchs and political elites.
