Following outbreaks in Paris, in mid-late February, February 22nd, the 24th, King Louis Philippe abdicated, and a republic was proclaimed.
With universal male suffrage, national workshops were also established. Interestingly, again, this national workshops harkens back to the Constitution of 1793, which guaranteed the right to work.
Now, most of the people who were part of the committees that put these things in place in Paris and Lyon had wanted nothing to do with national workshops.
But once the people set up barricades, they wanted nothing to do with more urban violence either, and so they placated the people hoping to take back what they were giving later.
There were some real radicals and some even moderate socialists involved, but most really wanted a more reformist monarchy like Great Britain.
Spreading very quickly to northern Italy, although there had earlier been rebellions in southern Italy which didn't hit the map hard because it wasn't Paris,
on March the 4th, King Charles Albert of Piedmont, in the midst of riots, issued a moderate constitution.
After riots in Prague, Vienna, and Budapest, three great cities in the Austrian Empire, on March the 13th, our friend, Prince Commencement Metternich, resigned and fled to London.
He said, I can tell the difference between a passing illness and a terminal malady. We are in the throes of the latter, and he left happy to have his head.
A constitution was promised, and Hungary became virtually independent.
Shortly thereafter, a similar series of events occurred in Berlin and elsewhere in Germany, in many major cities as well, leading to a more liberal ministry and to a military evacuation of the city.
The military did not want to evacuate the city, but King Frederick William IV did want to evacuate the city because, as with Louis Philippe, he was afraid of too much violence.
The military kept its head better than the monarchs. They knew they had the power to repress if the will to use the power was there.
And King Frederick William also promised a constitution and support for German unity in one way. Again, constitutionalism, some form of support for nationalism, these are the big issues in most of the states of Germany.
Almost simultaneously, the Austrians were ousted from Milan, a republic was proclaimed in Venetia, Venice, and Piedmont declared war on Austria.
So all that Austrian inheritance from the Congress of Vienna is now being put in jeopardy.
At the end of March, an all-German pre-parliament assembled in Frankfurt, followed by the opening of the full Frankfurt Parliament, which debated and debated and debated about what was the best way to achieve German unity.
In April, a constitution was promised for the Czechs in Bohemia, again, one of the more industrialized areas of the empire.
Riots spread to other sections of the Austrian empire. Revolts for independence even began in Poland, including Russia and Poland.
And Pope Pius IX declared neutrality in a war between Catholics against Catholics, losing much of his earlier support.
Coming into power in 1846, he looked and began to speak like a more reformist pope until the revolutionary outbreaks occurred.
During the second stage of the revolutions between June and December 1848, the revolutions were clearly in trouble, almost on all fronts.
Following the meeting of a pan-Slav Congress in Prague, Austrian general Wendisch Graz, if you can spell it, extra credit comes to you, bombards Prague, crushing the Czechs.
And again, German nationalists at Frankfurt were happy that this occurred, Czechs versus Germans.
During the June days in Paris, following the closing of those national workshops, radical Republicans and some socialists were suppressed in the bloody June days,
leaving a legacy of class hatred and leading to reaction. Moderate liberals didn't want a radical republic, let alone a fully democratic republic.
Prince Louis Napoleon, nephew of our Napoleon, was elected president of the Republic in December, easily defeating all of his Republican rivals, including Lamar,
team the poet and general Cavaniak, who had repressed the workers in the June days.
