Austro-Prussian tensions were raised, while the Austrian elites also felt threatened because they were forced to rely on Russian intervention.
Let's stay there for a while. Even the Austrians were tense because the Russians had to be called in to help them do their own business.
What this meant is that these elites would try to do something about this afterwards in both Prussia and in Austria.
Class tensions were also raised in a number of states, and by 1848 we can begin to talk about class consciousness in a more meaningful way.
1848 is when Marx writes the Communist Manifesto. 1851 is when Marx writes the 18th of Brumaire, the rise of Louis Napoleon,
but significantly 1848 sees de Tocqueville publish his souvenir, his memoirs, and in de Tocqueville's memoirs he is even more emphatic about the nature of the class struggle
he saw on the streets of Paris than Marx was. He's more frightened by it because he's a liberal constitutionalist.
Marx is happy for it. To Marx, this 1848 revolution is a presage of what is to come and what he wants.
However, looking at the violence and the disruption and the instability and the workshops even, the middle classes increasingly favored property rights and stability over substantive change.
Prior to the revolution, the middle classes tended to speak in the name of everyone else as well and think that that was for real.
And they were liberal and sometimes democratic and sometimes experimental. Now they face the violence.
And they, generally speaking, become somewhat more conservative and somewhat less critical of any order that can establish stability or authority, although this will differ from place to place.
The masses, however, urban masses, using violence, demonstrated that their needs had to be considered by the elites, whether aristocratic or middle class or both, and they have achieved a greater sense of class consciousness in doing battle even in defeat.
The fact that they had done this, forces, the elites, if they have any sense of realism or intelligence, to be more attentive to the needs of the masses and the middle classes through some kind of reform or by greater implements of repression,
including a modern, a more modern police force, and also it leaves them to understand that like it or not, nationalism is a powerful force and they better learn how to deal with it.
This is the beginning of a time period in which some more intelligent members of the conservative elites, including the aristocrats, would know how to co-opt nationalism and to use it on behalf of conservatism against liberalism and democracy.
At the same time, the failure of the revolutions of 1848 to establish any dramatic changes except in those moderate constitutions very, very much discredited the power of ideas themselves, that romantic temperament.
As AJP Taylor has indicated, never has there been a revolution so inspired by a limitless face in the power of ideas, never has a revolution so discredited the power of ideas as a result.
The discrediting of the ideas and the myths of revolution, paralleled by the evident material gains and impact of the industrial revolution, symbolized by the first universal expo that took place in London in 1851,
usher in a new paradigm, a new historic era. A clear transition has occurred. The period from 1850 to 1870 would be remarkably different than the one that came before it. Thank you.
