The era witnessing this expansion and maturation of state action on so many levels internally
are also witnessed a dramatic change in the world balance of power as well,
obviously, inherently, to the advantage of Europe.
Although not an age of self-conscious imperialism, the British and the French
rather easily increased their power at the expense of India, China, Southeast Asia,
while the increasingly industrialized United States opened up Japan in the 1850s
just prior to the American Civil War.
And indeed, isn't that how all of us were taught about this confrontation?
We opened up Japan doing them a favor, a favor that they didn't want,
but we came back another year with a larger fleet and they opened up
and they learned supposedly inferior yellow races.
The Japanese put finish to that if people only had eyes that would see.
But that just shows you how clouded our vision can be when we hold to fixed ideas.
Indeed, the American Civil War would be the real harbinger of the future potential industrial warfare
that would occur at the end of this time period between relatively equal combatants.
The American Civil War would be a real foretaste of World War I,
but again, America 3,000 miles away on a certain level might still almost have been on the moon.
People didn't study the American Civil War, they studied the Franco-Prussian War,
studied the Austro-Prussian War, wars that took place quickly, limited costs,
great advantage to the victor, very, very different than the American Civil War.
Although a number of the major tendencies of these two decades continued into the next era,
the completion of the process of Italian and German quote-unquote unification in 1870 and 1871
and the emergence of Germany as the new hegemon, the new dominant power, replacing France
in the gendered language of the early 20th century, scholars used to say Europe had lost a mistress,
France and gained a master, Germany.
This marks a transition to a new era, not surprisingly known as the age of Bismarck of 1870 to 1890,
which we will cover in our succeeding lectures.
Other scholars may take different tax to end this particular epic.
Some feel that the epic really ends with the beginning of the Depression of 1873 until 1893.
Don't take the word depression to mean 1929, it wasn't that kind of depression,
but it was disorienting and it was powerful and even our friend Hobbes-Bohem in his book
The Age of Empire begins with that date, not with the German defeat of France in 1870.
Others, scholars whose main emphasis is imperialism, may even start in 1880 when the newer European imperialism
really, really dramatically accelerated and led to depredation in Africa and in Asia.
I think that the rise of a modern German state under Bismarck and that state's defeat of France
was the most important political development of the 19th century.
France had recovered and in the 1850s and even the first half of the 1860s, France seemed to be the dominant power.
The Crimean War ended at the Peace of Paris, where the peace conference takes place frequently is significant
because it shows who the dominant power is.
The unification of Germany and the breakaway power of German industrialism and military potential thereafter,
I believe, really brings this era to a transition together with the unification of Italy at the same time.
Many of the issues we've talked about today from the Reapolietik to the materialism to the science to the antagonistic enhanced
social Darwinian and frequently racialist nationalism to the spread and the deepening of the industrial revolution
will in fact continue into the next time period, the time period between 1870 and 1914,
which saw both the zenith and the beginning of the demise of European ascendancy. Thank you.
