One of the most important books of the entire century of the entire modern era was obviously Charles Darwin's 1859
on the origins of species, or should we give the full title?
On the origin of species by means of natural selection
or the preservation of favored races in the struggle for life.
Now Darwin was a gentle scientist.
He continued to do his research thereafter and published The Descent of Man even more powerful at the end of this time period in 1870-71.
And he had worked at his labor scientifically, standing on the shoulders of many, many others as well,
carefully, carefully thinking about the implications of his evidence.
And in fact, he waited on the publication of his manuscript because he knew it would challenge established religious beliefs
and he was still somewhat religious in himself and he knew it could be put to bad use as indeed it was put to bad use.
Listen to him more carefully.
Thus, from the war of nature, from famine and death, the most exalted object of which we are capable of conceiving,
namely the production of the higher animals directly follows.
There is grandeur in this view of life.
Let me continue.
The idea of struggle is as old as life itself, for life is only preserved because other things perish through struggle.
The stronger the more able win, while the less able the weak lose.
Struggle is the father of all things.
Oops, I made a mistake.
That was a hundred years later, somewhat.
That was Adolf Hitler speaking.
But the language is remarkably similar, at least thus far.
Hitler would continue.
Struggle is the father of all things.
It's not by the principles of humanities that men live or is able to preserve himself above the animal world,
but solely by means of the brutal struggle.
If you do not fight for life, then life will never be won.
Well, let's redeem Darwin.
Darwin would never have gone ahead with that second half because Darwin would have wanted to compensate for human decency.
During his research, he even said when he was on the Galapagos Islands,
it would appear that the birds in this archipelago have not yet learnt that man is a more dangerous animal than the tortoise.
Not surprisingly, traditional religions were on the defensive during this era,
both the Catholic and the Protestant churches, and even more so the Catholic Church because it was more centralized.
Darwin found many people who took his arguments and supported them,
and generally speaking, arguing both against Protestants and Catholics at Oxford and elsewhere, they won the day.
As Huxley said, if I had to choose, I would prefer to be a descendant of a humble monkey rather than of a man who employs his knowledge and eloquence
in misrepresenting those who are wearing out their lives in searching for truth.
The Cardinal Manning retorted, the ape is our atom, but these were the implications of all of this cultural conflict.
It's not accidental that in 1863 Ernst Renan, a French philosopher and historian, published a very, very important book called The Life of Jesus
in which, for the first time, a biography, a secular biography, done by what was formerly a believing Catholic, concluded that Jesus was a magnificent human being.
And of course, all of that spread conflict even further.
In the midst of all of this, Pope Pius IX issued in 1864 a code called The Syllabus of Errors, sadly, in which he said the following,
Error, every man is free to embrace and to profess the religion he shall believe true guided by the light of reason.
Error, men may find the way of eternal salvation and obtain eternal salvation in any religion.
Error, Protestantism is nothing more than another form of the same true Christian religion, a form in which men may be as pleasing to God as in the Catholic Church.
Think of how far we have come and how far we have yet to go.
These were really, really important issues because people based their whole life's assumptions of ground that was shaking and changing right underneath their feet during these two decades.
And many of the terrible things that happened in these decades and thereafter are a result of these challenges to the very, very foundations of European civilization occurring during this era.
