In the case of Karl Marx, all history is the history of class struggle.
We have another direct challenge.
The scientific laws of history that Marx thought he had uncovered
that would be true in all places and at all times.
Count Arthur de Gobineau in France, 1854 to 1855, 1853 to 1855,
actually four volumes on the origins of inequality among the human races
in which he posited that the single most important determinant of history
in any period of time was the dominant group,
the racial component of the dominant group in its conflicts with other groups
and that each of the races had peculiar biological,
again Darwinian, biological, scientifically valid racial characteristics
and you can't move from one race to another.
You are what you are and then he categorized them by means of their characteristics,
who was higher, who was lower, who was fit to rule, who was fit to be a slave.
Ironically, in Gobineau's analysis, Jews were as capable as Europeans,
others would see it otherwise, but blacks, Africans, Asians, yellows
were fit to be ruled and had no inherent considerable value
and the worst thing of all was race mixing.
By the end of this period, in 1870, we would also begin to get the germ theory of disease
as medicine itself would become more powerful.
The germ theory of disease, race mixing, you know where we're going.
In many ways, it was also an age of expanded constitutionalism,
both liberal and democratic, as an age of remarkable economic development.
In fact, one can begin to speak of mass society during the 1860s in the most developed nations.
Stopping here for a moment to think about again the implications of all of this,
this economic development was again inherently related to the Second Industrial Revolution.
It was inherently related to the expanded middle class
and to the expanded larger numbers of workers in large cities,
all of which helped pressure regimes to respond to the constitutional
as well as to the national desires of these larger numbers of people.
During the Second Period, larger numbers of people were also beginning to live better
where that industrialization and that constitutional expansion had occurred
as governments very, very much had to respond to their middle class
and even sometimes their working class,
and governments were learning how to do this quite well during this time period,
which is one of the reasons, in addition to the failures of the revolutions of 1848,
it's one of the reasons in which there was less revolution from below during this time period,
even as Karl Marx had thought that the Revolutionary Era was about to begin,
but governments had learned how to adapt.
They needed to know how to adapt, and they had also, during this time period,
even with increased constitutionalism, increased the size and the power
and the organization of their police forces, professionalized police forces,
for the first time, as well as expanded state apparatus on every level,
again linked to the possibility of transportation and communications revolutions.
All of this is impossible if you don't know what's happening in wider spheres of your own country.
Even Tsarist Russia, faced with defeat in the Crimean War,
experienced considerable, if insufficient, reform from the mid-1850s to the mid-1860s.
During the Crimean War, again, and this, in some manner, was the most important of the wars
because it made possible the unification of Italy and the unification of Germany.
During the Crimean War, it was so obvious that Russia was industrially ill-equipped,
but not only industrially ill-equipped, Russia could not mobilize the will of its own people,
the passion of its own people, and therefore the news are, Alexander II first emancipated the serfs
and then began a whole series of other reforms that we'll talk about in much greater detail
in succeeding commentaries, which helped to begin to modernize the whole structure
and nature of the Russian state in face of what was so clearly its comparative backwardness.
Remember, again, at each stage the word comparative is central.
If France and Britain and Germany had not progressed, the actual structure of Russia at that time
would not have meant such a disparity.
It's the comparative and uneven process of all of this change between countries
and within countries that is so dramatically important.
