What, then, are the major components of this new epic?
Well, obviously, some of them are the very causes that we just discussed and we now have
to embellish somewhat.
Again, perhaps the most important marker is the Second Industrial Revolution and all
of its implications.
Propelled by new technologies and heavy industry, especially in the realms of steam and steel,
this epic saw revolutions in the domain of urbanization, transportation, communications,
capital expansion, real banking.
And I would urge you, in thinking about this time period, to pick up any of the books of
Charles Dickens, but most particularly hard times.
Increasingly, governments sought to guide its path, especially because of the military
implications of industrial technology and especially in the fields of railroads, navies,
artillery, weapons and munitions of all sorts.
Remember, this is also the time period in the 1860s of the American Civil War.
And just think about the confrontation between the Monitor and the Merrimack.
If one had iron clads, the other needed iron clads, because the other ships of the line
were no longer any good if you were facing an iron clad.
Governments understood this, and they needed to industrialize simply to maintain pace.
And it was clarified even more directly during the Crimean War, which we'll discuss soon.
Although not overnight, more and more production took place in larger factories with obvious
implications.
You can really, really begin to talk about a factory system here.
Large numbers of workers being in the same place under still very, very difficult conditions
led to increased class consciousness.
Where industrialism spread, the middle class expanded, as did this self-conscious proletariat,
while artisans and peasants and even aristocrats needed to adjust somewhat to the new environment.
And not all of them were very, very comfortable with it.
And especially aristocrats, the old-day elite, when they become uncomfortable with a new
environment, you can have a problem, as with artisans, very, very prone sometimes to take
matters into their own hands.
One can also properly begin to talk about class consciousness in a deeper level during
this era, and even about an incipient class struggle, as long as this is done with moderation.
Even in the growing working class proletariat, there were deep divisions and multiple loyalties
between skilled and semi-skilled and unskilled workers, part-time workers, Karl Marx, not
withstanding, but this was the age of Marx.
The Communist Manifesto and then Das Kapital at the end of this particular period.
This leads naturally to the second dominant force in this epoch, an expanding and changing
nationalism both within countries and between them.
The more liberal and tolerant and universalist nationalism of the first half of the century,
signified by the early phase of the French Revolution and by the Italian patron Mazzini,
became sharpened and exclusivist, and began to be co-opted by conservative elites as well
in order to maintain their power.
Whether Napoleon III or Bismarck or Cavour, elites began to learn, elites had to learn
moreover how to use nationalism if they wanted to remain in power.
Worse, by the 1860s, changed nationalism began to combine with newer forces of social Darwinism
and so-called scientific racism, both against external and internal enemies, often, usually
in fact, imagined.
