Not surprisingly, this era also saw a number of nationalist-related wars, including the
Crimean War between 1853 and 1856, a Franco-Piedmontese war against Austria at the end of the 1850s,
the war between Prussia and Austria in 1866, which represented a significant change in
the balance of power, and then the most important war of all, at least in terms of actually
changing the balance of power, the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, 1871, in which the new German
Empire defeated France and became the strongest power on the continent.
These wars led to the so-called unification, quote-unquote, of Italy and Germany in the
1860s, and to the defeat of Russia, Austria, and France.
By 1871, united Germany or expanded Prussia, however you look at it, had become the strongest
continental power, both militarily and industrially, and that was only to accelerate in the period
thereafter, especially in the realm of economics in which the new German Empire would begin
to rapidly outstrip the economic power of France and then catch and begin to outstrip
the industrial economic power even of Great Britain.
In fact, the only state whose industry expanded more rapidly than Germany's at the end of
the 19th century in real terms was actually the United States.
Obviously, these changes marked the breakdown of the Concert of Europe and the general idea
of collaborative diplomacy itself.
Indeed, a series of new statesmen who came into power after 1848, such as Napoleon III,
Emilio de Kivore, and Otto von Bismarck, governed by a new style of diplomacy known as Real
Politique.
Machiavellian and self-satisfied statesmen made secret treaties and planned for wars.
Secret treaties specifically, indeed, to plan for wars and without shame.
If this succeeded, so be it.
If it didn't, lie about it in your memoirs.
As historian Jacques Varsen has said of Real Politique, there was nothing really new, but
when the practice became the rule and the rule was preached as moral duty sanctioned
by science, that was something new.
In place of romanticism, idealism, philosophy, and history, although history still remained
a very prominent but different way, this was an age of increasing cultural realism, materialism,
and above all of science, all of which reinforced one another, and also reinforced the changing
nature of nationalism and diplomacy.
Let's stop for a second and think about this.
Realism, what is important is what is hard and fast and touchable, quantifiable, materialism
again, not ideas, but material forces are what determine history.
Think of Karl Marx's material determinism and also science, all of it, undergirded,
by the powerful presence of science.
And this was seen to play out in both diplomacy, industrial enterprise, the existence of people,
and their relationships one with another.
It was the quintessential age of Charles Darwin, Karl Marx and Wodner, and even Marx and Wodner
and many others thought they had discovered the revealed scientific laws, governing society,
governing the economy, race, and indeed the whole evolution of life and civilization.
Let's stop for a moment and consider what this meant a little bit more carefully.
