Lecture 10, The Crimean War, 1853 to 1856.
This is a slightly different kind of lecture than that which we have been hearing.
We're going to be talking today about the Crimean War following the introductory lecture
to this second section of our series, not because the war in and of itself was so important
or even so dramatic, although it's always dramatic when a half a million people die unnecessarily,
but because of what the war made possible.
In order to understand this more completely, we're going to go back to an organization
that I've mentioned several times before called the Consulate of Europe.
Now there's even an argument over whether there was such a thing as the Consulate of
Europe.
Indeed, one of the historians whose books I've suggested that you look at, LCB Seaman
from Vienna to Versailles, says essentially that the Consulate of Europe is a figment
and a creation of historians rather than an organization that actually existed and had
some reality.
Other historians such as David Thompson and Gordon Craig have said that the Consulate
of Europe meant no annexation without ratification or that the Consulate of Europe became actual
and operative after the Congress of Vienna, and it's obviously that particular interpretation
that I hold more closely to my soul, specifically since the diplomatic documents that I looked
at from my PhD thesis 35 years ago at the end of the 19th century continuously do refer
to the functioning or the malfunctioning of the Consulate of Europe.
So if diplomats were talking about the malfunctioning of the Consulate of Europe at the end of the
19th century, it must have existed at some point at an earlier time, and indeed it did.
So what was the Consulate of Europe?
The Consulate of Europe was the acceptance of the concept of one Europe of a common Europe
at least on the part of the great powers and that they had some clear responsibility, indeed
even a conscience, even a conscience on the part of Metternich to maintain the peace.
The Consulate of Europe believed that the balance of power was essential to maintain,
that no one state should be allowed to expand without compensation with others, and that
it would be better if none of the great powers expanded at all.
The Consulate of Europe believed that less secret diplomacy was better.
The Consulate of Europe believed in a certain level of self-restraint and compromise and
the acceptance of the status quo in the geography and in the balance of power of Europe.
And the Consulate of Europe also agreed that any power that stepped out of that environment
should be constrained by the others, a very, very important concept that all held in mind.
Why was this possible?
And why was it possible to function for so long, even during the revolutions of 1848?
The men of the time period, their previous experience, Prime Minister and Foreign Minister,
Sir Robert Palmerston, Metternich, Nicholas I of Russia, and many of the other leaders
remembered the Napoleonic Wars, their ravages, the revolutions, the disruptions that they
had caused, they didn't want to see that again in their lifetime.
The milieu was also important.
This was not a real age of ideology for statesmen as yet, and especially most of these statesmen
surely were not really nationalists.
In addition, it was an age in which public opinion could be less important, was less
important, and did not disturb the tranquility of statesmen to do their business as they
saw fit among themselves in their own great power club.
And most importantly, the Consulate of Europe, the balance of power, the maintenance of peace
suited the self-interest of all of the great powers, and that's what you really need for
an institution to function, and function indeed it did.
