Zaryl Nicholas saw not only a reversal of this, but the formal right to protect Orthodox Christians throughout the entire Ottoman Empire, a huge step forward.
Now here's where it begins to get dicey.
As an inducement in his discussion with the Sultan, in June 1853, Russian troops occupy the Ottoman provinces of Moldavia and Wallachia, which just happened to be the core of present-day Romania, which at that point part of the Balkans were part of the Ottoman Empire.
So let's have a discussion, but I'm going to take a good piece of your territory to see that you discuss it the way I want to discuss it.
Okay.
Receiving conflicting indications from separate British diplomats. Very interesting.
A lot of cabinet shuffles, a lot of shuffles within seats in the cabinet posts, different British diplomats advising the Sultan in different ways.
The Sultan took a hard line, finally declared war against Russia, followed by the Russian destruction of the Ottoman fleet, the so-called massacre of Sinopi in November of 1853.
Now, the Russian fleet was no marvel to behold. It was stronger than the Ottoman fleet, but when you call something a massacre, something unfair has happened.
The Russians defeated the Ottomans. The British and the French were angry at the Russians to begin with. They called it a massacre, and it was presented in the press as a massacre.
And in more modernized Britain and France, by the 1850s, the press already mattered, public opinion already mattered, and even began to hamper the way diplomats would make decisions.
Widespread outrage in the West, and especially in Great Britain, convinced the Tsar to change course and to suggest a compromise agreement to the powers meeting at Vienna in February of 1854.
And here again we get a clear deciding point. This would have been the old concert of Europe functioning. The Tsar stepped out too far.
The British and the French called him back. The Tsar agreed to compromise. The British and the French ought to have agreed to compromise as well.
And then they would get on with their business of doing whatever they wanted to do with the outsider, the Ottoman Empire, except that the British and the French didn't play ball.
The Anglo-French refusal to consider these offers and their subsequent declaration of war in March represents a clear breakdown in the concert and a breakdown for the will, for peace, and the desire, and rather the desire to teach the Russians a lesson.
Especially in Great Britain, this also demonstrates the problematic nature of the role of public opinion in matters of war and peace, even in a democracy.
And one can see diplomats bewail that at the end of the 19th century, especially because it used to be a good old boys club, a small group, they knew each other, they socialized together, they intermarried, and they weren't bothered by outsiders, but the public was an outsider.
Napoleon III, rather, sought to undo the Vienna settlement, to consolidate his legitimacy, and by acting in concert with the British through military success to gain even more domestic and European-wide status.
Now, moving to the war itself.
Although the Crimean War was relatively localized, it was a bloody mess. It was pregnant with consequences and deep implications.
Between September 1854 and December 1855, Anglo-French forces besieged Sevastopol, the most important Russian Black Sea naval base.
Although superior Western technology allowed their forces to concentrate more effectively than the Russians, lacking adequate railroads in Russia, all of the armies performed poorly, although the French performed less poorly than the others.
The Russians performed very poorly. They couldn't get their forces mobilized. They were peasant resistance to being constricted. The British didn't do too well.
The French army comparatively looked better than the others of three societies that don't do well at that time. They hadn't had a good war in a long time. It takes practice.
Despite the courage of Florence Nightingale, her far-sightedness, creating the Red Cross,
