Lecture 11 From Napoleon to Napoleon, France, 1815 to 1852.
Having just personally negotiated the Treaty of Paris with you in our previous commentary,
bringing Napoleon III into center stage in all of his glory, we return to France and
a set of comments entitled from Napoleon to Napoleon, France, 1815 to 1852.
And if you have an interest in a deeper understanding of the background of France in the 19th century,
indeed of all of French history, I would suggest tackling a mammoth wonderful book by my friend
James Collins of Georgetown University entitled From Tribes to Nation, France, 500 to 1799.
The book is a mouthful and that's a mouthful itself and it's worth your effort.
Even the second restoration of Bourbon King Louis XVIII was a compromise solution which
left considerable dissatisfaction both among the left, the liberals and the radicals, and
the right from conservatives all the way to ultra-conservatives.
Although he wisely accepted many of the moderate legacies of 1789, including a charter, the
Napoleonic Code, and the major property changes that occurred during the Revolution, as well
as the major administrative changes, namely the centralization and the reduction of tolls
that divided everyone.
He claimed to rule by divine right and this still concerned liberals.
This was of even greater concern during the early 1820s when following the assassination
of an apparent successor, voting rights were restricted somewhat and other forms of repression
were employed even by Louis XVIII.
Among the more conservative elements known as the altres, there was in fact a desire
to return to the alliance between throne and altar, to compensate nobles for their losses
during the revolution, indeed to pretty much return to the Ancien regime.
And there were people who still wanted to do this almost a hundred years later.
Indeed several years ago I saw a monarchist demonstration in the center of Paris at the
Place de la Concorde with 5,000 participants.
This situation was exacerbated when Louis XVIII's ultra-brother became king in 1824 following
Louis' death.
Charles X made no secret of the fact that he favored landed aristocratic interests to
those of the urban, more liberal bourgeoisie and he quickly implemented a series of unpopular
policies.
Ultras returned to power as his advisors and aristocrats were compensated for some of their
property losses during the revolution, obviously at public expense.
The alliance between throne and altar became more open and the church was given further
control over education.
More severe censorship was introduced and the largely middle class National Guard was
abolished, lafayette not withstanding.
Equally upsetting was the changed tone of the regime, supported by a number of powerful
romantic conservatives, Demestre Bonard, Chateaubriand, one of them had said, as right
is of itself a force so force can be of itself a right.
Charles X's coronation was medieval in nature and he was the last French monarch who claimed
to cure such diseases as scrophila, skin disease by the laying on of his hands.
Nicholas II of Russia still thought he could do that in 1917.
During a severe harvest in 1826, leading in 1827 to distressed urban economies as well,
more liberals were returned to the chambers in two successive elections, despite the use
of repression scandalizing the ultras.
In other words, even within a very restricted voting possibility, people did not want ultra
control or a return to the past.
Seeing this and throwing caution to the wind under the advice of ultra-prince Paulignac,
in July 1830 Charles X attempted a coup d'etat, issuing a series of draconian decrees.
