Charles X abrogated the restoration charter of 1814 by which Louis XVIII had come back into power,
severely curtailed the press, further reduced the number of eligible voters,
and then called for new elections, which, of course, he could pack.
Almost immediately, Parisians who knew how to do this well streamed into the streets,
simmering with discontent on the part of a broad spectrum of groups from middle class to working class to artisan,
including powerful individuals such as Victor Hugo and the Marquis de Lafayette returned the powers immediately
in the Reformed National Guard, leading to the overthrow of the regime of Charles X, who fled to London.
Moderately liberal elites, representing a goodly segment of the non-offer establishment,
then offered Louis Philippe Duke d'Orléans the throne of France on the part of the French people.
He would be king of the French, not king of France.
Although Louis Philippe wished to rule as well as to reign, to govern,
he wisely accepted this compromise, becoming known pretty much as the bourgeois king or the citizen king,
or later to his detractors, scandalized beautifully, magnificently by Domier's caricatures, simply as La Poire, the pair, which he looked like.
Although the kingship of Louis Philippe was often uninspired,
sometimes repressive, and even corrupt, these were generally good years for France,
and surely a kind of respite between the revolutions of 1830 and 1848.
Following a series of leftist revolts in the early 1830s, including in Lyon, among the silk workers,
that was the inspiration for Hugo's Les Miserables, a poignant masterpiece, massive, worth crying through,
relative calm, without severe repression, lasted for nearly 15 years.
Though suffering an occasional diplomatic setback even at the hands of Great Britain, French diplomacy was relatively cautious,
and importantly, France lived within its means, always a good choice for government.
Although favoring more conservative liberals, rather than expanding the franchise,
Louis Philippe accepted constitutional constraints and surrounded himself with more bourgeois advisors even than aristocrats.
His regime also fostered a variety of economic developments, expanded secular education, had low taxes,
and continued to grow a more modernized infrastructure.
Still, discontent persisted, especially as a result of tensions attending the gradual expansion of industrial areas,
and especially in the 1840s with poor harvests, especially in 1846 and in 1847, which once again then transferred to urban distress.
But it has to be emphasized that in general, this was a period of considerable stability and considerable order,
and general prosperity before the late 1840s.
At the same time, nationalists received little satisfaction from this moderate and even boring regime.
Remember, de Tocqueville had said France is a nation that is warred.
Artisans and urban workers were often dissatisfied and insecure, while many newer elements in the middle class,
including students, journalists, lawyers, and intellectuals, wanted jobs and the right to vote,
and this kind of situation continues even today in many parts of Europe, including France,
when you produce more educated people than you have decent jobs for.
There is tension, especially when it is known that the people who already have those jobs may not have them because of their merit,
but because of their connections.
Little inspiration or sensitivity could be expected from the guiseaux ministry or the political elite in general.
