Louis-Napoleon then dissolved parliament, called for new Republican elections with universal
suffrage by plebiscite, and was overwhelmingly supported, establishing a new form of parliamentary
structure with universal suffrage and the 10-year presidency.
One year later, on December 2nd of 1852, following another successful referendum, nearly 8 million
votes for him and only about a quarter of a million against him, Louis-Napoleon established
a hereditary empire, changed his name to Napoleon III, and proclaimed that the empire would
stand for peace and well-being.
L'empire c'est la paix.
But guess what, we already know that l'empire c'est la guerre because we've already discussed
the Crimean War, so we know that Louis-Napoleon didn't hold to that particular word.
The word he did hold for is to try to deal justly and fairly and kindly for the overwhelming
majority of the French people as the best that he could.
However, this was not an easy task.
Louis-Napoleon had shed the blood of workers.
Getting their attention was very, very difficult to do.
Louis-Napoleon had outraged many conservatives for his part during the Revolution of 1848.
Louis-Napoleon had upset liberals and Democrats, even the liberals who wanted to re-establish
a monarchy, wanted to re-establish their own monarchy, not his monarchy.
Louis-Napoleon had upset some Catholics by some of his actions.
Louis-Napoleon had to juggle balls between so many disparate groups because the legacy
of the French Revolution continued to leave a legacy of disparate groups.
It sometimes said, France is a nation that has too much history.
Many nations do not have enough.
France indeed had too much.
And the representatives of every segment of that history still believe to this day in
many cases that they represent the true France, the true French history, just as Louis-Napoleon
believed he did so himself.
Some have called him a proto-fascist, I think, unwisely.
Some have called him a Saint-Simonian on horseback, a utopian socialist on horseback.
Some have called him a Césarian Democrat.
Some have called him, in a sense, a modern totalitarian, and that's what a proto-fascist
is.
In our next meeting together, we'll discuss all of these various ideas.
Take a very, very careful look at the largely successful domestic politics that Napoleon
implemented and take an equally careful look at the very, very unsuccessful foreign policy
that ultimately brought him down in 1870.
Thank you.
