Guizot was a great historian, one of the early historians of the French Revolution, multi-volume,
magnificent, large volumes.
But he was a moderate liberal, or a moderate conservative.
He didn't mind if you voted, he just said, work and grow rich, and then you will be able
to vote, or two things are necessary to govern, common sense and canon.
Well he didn't in the end have enough of either, at least willingness to use the canon when
the time of crisis finally came.
As to Tocqueville, other than one of his prophetic parliamentary speeches, can't you feel the
breath of revolution in the air?
Indeed, the outbreak of revolution in Paris, when a slightly more liberal former Prime
Minister Adolphe Thierre called a series of public banquets to protest Guizot's policies,
was a clear manifestation of the law of unintended consequences.
Thierre was just slightly more liberal than Guizot, what Thierre basically wanted, on a
certain level as what the British had gotten in 1832, bringing in another swath of the
middle class.
What Thierre clearly wanted was to replace Guizot.
In fact, Thierre would remain in government off and on in France for the next 40 years
or so.
Thierre told to cancel the meeting by Guizot, even followed Guizot's orders.
But a crowd showed up anyway.
And so did the gendarme.
And barricades were set up, shots were fired, and Paris repeated the scenario.
It had learned so very well in 1789, and repeated in 1830, and often in between.
King Louis Philippe panicked, as did so many of the other monarchs in 1848.
And King Louis Philippe also on some level was a moderate citizen's king.
He did not want to unleash radical bloodshed, especially in those urban areas, and he fled
to London.
London was a great place for emigres.
What this did basically, however, is place back on the table, directly, all of the issues
that had been at stake from 1789.
You have a temporary vacuum of power.
This means that moderate liberals will want to have their say.
This means that Democrats or radicals will want to have their say.
This means that utopian socialists and more pragmatic socialists, and again, I don't want
to distinguish between the two overwhelmingly, will want to have their say.
And increasingly, it also means that the growing urban population will also very much want
to have its say, especially in terms of food and work following two years of agrarian and
urban depression.
In play, therefore, were the popular representatives of everything from moderates to real radicals,
wanting either limited suffrage to universal suffrage to forms of social welfare in time
of crisis and making Paris perhaps the most interesting and combustible European city
in 1848, although personally, I find Paris to still be the most interesting city in Europe
anyway, even when it's combustible.
And my wife and I have watched powerful demonstrations file past our hotel for the better part of
8 to 12 hours with hundreds of thousands of people carrying placards representing all
kinds of things, some reasonable and some really not very reasonable.
However, although the hastily created revolutionary committee contain elements from all of these
different positions and proclaimed universal suffrage and a system of national workshops
to create jobs, both in Paris and in Lyon.
