Educated in exile by a Republican tutor on the myths propounded by his uncle and his memoir,
Louis twice attempted to overthrow Louis Philippe's regime.
After all, he was legitimate, both in 1836 and in 1840, and spent time in prison.
The second time was wonderful because he escaped dressed as a painter carrying a step ladder out of the prison.
And then he wrote a socialist inspired pamphlet entitled The Extinction of Poverty.
And then he served as a constable in London during the Chartist demonstrations on the eve of 1848.
No wonder the voters didn't know what they were getting.
I wonder if Louis Napoleon knew what he was giving on a certain level. Indeed, he did.
Conservative voters thought he would be a moderate monarch, malleable. Liberals thought he might be liberal.
Democrats thought he might really be better than the people who would just put down the workers.
Peasants thought he represented France, and Frenchmen in general still preferred the glory of Napoleon they had forgotten, the carnage they remembered, the glory.
Following his dramatic election in December as President of the Republic by an overwhelming majority of voters against several other well-known Republican candidates,
Louis's main problem between 1849 and 1851 was how to remain in power.
One thing the moderates did in creating the Constitution is to forbid a second term for the president.
What to do?
Louis tried to see if he could get that particular stricture to be changed, but it wasn't possible.
And he intended to stay in power, unable to obtain legislative legitimate due process remedy.
Although the increasingly conservative legislators elected in May 1849 even ended universal suffrage and placed secondary education in the hands of the church,
Louis courted the urban and rural masses, courted the military, created a loyal leadership cadre,
replaced some members of the military with other people who were closer to him and more loyal,
and pulled off a coup d'état in Paris on December 1st and 2nd, 1851,
imprisoning a large coterie of opponents, suppressing workers who set up those barricades in a revolt which ensued and was repressed.
He believed he had no choice, and it left a legacy that was very, very deep.
As his wife Eugenie said, a coup d'état is like a convict's ball and chain.
You drag it along, and eventually it paralyzes your leg.
Everything he did at this point made him another enemy of tremendous importance in a sense,
Victor Hugo, who went into exile and wrote a pamphlet, scurrilous pamphlet, scathing pamphlet,
Napoleon Le Petit par Victor Le Grand, Napoleon the Little by Victor the Great,
in which Hugo described those terrible two days.
The workers massed, and they cried down with bone apart.
The troops were in front of them, of course. Suddenly, at a given signal, a musket shot being fired,
no matter where, no matter by whom, the shower of bullets poured upon the crowd.
A shower of bullets is also a crowd.
It is death-scattered broadcast. It does not know whether it goes, nor what it does.
It kills and passes on. Later, Hugo continues,
I reached the boulevard. The scene was indescribable. I witnessed this crime, this butchery, this tragedy.
I saw the rain of blind death. I saw the distracted victims fall around me in crowds.
It is for this that I have signed myself in this book, and I witness.
And indeed, this comes from Carey's book, Our Eyewitness Accounts.
So of this kind of primary source material that I find really helpful and indeed inspirational,
if this kind of material is of interest to you, then by all means, get that book.
It's available in most bookstores, and enjoy the reading.
