Most Frenchmen wanted the restoration of order and stability and sought ways to achieve this.
Or should I say, most propertied Frenchmen wanted the restoration of order and stability.
Actually, it would have been both because most Frenchmen were peasants at that time still.
Only about 25% of them lived in cities and the peasants overwhelmingly really were a conservative force
and would behave conservatively during this time period in France since they already had some property
and they already were emancipated by the universal suffrage.
On the other hand, liberals, moderates did not want to allow things to get out of control,
so at least temporarily they obviously proclaimed universal suffrage
and following the ideas of some of the utopian socialists, they set up these national workshops.
Now, what do you think happened if you have workshops set up in Paris or in Lyon,
kind of like the things that were set up during the 1930s in the American Depression,
people from the countryside who were unemployed are going to flood into those areas,
making the cities even more dangerous and combustible.
But this was part of the Constitution of 1793, the right to work, the right to subsistence as a citizen of France.
However, once things calmed down, the moderates who thought that the workshops were an excuse for laziness
and the peasants who had had enough of Paris anyway and also thought they were an excuse for laziness
closed the national workshops, leading to the workers revolting and setting up their barricades again,
leading to the bloody June days from June the 23rd to June the 26th,
when thousands of people were killed in another tragic, mini, French civil war
that would leave a legacy of increased class hatred.
The largely middle class National Guard, combined with peasant military recruits,
quashed the urban rebels, leaving thousands of dead and imprisoned, a legacy of class hatred,
popularized by Karl Marx in his long essay written in 1851 and published in 1852,
the 18th Brumaire of Louis Napoleon Bonaparte.
Thereafter, in some manner, as LCB Seaman maintains in his book from Vienna to Versailles
and we're serializing this book as part of the supplementary readings in this course,
Seaman says, from June 1848 until the coup d'état of Louis Napoleon, December 1851,
the Second Republic was a monarchy in search of a king. Now Seaman is always cynical.
He's brilliant, cynical. In a sense, he's really right.
These moderate liberals needed a monarch to restore things.
They didn't want Louis Philippe necessarily to flee.
They wanted him to expand the franchise. They wanted moderate change,
but he was gone. He couldn't be called back. What to do?
So they formed a system, an interim system.
And of all things, in the context of this interim system, Prince Louis Napoleon,
nephew of Napoleon Bonaparte, and one of the most fascinating of 19th century statesmen,
was only too pleased to play this role.
Although almost all groups who voted for him in the universal suffrage, male suffrage,
democratic elections of December 1848 got much more or much different than they had bargained for.
Extremely enigmatic in nature, Louis Napoleon was a strange composite
of many of the conflicting forces of the age, refracted through his understanding
and belief in the memoirs his uncle Napoleon had bequeathed him.
Now Napoleon wrote his memoirs to tell us what he wanted us to believe he was doing.
Totally different than what he actually did and what he actually knew he was doing,
but Louis Napoleon believed in a lot of the liberal press that Napoleon put into his memoirs.
Believing in his star, his right to rule, his legitimate right to rule France, on behalf of the people,
and to improve the plight of humanity universally, this romantic adventurer was influenced by a
melange of monarchic, liberal, democratic, socialist, and liberal slash nationalist sentiments
so prevalent at the time.
He was a composite of so many different forces I wonder if he ever understood himself.
