Lecture 12, Napoleon III and Evaluation
Today I hope will be a real pleasure for you and I know it will be a real pleasure for
me because it's the first time in our series that I'm going to have the opportunity to
basically speak about the same country twice in a row continuing the story of Napoleon III
in France and moreover in the next series of lectures we will be doing the same thing
two on Italy, two on Germany and then several one time lectures on the other great powers
giving us more concentration, more depth, more focus and the main theme should be coming
more familiar and more easily understood as we proceed in this particular manner. Although
somewhat artificial since domestic and foreign policy are always interrelated Napoleon III's
regime can be analyzed in two components, a largely successful and imaginative domestic
sphere and an adventuresome and finally disastrous foreign policy. Even within the domestic
sphere the regime was composed at least politically of two eras, the moderately dictatorial 1850s
and the increasingly liberal 1860s. During the 1850s advised by a diverse political elite
not representing a single party therefore but generally loyal to Napoleon III, Napoleon
did rule dictatorially using prefecture dominated pseudo elections with universal suffrage but
you can fix elections and moderate repression when necessary including censorship and a
police apparatus. At the same time he attempted to be all things to all people, his hallmark
governing broadly on behalf of the French people even on behalf of the interests of people
who opposed him. Following an activist socioeconomic policy he encouraged industry, commerce, railroads,
agricultural development with special banks for that, public works and foreign investment.
He expanded credit both industrial and agrarian helping to found a series of semi-public
banks and public bond issues. Railroads increased by four times in the 1850s. He also expanded
free trade, climaxing with the Anglo-French Cobbin-Chevalier Treaty in 1860. Now even
that is a peculiar combination. Free trade which is liberal laissez-faire Adam Smith
economics combined with public expenditure government intervention in the economy showing
how imaginative he was, others might say how confused he was, I think it was imaginative.
He encouraged work on scientific farming, widespread urban renewal, expanded education,
constructed hospitals and worked on other social agencies. In fact he even confiscated
the property of the Orleanist monarchy and used the money for social welfare. For those
of you who love to walk the streets of Paris, I'm sure many of you realize that those broad
boulevards come from the work of Baron Al-Small who architected that work under the inspiration
and support of Napoleon III. Even there multiple purposes, those boulevards are magnificent.
It's much harder to set up barricades across them if you want to rebel and it's much easier
to have cannon troops go down them if you want to put down rebellions. So multiple-purposed
reconstituting the city of Paris to make it ever more beautiful. He encouraged the arts
employing mild censorship there but still encouraging the arts which did flourish. Maintaining
the thrust of these domestic policies, Napoleon proceeded to liberalize his regime in the
1860s, attempting to establish a type of hereditary constitutional monarchy and as he said he
would do to crown the edifice with liberty.
