After Napoleon had gone through the experience of Italy in 1859 through 1861, he simply should have known better.
He simply shouldn't have known better. That war got out of control. He could not control it and he should not have played.
That was a dramatic and continuous character flaw that was part of the very nature of the individual.
He had a retarded derning curve. He always seemed to need to be on the move.
He also was ill by that point, suffering in pain, but for that kind of decision, it's not a good excuse.
Although Napoleon has to be given overall responsibility for the events that led to the dramatic French defeat in the Franco-Prussian War in 1870, 1871,
ending his regime, there are mitigating circumstances to consider.
During the era of his liberal empire, he shared control with legislators who blocked needed military reforms and who blocked needed expenditures.
Remember, they had gotten more control over taxation and the purse, but they feared Napoleon III would use the strengthened army to put them down and reestablish a dictatorship.
In other words, they didn't believe his liberal intentions.
He had done so many various things along the course of his career that when he said he would crown his edifice with liberty and therefore he was behaving exactly as he had promised, they didn't believe it.
And therefore they would not accord him the expenditures.
After 1865, Napoleon III was seriously ill and he was not functioning at his best, and that is clear.
In the final crisis, once Bismarck had decided for war, Napoleon III was pushed into the conflict by French nationalists and by the very legislators who had blocked his proposed military reforms.
And Bismarck did this very skillfully.
He added the M's dispatch telegram making it appear as though the Kaiser had willingly and openly and directly insulted French honor.
And that was like putting a flag in front of a bull and France was the bull and they bit.
And Bismarck had the war that apparently he even he had not decided upon until just a year or two before at the earliest.
It was a late minute decision for Bismarck, but he knew how to do those things. He did them brilliantly and he made it work.
Still failure is failure.
And the French army was not up to the task. The Germans mobilized more quickly.
The French were defeated at a series of decisive battles in the beginning of the war.
And what Napoleon III did at that time, realizing that the war was lost, is to abdicate and to surrender directly to the Prussians in the hope of ending further bloodshed.
And perhaps in the hope of preserving the emperorship for his son, neither of those things were to happen.
Further bloodshed there would be the French people would resist for another half a year or so.
Paris would be besieged for months. Most of the wealthy would leave.
The poor would be happy occasionally to eat rats.
And then the French followed that up in the spring of 1871 with a wonderful little civil war called the Commune.
More on that when we talk about late 19th century France.
Some final thoughts are in order.
As Theodor Zeldin has commented, Napoleon seems to have been an innovator in politics as others were in diplomacy.
Strengthening France in many ways and leaving her wealthier and also freer than he had found her.
Indeed, our friend LCB Seaman is one of the great criticizers of Napoleon III.
He doesn't give Napoleon III credit for a great deal of intelligence.
He doesn't give Napoleon III credit for a great deal of intelligence.
He doesn't give Napoleon III credit for a great deal of power.
He says that conspiracy was the only game he knew.
And yet even Seaman concludes saying unique among dictators in ending his career with a government that provided his country with more freedom than the government he started with.
