Even with a significant loss of Alsace and part of Lorraine,
if you've traveled to Alsace and Lorraine, you know how beautiful it is,
and it was going to be a bone of contention between Germany and France
for the next 45 years until World War I began.
Even with a loss and the bloody French Civil War known as the Commune in the spring of 1871,
France paid back the 5 billion franc German indemnity far more quickly than expected,
and France began a process of normal recovery.
In other words, Napoleon III had left France far wealthier than he found her.
Again, some people argue over how much of that was situational,
how much of that was periodic. There was a general European expansion during that time period,
but it's very, very evident, rethinking about the first half of the comments of today,
that he pursued an activist economic policy broadly based that furthered the interest of industry,
that furthered the interests of agriculture, that furthered the interests of science and technology,
furthered the interest of education, furthered the interests of banking,
provided a level of security, provided a level of order and domestic tranquility,
and also provided a level of room for people to breathe even during the first decade of his years in power.
It's notable that except for the Vichy Regime, the fall of France to Nazi Germany in June of 1940,
Marshal Pétin's Vichy Regime from 1940 to 1944, it's notable that after Napoleon III's regime,
universal suffrage was the norm, at least for men, for French history until the present time,
women having gained the right to vote in France after World War II.
Remember again, there were lots of people, particularly among the elites, who were against universal male suffrage,
and who thought that even the lower middle class, people without lots of property, people without lots of education,
should not have the right to vote. Napoleon III believed in universal male suffrage,
and then he went about trying to gain the support of most people in France.
Although often well-intentioned, foreign affairs revealed Napoleon III's most serious character flaws,
and he was finally bested by two of the brightest and most successful statesmen of the century,
Camille de Cavour and Otto von Bismarck.
In fact, there's a book by Jules Cambon, a French diplomat at the end of the 19th century,
on precisely the question of who was greater, Cavour or Bismarck, and Cambon actually said that Cavour was greater
because Cavour had a small deck of cards, Bismarck had a big deck of cards.
I don't know if I accept that judgment anyway, but it's nice in any case to have a goodly sized deck of cards,
meaning industry and a good army and good generals, if you're going to play foreign policy.
See, neither the French, nor most people for that matter, suffer those responsible for military defeat easily.
Most French people still revere his uncle, for whom I have not a great deal of respect,
responsible for several millions of unnecessary deaths in war,
and most Frenchmen still underestimate the contribution Napoleon III made to the development of French civilization.
Under his regime, France experienced more positive social legislation for a wider variety of its citizens
than any other regime until the post-World War II era.
He was an innovator in domestic politics, he was in the end a tragic failure in foreign policy,
and ultimately in the toughest area of foreign policy, the area of war.
Our next lecture will be on Italy, its history prior to the era of unification, its unification.
We'll follow that up with two commentaries on Germany following the same procedure,
going back into the past, setting a foundation, giving you a context, and watching that context develop.
Thank you.
