In the imperialist realm, not one of my favorites, but liked by contemporaries, Napoleon pursued
a reasonably successful policy, expanding French interests in the Near East, in Algeria
and Syria, North Africa, in West Africa, in Southeast Asia, in Vietnam.
Whenever possible, he did these things in cooperation with Great Britain, cooperating
with Great Britain economically and imperially, was one of his designs, and again, he knew
Britain, he had lived there, and he was comfortable with their form of government, very comfortable
with their form of government.
He expanded the concept of free trade whenever possible, most notably with Britain, but with
other states as well, and this period of 1850 to 1870 was in fact the peak of free trade
in Europe, which is an important thing to remember, because free trade has a psychology
of its own.
If you have free trade with other states, it leads to other forms of pacification, it
leads to other forms of communication, whereas when you have tariffs, it leads to competition,
competition leads to bad feelings, Napoleon III was good on this issue with respect to
his policy of tariffs.
Although Napoleon's support for Piedmont's anti-Austrian war in 1859-1860 got out of
control, and we'll spend a good bit of time on this when we talk about the unification
of Italy, angering French Catholics because the Pope was against this, and leading to
greater Piedmontese expansion, this then was anticipated, because the plan was really
hopefully to form some kind of Italian confederation with the Pope nominally being in charge, and
the Piedmontese really being in charge.
This adventure did expand liberal national constitutionalism in Italy, it substantially
restricted Austrian meddling from the affairs of Northern Italy and Southern Italy, which
was very poorly governed, and it provided France with the provinces of Nice and Savoy.
If you visit Nice while you're in France, it used to be part of Italy, earlier it had
been part of France, it was Franco-Italian in culture.
It even yielded Napoleon a show princess for his son, and the document in which that was
negotiated between Cavour and Napoleon III, and Cavour and his emperor is quite a document.
The meeting at Plombier, and Cavour afterwards said to his emperor, listen, this is a good
deal, we have to go along with his wishes.
Napoleon's quixotic policy of attempting to impose Prince Maximilian of Bavaria as emperor
of Mexico between 1861 and 1867, which again would have pleased Catholics, and would have
brought France further national kudos, was a dramatic and even silly failure, but not
a fatal one.
Indeed, it was fatal for Maximilian, because even after the French troops left Mexico when
following the American Civil War, we advised them not to politely to leave Mexico, Maximilian
believed in his star too, was finally captured and put to death by the Mexicans who took
over their own country.
His support for Bismarck's policy of expanding Prussia and further weakening Austria in 1865-1866
was a disastrous defeat since Prussia unexpectedly routed Austria and her German allies coming
to dominate all of North Germany.
That was not expected.
Prussia and Austria were relatively equal in strength, although Prussia clearly had the
nod by that time, although not everybody realized it, remember Austria was the historic dominator.
But Prussia had expanded its military more powerfully, and Prussia's economy had expanded
and its focus was much stronger than the Austrian focus, and its generals were much stronger
than the Austrian generals, and Bismarck was in charge.
However, bets were that there would have been a longer war, and France would have intervened
to settle and moderate the war and gain compensation on France's eastern border, maybe taking the
border a little bit back to what it was in 1792 during the early part of the French Revolution.
But in any case, France would once again have been the arbiter of the fate of Central Europe.
This is what more people thought was going to happen.
