Now, again, this was very, very difficult.
What he is trying to do is bridge the gap between someone who took power by a coup d'etat,
even with a majority of the people supporting him, and someone who wanted to establish a
legitimate hereditary monarchy, somewhat like what existed in England except with more
power in the hands of the monarch, but clearly with shared governance, the rule of law, fair
law, equal law.
And scholars debate over whether or not these liberal changes in the 1860s came out of political
necessity or whether they came because he wanted them to occur.
Now political necessity may have accelerated the pace from time to time, but at no time
until the Franco-Prussian War did he ever lose the support of the army, did he ever
lose the support of the bureaucracy, did he ever lose the support of the overwhelming
majority of the French people, he could have ruled by force and by decree if that's what
he chose to do, he chose otherwise.
In 1860, both the lower and upper houses of parliament in published form gained the right
to respond to the emperor's major speeches, leading to wider public debate.
In 1861 the lower house obtained more control over the budget, while in 1862 ministers were
required to defend government policies before the chamber.
Budget and ministers before the chamber.
Control over the budget in any society is always a main perk.
If you can control the budget, you can alter the policy.
Having your ministers stand before the parliament to explain their policies puts them on notice,
they better know what they're doing.
From the early 1860s political prisoners were amnestied and more freedom of the press
was allowed.
Beginning with the legislative elections of 1863, the rigging of elections by prefects
was called off and opposition groups form in the chamber.
If you want to read and detail the history of how all of this happened, read Theodore
Zeldin's wonderful little book, The Political System of Napoleon III, and Zeldin is one
of the great scholars of modern French history and modern French culture.
Significantly, in 1864 workers are allowed to unionize and to strike more clearly, actually
in some ways even in England at the same time, and a workers delegation is sent to the first
international work humans conference held in London at that year.
So he attempted to do everything he could to bring the workers back into his bosom.
In the hopes of educating the new workers of France during 1865 and 1866, widespread
educational reforms were introduced by Victor Durie with full Napoleonic support, expanding
primary education, expanding vocational education, even expanding education for women, and improving
secondary education all with less clerical control.
In virtually every one of the countries in Europe, control over education was to be a
main bone of contention between church and state because the belief was that if you could
control the mind of a young person, you could control that person's future.
Many of the most powerful revolutionaries, in fact, went to Catholic schools.
So the belief is not the reality.
Those of us in education for our entire lives know that, but it's nice to believe anyway.
Between 1867 and 1869, freedom of the press and assembly were restored.
Freedom of houses of parliament obtained expanded powers, including over taxation and including
over unpopular ministers.
And a free election in 1869 still gave Napoleon III a comfortable majority, but with more
than three million votes for opposition candidates who now sat in the legislatures, accepting
the ministry headed by former opposition liberal Emil Olivier in January 1870.
