Napoleon III won an overwhelming victory in a referendum over 7 million votes to a million and a half votes in a May 1870 referendum concerning the previous collective reforms,
seeming to have successfully created a liberal empire just on the eve of the Franco-Prussian War.
In other words, he seemed to have really, really done it.
Achieved a ministry of more liberal people willing to work with him, still with the overwhelming support of the majority of French people on his side,
in a country that was very prosperous at that time, beautiful, booming culturally, doing well economically,
and in a process in which virtually every group in French society had benefited from those changes,
except of course those people who died and those riots, who never got to achieve the benefits.
In the realm of foreign policy, the source of his eventual demise, it has to be remembered that Napoleon III seemed to be dominating the fate of Europe,
at least until the Austro-Prussian War of 1866.
In other words, in an area in which he found his ultimate demise,
contemporaries thought he was still in the saddle, as did he.
As in the case of domestic politics, Napoleon was an activist.
An activist from a combination of motives, courting patriotic and Catholic interests, seeking legitimacy,
supporting the cause of liberal nationalism, while simultaneously seeking moderate French aggrandizement as well.
Again, another tension.
Napoleon seemed to believe in the liberal nationalism of the first half of the 19th century,
that every people had its own karma, and every meaningful people, relatively large at least,
should have some form of national self-determination, some ability to express its political sensibility,
some ability to express its culture.
He was willing to support that, taking risks, but he would only do so if France could gain something as well.
So his heart and his mind were sometimes, in fact, usually in conflict.
However, as distinct from domestic policies, even when well-intentioned, his politics were often quixotic, insufficiently considered,
events often got out of control, and he didn't seem to learn from past mistakes.
In domestic policy, he adjusted well.
In domestic policy, he took risks.
In domestic policy, he knew how to support people of quality who carried out programs of magnitude.
He stayed with them.
His learning curve in foreign policy truly was pathetic, because what he didn't recognize is that foreign policy is another element of war,
and war gets out of control, and he didn't understand it.
And he should have, because it happened to him enough, that he should have learned.
In foreign affairs, he was playing also a high-stakes game with players such as Otto von Bismarck and Camille de Kavor,
who were more adept, and in terms of Bismarck, let us also remember, much more ruthless than Napoleon III.
He was out of his league in foreign policy.
At least until 1866, however, this was not apparent to contemporaries, and Paris seems to have once again become the diplomatic capital of Europe,
the place from which initiative and action occurred.
In terms of the first 15 years of his reign, foreign policy adventures, even when leading to loss of life and unnecessary expenditures,
usually were downed to French national pride, and did strengthen Napoleon's legitimacy.
