These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by the teaching company.
These lectures are titled, The Long Nineteenth Century, European History from 1789 to 1917,
Part 2.
Chapter 13, Italy on the Eve, An Overview.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
Having just spent the last two encounters dealing with French history in the first two-thirds
of the nineteenth century and bringing Napoleon the third in and out of power, we now turn
today to an even more precarious subject, the creation, the development of the modern
Italian state, the unification of Italy, and one has to use the words modern and unification
both in quotation marks.
It was a precarious process and it was a precarious creation.
And it remains precarious.
As some of you know, even in the recent years in northern Italy there has been such an organization
known as the Lombard League, a group of wealthier elements who often talk about seceding from
Italy because northern Italy is still so much more industrially developed than southern
Italy and not particularly liking to pay taxes that then go to the development of the south.
And indeed the development of the south since the end of World War II is one of the miracles
of contemporary European history.
At the same time recently in the New York Times I came across an article that spoke
about the more than 50 coalition governments that Italy has had since World War II from
one political crisis to another.
And indeed between 1919 and 1922 when Mussolini came into power and the very name Mussolini
is really a stake in the heart of Italian liberals and democrats and real patriots, there were
five separate coalition governments between 1919 and 1922.
Where did all of this come from?
What is often called the flawed unification of Italy between 1859 and 1870 did not represent
the expectations of any of the major participants and leaders, whether revolutionary or established
of any of the major Italian states.
Whether it was the soul and spirit of the process, Mussini together with his even slightly
more radical students, Garibaldi, whether it was Camillo de Cavour who actually fathered
the process, the real process between 1859 and 1861, it wasn't what he had expected,
it certainly wasn't what Pope Pius IX expected or wanted, and prior to this time the papacy
was the most established and renowned institution in Italy, it wasn't what Napoleon III expected
and it wasn't even what the eventual king of Italy, Victor Emmanuel II expected.
It was far more of a disguised Piedmontese conquest in fact than a reflection of the
desires of most Italians at that time.
And Italians bewail the process which they felt was the undermining of their cultural
and patriotic rebirth known as the Risorgimento, the Italian rebirth.
One scholar during and after World War II said the following, there was no reason for
and no possibility of making Italy the center of the universe as Mussini had dreamed.
But she might have been a beacon for all, a thing of beauty.
Why did this not happen?
Why was Italy so short lived?
And you can feel the pain in this historian's voice.
Even in 1870 when the process was completed with Rome being occupied by the Italian forces
under Piedmont as the French withdrew their troops from Rome where they protected the
Pope in order to fight the Germans unsuccessfully in the Franco-Prussian War, even in 1870 the
overwhelming majority of Italians were functionally illiterate and spoke dialects unintelligible
to those elites in the north who spoke Italian.
Statistics go as low as below 5% of people who really, really understood the modern Italian
language rather than the local dialects that they spoke.
