A European wide sense of responsibility, part of the Romantic movement.
Continuing.
Without country, you have neither name, token, voice, nor rights.
No admission as brothers into the fellowship of peoples.
You are the bastards of humanity, soldiers without a banner,
Israelites among the nations.
You will find neither faith nor protection.
None will be sureties for you.
And then he writes about what should happen.
For Mazzini, a national Republican bottom-up unification was required.
Italians, and here Italian men, need to take their fate into their own hands.
They are the ones who need to create a liberal, more than a liberal,
a democratic egalitarian, united Italy, including all of its parts,
created by the people rather than by the elites.
And if Italy could do that, Italy would become a beacon for all of Europe,
harmonizing, quote, harmonizing earth and heaven, right and duty.
How romantic, and how dangerous.
Mazzini participated in unsuccessful revolts in 1820, 1821.
Was a leader in the underground, carbonary, charcoal burner movement.
Did his time in prison.
Founded the secret young Italy movement during the revolutions of 1830 and 1831.
Inspired his follower Giuseppe Garibaldi and terrified nearly all other moderate and property interests.
Mazzini, and no collection really of Mazzini's and let's say really, really coordinated well,
could never have the capability of doing full battle alone with either the Austrians
or with the French who would never have allowed the Papacy to be forced out,
could never have done it themselves.
But what they did is terrify everybody else and spread the message.
And this forced more liberal constitutionalist types
and even a number of aristocrats to realize these guys won't go away.
They're really dead serious about this and they're dangerous.
They can call everything into question and so we must compete with them.
By the 1840s, a number of more moderate voices emerged,
including that of Count Camillo Cavour of Piedmont,
a moderate liberal who was especially influenced by British economic and constitutional development.
I love to hear the voice of Mazzini and then hear the voice of Cavour.
In 1843, Cavour wrote an article about railroads.
They had begun to become important in England in the 1820s.
They had begun to make their presence in some parts of Europe.
Railroads, railroads are power. Railroads are economic power.
In the article, Cavour talked about some form of greater Italian unification on some level.
That would give people a sense of opportunity.
Cavour talked about the commonality and this is where his attitude is so British.
He talked about the potential commonality of interest between liberal aristocrats
and moderate members of the middle class working together to create more opportunity for everyone.
He talked about the need, most importantly, to exclude Austria and others from Italy.
This could only be achieved if the elites of the different segments of Italy got together.
Cavour was actually more of a Piedmontese patriot than an Italian.
Some scholars suggest that later in the game he became more of an Italian.
He developed more of an Italian vision and we'll talk about that next time.
But he was a Piedmontese patriot and Piedmont couldn't improve unless the Austrians were out either.
He talked the people as being docile but full of ardour,
needing to be led, quote unquote, by responsible elites.
