Kavor found all of Metzini's tactics dangerous, he was opposed to the revolutions of 1830.
They were dangerous and subversive because they would raise expectations that could not
be satisfied and they would bring upon Italy further foreign intervention which she could
not stand up to.
The elites should guide the process from above in direct opposition to Metzini, the
people should force the process with violence and revolution from below.
By 1840's perhaps the seemingly most prominent nationalist thread, and this is interesting,
came from what is called the neo-Guelph movement, those Catholics who supported a Federalist
Italy under the guidance of the Papacy.
What made this more possible was the beginning of a new pope's reign in 1846, Pio Nuno pious
the ninth.
The Papacy surely was Italy's most long lasting and universalist structure and with pious
the ninth becoming pope and seemingly being interested in some liberal and reformist elements,
many of the middle class elites in other parts of Italy looked to the Papacy as a potential
center of some kind of Italian federalism.
And even later when Kavor finally does bring about the Piedmontese expansion in the beginning
he hopes it will be under the presidency of the Papacy, not because he wants the pope
to have any power but because that's the commonality of the Italian people, that's the largest
common denominator and also something that would not be offensive to Catholics in France
nor to Catholics in Austria.
Although the revolutions that broke out throughout Italy following the signal giving by Paris
in February of 1848, remember there were revolts in Naples somewhat earlier but the signal
comes from Paris quote unquote although they were almost universally unsuccessful once the
Austrians and the French regained their composure, this was a clarifying experience for Italian
nationalists.
Although defeated by the Austrians at the battles of Custoso and Navarro, King Charles
Albert of Piedmont had stepped forward against the hated Austrians while Pope Pius IX fearing
revolutionary disorder and not wishing to have Catholic fight Catholic, Catholic Italian
fight Catholic Austrian decided to sit this one out and in fact decided to sit the rest
out as well.
And Charles Albert abdicated fearing that he was going to lose his throne altogether
from his family on behalf of his son Victor Emanuel II who maintained the moderate Piedmontese
constitution that had been granted in 1848 while Pius IX chased from Rome by revolutionaries
even a year later 1849 was only returned to power through the efforts of French troops
and indeed kept in power by the presence of French troops.
Although the defeated Metzenians remained steadfast more patriotic eyes were now directed
toward Piedmont although realists understood that Piedmont could not defeat Austria alone.
Austria like Russia was now despised by many liberals everywhere and especially by anyone
who loved Italy past or present or who had dreams of a real Italy of the future.
And so 1848 served really as a definite turning point in Italy even when much of the old order
returned except for the fact that Piedmont got a constitution called far more attention
to itself and that the papacy by inaction also called attention to itself.
Italian patriots however knew that Piedmont was no match for Austria alone they would
have to seek help they hoped that help would come from the British and from the French.
Thank you.
