But what was lost was economic vitality relative to the other states, and even more so political
vitality.
The ability to have a say in something.
I recently checked the timeline in one of the books that I've assigned as a supplementary
reading.
And in the timeline, in the entire period from 1648 to 1815, there's only one mention
of Italy, and it comes from a papal ban on Jansenists who believed more heavily in predestination
than the papacy believed Catholics should identify with.
So while Prussia and France and Austria and Russia and Spain and Holland and Sweden were
all mentioned, there was no mention of Italy.
Now if we were talking about operas and if we were talking about works of art, it would
be different.
If we're talking about power, there was no mention of Italy.
Still, some members of the Italian elite played significant roles during the 18th century
enlightenment.
Names such as the great historian Vico, who was often mentioned with Voltaire as the beginning
of modern historiography, or the great criminologist Becariah, the punishment should fit the crime,
the torture is the worst thing that you can do, and others were surely affected by the
modernist ideas of the Enlightenment.
However, it was the French Revolution and the Napoleonic era that really shook Italy
from its relative lethargy, especially since French armies under Napoleon introduced a
semblance of unified equal laws, administrative modernization, and a variety of other liberal
and radical constitutional ideas, even out of the barrel of a gun, so to speak, shaking
the old regime in Italy to its core.
Because many of these things were progressive from 1796, almost on and off continuously
until 1814, 1815, many of the Italian middle class elements and people who were aware of
the Enlightenment initially at least welcomed the French.
There were some patriots, or some people who got tired of the French staying there, billeting,
taxing, recruiting, but the French Revolution for Italy represented an opportunity that
simply wasn't there without outside intervention, shaking the established order to its core.
So middle class elements, students, literate people, journalists, thinkers, liberal aristocrats,
sometimes more so after the French left than during, saw what the French brought as an
opportunity for modernization, for the rule of law, for improved economic opportunity,
for the restricting of restraints that prevent commerce, for order, for security, for stability,
for progress.
French occupation and the nationalist ideas the French brought with them, however, stimulated
patriotic local responses although nothing like what happened in Spain where a deep profound
patriotic movement of what was at least a unitary state, Spain, occurred.
In Italy at that time, Italy was as it is sometimes said, usually said, a geographic expression
composed of nine or 10 or sometimes a few more separate entities like the 13 colonies.
Compared to what was going on in Germany at the same time when there were over 300 states,
nine or 10 sounds manageable, but when you're trying to get something done, it really still
isn't unless there is a sense of commonality and that sense of commonality was not there.
As elsewhere in Europe, the Vienna Restoration, the Congress of Vienna in 1814, 1815, attempted
to reimpose as much of the old order as was possible, including the enforced reghettoization
of the Jews wherever the French armies went.
Jews were forced to live in Walden ghettos sometimes allowed out to do their commerce
during the day, required to go back in at night unless they had a pass.
The French broke down those ghettos wherever they went.
The old order returns.
The ghettos return with them in many of the German states as well.
In fact, the Jewish ghetto in Rome last until 1870.
But the return of the victorious powers reestablished the old order as much as was possible.
And if possible even more so because the Viennese conservatives at least certainly understood
that the old regime having been shaken and challenged so profoundly would have to do
something in terms of police and military power to be able to really establish order,
which is what they wanted.
