Despite the heroism and powerful propaganda efforts of the mostly middle-class Italian
patriots, something like the improbable unification of Italy can only be understood in the context
of a complex interaction of 19th century ideas, 19th century politics, 19th century material
forces, and indeed we're going to go back again and again to the impact of the French
Revolution, the Napoleonic Era, and the spread of the Industrial Revolution.
What were the main components of the problem of Italy prior to this time, as it is sometimes
stated, as it encountered its 19th century Risorgimento or rebirth?
And how did these problems come to be?
From the decline of the Roman Empire in the end of the 5th century through the early Middle
Ages, Italy quote-unquote degenerated into a series of small, separate states and regions,
experiencing extreme particularism and localism in matters of politics, diplomacy, economic
development, and culture, and that's where we get all of this linguistic diversity from.
Even during the late Middle Ages and the Renaissance, when Italian culture and urban economic development,
at least in North and Central Italy, but not just there, were the marvel of much of Europe,
Machiavelli bewailed the incapacity of local rulers and elites to defend Italy against such
predators as France and Spain.
In 1494, the French invaded Italy, thereafter the Spanish later invaded, staying there on
and off for several centuries under the guise first of the Holy Roman Empire, and these
states, these great larger states in development, fought their battles on Italian soil, ravaging
and looting often at will.
One can remember even during the English Reformation, when Henry VIII wanted to get a divorce from
Catherine of Aragon, who happened to be related to Charles V, the Spanish emperor.
Charles V, at that moment, had the pope in captivity and was ensconced in Rome, so obviously
the divorce did not go through, but imagine the humiliation that Italians felt from time
to time based with these kinds of realities.
That's what led Machiavelli in 1513 to write the prince and later to write another treatise
on the art of war, in which he urged, as some say as the first modern political scientist,
he urged the separate units of Italy somehow to come together and protect the Italian patrimony
against the ravages of its stronger, larger and most importantly centralized neighbors.
The shift in Europe's economic gravity from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic in the late
16th and especially in the 17th century, and the simultaneous growing power of the Ottoman
Empire in the Eastern Mediterranean, undermined the economic vitality of much of Italy, which
declined further relative to the other developing European states, except in terms of such
cultural treasures as art and music.
Now again, let's stop and think about those terms relative to the other centralizing European
states.
Everything takes place in the context of a competitive state system in Europe, and those
that change and modernize even in the pre-French Revolutionary period do better, and those
who don't adapt and modernize do worse, or are the prey of others.
Other art, painting, music, Italian opera houses in Venice, there were 16 opera houses
in Venice in the early 17th century, the study of music in Naples, all of these things continued.
