In the north, Lombardi and Venetia, which is Milan and Venice, became part of the Austrian
Empire, pure and simple, while the Duchies of Parma and Modena, nominally independent,
were governed by Austrian Stooges, Dukes who owed their power and their preservation to
the Austrians.
The region of Tuscany, Florence, was still independent and fairly well governed by Dukes,
although patriotism, or rather, wider Italian nationalism, seems to have been somewhat less
in Florence than in some other areas, perhaps because Florence was doing relatively well.
The Papal States going down further into the peninsula in central Italy, and there were
a series of Papal States, not just Rome, the territory around Rome with an army and police
and a bureaucracy and tax collectors, the Papal States were generally governed poorly
by very, very conservative popes and cardinals who feared the potential immorality of railroads
and tunnels, opposed secularism, and proposals for national economic unification.
Right after Vienna, they too were really shaken to the core, and they liked things basically
the way they were as well.
They agreed perfectly with the Austrians about that.
In the very south, the war-ball-ruled kingdom of Naples and Sicily restored and protected
by the Austrians with its overpopulated third-world peasantry represented one of the worst governments
in all of Europe.
The person who hired me at Lafayette College and protected me and loved me, my second father,
Albert Genda being used to say, that regime made the mafia look relatively respectable
by contrast, and Albert studied in Italy during the 1930s and knew Italian and loved every
moment in which he spent there.
Only in Piedmont Sardinia, in some ways, as much French as Italian in culture, did one
see the beginning of middle-class and liberal aristocratic rule and industrial development,
especially in the 1840s, in the northwest corner of Italy closest to France.
There railroads began to be thought about and developed a wider and larger middle-class
developed over time, somewhat more responsible political leadership was there, and surely
the elites there chafed at the bit because indeed it was the Austrians in Lombardy and
Venetia who were right next door, and so they felt threatened as well as unhappy with the
Austrian presence and indeed the whole sense of Italy at that time.
In short, on the eve of 1848, in terms of sound government, only Piedmont and Tuscany
seemed to represent progressive developments.
The rest of the peninsula was dominated by Austria, the Pope, and inappropriate monarchs
in the very south of Italy.
Still as elsewhere in Europe, a number of diverse liberal and democratic nationalists
and revolutionary voices surfaced in the wake of Metternich's handiwork, and most Italian
patriots of any stripe agreed that the Austrians should be expelled from Italy.
That was their commonality.
And indeed in the scholarly understanding of how nationalism develops, sometimes it
develops largely or certainly partly because of commonalities that people have, but frequently
it also develops with respect to what people do not want external enemies.
Austria was an external enemy that unfortunately was internal as well because it was right
there.
Perhaps the most irrepressible and romantic voice and the best representative of liberal
nationalism in the 19th century was our friend Metzini, and I like to call him my friend,
the soul of the Risorgimento, whose writings and conspiratorial revolts either inspired
a generation of passionate adherents or forced more moderate and cautious individuals to
state their case and enter the fray.
Let's listen to his voice for just a moment to see what he was all about.
Peace to country.
Your first duties, first at least in importance as I have told you, are to humanity.
You are men before you are citizens or fathers.
Listen to that.
You are men before you are citizens or fathers.
