It seemed at this point that Kevord accelerated plans to confront Austria in the near future.
In 1857, and thereafter, he began to work with the newly established Italian National Society,
which began to establish branches in the north and in central Italy.
Now these national societies again represented all of the tendencies that were present.
There were moderate liberals, there were republicans, there were radicals,
there were some people with socialist inclinations as well.
But what Kevord did with eyes all over his head, including in the back,
is spread the tentacles of his relationships with as many potentially useful groups as possible,
either within Piedmont, in other sections of Italy, or outside of Italy.
More pointedly, on July the 20th, 1858, Kevord and Napoleon III met at Plombier-les-Bains
and literally plotted a war against Austria.
It is an absolutely incredible experience, this meeting at Plombier.
And since Kevord had to explain all of it to Victor Immanuel,
we have the documents that show exactly what he thinks happened,
what he believed Napoleon and he had agreed upon,
and where they were in this circumstance,
vis-à-vis France, Piedmont, and Austria.
Fortunately for Kevord as well,
this encounter occurred barely six months after a bomb had exploded near the opera in Paris,
with Napoleon III and his wife going to that opera.
Done by four Italian patriots, one person's patriot is another person's guerrilla or terrorist,
but we can look at this in the 19th century even,
and in this peculiar circumstance, the terrorist, the patriot, Orsini, was also very, very articulate,
and Napoleon III even visited him in prison,
and he was moved by these patriots burning desire for freedom for their Italy,
which they begged Napoleon III to turn to because the destiny of Italy was in his hands,
and then they were executed.
So Napoleon was in a pretty good frame of mind when he met with Kevord,
and these two gentlemen took out a map, which I had one right here in front of me,
and I could show you the pawns.
They took out a map and they looked for where to provoke a war with Austria.
This is the most extreme case of Realpolitik that I can think of.
This is a Bismarckian level of Realpolitik and maybe beyond.
Kevord was getting embarrassed. He couldn't figure out where it should come.
Napoleon comes to his aid.
Well, what about if we do this?
And what Napoleon was ready to do is to promise French military support should a war,
which means when a war began with Austria.
There was some price to pay for it.
Nice and Savoy would have to be ceded to France,
and King Victor Emmanuel's daughter would have to marry Napoleon's cousin,
which would strengthen the dynasty of the Bonaparts.
But Kevord's presentation of this deal to his monarch represents one of the most interesting documents of the century.
An example of Realpolitik in its clearest and crudest form,
as Kevord says, I know this is a great, great sacrifice on your part, your daughter.
But Napoleon really wants this. It's not absolutely necessary, mind you.
But his cousin is in his cabinet.
If we do it, we will have their everlasting gratitude,
and you know how good the French can be with their gratitude.
If we don't do it, we may have their everlasting rancor, especially from the cousin,
and you know how the French can be with that, but I'll leave it up to you.
And of course, the King bit, and maybe one shouldn't say of course,
but that's what kings often do.
Nonetheless, the plot near they failed, as the British who were supposed to be helping
didn't want to help because they didn't want the confrontation.
