So the British tried to bring the issue of Austrian policy in Northern Italy before the
concert of Europe, where Austria suffering embarrassment had the legal right to carry
out its policies in Northern Italy, according to the Treaty of Vienna.
Austria was in the legal right, but the Austrians and they would make a number of mistakes
like this throughout the course of the 19th century.
Austrian unwillingness to launder her politics in public, especially in face of an upstart
Piedmont, yielded instead an Austrian ultimatum against Piedmont in April of 1859, the perfect
excuse for a now so-called defensive Franco-Piedmontese coalition.
From that point on, although events got out of control, and this is why what finally happened
isn't what any of the players expected to happen, Kavor proved to be the master of
the field, maximizing Piedmont's potential gains and minimizing her potential losses.
And there were potential gains and there were also some real possible losses, had he not
done what he did.
Following bloody French victories at Magento and Sulferino in June and July, and rebellions
of national societies in Northern and Central Italy calling for a union with Piedmont, wonder
how that happened, Napoleon reached a compromised peace with Austria in November, leaving Kavor
who resigned in the lurch.
Why did Napoleon do this?
Well, it's getting out of control.
And also, they were French victories, but they were not radical victories.
Napoleon III was on the battlefield, looking at least from afar, and he did not like what
he saw.
He didn't like the blood, and he didn't like the instability, and he wanted to restabilize
things.
However, more rebellions and calls for a union just happened to materialize, forcing Napoleon
III to reconsider and allowing Kavor to return to office.
Kavor had done his work well with those national societies, and those national societies provided
a level of instability and a call for union with Piedmont that allowed Kavor to convince
Napoleon III that it was necessary to go ahead, that it would be more destabilizing
not to go ahead, and so Napoleon III gave Kavor his support again, and they went ahead.
In January of 1860, Nice and Savoy were ceded to France as promised.
So if you visit Nice, you know where it is, it's in France.
While following plebiscites in the north, all of northern Italy, except Venetia, Venice,
were annexed by Piedmont.
Plebiscites, that's a Napoleonic process.
An even more dangerous situation was then diffused by Kavor.
And following Garibaldi's radical liberation of Sicilian Naples in the spring of 1860s,
Kavor and Victor Emanuel II prevented Garibaldi and his red shirts from liberating Rome as
well by conquering the adjacent papal territories, blocking Garibaldi's path, and joining him
in union with Garibaldi was willing to do because Garibaldi was unwilling to provoke
a civil war between Italians, even though he was a Metzion and a Democrat and a Republican,
faced with the forces in the field, Garibaldi yielded.
And then Naples and Sicily were also joined to Piedmont following additional plebiscites.
Now those plebiscites didn't give you five choices, okay?
So these plebiscites are in a sense rigged.
Do you want union with Italy or with Piedmont or do you want to return to the status quo
anti?
Well, that's not much of a choice.
What the real significance of this is, is that had Garibaldi himself attacked Rome, which
he was going to do, after all, Metzion and he had done it in 1849, why not do it again?
Both French and Austrian forces might have returned to the fray in Italy together and
the whole process might have unraveled.
