As our friend LCBCman maintains, the case of Italy was a quote, bad imitation of a good
model.
How nice and condescending for an Englishman.
The good model was England.
Adelaide was a bad imitation of a good model, since Kavor was so Anglo-centric in his view.
And in a sense, that is probably true.
It was a bad imitation of what was fundamentally a good model.
But a good model for Great Britain is not necessarily such a good model for Italy with
all of its greater economic, social, fundamental problems.
At least on the plus, a moderately liberal constitutional structure with fundamental
human rights, promulgated law, a certain amount of due process was put in place.
At least the Austrians were finally expelled from Italy, together with all of their Stooges
in the North, and their even more incompetent monarchical Stooges in the South.
Sadly, at least until after 1900, Italian statesmen who replaced Kavor, admittedly
facing difficult challenges, were not up to the task, and not much had been done to create
a modern state or to facilitate the growth of a healthy, integrated national identity.
Instead, there was a process called Trasfamismo that was put in place politically in Italy.
Political musical chairs.
The same person could for two months be Minister of Economics, and for six months be Minister
of Agriculture, and then Minister of Foreign Affairs.
The goal was to stay in power, and what Italy had was continuous political instability and
jockeying for position.
If one seeks to look at any general European history that is not centered on the study
of Italy during this time period, you will be hard-pressed to find major political figures
whose names are mentioned during this succeeding time period.
In fact, the first one of real magnitude will be someone named Crispi, who comes in the
power in the late 1880s until 1896, and is popular, attractive, and gets involved in
imperialism in which Italy loses a battle to Ethiopia, the battle of Adawa, that Mussolini
will then attempt to revenge in 1935 when he attacks Ethiopia.
Now again, everybody laughed, Ethiopia beats Italy.
Well, Ethiopia at that time was ruled by Emperor Malik, who knew what he was doing, and he
also was able to play the other powers off one against another, but Italy lost a major
battle in Africa.
And Crispi then is forced to office, and then you have martial law for two years so that
the history of late 19th century Italy is not very attractive until after 1900 when finally
she gets a series of far more competent statespeople.
What that meant is that the unification of Italy already added one more loose cannon
in a Europe that already had too many loose cannons.
And unfortunately, it did not become a beacon for the rest, but just another player.
We'll turn to an even more powerful player in our next two commentaries, during which
we'll discuss the quote unquote unification of Germany.
Thank you.
