Lecture 14, Cavour and Napoleon III, Unifying Italy.
Having established in our last set of encounters, what were some of the major problems that
the states and separate entities of Italy faced historically all the way through the
revolutions of 1848, today we're going to discuss how moderates attempted to react to
those issues and do the best that they could with the weapons at their disposal and radicals
reacted at their own pace as well in conflict with moderates.
Following the failures of the revolutions of 1848 in Italy, the conservative turn of
the Papacy, Austria's defeat of Piedmont, it was clear that the next attempts at liberation
or unification, whichever they might be, would require more careful planning, outside help,
either from France or Great Britain or from both.
After all, thinking about help from Prussia, Austria or Russia is an unlikely possibility.
Fortunately for Piedmont, after the stabilizing interim leadership of Massimo d'Eglio, Piedmont
found the leader of first-rate stature, one of the great leaders of the 19th century,
Camille de Cavour, who remained prime minister almost continuously from 1852 until his untimely
death in 1861 and who achieved far more success than could have been anticipated, least of
all by Cavour himself or even wanted in terms of what that real success was.
Although it seems that in view of the radicalism of popular action during 1848, Cavour was
now concerned above all to strengthen and expand Piedmont and to force Austria out of
northern Italy.
He was a consummate pragmatist, a powerful administrator who first strengthened his base
while awaiting propitious opportunities for wider action.
A good 19th century liberal, a technocrat, someone who understood agriculture, urban
economics and even warfare and diplomacy, he oversaw the strengthening of Piedmont's
infrastructure, especially railroads that he had written about and studied.
He expanded trade, especially with Great Britain and France, using the tools he had
at his disposal, and he helped modernize Piedmont's agriculture as well.
The scope of his vision is going to be important later when we consider the might-have-bins
of history because Cavour tragically died too early.
Simultaneously, he strengthened his political base in Piedmont, capably balancing divergent
political interests and ideologies, and making himself indispensable to King Victor Emmanuel
II and also modernizing Piedmont's military forces as best as he could.
Again, he was capable of getting moderate liberals and moderate conservatives to work
together in the Piedmontese parliament, and he was capable of making himself indispensable
to the king who really didn't even like him and who wanted to be an old-style king but
knew that he couldn't.
In that sense, Cavour was the person of the hour.
Using the possibility of courting favor with Great Britain and France and of gaining status
for Piedmont, Cavour sent a meaningful Piedmontese contingent of some 15,000 troops to join the
Allied cause during the Crimean War.
This gamble paid off since the Italian question was discussed at the Peace of Paris, where
Cavour was allowed to criticize the role of Austria in Northern Italy and elsewhere at
the same time in which Austrian fence straddling looked even worse by comparison, and of course
the Austrians gained the antipathy of the Russians as a result of their behavior and
didn't get any further credits with the British and the French.
Returning home, Cavour said that he did not believe that it could long be before the British
and the French would help Piedmont reach its destiny.
