Lecture 15, Germany on the Eve.
If the modern state of Italy was to be a player in modern European history, as it turned out,
the state of Germany was to be the player in modern European history, and it is to the
process that brought that into being that we turn to today and in our succeeding lecture.
As in the case of Italy, only more so, the German states were even more disunited from
the time of the breakup of Charlemagne's empire in the Middle Ages, and instead of
talking about 9 or 10 or 12 or even 15 units, in the case of Germany, we're usually talking
about over 300 separate political entities, at least until Napoleon simplified this in
1806, reducing it to under 20.
Although the position of the Holy Roman Emperor rested with the Austrian Habsburg dynasty
from the time of Charles V's separation of his unwieldy empire into a Spanish Habsburg
and an Austrian Habsburg segment, the empire was more of a shell than a reality, and it
was to Charles V's good sense that he realized that it simply was too much to be both in
control of Spain and its overseas empire and its other possessions and all of central
Europe at the same time.
To begin with, the larger kings and princes and dukes did their very best to restrict
any growth and power of the elected Holy Roman Emperor, rather to maximize their own independence
and their own strength.
In any case, in addition to the handful of electors of the Holy Roman Empire, it not
only consisted of over 300 separate larger and minuscule states, but dukedom's ecclesiastical
principalities and free cities, but also of whatever non-German territories the Austrians
and the larger Germanic states such as Brandenburg, Prussia and the East added to their domains.
These fundamental divisions were exacerbated definitely by the 16th century Protestant
Catholic split, the Protestant Reformation and the Catholic Reformation or Counter Reformation,
depending on how you name it, and by the devastating Thirty Years War between 1618 and 1648 fought
mainly in the German states which actually began as a continuation of the wars between
Catholics and Protestants in the previous century.
When Martin Luther put his 95 theses on the post at Wittenberg in 1517, he surely didn't
expect this to happen.
No one could have foreseen it, but the responses of some German princes supporting him, not
wishing to see more of their funds go to Italy, demonstrated an earlier kind of German cultural
sensibility as well as a response to what was perceived and accepted, including by Catholics
to be the problems inherent in the structure of the papacy at that time and its abuses.
As a result of the rough equality of forces, by the time of the Peace of Westphalia in 1648,
more than Germany had become predominantly Protestant with some Catholics, while southern
Germany and Austria remained overwhelmingly Catholic as it still is today.
These wars however were devastating because of the relative equality of forces and the
fact that the French got involved, the Swedes got involved.
This was a horrendous experience for Central Europe and many places, population losses
were from a third or even a half of its bulk, while normal economic patterns were disrupted
and undermined throughout.
