As a result, the new ideologies and administrative slash constitutional forces of the revolutionary
and Napoleonic eras were spread throughout many of the German states via occupying French
armies and administrators, never to be completely lost from view thereafter.
In other words, what happened in Prussia during the Napoleonic era is somewhat similar to
what happened in Italy, although it might have happened even more intensely in Italy,
because parts of Germany still retained their independence even under Napoleon, but French
administrators, French procedures, concepts, constitutional concepts, national concepts,
career, for talent, concepts, efficiency, all of these things spread.
In Prussia especially, however, during this time period, a number of important military
and administrative reforms were undertaken, many of which survived into the Restoration
Era as the masses had to be given some reason to resist the French.
So what one sees is the mobilization, the attentive mobilization of the Germanic middle
classes and masses against the French, together with the fact that French occupation was not
always so gentle or sweet, people were conscripted, people were taxed, people were billeted, and
this leads to an anti-French early nationalist Germanic revival.
Throughout much of Germany, especially among the intellectual elites and the educated middle
class, an anti-French pro-German nationalism was born, even among liberals who initially
were positively disposed to the message of the French Revolution, but also on the part
of volkisch-German nationalists, often very conservative.
One who was a mixture of conservatism and liberalism, Johann Gottlieb Fichte's addresses
to the German nation, was the best example of this German nationalism, unlike the French
concept of citizenship based on law, German nationalism sometimes expressed ethnic identity,
culture, language, and this was important also because so many of the German elite preferred
to speak French and Fichte said to them, no, your language is better, your language is
the future of Germany and more.
In addition, when Napoleon abolished the Holy Roman Empire in 1806 and having already
worked on reducing the number of Germanic states twice from over 330 to 19 rearranged
entities, Napoleon unwittingly facilitated further mergers and the strengthening of these
German states by simplifying the unwieldy mess that was Germany.
In other words, just by doing that, the French had unwittingly helped process the growing
potential unification of Germany.
Significantly, the powers meeting at Vienna in 1814-1815 set up a Germanic confederation
of 39 states, they didn't stay at 19 and they didn't go back to 300.
Under the presidency of Austria and the vice presidency of Prussia, while Austria and Prussia
also gained territory, Austria is mainly outside of Germany, the territory in northern Italy,
and Prussia is in Germany, including further west in areas that may not even have been
contiguous with Prussia, but gave it points of reference further west.
Although Austria and Prussia mostly cooperated between 1815 and 1848, under the conservative
anti-revolutionary tutelage of Metternich, Prussian economic and administrative development
continued to outstrip Austria's, especially in the 1840's and especially in the domain
of railroads and industry.
