But the Prussian monarchs were more pragmatic in terms of trying to build their state.
All of this was also a product of their previous weakness.
It may well be that one of the reasons that people tolerated the discipline and the military bureaucracy
and all the rest of the exactions is because they remembered those 30 years war which so much represented German weakness.
The Hohenzollerns were the predators. Their people were secure except from the Hohenzollerns themselves.
A radical expansion of Prussian power occurred however under the reign of King Frederick the Great from 1740 to 1786
under whom Prussia really first emerged as one of the five European great powers.
Audacious and talented, a great military leader, Frederick crudely attacked Austria at the moment
that Maria Theresia questions, Maria Theresia's questioned ascension to the emperorship occurred
and he successfully attacked her in her period of instability annexing Silesia during the war of Austrian succession
and by annexing Silesia which was a wealthy and a densely populated area
he expanded Prussia's population and Prussia's resources by about 50% in one fell swoop.
Allied only with Britain, he made good on this conquest against the forces of France, Austria and Russia
during the Seven Years War from 1756 to 1763.
Now he did have some luck. A regime change occurred in Russia when he was really on the point of being defeated
and the new Russians are was favorably disposed toward Prussia and called it off
but he was a military great at that time whose greatness is only overshadowed by Napoleon coming shortly thereafter that.
In addition, so-called enlightened despot and he was enlightened in certain ways
but the people who he increased serfdom on didn't think so
Frederick continued to improve the financial, administrative and military apparatus of his regime
as well as to make Prussia and Berlin a center of European culture for the first time
indeed making Prussian primary education second to none in Europe.
I did a book review on education in Europe at the end of the 18th and the early 19th century
several years ago and one of the strangest things I found which went against my expectations
is that primary education was far more well advanced than Prussia, than in England or in France
because the state was far more active and determined standards.
At the same time, both Prussia and Austria also expanded eastward
during three partitions of Poland together with Russia in 1772, 1793 and 1795.
Now this was really an important event.
The mid-century wars brought Russia into the European balance for the first time.
The partition of Poland made Prussia and Austria north and south neighbors directly of Russia
which had occupied half of Poland as each of these powers took a piece of Poland
which disappeared because it couldn't defend itself and it couldn't defend itself
because its monarchs never established enough authority to bring military force to bear
until it was far too late and some Polish revolutionaries who fought in our wars of independence
went home to Poland and tried to save her but it was too late
but what they now did is put each other next to one another
which really made it a difficult issue for the future.
Still, neither the vaunted military efficiency of Prussia songs Frederick the Great without him
even at times combined with the power of Austria and Russia could withstand the mobilized material
and human nationalistic passion of revolutionary French armies
especially when those armies would soon be commanded by Napoleon
at least not until Napoleon overreached himself in the 1812 war against Russia and thereafter.
