Obviously, given the bitter religious divisiveness, the wars ended simply because they couldn't
be tolerated any longer.
It's not that any reconciliation was achieved.
Given this bitter religious divisiveness, strengthening the structure of the Holy Roman
Empire was a mood issue, especially given the pressure of the Ottoman Empire in the
East pressing in on Austria, conquering Hungary, actually, besieging Vienna in 1683.
Try this out, often in alliance with Catholic France, which was against Catholic Austria,
so it reached an alliance with the Muslim Ottoman Empire.
And France emerged at the end of this procedure as the most powerful European state at the
end of the Thirty Years' War, continuing its struggle against the Spanish Habsburgs
and finally defeating them and imposing on them the peace of the Pyrenees in 1659.
And so it is from 1659 to 1870 that France is the dominant power on the continent at
the same time in which, over time, it develops the second largest world empire, second only
to Great Britain.
With the center of global economic expansion shifting now to the Atlantic Seacoast, Western
Germany often saw socioeconomic patterns more reminiscent of France, while Eastern Germany,
which still had a lot of internal trade in Central and Eastern Germany, but still Eastern
Germany and the Austrian Empire, especially as the Austrian Empire expanded eastward against
the Turks in Hungary, patterns of feudalism and serfdom actually intensified in Prussia
and Austria, even as they were disappearing in the West, including in West Germany.
So here is yet another division.
You have Northern Germany Protestant, Southern Germany Catholic, Western Germany more fluid
economically, Eastern Germany looking toward the East, almost looking toward Russia, sharing
commonality with developments that were occurring in Russia during the 18th century.
In the midst of all of this turmoil and insecurity, several medium-sized states developed in Germany,
including Saxony and Bavaria, but the most precocious of them was Brandenburg Prussia
in the East, centered in the Protestant Northeast of Germany, but over time achieving some outposts
elsewhere in Germany as well that weren't even contiguous with it.
In the aftermath of the Thirty Years' War, a series of careful, predatory and autocratic
Hohenzollerin monarchs, and that's the name of their dynasty, developed an efficient bureaucratic
apparatus, a fine-tuned military, a carefully managed financial structure in which they
were parsimonious, they didn't spend more than they have, in collusion with their own
Prussian aristocrats known as the Junkers.
In return for loyalty and some form of military service, the Junkers received more control
over their own serf peasants, acting thus as the main social prop on which the state
and its elite were based.
So the Junkers and the monarchy in the course of Prussian history are one, essentially.
As late as the early 18th century, however, Berlin was still a small frontier outpost,
a capital but an outpost capital, with nothing like the splendor of Prague, let alone Vienna,
Paris or London.
Still, northern German economic growth began to expand, given the stability provided by
the Hohenzollerin monarchs, who at the end of the 17th and in the 18th century even allowed
a small number of, quote unquote, privileged Jewish merchant bankers, and especially court
bankers, to enter their cities in order to strengthen the economy and the financial strength
of the monarchs.
Now, this was significant because religious toleration, let alone anything like religious
acceptance, did not exist in Central and Eastern Europe, and at the same time the Russian
czars expelled from their territory any Jew who happened to get into their territory.
