Unfortunately, as was the case in Germany, this quote-unquote deal between the elites
of Austria and the even more conservative elites, agrarian elites especially like the
Prussian Yukers of Hungary, against the interest and wishes of the other subject nationalities,
especially in the Hungarian half of the empire, was not intended to introduce shared governance
except between the Austrian and Hungarian elites.
Later in 1907, Austria itself internally would pass universal male suffrage.
The Hungarians would never allow that to pass in their half of the empire because they
feared being overwhelmed by the far larger majority of Slavic groups in the Hungarian
half of the empire.
By 1914, Austria-Hungary, the Austro-Hungarian empire, had over 50 million people.
And there were only about 10 million Germans in the Austrian half and only about 10 million
Hungarians in the Hungarian half and 30 millions of other peoples from other major large nationalities.
A story that we surely will concentrate on greatly later because that's the infrastructure
from which develops World War I, the inability, the unwillingness, the inability of the Austrians
and the unwillingness of the Hungarians to give the rest of the ethnic groups a stake
in some form of integrated nation-state.
Austria remained a multinational empire in an age of increasing nationalism and could
never make the leap into a period of real nation states.
Now ironically, in terms of what was going to happen later, as a result of the German
constitution that was created and as a result of this new Austro-Hungarian constitution,
in both states, the small number of several hundreds of thousands of Jews received emancipation
for the first time really in a fuller way, not because of any popular pressure for this
to happen, but simply for the logic of the situation.
Now there was resentment against that and that particular issue that we also will talk
about later would lead to a peculiar legacy of difficulty in both Austria and in Germany.
It's often said that the Austrians have the better of the deal.
Everyone thinks that Hitler was born a German and Beethoven was born an Austrian, but Beethoven
was born a German and Hitler was born an Austrian, but an Austrian whose culture was German and
Germanic.
Within Germany, a certain level of rule of law and efficient and ordered government did
indeed facilitate tremendous material progress and an unprecedented leap forward in science,
education, philosophy, history, technology and the overall quality of life for citizens
of Germany.
German universities became the marvel of late 19th century Europe.
German science was the marvel of late 19th century Europe.
And music, German technology, again only the United States did better in terms of industrial
expansion and by the late 19th century Germans had a very, very nice living standard.
At least as of 1871 most Germans were in fact thrilled with everything Bismarck had accomplished,
at least most Germans who lived in Germany.
Here Bismarck omitted the 10 million Germans in Austria.
He excluded them.
Hitler was a pan-German who wanted to unite all the German people and conquer the rest
of Europe and more.
Bismarck excluded the Germans in Austria because he came to believe that the state he had created
was a satisfied state and what he wanted to do is preserve the power of the monarchy and
the aristocracy in that particular state.
With hindsight most historians have concluded that Bismarck had succeeded in creating an
autocratic, aristocratic and militaristic state with the trappings of constitutionalism.
Moreover, he was to guide the destiny and the stability of this creation for the next
20 years against all potential domestic and foreign opponents, reinforcing many of that
state's negative tendencies, especially the unwillingness to have shared responsible
government develop.
Thank you.
