Confronting Parliament at the outset, Bismarck suggested that Prussia's destiny would not
be determined, quote, by speeches and majority decisions, but by blood and iron, unquote.
Claiming raison d'etat reason of state in his stalemate with the parliamentary liberals,
Bismarck successfully collected taxes without consent, further enraging his opponents, who
complied nonetheless, paying their taxes, enabling the military expansion and reorganization
to continue, and at that point many questioned how deeply liberal were the German liberals,
and this is a very debatable issue.
If the same thing had happened in Britain, and certainly in France, there would have
been barricades, there were no barricades in Prussia at that moment, and if there had
been, I think Bismarck would have put them down.
Bismarck then involved Prussia in three successive interconnected wars, each one progressively
wider and each one progressively more successful.
Having placated Russia during its suppression in 1863 of rebellion in Poland, then therefore
assuring Prussia that Russia would continue to stay out, Bismarck joined Austria in a popular
war against Denmark, who was foolishly attempting to tighten its control over the largely disputed
Germanic territories of Schleswig and Holstein.
Thereafter, having reached agreement with Napoleon III in October 1865, much as Kovor
did with Napoleon III at Plombierre in 1858, reaching an alliance with Italy as well in
April 1866, Bismarck then provoked war with Austria and the other members of the Confederation,
look at his mechanism, with a call for a German national assembly based on universal male
suffrage.
In other words, he uses nationalism and constitutionalism, throws down the gauntlet right on top of
them provoking a war.
More rapidly mobilizing and with greater railroads, Prussian forces defeated the smaller German
states quickly and then bested the Austrians at the Battle of Sedala or Königsgrat in
July of 1866.
The Austrians were beaten but they were not destroyed.
The Prussian army and the Prussian king wanted to continue, Bismarck said no, wisely compelling
his generals and King Wilhelm I to forego a possibly difficult but potentially glorious
conquest of Vienna.
For fear of what Napoleon III might do, Bismarck imposed a one-sided but not draconian peace
on the Austrians, the former Germanic allies.
Now again, this is important, Bismarck would later say he already had in mind that he would
go to war with the French and so he needed to pacify Austria.
He was even more concerned, it seems, as to what Napoleon III was going to do at that
moment because if the Prussian troops got bogged down in the siege of Vienna, Napoleon
could have mediated and forced the Prussians to give the French the promised gains on
France's border such as Luxembourg or more and Napoleon III would have ended up being
the arbiter of the Prussian-Austrian conflict.
Instead, Bismarck was going to be the arbiter of conflict both with Austria and then later
with France.
Accepting the abolition of the Germanic Confederation, Austria now agreed to exclude itself from
the affairs of Germany proper.
Within Germany proper, the North German states were either annexed or compelled to enter
a North German Confederation, under Prussian domination, under Prussian constitutional
structures, but not including universal male suffrage for elections.
The South German states, including Bavaria, while nominally independent, were placed
under a kind of moderate Prussian tutelage, especially in terms of their defense and foreign
policy.
