Bismarck then welshed on whatever promises of compensation he had earlier made to Napoleon
III, saying that the German people would never accept a session of further territory,
and Bismarck's troops are already in the field and the Napoleons are not mobilized,
so Napoleon is humiliated.
In fact, the French realized that they were also humiliated at the Battle of Sedowa.
The Battle of Sedowa is not only a defeat for the Austrians, but a defeat for the French
because a radical increase in Prussian power diminishes French power even if it doesn't
change.
It's comparative.
Having accomplished this, Bismarck finally goaded the hapless and unprepared French into
war in July 1870, editing the famous F.M.'s dispatch to make it look like a real rebuke
to the French, while German and mainly Prussian armies defeated the French at the Battle of
Sedowa in September, and finally not only besieged, but occupied Paris in January of 1871.
Following the proclamation of the new German Empire, the southern German states joined
under similar conditions as the northern German states had in 1867, following the proclamation
of the German Empire in January 1871 of, in all places, the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles,
again a slight an insult to the French, Bismarck imposed what for that era was a relatively
Punic peace on France in the Treaty of Frankfurt in May of 1871.
The strategic and wealthy provinces of Alsace and part of Lorraine were annexed by the German
Empire, and indeed they were placed directly under the control of the German Empire.
The Kaiser, we're talking about Strasbourg, Colmar, Obechne, all those exquisite little
villages, and all of those magnificent vineyards, which also are a wonderful invasion route.
A considerable indemnity was imposed on France, and German forces were to occupy French territory
until it was paid off, which was done by the French in 1873 much earlier than was expected,
much to Bismarck's surprise and indeed to his unhappiness.
Following the Prussian victory over Austria, Bismarck's use of nationalism against liberalism
had already yielded fruit.
In the fall of 1866, the Prussian Parliament, including most of the liberals, indemnified
the government and Bismarck for the collection of taxes illegally and even granting Bismarck
an additional estate for his efforts on behalf of Prussia and Germany.
They admitted that he was right and they were wrong, and his breaking of the law was valid
because of raison d'etat and national necessity.
Bismarck's ruthless but brilliant policies largely accomplished both his domestic and
foreign policy agendas, but were pregnant with potentially dire consequences for Germany
and for Europe. To use once again what I did before the gendered language of the time, Europe
had lost a mistress France and gained a master Germany.
In his radical change in the European balance of power, as has occurred, as had occurred
since France defeated the Habsburg forces in the mid 17th century, the German Empire had
replaced France as the dominant power on the continent.
Moreover, although the French were bound to resent this change and to seek redress if possible,
the annexation of Alsace, Lorraine poured salt on an open wound making war in the future
more likely. Again.
