Lecture 16, Age of Bismarck, Creating the German Empire
Having done our very best to analyze the very, very complicated structure of the Germanies
and their relationship with Austria from the early modern period and even before until
the middle of the 19th century, we turn today most of all to that individual who really helped
clarify the situation, either for the good or for the bad and in some ways for both.
That is, Otto von Bismarck, who created the German Empire.
Ironically, the turn of events that brought Bismarck to power, leading to a showdown between
Prussia and Austria in Germany and over Germany, began during a constitutional crisis in Prussia,
which almost led to the resignation of King Wilhelm I.
Somewhat similar to what would happen in France in the mid-1860s, where liberals in parliament
were unwilling to vote increased taxes for the expansion and the reorganization of the army,
in France the French and Prussia the Prussian, preferring a greater role for civilian militia,
the king found himself in a quandary just as Napoleon III did.
Unable to increase his electoral support even though he tried, Wilhelm II was finally
convinced by General von Ruhn to appoint confrontational Arch-Conservative Bismarck as Prime Minister
of Prussia, hoping to break the impasse and even to save his monarchy.
The king had promised to observe the Constitution limited and disagreeable, though it was, and
he would not break his word.
He would allow Bismarck to do it for him.
This was a sign of near desperation since Bismarck, although more recently having served
as ambassador, Prussian ambassador to Russia and to France, had been revoked in 1859 from
his ambassadorship at the Germanic Confederation for fear that he would provoke a war with
Austria which Wilhelm did not seek and in fact did not want.
Sharing many of the deeply conservative beliefs of his Junker aristocratic peers and equally
loyal to the Prussian monarchy and to the prerogatives of the Junker aristocrats, Bismarck was an
ideologue.
Bismarck had come to believe that Germany was simply too small for both Austria and
Prussia.
In 1848 he had actually favored what Austria had done, but when Austria tried to centralize
the Confederation, Bismarck would have none of it.
However, more broadly educated, mostly by his mom, brilliant, opportunistic, ruthless
and daring, Bismarck was prepared to harness the constitutional and the nationalist forces
of the age in order to glorify Prussia and its monarch to preserve aristocratic power
and to limit that very constitutionalism that he purported to use.
In other words, this man was so fundamentally intelligent that he understood the deepest
forces of the age, but he also figured out over time how to turn them against his enemies
and away from himself and his class, the Junkers.
As the wonderful British historian W. N. Medlikot has indicated, he was a man of instinctive
violence saved only by his intelligence, so that intelligence balanced the violence somewhat
and Medlikot then adds, the single dominating impulse throughout his career was the exercise
of power.
Although often scurrying defeat and as with Kavor, functioning more as a brilliant tactician
than as a grand strategist between 1862 and 1871, now Bismarck lived long enough to write
his memoirs in which he retold that story mostly falsely, pretending that he had managed
everything long in advance, but really he was an incredible tactician.
Bismarck mastered his domestic opponents and vested both the Austrians and the French radically
changing the European balance of power.
