On another occasion, he said, no government can be long secure without a formidable opposition.
Can you imagine Bismarck saying the same thing, although Bismarck ruling Germany at that time
very, very much respected Israeli as Israeli respected Bismarck.
Assuing laissez-faire in the face of the obvious need for more government regulation,
in 1875 alone, conservative Israeli passed legislation dealing with public health issues,
housing, a food and drug act, conditions for semen, and he also liberalized laws concerning
trade unions, including the right to strike and the right to pick it.
Now again, let's step back and challenge our understanding of politics from our 21st
or 20th century vantage point.
Conservatives in the 19th century who were not wedded to laissez-faire, sometimes were
far more paternalistic and believed in more government intervention than did liberals.
And this was surely a great reforming era, just as the previous six years under Gladstone
had been a great era in the expansion of the democratization of the process.
Unfortunately, Israeli then shifted his attention to foreign policy, becoming one of the great
apostles of renewed British imperialism, symbolized by the purchase of the Suez Canal from Egypt
in 1875, and by many of his most Churchillian speeches on behalf of imperialism, some of
which you'll hear when we talk about imperialism in a few commentaries from today.
Now so we have the greats, the liberal Gladstone, the quote-unquote conservative Israeli, I don't
really consider him to be conservative at all, but what about that sub-set of the local
areas coming from the Municipal Corporations Act of 1835, straddling the ministries of
Gladstone and Israeli in the 1870s was the dynamic and creative mayoralty of radical
Joseph Chamberlain in Birmingham, one of those new industrial cities which was growing beyond
all bounds.
Made possible by the 1835 Municipal Corporations Act, which had liberated cities from the centralized
control of London and also democratized them, and again, it couldn't have happened in France
because in France everything had to go through Paris, and would continue to have to go through
Paris until Mitran changed this in the 1980s, Birmingham's Chamberlain pioneered in numerous
forms of social and urban legislation, making Birmingham more livable for the poor and for
others as well, and bringing Chamberlain national recognition.
How about some public sewage, for example, and how about public lighting in modern urban
areas?
In some sense, what he was able to do locally is what Roosevelt did in New York before the
New Deal, testing pioneering thinking and then going to the national level and trying to
carry these things out on a wider scale, already having tried them out on a more local
scale, reducing again the issue of collateral damage.
The combined careers of Gladstone, Disraeli and Chamberlain represents the extent to which
a liberal constitutional bourgeois industrial Britain was beginning to make the transition
to a mass democracy with a modern, stable, two-party system of government.
The aristocracy still had plenty of power, and they would continue to be important for
a very, very long time in government, society, culture, sports, and everything else, but
they were not overwhelmed, and on some level, they went along with good humor.
And this is one of the things that differentiates the British experience from the experience
of most of the other states we've been talking about.
Thank you.
Have a good day.
