Beside the sheer wonder of the material and scientific and industrial prowess, this expo
represented the faith in hard work and progress so characteristic of mid-nineteenth century
England, especially in this self-satisfied Victorian era.
And it was so self-satisfied that many thought they didn't have to go any further in terms
of their reforms, although they would soon find out otherwise.
As an editorialist in the London Times indicated, quote, when we refer to a few events of this
kind, we become convinced that the half-century just elapsed is more full of wonders than
any other record.
And in many ways that was indeed true, especially for Britain.
It was a powerful half-century of development.
It was perhaps also the crowning era of the smug doctrine of self-help popularized by
Samuel Smiles, Britain's Horatio Alger in a sense in his writing, and also by Viscount
Robert Palmerston in his belief that in foreign affairs, liberal Britain could do no wrong.
Now it is also instructive that Samuel Smiles, the doctrine of self-help, later came to understand
that some government intervention was necessary when conditions called for it.
So again, people take positions and then they modify these positions in face of fact or
perceived fact.
Still, Britain was also blessed with such unusual public reformers as Richard Cobden
and John Bright, while philosopher John Stuart Mill, whose career shifted from laissez-faire
liberalism to a belief in popular democracy, including equality for women in voting and
in divorce and in property rights, then shifted to favor more responsible social welfare and
produced one of the great political tracts of the 19th century on liberty in 1859.
I've always said, if a Martian came to earth and wanted to know what free speech was about,
I would still give that person Mills Pamphlet, 1859, on liberty.
The claims of reformers combined with the logic of the incomplete nature of the reform
bill of 1832, in the context of a maturing urban industrial society whose quote unquote
superior aristocratic and upper middle class elites looked rather insipid during Britain's
poor performance during the Crimean War, produced yet another surge of remarkable
reform from the mid 1860s to the mid 1870s under the aegis of two equally remarkable,
though very, very different political leaders, William E. Gladstone and Benjamin Disraeli.
And it's interesting that the Crimean War and Britain's performance in that Crimean
War, as well as the American Civil War, were going to have this kind of impact because
in the American Civil War, that actually referred debate to Britain about the structure
and nature of its own politics.
During the popular turmoil and the parliamentary debates surrounding the passing of this second
reform bill of 1867, which enfranchised the rest of the middle class and most of the workers
and also led to a further redistricting and equalizing of these voting districts, liberal
party leader Gladstone and conservative party leader Disraeli both sought to get out in
front of the pack, partially in order to get credit for an idea whose time had come.
Under the passage of the reform bill of 1832, conservatives and those against it had said
you're letting the mob come in and govern and we're going to have turmoil and collapse.
It didn't happen. Now it was time to catch up with yet another 30 years of industrial
urban development and education. And there were, again, those who said this is really
going to open the floodgates. And you can follow the parliamentary debates and these
ideas are articulated as clearly as possible. Those who think reform has come and will not
do any damage and those who are terrified that this is a step into the void and one
will never know what is going to happen.
