The peculiar nature of British history, at least from the time of the Vienna settlement in 1815,
until the last decades of the 19th century when mass society became a reality,
can best be examined by analyzing a representative sample of historical developments,
significant statespeople, emphasizing the concept of more efficient change and adjustment over time
with less violence and less disruption.
Let's make it clear, there was violence, there was disruption, and much of the change that occurred,
occurred because the elites did not want to face more violence and more disruption,
but almost alone they were able to perceive that among the other European states, the large states,
and to get out in front of the pack,
and to bring the more conservative elites with them even by forcing to overwhelm them
by having the kings create more peers if necessary, and the king collaborated in that process.
Although more people, including scholars, are aware of the nearly unique success of the reform bill of 1832,
which gave most of the middle class voting rights and more fairly redistributed voting constituencies
so that there wouldn't be the so-called rotten or pocket barrows in which aristocrats could determine the votes,
a number of other pre-1848 developments are of nearly equal importance,
and one still has to remember that that 1832 reform bill still only left one-sixth of the British men able to vote.
Following the emancipation of Catholics in 1829 and some greater political rights for Jews immediately thereafter,
based on Christian oaths, Jews could not sit in Parliament until the mid-1840s or in the House of the Lords until the mid-1880s,
and that's a story in and of itself because Israeli, Benjamin Disraeli, converted but still very, very much Jewish culturally,
won the heart of Queen Victoria, who finally removed her opposition to having Jews sit in the House of the Lords.
The wealthy political elite, probably aware that change would eventually go further,
co-opted the greater part of the middle class in 1832.
As the great Whig historian and statesman Thomas Babington Macaulay explained during this historical debate,
this was a quote-unquote practical question, and quote, we drive over to the force of revolution those whom we keep out of political power.
And what he meant by that, those who we keep out from political power who deserve to share that political power,
so Macaulay wasn't ready to pass universal male suffrage because the rest of the men were not ready as far as he was concerned
to play their role as active citizens. However, in theory certainly, when they would have become ready to play that role,
the ball would have continued to roll forward. Macaulay made it clear in his speech that he was speaking for the nation,
not for any one particular class or elite, the monarchy existed for the nation and the needs of the nation were primary.
This was followed in 1835 with the Municipal Corporations Act, which allowed and fostered more complete and independent local government,
further encouraging and expanding an experienced political elite, greater experimentation based on local conditions.
In a word, more intelligent government and more freedom. My thesis advisor, wonderful individual named Henry Winkler used to say,
this was equal to the Reform Bill of 1832 because this made it possible for larger and larger numbers of people to be trained locally before they would go on to the national stage.
And we will see how that works with Joseph Chamberlain from Birmingham later in the course of these comments.
From the 1830s until the mid-1840s, amidst live public debate, mass meetings that sometimes got out of control, demonstrations,
the Chartist Movement and the Anti-Corn Law League, for example, the aptly named Victorian compromise occurred.
And what the Chartist Movement and the Anti-Corn Law League represented was a very, very live, what we would now call civil society,
the development of a live civil society in which intellectual elites and political elites spoke to masses of people,
while educating them in these large demonstrations and using their power to educate the elites in power to make them recognize that change was necessary.
