Lecture 17, The British Way.
Good morning.
Having spent the last five encounters dealing with France, Italy and Germany, we begin two
sessions on the bookends of Europe, as I've called them, liberal Britain in the West and
more conservative and authoritarian Russia in the East.
Although the 19th century, 19th century Britons as a group committed their fair share of special
sins such as the miserable treatment of the working class, the repulsive, even if unintentional
genocide of the Irish during the potato famine from the mid-1840s to the early 1850s, the
harsh and sometimes soulless treatment of people of color in the British Empire and elsewhere,
their slow recognition of equal rights for women, and even either off even their arrogant
and self-righteous view of the rest of the world, the 19th century was very much their
century, the 19th century was very much the British century, and they had much to celebrate
and much about which to be proud.
As indicated earlier, their economic system already in the late 18th century was the most
variegated and dynamic in the world, giving them an industrial lead they would maintain
until the eve of World War I.
Their political system, too, was structurally the most well-balanced and stable, allowing
for the possibility of change without violent revolution, sometimes too slowly, usually
too slowly, but also with less risk of severe error or collateral damage.
Undoubtedly, largely because of these two factors, as well as Britain's larger history
of shared governance and her relatively larger middle class, which experienced somewhat of
a more fluid relationship with the British aristocracy, the British were blessed with
the relatively large and ever-changing political leadership elite, often pragmatic in nature,
which was also one of the marvels of the century.
Over the long run, in a general way, if the Prussian upper middle class was in some manner
feudalized taking on some of the norms and worldviews of the aristocracy, the smaller
British aristocracy over the long run was somewhat bourgeoisified and merged with the
nation.
Even during the wars of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic era, which probably delayed
further political reform in Britain by frightening conservative elites, the British often stood
alone against Napoleon, almost as they would later do against Adolf Hitler, in both cases
fortunately for them with the Russians.
Even the so-called British conservative philosopher and statesman Edmund Burke was more pragmatic
and realistic than many a continental liberal, and the same was true for many British conservatives
throughout the rest of the 19th century.
What many Brits were trying to conserve were rights and freedoms most continental Europeans
would not achieve until the second half of the 19th century, such as relative freedom
of speech, press, religion, fair trial, promulgated known law, and protection against inconsiderate
or unduly harsh government, and so that even during the French Revolution when there was
a tightening up, the British were still trying to conserve those basic British liberties
and conservative Burke would have been very liberal on the continent.
