Although Disraeli finally got credit and succeeded in passing the bill, again, conservative
Disraeli passes this liberal bill, the liberals will return to office in 1868, making possible
the first great Gladstone ministry from 1868 to 1874.
Gladstone was to live longer than Disraeli and he was to return in power several times
as we're going to see in the future.
An easily caricatured, moralistic, non-conformist humanitarian, and by non-conformist we mean
he's not a member of the Anglican church, the majority church, he is Protestant but
non-conformist, who had a strong belief in laissez-faire government.
Gladstone had also come to believe in honest, open, fair-minded liberal democracy, including
equality of opportunity.
Still eschewing needed factory legislation, not passing factory legislation, because this
involves state regulation in which he did not really believe, Gladstone helped really
democratize Britain, although, again, we have to remember, even with the second reform
bill, now we have only one third of the male population that can vote.
He ended religious tests for university degrees, especially at Oxford and Cambridge, and I
can remember walking under the panels of the universities of Oxford and Cambridge and saying
posted at the time of Jewish holidays, statements saying those observing the Jewish holidays
can take their exams the following other days so they don't have to attend classes.
He expanded state aid for education, passed an omnibus civil service act in 1870, including
military reform, now even the aristocrats have to take civil service tests, it's a merit
system, if you're going to have a democracy you should have a merit system, you have
to have careers open to talent, you have to have some kind of equal access, and a secret
ballot act in 1872.
Now this is interesting because there were some people who were liberal and democratic
who were not for a secret ballot, they said you have to have the guts to express your
voice openly or you shouldn't have the right to vote, but we all realize that in certain
times the influence that can be placed upon people voting if it's not a secret ballot
really takes away the validity of their vote.
In a further portent of what was yet to come Gladstone courageously attacked the problem
of Ireland.
Disestablishing the Anglican Protestant Church in 1869, Catholics were forced to pay tithes
to the Anglican church in Ireland and passing a moderate land reform act in 1870 giving
some protection to poor Catholic tenant farmers, fixity of tenure and reasonable rates of payment.
This is the beginning of a sincere attempt on the part of Gladstone which he would continue
for the rest of his political career to attack the problem of Ireland so Ireland could remain
a part of England.
It was too little, too late, but it redounds to the glory of the British political system
that someone risked his office and stood up and continuously tried to attack this issue
which we will discuss in the future more so as well.
Developing a more modern national party apparatus while in opposition, conservative party leader
Benjamin Disraeli formed a government in 1874 remaining in office until 1880.
A converted but very recognizable Jew and a first-rate novelist especially sensitive
with respect to the plight of the poor in his novels, Disraeli's novels really parallel
Dickens novels at the same time.
Disraeli's more modern conservatism was apparent in a number of his speeches and in a number
of his policies.
Let's listen to his voice for a moment.
In 1867 he maintained change is inevitable.
In a progressive country change is constant.
Now again we're talking about the leader of the conservative party.
