His successors would play a major role, therefore, in deciding Russia's fate.
They could have gone further in his earlier direction, and the fate of Russia might have been very, very different.
Instead, the next two czars returned powerfully to the triad of autocracy, orthodoxy, and Russification,
virtually consistently until forced to change that somewhat by the revolution that broke out in 1904-1905
during Russia's defeat in the Russo-Japanese War.
But Russia's fate, Russia's karma, was not yet decided at this time.
There were real choices that could have been made, and Alexander II at least set his society in the right direction
more powerfully than any other Russian monarch considered doing at any other court part of the 19th century.
Well, at this point, we've actually gotten through the second segment of our course,
and we're going to begin with the apogee of Europe 1870-1914 next time.
It would be worthwhile and useful to step back and see where we are and where we have come from.
We came from the time period of the French Revolution, the Napoleonic experience,
and the early Industrial Revolution in Great Britain, which then finally spread to western and central sectors of the continent
after 1830 and in the 1840s.
We saw harvest failure and urban distress and nationalist and constitutionalist pressures
building up in the wake of the French and Industrial Revolutions
and in the wake of growing urbanization and the expansion of literacy
break out during the revolutions of 1848 only to be repressed in almost all areas,
whereas in Prussia and in Piedmont, at least, a constitution was not only given but maintained.
We saw the curious rise to power of Napoleon III in France.
His powerful domestic policies implemented in the 1850s and the 1860s,
leading to the construction of a liberal empire,
but we also saw the devastation he wreaked on France itself
through unnecessary and excessive foreign policy adventures,
which were taken advantage of by more capable European statesmen Kavor in Piedmont and Bismarck in Prussia,
leading to the quote-unquote unification of Italy and the creation of a unitary Italian state
between 1859 and 1870 and the even more significant Prussian expansion over the rest of Germany,
especially during a war against Austria in 1866 and then a war against France in 1870-71,
leading to the creation of the German Empire, which became the strongest power in Europe,
and then began an even more rapid industrial takeoff.
We saw a process of more evolutionary and generally successful reform in Great Britain,
politically, constitutionally, on a national level, on a local level,
based on prior industrialization and economic development,
in which, by the middle of the century, Britain was really producing in heavy industry
as much as all the rest of Europe combined,
and I think you could throw in the United States in it and it wouldn't make any difference.
And today we saw the attempted adjustment of Tsarist Russia to the lag in modernization
that put it to such great shame during that Crimean War after it defeated Turkey,
only to be defeated by Britain and France in 1854, 1855, and 1866.
I hope all of this prepares us well to engage in the next exciting segment of this European adventure
Europe from 1870 to 1914, which we will turn to next time.
Thank you. Have a wonderful day.
