By far, the most important reform was the emancipation of the nearly 50 million serfed peasants.
Disgust and a special assembly of notables in 1856 and implemented between 1861 and 1863.
Now let's remember what took place before the French Revolution in 1787,
another assembly of notables that got out of control,
but here there was an assembly of notables that realized they were facing the wall
and they needed to do something about it.
This emancipation fell short of total emancipation,
since the peasants' commune, called the Mir,
was collectively responsible for government loans used to repay the nobles
for the segment of their land given to the peasants.
To better believe, the nobles got the better segment,
the peasants got the lesser segment and then they had to take out loans and repay those loans
so they couldn't initially just leave the local commune
because they had to support the commune so it could pay back the loans to the government.
But some could and did leave and this made possible a larger urban labor force
which was part of the understanding of the whole emancipation.
Russia had to industrialize.
Russia had cottage industry and cottage industry in the countryside was expanding
but that's not the same as what was happening in London and Paris and Vienna and Prague.
They had to catch up.
This was the essential dilemma of attempts to reform Russia then and thereafter,
including more recently.
Any substantial changes were bound to come at the expense of the very elites
who supported the regime and yet some changes had to come for Russia to modernize.
Still as John Merriman indicates and I hope you know who John Merriman is quite well
because it's the major textbook that we're thinking about using for this course,
John Merriman indicates this was surely the largest single radical social policy
implemented anywhere in the 19th century in Europe and far greater in scope
than the emancipation of American slaves during the Civil War
and moreover it occurred without a revolution but it did occur after a lost war.
Other substantial reforms included the establishment of rural councils
or Zemstvils in 1864 and urban councils or Dumas in 1870.
Remember the aristocrats had virtual political control over life and limb
wherever they domained and the emancipation of the serfs requires something to be put
in place of the vacuum left by removing that total aristocratic local control.
So we have local government for the first time in the countryside Zemstvils
and then even in some urban areas Dumas the beginning of the development
of a more modernized political culture or civil culture.
Then in 1864 came a statute reforming the judicial system,
giving Russia a judicial system roughly equal to what England had achieved
more than a century and a half ago in 1688, 1689.
So from 1861 to 1863 came the proclamation and then the implementation
of the emancipation of the serfs and that was followed with the judicial form
that also was of such great importance.
Let's hear the Tsar's voice also for a moment.
Summon to the throne of our ancestors by divine providence and the sacred law of heredity
we have promised ourselves with heartfelt sincerity to extend our affection
and imperial solicitude to all our faithful subjects.
And then comes the talk of the edict followed by,
and now my orthodox and faithful people make the holy sign of the cross
and join their prayers to ours invoking the blessing of the Most High
upon thy first free labors for this alone is a sure pledge of private well-being
and the public wheel.
The authority still came from above and authority was still supplemented
by the authority of religion undergirding the whole system.
