The Tsar also carried out significant reforms in secondary education and in university education,
as well as in the military, while railroads and banking were also expanded.
Now that was going to be somewhat limited because Russia didn't have sufficient capital
to do that right away, and it would do it in a much more radical way at the end of the
19th century under a more conservative Tsar, but under clear pressure from the outside
with loans coming from the West and mainly from the French.
Significantly, much of this legislation applied to Jews as well, some of whom were now permitted
to move into the interior of urban areas, including even Moscow and St. Petersburg,
while the most egregious anti-Jewish laws, including doubly burdensome forms of military
conscription, both in numbers and in length of service, were abrogated.
Well, you might ask yourself, where did those Jews get into Russia?
That was another one of those ironic twists of history.
When Russia annexed Eastern Poland in annexed a part of the world that happened to have
the largest number of Jews living anywhere at that time, and there were only about two
million or so in Europe at that time in the end of the 18th century, Russia got the largest
share, Germany got a share, or Prussia got a share, and Austria got a share.
So now Russia found itself not only governing Poles who were continuously rebellious and
wanting their independence, but Jews as well who they couldn't get rid of, so instead they
repressed and repressed severely until Alexander II's reign when there was a temporary respite.
During all of these reforms, the Tsar still maintained ultimate power, including even
judicial, and this is different from Britain, because the Tsar could overturn or hardened
verdicts if you wish to.
The police and the military were strengthened, so it was the carrot and the stick, which is
good government actually, and Russia expanded its borders into Eastern Siberia, abutting
China into Muslim Central Asia, north of Persia, and continued to press in on the Ottoman Empire
in another Russo-Turkish war in 1877 and 1878, in which Russia lost the fruits of its victory
because the British and the Austrians forced it to divulge them.
Here we go, it's a repeat of the Crimean War, and we'll talk more about that when we deal
with the era of Bismarckian diplomacy, because Bismarck played the honest broker calling
the Congress of Berlin in 1878 at which the British and the Austrians supported when necessary
by Bismarck forced the Russians to divulge the gains they had made in finally defeating
Turkey in 1878.
Although the pace of reform was slowed by a rebellion that broke out in Poland in 1863
and repressed brutally, and by an attempted assassination of the Tsar shortly thereafter,
as well as by the growth of Pan-Slavic nationalist sentiment, which tended to be rather conservative
as well, and this was expressed even more fully during the Russo-Turkish war, 1877 to
1878, Tsar Alexander II had abolished the worst of Russia's secret police agencies,
and was apparently considering some form of national parliamentary structure when he
was assassinated by the revolutionary or terrorist organization, the People's Will, in 1881.
And they made it clear why they had done it also because they wanted more and quicker,
and that was part of the essential difficulty and tension that the regime was in.
That is what wanted less, and radicals wanted more, and the Tsar was caught in the middle.
Although much obviously remained to be done, much actually had been achieved under Alexander
II, and scholars disagree over how much more he could have done versus how much he actually
did given the constraints he was facing, but much had been achieved.
