A multinational, multi-religious, and multi-racial empire inherently because of all of this expansionism,
Russia had no experience in liberalism or intoleration either on the religious or the ethnic front with the Tsars
who came to head both church and state spreading orthodoxy and Russification and repressing minorities nearly everywhere whenever they could.
Significantly, although Russia experienced internal religious conflict within orthodoxy,
she was not part of the European Renaissance that we've discussed.
She did not have a reformation that we've discussed or even the scientific revolution of the 17th century,
at least not until the pivotal reign of Tsar Peter the Great from 1682 to 1725.
Curious and concerned that Russia was falling behind the West,
the huge Peter initially traveled widely incognito in the West the better to centralize his power and to defeat foreign and domestic enemies.
Returning home and carrying out tasks of modernization with great success,
Peter moved his capital from the interior of Moscow to the newly constructed city of St. Petersburg, his window on the West.
However, anticipating the policy of later Tsars,
Peter sought only the material and scientific secrets of the West,
not its modernizing political ideology.
He had no interest in bringing back John Locke's liberal philosophy to Russia.
He forced secularized westernization on the Russian elites where it was necessary in terms of dress and shaving.
He harnessed the spiritual power of the Orthodox Church behind his throne,
and in a sense he did harass it as well, further increasing the power of the monarchy
and centralizing the structure of the state which expanded on all fronts.
This represented a general pattern of forced change from above with occasional violence revolt from below,
almost always repressed with great brutality, and this was to become central to Russia's history henceforth.
Since there was little built-in flexibility or balance in Russia's political culture
or in its social structure.
Indeed, very much a bridge between Europe and Asia and a land of enormous contrasts.
Russia did not become a permanent member of the European balance of power until the mid-18th century
during the wars of Frederick the Great and thereafter during the partitions of Poland that we've discussed so frequently.
Still, prior to the Industrial Revolution in the West, the huge state was enormously powerful,
singly defeating Napoleon's Grand Army with the help of Generals Winter and General Space
and the guerrilla activity on the part of Russians.
Playing a powerful central role to Congress of Vienna, Russia was feared by many European elites,
even conservative ones, as the potentially next European hegemonic dominant power.
As a result of Russia's delayed industrialization and overall modernization,
they were only 150 years early in their predictions.
Indeed, de Tocqueville, who we mentioned so frequently in the 1830s,
predicted that Russia and the United States would become the two superpowers in the future.
Between 1815 and 1917, the overall policies of Russian czars were usually autocracy,
orthodoxy and Russian nationalism, with the exception of part of the regime of Alexander II,
the most liberal czar of the century, who ruled between 1855 and 1881.
