Although Alexander I from 1801 to 1825 was somewhat mystical and romantic and flirted
with liberal and constitutional ideas at first, also coaxing the other great powers, except
for Great Britain, to enter his holy alliance, his aristocratic advisors kept him on a traditional
path, opposing constitutional and national change nearly everywhere, except in the case
of Greece's rebellion against the Ottoman Empire, a rebellion of Christians against
Muslims.
His son Nicholas I's regime began inauspiciously with what is known as the Decembrist Revolt
in 1825.
Let's hear the voice of some people who took part in that revolt.
Indeed, it was a portent of what it was to come as the union of Tsar, autocracy and church
and serfs slowly broke down during the course of the century.
This revolt came from young military elites who had seen the superior quality of life
in the West and thirsted for change in Russia.
Let's hear their voice.
As one of the revolutionaries wrote to a general in the army while he was already in prison,
the people have conceived the sacred truth that they do not exist for governments, but
that governments must be organized for them.
He continues.
The United States will shine as an example even to distant generations.
He continues.
The revolution in France shook all the thrones of Europe.
Yet a second wrote to the Tsar directly before execution, did we free Europe in order to
be ourselves placed in chains?
Did we grant a constitution in France in order that we dare not talk about it?
And did we buy at the price of blood, priority among nations in order that we might be humiliated
at home?
If you think about what they really said, they understood what the French Revolution and
the American Revolution meant.
They are the ones who on behalf of Russia had saved Russia's person and they came home
to what?
Think of African American Vietnam veterans coming home to what if you want to remember
what that tension felt like some decades ago.
Thoroughly repressed, this revolt further set Russia's course on severe autocracy, orthodoxy,
and Russian nationalism, earning Russia the hatred of European liberals, especially when
she served as Europe's policeman during the revolutions of 1848.
Still, the West was modernizing and Russia was not modernizing very much.
Russia's ignominious and unexpected shocking defeat during the Crimean War from 1853 to
1856 highlighted Russia's material inferiority and also the sulleness of its peasant masses
who did not wish to serve.
And this brought matters to a head, a pattern that would be repeated during the Russo-Japanese
War in 1904, 1905, and repeated again during World War I when the war finally pushed the
regime over the edge, causing it to collapse.
Combined with the growing awareness of much of literate and literary opinion that serfdom
had to end, defeat in war and the lucky ascendance of a more liberal Tsar Alexander II to the
throne allowed Russia to enter an era of serious reform, even if it turned out not to be sufficiently
far-reaching.
And it's not as though Russia didn't have great novelists and great social critics and
great literary revolutionaries who were pushing the throne in this direction as well as literate
aristocrats who understood what was going on in the rest of the world.
