The Middle East, most of which still remain nomally a part of the Ottoman Empire, was the only large region of the world in which Europe expanded further after World War I, with the collapse of the Ottoman Empire during and after World War I.
Prior to that time, Europeans had already come to control Algeria, Tunisia, and Morocco, and Tripoli, Libya today, and Egypt, parts of Syria, Lebanon, but the core areas of the Middle East were not under European control yet.
They were under the control of the Ottoman Empire, and even most of these other areas still theoretically had shared authority with the Ottoman Empire.
Although Europeans and Japan came to control more of the periphery of China during this era, as well as other large parts of Southeast Asia, and even to make extensive inroads into its interior,
a greater collapse of China was actually prevented by the powers checkmating each other at the turn of the century, and then by the beginning of a more effective Chinese proto-nationalist resistance in the Boxer Rebellion 1899 and 1901,
and then more effectively by Dr. Suniat Sen's nationalist movement, the Gomondang in 1911 and after. But the greater reality was that the European powers checkmated each other, and therefore agreed not to move even further into the central parts of China,
and the most important aspect of that actually was Japan checkmating Russia in the Russo-Japanese War.
Returning to Europe proper, in many respects, the 1870-1914 era witnessed a spread and intensification of developments already underway in the 1850-1870 era.
There was, between these two time periods, more continuity than there was radical change, although the intensification in the 1870-plus era did signify indeed radical change, but radical change of the same type.
This was truly the era in which the second industrial era took off, quote-unquote, in a sense, changing the European environment in very dramatic ways. Not overnight, but more overnight than ever before.
In other words, each of these eras of modernization would accelerate and deepen, and in this last one it came to effect almost everyone who lived in industrialized, modernized societies, and also most people or many people who lived in less modern societies.
This was an era of steam and steel, but also of telegraphs and telephones, and at the end, in the late 1890s, of silent movies, an era of electricity and chemicals, and then oil.
During this era, science and industry merged, and modern technology, including research and development, was born, and Germany took a lead in much of this.
So too was the beginning of what later might be referred to as a kind of military-industrial complex in which the military and the upper industrialists have similar interests and work together and determine a good segment of the course of a nation's economic policy.
An era of rapid urbanization, and especially of large cities, it was the era of industrial cartels, large unions, or the beginning of unions, defending a real industrial proletariat.
It was an era of more effective national integration. The active or positive state really began to come into its own in a world of mass society.
Now, ironically, again, our friend Bismarck, the conservative, is going to pioneer in the active state. Faced with the reality that more and more workers were voting socialist, and we'll discuss this in greater detail when we discuss Germany,
Bismarck came to recognize that either the state would be partly socialist or the socialists would take over the state, and he pioneered in sickness, accident, and old age insurance in the 1880s to beat the socialists and the Democrats and to try to maintain his control over the working classes.
