Nowhere was the combined impact of Darwinism and nationalism in a competitive state system
more prevalent than that of more noteworthy than in the frenetic European expansionism
known as the new imperialism from the 1880s until about 1905, as we've already signaled
a bit earlier and we will have one entire commentary on that and then go into its diplomatic
ramifications in even greater detail.
Not only a product of so many of the primary forces of the age, such as aggressive nationalism,
social Darwinism, racism, the struggle for preferential markets and raw materials, the
race for empire reinforced all of these tendencies in a kind of self-fulfilling prophecy made
all the more possible by the European technological edge which was now so overwhelming.
It was also a primary vehicle with which political elites used the spirit of nationalism, glory
and adventure, reported in the daily mass circulation press to reinforce their power,
making people's minds off of their own immediate problems and misfortunes and making them
believe that they were part of some collective majestic mission of greater importance than
their own petty existence.
And there were humanitarians who were part of this imperialism as well.
Scholars still debate whether imperialism was a primary cause of World War I or whether
it served as a kind of safety outlet for Europe's excess material and psychic energy, focusing
conflict outside of Europe where compromise at someone else's expense could always be
achieved.
Again more on this later.
Under any circumstances, imperialism certainly played a significant role in developing the
competitive alliance system, first instigated by Bismarck in the 1870s and 1880s, and in
the exacerbation of the arms race after 1900, particularly in the naval race between Britain
and Germany.
And we should remember that it was in 1890 that Admiral Thayer Mahon wrote a very, very
important book, The Influence of Sea Power on History, perhaps the most important naval
treatise of the 19th century, and it was an American who finally had something really
important to say, and Europeans read his book and took it very seriously.
A second major new theme or counter theme during this era, especially in the 1890s and
thereafter, was the growth of a type of neo-romantic reaction to the dominant, scientific, rationalist
material cultural assumptions since the 1850s, especially in the part of the younger, intellectual
and artistic avant-garde, which came to be known as the modernist movement.
As with earlier romanticism in the first half of the 19th century, it too stressed the centrality
of emotion, intuition, psychic energy, and the power of the subconscious, irrational
forces as opposed to, or merely as a corrective to, the previous positivist emphasis mandating
the dominance of science and reason, leading almost inedibly to progress.
You could almost have the commercial that we grew up with as children, better living
by DuPont.
That was mid-19th century positivism.
If it was scientific, it was true.
If it wasn't scientific, it was silly.
Well, here we have a corrective to that.
With names such as Nietzsche, Freud, Bergson, Durkheim, Einstein, Max Weber at play, we
are surely entering the modern world, a world in which all of us would find much more commonality.
Would we be transposed back to a modern European urban center in 1914?
This really would have been the first time that we would have felt somewhat at home.
