Because of all of these technological changes that had such dramatic impact in communications and in transportation,
the state could really for the first time take a census and know who lived in its territory and what were the conditions in different areas
and what could be done to improve those conditions in order to integrate the bulk of the populace behind the power of the nation-state.
Industrialism, which also spread eastward and southward, effectively reaching the Russian Empire in a larger measure in the 1890s,
also encouraged the spread of education and literacy in all of its forms.
Now in our time and indeed for the previous 50 years or so, education has been something that all new immigrants and even people well established
have felt to be absolutely essential to their families, to their children.
There were times in the 19th century when for many groups of people this was not so because the education of one's children beyond a certain point
meant that they would leave the family in a sense. Too much education disturbed tranquility and respect.
But by the last quarter of the 19th century, even among peasants, it was essential to have one's children learn how to read and write
so that they could do some of the things for the parents that the parents couldn't do for themselves because in many and indeed in most cases
the parents couldn't read and write and with a more technologically and market driven economy being able to read and write
knowing how to sign a contract and what it meant was essential. So the family came to support these changes sometimes to demand them.
Now think about what education means. We believe in America that we have a capitalist economy.
It's a moderate capitalist economy. It's a modified economy. The single most important thing to me in my life over time
beside my wife is my children. The state determines what my children will learn and when they will learn that.
That doesn't sound like laissez-faire to me. We lived in a mixed economy with a mixed society in which the state is so powerful
we just take it for granted. All of this was new in the second half of the 19th century in which the state began to determine
and to spread and to demand primary education free and for all and then by the end even elements of secondary education
and again that also determined the pace of modernization and integration of society. It was essential.
Leading to an enlarged middle class and even more rapidly growing working class and therefore to the further spread of universal male suffrage
in most industrialized states. The era also saw finally a considerable expansion of the legal and human rights for women
and a strong push for political rights as well and generally speaking the more liberal and democratic the society the more powerful the push
among women with some male support for those equal rights occurred. By the end of the century women in Great Britain could control their own person
if they got a divorce they had a chance to have control of the child. Prior to that time in the first half of the century a wife and a child
were basically forms of property with almost no independence whatsoever unless extreme and radical abuse occurred and even then you had to prove it.
Industrial capitalism and mass society also led to the rapid development of a variety of forms of socialism, Marxist and otherwise
and we'll spend an entire session on this and other even more violent forms of protest movements such as anarchism,
syndicalism or a combination of the two anarcho-syndicalism and remember this occurred on some level even in the United States
as President McKinley was assassinated at the turn of the century in this kind of circumstance.
