With the spread of social Darwinian concepts, struggle for survival and survival of the
fittest, not Darwin's term, but Herbert Spencer's term, who popularized much of Darwin, into
both the domains of national and class relations, the ideology of nationalism hardened and became
a more competitive zero-sum game.
For someone to win, someone else had to lose.
With the spread of scientific, quote-unquote, racism as a means of understanding life and
history as an ideology, as a worldview, nationalism and racism often fused both against external
and internal enemies, usually minorities.
Not only did this lead to deeply felt beliefs in racial superiority and in the right of
superior races to dominate, but in a series of pan-nationalist movements.
At the end of the 19th century, there was the pan-German movement, the belief that all
Germans, including those in Austria, and including some of those who had migrated into Eastern
Europe, should be part of one greater German state, Pan-Slavism.
The belief that all Slavs were brothers, and there should be one Pan-Slavic entity, perhaps
or at least Russia should aid all other brother Slavs.
There was even a movement of Anglo-Saxon solidarity, and at the end of the 19th century, Joseph
Chamberlain attempted to achieve a solidarity between Anglo-Saxons in England and America
and Tutans in Germany.
There was even a minor move for Latin solidarity between the French, the Spanish and the Italians,
which didn't go very far, but gee, everyone else was doing it, why not try that?
And of course, there was also the development of modern racial, political, anti-Semitism
throughout much of industrialized Europe.
And interestingly, the anti-Semitism in the Russian Empire, which was much more volatile
and pressing immediately, was far more of a traditional style, whereas in the modernized
area you get modern racial and political anti-Semitism, and we will talk more about that as well since
it was to have such a dramatic impact in the 20th century.
Even in the most benign liberal and democratic cases, states increasingly used symbols of
nationalism and patriotism as a means to integrate their populations, construct legitimacy and
forms of conformity in terms of laws, taxes, military obligations, not only through all
available public force, but especially in expanding primary and secondary education.
This is one of the main reasons why the states sought to oust control of education from the
churches during this era and to establish national patterns of curricula, determining
what students should learn.
This was very, very true in democratic republic in France after 1870.
If the church controlled education, which it already did in large part, the state feared,
the republicans feared, it would lead Frenchmen to be conservative and monarchical.
So the state had to teach democratic republican education and tried its best to do so, and
over time did largely accomplish that task.
The victory of Prussia over Austria and especially over France often perceived as a victory of
more secularized or modernized Protestantism over more traditional doctrinaire Catholicism,
and the continued centrality of science during this era heightened the battle over education
between church and state, especially in some Catholic countries, and generally put people
of faith on the defensive.
However, there was also some reconciliation during this time period.
Pope Leo XIII became pope in 1878 until 1892, a liberal pope who understood the changing
times and the need for some reconciliation, and who went far to achieve the beginning
of a reconciliation between Catholicism and the potential of republicanism or parliamentary
government, while at the same time attacking socialism, he attacked the excesses of capitalism
and industrialism and called upon the state and the conscience of religious well-meaning
people to pay a fair price for a fair day's work.
And this kind of Catholic interventionism into social ills was really new and was a precursor
of the post-World War II papacy.
