Lecture 19, The Apogee of Europe, 1870 to 1914.
Welcome to section three of our encounters.
We will begin with an overall lecture covering Europe from 1870 to 1914 today, followed by
several other general lectures, topical in nature, and then proceed, as we have done
in the previous section, with a number of in-depth commentaries on the separate European
Great Powers, after which we'll enter the realm of European diplomacy from 1870 to 1914
in great detail, leading to the origins and impact of World War I.
Although the European powers began to be challenged toward the end of this section, 1870, 1914,
by such non-European powers as Japan and an extension of Europe, the United States, which
in the second half of the century really took on an identity and an integrity and a culture
of its own, and even by the first wave of anti-colonial revolts in the developing world
after the turn of the century, this era represented the greatest extent to which European power
projected on the economic, military, political, and diplomatic levels throughout the world.
This was the zenith or the apogee of Europe.
During this era, the advanced and industrialized European states, as a collective, truly became
the world's banker.
There's a book by Herbert Feist called simply Europe, Colon, the World's Banker, not just
Britain, the world's banker, but Europe, including Holland, even within the rapidly expanding
the United States.
So many of our railroads were in fact financed by European capital, and the United States
was a better nation until after World War I.
Europe was not only the world's banker, but Europe collectively was also the workshop
of the world by the end of the 19th century, together with the United States and Japan,
Japan making a rapid transition to industrial modernity at least in the 1860s and thereafter.
In a way that we don't often think of it, demographically, population-wise, even with
tens of millions of emigrants, Europe's population expansion reached its zenith during this time
period of over 400 million people relative to the rest of the world, until a more natural
pattern of middle-class, lower population births took place, radically abetted by the
fratricidal two-world wars of the 20th century, leading to a decline in Europe's population
relative to the rest of the world.
Culturally and militarily, Europe's sway was unchallenged, as even the United States
did not project much power worldwide until the end of the century, beginning with the
Spanish-American War and the announced open-door policy in China in 1901.
And interestingly, as late as 1895, when the United States protested to the British over
some policy, the British didn't even bother to answer the American protest.
When Jules Campbell became French ambassador in Washington in 1900, it was exile from Europe.
He had gotten across from the wrong enemies, and they almost broke him totally.
His career was saved by his older brother, but they exiled him to the far off corner
of the world, the United States, a wasteland.
Not really, but in a sense, yes.
Only from the 1880s until about 1910 or so, another burst of mostly European expansionism,
often known as the New Imperialism, saw Europe come to control or to strengthen and deepen
its prior control over whatever available, quote-unquote, available territories were
left for the taking, especially in Africa and Asia.
Much of this thrust actually ended around 1905, but there was still a residue of several
further movements before World War I, actually.
