Stimulated also by military concerns with respect to self-sufficiency during time of war,
by the reality and psychology of economic competition,
this stimulated the frenetic pace of imperial expansion also from the 1880s until about 1905,
while simultaneously exacerbating a naval race and diplomatic relations in general,
and that imperial race itself took on a radical momentum of its own that, in a sense,
sometimes united elites and the masses in what looked like a grand sports activity
accepted affected people's lives and it was dangerous.
Forms of economic pressure or inducement were also used extensively as weapons in late 19th century diplomacy.
For example, Bismarck gave the Russians a hard time on the German markets toward the end of the 1880s
trying to get them to behave better in the Balkans.
What he hadn't counted on, though, was that the French would open up their markets
and extend credit to the Russians at the same time, so it didn't work.
Having a problem over Tunisia, the Italians and the French in increased tensions got involved
in a tariff war from the late 1880s until about 1900, 1902.
Now, the Italians started that issue, but who do you think won the tariff war,
the weaker Italian economy or the stronger French economy,
and again these tariffs and this economic warfare and pressure made diplomacy more problematic.
Internally, the process of industrial and urban development led to a rapid population expansion
except really in France and to a redistribution throughout Europe
and equally to significant changes in the social structure as well.
For example, between 1870 and 1914, Britain's population rose from about 23 million to 40 million.
Germany's from 41 million to 65 million.
Italy's from 27 to 36 million, with several million who went to the United States as well.
And France's only from 36 to 39 million.
Now think about this for a moment.
In 1800, other than Russia, France had the largest population in Europe.
It was the Great Nation.
By 1914, Italy equaled France, Britain passed France,
and Germany had 50% greater population than France.
Now the irony of this is that on a certain level, the French might have been better off all things being equal.
The quality of life in France was very, very high.
French parents loved to have children, not too many children.
Whereas you had a rapid population expansion in most of these other countries.
If not for the problem of warfare, it wouldn't have mattered.
But given the comparative state system, 65 million Germans versus 39 million Frenchmen, we have a problem.
And the imbalance would continue in the 20th century as well.
On another level, think about what all of this meant.
However, in the states we're talking about, except for Italy, in Britain, in France, and in Germany,
people really were living better even as the population expanded,
which gives you a clear indication of how powerful this industrial economy had become.
In Italy, a good percentage of the population was also clearly living better.
But in the southern regions where most people were still peasants and suffered from radical overpopulation,
they were not living better, they were living worse, and therefore they were leaving and going to the United States.
And to Argentina.
