The new factory proletariat was quickly becoming the urban majority, and in Britain, the global
majority as well.
Although their work was often boring, difficult, unsanitary, and even dangerous, working conditions
and living standards improved between 1870 and 1914, although not steadily.
And this is always the rub.
Economic recessions and depressions, especially from the early 1870s to the early 1890s, technological
unemployment made life insecure, with unions and social insurance only beginning to substantially
ameliorate the situation, and government intervention and regulation only beginning to ameliorate
the situation as well.
There's always a long time lag between when regulation laws are put on the books and when
they are really put into significant operation and can be verified and checked.
The aristocracy still dominated both high society and government in most major countries
and remained enormously wealthy, often intermarrying with the upper middle class, or engaged in
lucrative enterprise sometimes itself in order to maintain its power, in order to maintain
its position.
French government was more democratized really than any of the other great powers, including
the British.
The British cabinet itself did not become primarily composed of newer men until the
liberal victory in 1906, and even then to be an ambassador was much better off if an
ambassador happened to be an aristocrat or certainly someone who was very, very wealthy.
Government on some level still function pretty much as a social or socialist enterprise
for the well placed and the very rich.
Among the great powers, as I just indicated, only the French, except in their diplomatic
corps, had truly become the presence of the middle class, while the aristocrats and upper
middle class dominated the British government until the liberal victory of 1906.
And in Germany, the power of the aristocracy remained permanent as the government pretty
much supported their interests together with the upper industrialists.
The peasantry was also a highly variegated group from small farmers to prosperous tenants,
marginal tenants, sharecroppers, day laborers, migrant workers, and people often went into
the urban areas and then out of the urban areas and into the urban areas and out of
the urban areas.
In fact, one of the reasons that the French suffered less dramatically in the immediate
sense from the Great Depression of 29, not really feeling depression deeply until 1931,
is because so many Frenchmen still had relatives who lived on the farms and lots of people
of the cities just went back to the farms and managed to find some work there even 30
years after the time period that we're discussing right now.
Especially in eastern and southern Europe, peasants were still the largest segment of
the population.
They lived with scarcity, often barely surviving, the scourges of overpopulation, underdevelopment,
and the whims of nature, just like much of the world's desperately poor do today.
For example, in 1914, Russia still remained about 90% rural with a threat and the reality
of hunger or starvation ever present.
Although most segments and certainly the majority of the developing or industrialized societies
were living better than ever before, and larger segments of the middle class were really beginning
to live with comforts and leisure never dreamt of before.
