Not only did this create tremendous internal economic dynamism, but a tremendous increase
in foreign trade in an increasingly interconnected, globalized market.
Between 1870 and 1914, Europe's foreign trade increased from approximately $2 billion per
year to $40 billion per year.
Doesn't sound like much today.
It was a great deal then.
Europe's population also increased dramatically during this era.
From about 266 million in 1850 to close to 300 million in 1870 to 400 plus million in
1900, even while 25 million Europeans emigrated between 1870 and 1900 mostly to the United
States.
Recently, I heard projections that our population alone in the United States will reach over
400 million by 2050 and that we're already in the 290 millions.
This gives you a sense of perspective of what we're talking about.
This also involved a radical population redistribution, mostly urban in nature, and also mostly to
very, very large teeming cities, and a dramatic shakeup of the social structure.
A bit more on this later, in fact, a lot more.
Now much of the increased productivity went into processes that eventually made life easier
for a greater number of people, including through the beginning of modern medicine.
It also led to radical changes and increases in armaments both in the Army and in the Navy
and soon during World War I in the Air Force as well and with respect to submarines.
By 1914, industrialized Europe and not just Great Britain was the world's major workshop
and banker in an interconnected European-wide and global trade network based far more on
interdependence than rivalry, although, unfortunately, many people perceived it otherwise, especially
those in power with dramatic consequences.
The combined historical experience of earlier colonial competition and colonial wars, the
process of mid-19th century nation building, again, by wars, the impact of social Darwinian
emphasis, all emphasized a culture and psychology of competition rather than one of cooperation
and interdependence, even if the reality was otherwise.
The Europeans traded more with other Europeans than they traded more with anyone else at
any time.
Although the liberal doctrine of free trade reached its zenith in the 1860s, especially
with the Franco-British Cobb and Chevalier Treaty in 1860, the increasing intervention
of governments and stimulating economic development soon took the form of protective tariffs
as well.
This was partly stimulated by the increasing well-known doctrines of Friedrich List, whose
book The National System of Political Economy, published in 1841, argued that less well-developed
economies needed protection against the cheaper British goods.
And by the perceived economic, political interests of Junker, landowners, and newer industrial
magnates in Germany in that marriage of Ryan Steele, Bismarck introduced protective tariffs
in 1879, followed by France in 1892, and some others thereafter, but the German and
French economies were the largest economies on continental Europe, at least in terms of
industrialized goods.
And List was correct that during an early period of industrialization, the British could
flood the markets of other societies with cheaper goods, and we know how tense those
relationships are even today.
Unfortunately, protective tariffs also increase tension and competitiveness, sometimes all
out of proportion to what the actual value of the gain is for a society.
