As a result of higher birth rates and longer life, lower death rates especially in the
early years of life, and both the mechanization of agriculture and more widespread international
trade and grains and now meat, a relatively constant agrarian population was able to feed
the teeming new industrial cities, many of which also became fabulous centers of highly
sophisticated culture.
For example, by 1914, France had become nearly 50% urbanized, Germany over 60% urbanized,
and Britain close to 80% urbanized, and perhaps even, therefore, over urbanized.
Britain was almost starved out of World War I by German submarines because it had to import
so much of its foodstuffs because it had urbanized so greatly.
In terms of size, London was by far the granddaddy of them all, followed in numbers humbly
but not in culture humbly, followed by Paris, Vienna, and Berlin, which had become a sophisticated
cosmopolitan city of 2 million people by 1914, and today we have magnificent books reading
the city, studying the city of every one of these urban capitals of Europe, multiple studies
ranging from 200 to 800 pages on each of these cities.
So if you're interested in urban history, have a field day, and some of them are written
extremely well with magnificent photographs that really make you feel you know what these
cities were like, and then if you go visit them, you can really enjoy them in the context
of the kinds of things that I hope you've learned from this course.
During this process, Europe's social structure became far more variegated in nature.
In the upper and the middle classes, there was a whole new class of cartel-based robber
barons whose wealth rivaled and sometimes surpassed that of the great aristocrats.
While the upper middle class, large merchants, smaller bankers, expanded as well, followed
by an even larger professional middle class composed of lawyers and doctors, engineers,
managers, journalists, and teachers.
There's a magnificent book by Peter Gay who's written a dozen books or so on 19th century,
20th century European history and culture, tracing the development of the European middle
class from 1815 to 1914 called Schnitzler's Century.
It is magnificent and it covers not only the middle class and its changes, but the other
classes as well and all of the cultural manifestations and implications of these changes in the 19th
century.
I would urge you to look at it.
An expanded lower middle class composed largely of small retailers, clerks, white collar
positions become very, very large during this time period, and artisans often felt constrained
both by big business.
We have large department stores in the last four decades of the 19th century as well as
by organized labor.
We have growing labor unions from the 1880s through 1914.
Only since many of these people had only recently emerged from the working class, that is the
lower middle class only recently emerged from the working class, or even from agrarian pursuits,
they feared downward social mobility and tended to be easier recruits for ultra-nationalist
and anti-Semitic causes.
They lived with great fears being caught between large capital enterprises and unions without
having any real protective structures of their own, and they felt prey to nationalism very,
very easily and to hypernationalism and racialism very, very easy.
Although the working class classes, too, were also highly variegated from the upper,
highly skilled labor aristocracy to those who worked at terrible, repetitive, menial
