Great wealth was also more highly concentrated than ever before and readily apparent in urban areas.
So the first part of Marx's statement was still true. The rich were becoming richer.
The second part, however, was not true. The poor were not becoming poorer and the middle class was not disappearing.
It was growing. However, even in Britain, with the highest combination of development,
general prosperity, freedom and fairly good government, 5% of the population controlled more than 60% of the wealth.
While one third of the population lived in chronic poverty.
One of the reasons we know this is because at the end of the century, as I had indicated before, people were keeping better social statistics for the first time.
And scholars as well as government officials were studying these issues.
At the end of the 19th century, England was involved in a war with Dutch settlers in what is now South Africa called the Boer War.
And it was found out that many of the recruits were simply not fit to serve.
Now, in a time period in which a nation's military capacity is based upon its potential to mobilize all of its human resources,
and especially male resources. One didn't think of women yet taking those jobs that would have been unheard of.
What does it mean if a third of your population lives in chronic poverty and still is not fit mentally or physically to serve in the army?
Something has to be done about things like this. And that's when greater state intervention ensued.
But these were also, also, fertile conditions for the rapid expansion of organized political and economic movements that attempted to ameliorate the situation.
That is, the rapid growth of forces for democracy and even more so at the end of the century,
for the first time the rapid growth of socialism and unionism in one form or another in all of the great powers.
Where this was legal or semi-legal, it was done openly in a political form, in an organized way.
Where this was not legal, it was done by conspiracy and underground organization, as in the case of Russia.
And it is not accidental that Russian socialism remained far more revolutionary than any of the Western European socialist movements,
regardless of what they said their expectations were of their members, because in Russia many people really didn't have much to lose but their chains.
There was more reason to be violent because there was no access to evolutionary legal change by normal means.
However, in Western and Central Europe, this was very much not the case as the socialist movement really developed fully, as unions really developed fully,
and as just as importantly, democratic, appropriate channels developed normally.
For example, during the period between 1906 and 1914, and indeed thereafter, one gets the Great Liberal Ministry in Great Britain.
One person has written a book called The Strange Death of Liberal England. His name is Dangerfield. It's a wonderful book.
And what Dangerfield says is Liberal England was dying there during this time period. Liberal England was dying because cultural violence was expanding.
Cultural violence among women fed up with not gaining equality and access to the vote, cultural violence among unions, cultural violence among the Irish who really wanted independence.
But at the same time, this Liberal Ministry between 1906 and 1914, in response to those statistical surveys and public recognition of the need for change,
instituted a series of very, very important ameliorative measures to cope with this new industrial circumstance,
including the omnibus 1911 national insurance law that became the infrastructure for Britain's social policy after World War II.
And the same was true in Germany by that time. In fact, because of Bismarck, the Germans were actually ahead of the Brits in terms of social policies attempting to respond to this modern industrial reality.
No matter how much the state attempted to respond to it in its own way with its own appropriate mechanisms, socialism as an answer continued to grow as well.
It was inherent to the kind of working conditions and demographic concentrations that existed in urban Europe before the generation of 1914.
We will turn to this issue next time. Thank you.
Thank you.
