So, whether as a result of the need to adjust Marxism to the tortured, suffering state of
the Russian masses, or a product of Lenin's temperament and need to strike out on his
own at this point in his life, this is the jump he made, and this movement was the only
Communist movement immediately able to gain and consolidate power during and after the
mass devastation of World War I when the Bolsheviks defeated all of their rivals, including
the initially larger Social Revolutionary Party based on the peasants rather than the
urban proletariat.
In fact, because Russia was so largely peasant, the social revolutionaries were more deeply
rooted in Russia even after the revolution than were the urban or oriented proletarian
Leninists.
The final variegated party or tendency within the Marxist Social Democrats were the revisionists,
those within the party who either for political reasons or ideological reasons or both revised
Marx's theory of increasing misery.
The rich would get richer and the poor would get poorer.
This was one of the problems of Marxism.
Things had to get worse for the revolution to occur, but as they were getting better,
the revolution was less likely.
What were these parliamentary socialists supposed to be doing, making things worse or making
things better?
What were the unions supposed to be doing, making things worse or making things better,
obviously better.
The more they improved, the further they got away from a real revolutionary circumstance.
And therefore, classical Marxism was increasingly untenable in terms of realism during the
final decades before World War I, but it will tell you how powerful a secular religion it
had become that the Marxists had trouble separating from it or critiquing it.
It had become a kind of biblical text, a new secular religion with its profits.
The most forthright opponent of classical Marxism within the German Social Democratic
Party, the largest by far, was Eduard Bernstein, emphasizing moderate parliamentary means, parliamentary
means of modifying or even overcoming capitalism and the equivalent weight of democracy within
socialism.
In countries where constitutional change was possible, Bernstein stated the obvious, peasants
do not sink, middle class does not disappear, crises do not grow ever longer, misery and
serfdom do not increase.
One of his friends wrote to him, Eddie, you can think about things like this, but you
don't say them and you especially don't write them.
But he did nonetheless.
All of the parliamentary socialist parties had members by the end of the 19th century
who function along revisionist Bernsteinian lines and assumptions, even if they did not
say so openly or even in many cases, which is most curious, even admit it to themselves.
The enduring power of Marxism as a revolutionary faith was just too powerful to jettison it
just because it seemed to be contradicted by present reality.
In Great Britain, under the thrust of the Fabians and other non-Marxist socialists,
the Democratic and reformist core of the new Labour Party and its greater willingness to
work with liberal allies was even more well-developed than within the German Social Democratic Party.
In England again, representing its partial uniqueness, Labour and Liberals worked together
at the end of the 19th century, after which they would then become enemies and Labour
would supplant the Liberals as the second party of Great Britain.
Although the socialist movements and the unions before World War I failed in their ultimate
attempts either of capturing real power or of preventing the outbreak of war, both movements
accelerated the long process of socioeconomic amelioration of the plight of the working
classes.
In addition to bringing the workers a degree of self-respect and the psychological well-being
that comes with solidarity and the power of collective organization.
