Somewhat of an offshoot of both Marxism and Anarchism was the revolutionary doctrine of
syndicalism, an important Marxist movement in France, and even more so in Spain and Italy,
but elsewhere as well.
And as it tended to be the case, the more underdeveloped the society, the more likely
there would be a powerful syndicalist unionist response.
With perhaps its clearest statement offered by French ex-engineer Georges Surrell in 1908
entitled Reflections on Violence, syndicalism was a Marxist protest against revisionist
socialist political parties and moderate unionism against Marxist politics as a whole, in fact,
and we'll discuss revisionism in a minute.
Syndicalism called for the destruction of the state, again it's always there, by economic
means and direct action, especially the general strike that would bring society to a standstill
and make possible a revolutionary overthrow of the previous regime, including parliamentary
socialist who had sold out.
Listen to Surrell's voice just to get a sense of the ranker between the various revolutionary
groups.
He says, against the noisy, garrulous and lying socialism which is exploited by ambitious
people of every description, which amuses a few buffoons and which is admired by decadence,
revolutionary syndicalism takes its stand and endeavors on the contrary to leave nothing
in a state of indecision.
Its ideas are expressed honestly without trickery and without mental reservation.
The general strike would occur and even if the workers were crushed in the fray they would
have achieved dignity in the process and equally they would have terrified their oppressors.
Syndicalism called for mass unions and solidarity, combining skilled and unskilled labor and again
had a major impact on unions in France and Spain and Italy before the war and even on
unions in Britain as well.
The inherent violence of syndicalism and of Surrell's writings is part of that cultural
violence of the late 19th century that I keep on emphasizing.
Not surprisingly, after Surrell somewhat left syndicalism, he moved over to support for
a kind of proto-fascism and extreme right wing nationalism.
Many of these radical movements were as much affairs of the temperament as affairs of the
mind and especially after World War I, many a person who had begun as a syndicalist or
a radical Marxist later became a fascist or even a national socialist in the crunch.
Still, a further offshoot of the Marxists were the Russian Leninists or as they should
be called Marxist Leninists.
Separating from the Russian Social Democratic Party at a conference in 1903 in which at
that particular conference Lenin was in the majority they called themselves the Bolshevik
or the Majority Party.
While their erstwhile allies and friends came to be called Mensheviks or the Minority Party
and indeed at that conference Lenin broke from Plekinov his teacher and Markov his close
close friend to go out on his own.
Proclaiming themselves Marxists, in fact proclaiming themselves the heirs to the true Marxism,
they reinterpreted Marxism sufficiently to warrant a hyphenated title, Marxism-Leninism
and later we would add Marxism-Leninism, Maoism after the Chinese Revolutionary.
In a series of powerful pamphlets and short studies, Lenin argued that a highly organized
dedicated vanguard political elite rather than a mass-based soft party could telescope
the revolution jumping over the long phase of bourgeois dominance and industrial capitalism.
Stop for a moment and think about this, Lenin is a Russian Marxist, capitalism is not widely
developed as yet, industrialism is really beginning to develop strongly at the end of
the 19th century, what are we to do, are we to wait or are we to add human labor to the
process.
