The socialist and unionist movements brought their concerns to the forefront of political
and religious elites forcing conservatives and many others to respond with more than
repression and avoidance.
They did respond with repression, and they did try sometimes to avoid, but they had to
confront this issue which was becoming the issue of the age, the single largest increasing
political party at the end of the 19th century in the industrialized countries was the Socialist
Party.
Ironically, it was the conservative Otto von Bismarck who pioneered with sickness, accident
and old age insurance during the 1880s arguing that either the state would be partly socialist
or the socialists would take over the state.
Now again, let's step back for a moment because we remember from our past encounters that Bismarck
was the person who understood the forces of the age so inherently even when he disagreed
with them, but he tried to confront them using those forces themselves.
And Germany had the most well-developed scheme of social insurance by the end of the 1880s
of any country in Europe, and that would basically remain so until World War I and thereafter
under conservative Bismarck.
Equally significant, more liberal Pope Leo XIII argued in a powerful encyclical Rerum
Novarum issued in 1891 that the issue of socialism was the issue of the day, the issue of the
working class was the issue of the day, attacking socialism, he encouraged the formation of
Christian unions, enlightened policies on the part of capitalists and the state, while
at the same time he argued that workers should accept social hierarchy in society and that
inequality was simply part of the human condition on earth.
But this was a radical step forward, and he used Christianity as his weapon to caution
the capitalists that they would be judged and to remember what the prophets and Jesus
had said about property and the misuse of property, and blessed are the poor and blessed
are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.
Despite these concessions and many others, socialist parties and unions continued to
grow in strength on the eve of World War I.
In the election of 1910, obtaining 35% of the vote, the German Social Democratic Party
with 110 seats became the largest political party in Germany, while the French socialists
around the same time had over 100 seats and were capable led by brilliant and humane
socialist Jean Jaurès, respected even by many of his conservative enemies.
Ironically, Jaurès would be assassinated by a crazed nationalist on the eve of World
War I. Jaurès was the most powerful of the socialists in terms of trying to bring about
solidarity and prevent the outbreak of war.
Sadly, the disasters of World War I, leading to Bolshevism and Fascism and National Socialism
undermined democratic socialism's chance of creating a better world with other humane
and democratic allies without first having to go beyond World War I and World War II
in order to move forward.
Significantly, in the small democratic Scandinavian states such as Norway, Denmark and Sweden
which avoided World War I, social welfare amelioration and regional economic cooperation proceeded
more quickly than in and among the western great powers.
So where have we come today and what does it all mean?
