Lecture 21, The Socialist Response
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
Having recently discussed the impact of the Industrial Revolution between 1870 and 1914,
today we're going to be turning to the issue of European socialism and giving it some in-depth coverage and you'll see why in the next few minutes.
Although there were many non-radical or non-revolutionary reformist political and economic responses to the Industrial Revolution,
including greater regulatory state intervention on the part of liberals, Democrats, and even conservatives, and humanitarian religious interventions from all of the major organized religions,
the most dramatic response to industrialism on behalf of and on the part of the industrial proletariat were a wide variety of socialist and unionist movements frequently revolutionary, at least in theory.
Most widespread, well-organized, and well-developed ideologically were the socialist movements inspired by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, their followers known as Marxists.
In a powerful series of prophetic essays and major socioeconomic-generated studies of history, Marx and Engels argued generally that the development of society and history was determined primarily by materialist economic forces and especially by the dominant means of production and the dominant derivative social relationships at any one point in time.
In short, during the phase of capitalism and especially of industrial capitalism, the bourgeoisie and especially the super-rich replaced the aristocracy as the dominant elite through controlling the means of production, not only controlled politics and power, but most areas of culture, including law, art, and religion, as well.
The Marxists also believed they had discovered a series of scientific laws of history parallel to those of Darwin over nature.
But, taking off from Hegel's dialectic idealism, that is emphasizing ideas in Hegel, the Marxists believed that history unfolded by means of a pattern of dialectic materialism.
It was material forces that determined the pace of history and especially the class struggle.
Within each phase of history, at least until the ultimate communist phase, the dominant system and elite produced generated their opposite, their grave digger, so to speak, which eventually rested power from it, and then the next progressive economic system came into being.
Thus, the bourgeoisie had rested power from the aristocracy as capitalism replaced feudalism and, in its own phase, capitalism was therefore progressive, and the proletariat would rest power from the bourgeoisie when communism or a brief socialist interlude replaced capitalism.
Thus, communism's victory over capitalism was virtually inevitable, not because capitalism was unethical, although they believed it surely was, but because it was historically inevitable that it do so at some point because capitalism became historically un-progressive.
Capitalism was inherently flawed because the greedy, competitive capitalists would either proletarianize most of the middle class, making the oppressed overwhelmingly the majority everywhere who would have nothing to lose but their chains, quote, unquote,
and therefore destroy capitalism from within, either by revolution, violent, but possibly by the ballot box, or as a result of imperialistic or militaristic competitive wars, destroying capitalism during the course of war as it would collapse.
