Lecture 22, The Longest Hatred, European Antisemitism
Although the late 19th century German socialist August Bebel was to call antisemitism the socialism of fools,
and Jean-Paul Sartre, after World War II, was to claim in a powerful book that antisemitism was, in a sense, the religion of the mediocre,
it was really not so easy as that.
Historian Robert Wistrich comes much closer in his book, Terming Antisemitism, The Longest Hatred, dating back over 2,000 years,
and experiencing many permutations along the way, as he says, making it protein in nature, capable of adapting to almost any circumstance,
including in societies where Jews don't even live.
I would urge you, if you get a chance to read Wistrich's books, or even equally to get a hold of the two-part tape, simply called The Longest Hatred,
in which he delineates this process.
During the Greco-Roman era, a number of major figures stigmatized Jews for their separateness, their refusal to accept the norms of quote-unquote civilized dominant behavior at that point.
However, this sense was not deeply rooted during the Greco-Roman era, and Jews even had many privileges under Roman rule except when they rebelled, which they did often.
They were a rebellious people, and when they rebelled against Rome, as with others who were rebelled against Rome, they were destroyed and branded as rebels and traitors during the era,
especially during the Bar Cuchba Rebellion and thereafter from 132 to 135.
The authors of the early Gospels in competition for the faithful and under Roman rule branded Jews a deicide people who in failing to accept the divinity of Christ as Messiah and Savior had forfeited God's grace
and who were now supplanted by the new Israel, the Christian community.
And Jews and Christians were in competition for the faithful during the first three centuries and thereafter of the existence of Christianity which came out of Judaism.
Competition and Columny was transformed into forms of repression and ostracism when the Roman emperors and empire accepted Christianity as the true faith during the 4th century, while such church greats as St. Augustine and St. John Chrysostom continued to vilify Judaism and the Jewish community.
Although the process of subjugating Jews was inconsistent and took centuries to be implemented, Jews were still fairly free under the reign of Charlemagne in the 8th century and after,
and was even worse under Eastern Byzantine Christianity than in the West, the Crusades from 1095-1096 throughout the 13th century continued to be a major turning point.
During the 4th Lateran Council of 1215 under Innocent III, Jews were forced to wear badges as a sign of their differentness, their physical differentness even, and this marked the dramatic degradation of Jews' conditions.
And during this time there were also continuous outbreaks of riots, murderous riots, wherever the Crusaders went against the Jews. Why go all the way from France or England or Germany to Jerusalem to destroy the Muslims and leave alone the other heathen heretics in your vows, in the vows of your civilization?
Making this worse was the exclusion of Jews from the rural-based feudal-minorial system, which was based largely on Christian vows, which excluded Jews during the middle and later middle ages from working the land and owning land,
which concentrated them more into usury, money lending at interest, which was forbidden by the church from the 12th century through the 16th century, although those forbidding laws were frequently broken.
