At least in theory and increasingly in practice, the French Revolution and the Napoleonic eras
saw the emancipation of Jews and the end of the ghettos, equality under the law, wherever
promulgated law was implemented.
But unfortunately again, this came more from the logic of modern state building from above
than from any change in the popular mentality below, and even from above, it was hoped that
unbelieving Jews would assimilate to the point of disappearing as a separate group.
And this was true wherever the process occurred.
The Jews gained rights as individual citizens, but they lost corporate rights.
The rabbinic and communal authority became voluntary as it had to be in a modern state.
This was an exchange that was difficult for many Jews, but an exchange that most Jews
were prepared to accept.
It was also, as they say, an offer they dare not refuse, because if they refused it, they
could leave and there was no place to go.
Indeed, in Western and Central Europe, as constitutions in any form were implemented,
between 1815 and 1870, Jews gained the better part of legal emancipation, although severe
social exclusion prevailed, especially in the Germanic areas.
For example, Jews were emancipated in the Austro-Hungarian Empire during the Ausgleich,
the constitution, the dualism that we've talked about, which happened in 1867.
And they were finally allowed to own real estate.
For a while, the Rothschilds rented one room, then they rented one floor, then they rented
the whole hotel.
They were not allowed to own real estate, even though they were among the primary financiers
of the monarchy.
The last ghetto in Western Europe, that of Rome, was torn down in 1870, and Jews gained
the right to sit in the House of Lords in Britain when Lord Rothschild took his seat
in 1884, Queen Victoria's veto finally being lifted because of the respect and affection
she had for converted Jew, Benjamin, and Israeli.
However, this long and difficult process of emancipation and adjustment was somewhat
more organic in Holland, Britain, and France, and Italy even, all of which had many fewer
Jews than in Germany or the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and even in France, birthplace of
emancipation, there were anti-Jewish riots during the revolutions of 1848, and also during
the Dreyfus Affair 50 years later, whenever public authority broke down, anti-Jewish riots
tended to break out, especially if times were tough and disrupted.
Even during this most promising era, which did see progressive intermittent gains and
the gradual acculturation of Jewish communities and their real political awakening fighting
for their individual and national rights as part of the German and Italian nations, there
were regressions and very serious danger signs, although they were very hard to read and very
difficult to do anything about.
As for regressions and far more damaging in the immediate sense, the three late 18th century
partitions of Poland in 1772, 93, 95, yielded Russia the largest number of Jews, about a
million, while Prussia and Austria also got a large quantity of Jews as well, several
hundred thousand each, at that time there were probably only about two million Jews
in all of Europe.
However, while late 18th century Prussia and Austria, at least under Joseph II, were beginning
to expand access to Jews, the Tsars, as we have talked about, in their capacity as defenders
of the true faith, had issued expulsion degree after expulsion degree against Jews who happened
to break into the Russian Empire.
For most of the 19th century, indeed until the Russian Revolution, Russia became an
Orwellian-like prison for the world's largest Jewish population, about one million in 1850,
as many as five to six million in 1900.
With long periods of incarceration and repression, briefer moments of respite and hope, and then
severe government repression, paralleled by popular outbreaks late 19th century riots
and pillage and mayhem known as pogroms.
And one of the things I did with my grandmother before she passed away, when she was already
about 84 years old, is ask her to describe to me what happened during these pogroms,
and my mother actually remembered them as well.
