One of my friends at Lafayette College, Ellis Finger,
once taught a course on the splendor of Vienna after World War I.
And he called me one day and he said,
did you know that half of the people who were part of that splendor
happened to be Jewish?
At that point, I didn't know.
And later, when I studied the material more closely,
I found that indeed.
Now, many of them had converted,
but many of them came from the Jewish community.
Even within the native cultural elite, including the universities,
there was a dramatic negative reaction to the emancipation of the Jews,
to the contributions they were making,
and to the general cultural transformations implicit in modern urban life.
In Germany and in the Austro-Hungarian Empire and even in France,
at the end of the 19th century,
there were mass-based political and religious movements
calling for the removal of Jewish rights during the 1880-1914 era
in what the historian Peter Polzer has called
the rise of political and racial anti-Semitism.
One of the developments that fed into political anti-Semitism
and in the long run made it literally lethal
was the Darwinian racist, biological, cultural mania of the late 19th century.
Just as racism was deemed scientifically based and biologically determined,
and racial science categorized the world's ethnic communities into hierarchies
designated unchanging characteristics being given to them,
Jews were characterized as a race as well
with assigned characteristics mostly negative.
And in this system, passing quote-unquote through conversion was no longer possible
no matter how much one tried.
In fact, the person who tried to pass by conversion
was more dangerous than the person who admitted that one was Jewish,
at least you knew who you were dealing with.
And with this biologically based understanding of culture,
when it became most deeply rooted, especially in the Germanic lands,
racial poisoning, was seen as even more dangerous
than whereas in France, the poisoning was understood
to be more culturally and historically determined
than biologically determined.
In either case, it was something to be avoided at all costs.
Thus, the late 19th century saw a large number of major scholars,
journalists and religious luminaries writing tomes
decrying the demise of European civilization,
its religion, culture, spirit and traditions,
and its biological essence as a result of either Jewish cultural,
economic or biological contamination or domination.
And they began to call for a battle to save Europe's soul,
all of which was put in pamphlet and popular form
to be consumed by the masses and in popular fiction as well.
Ironically, as we'll talk about next time,
this even came to a head in democratic France
during the Dreyfus Affair between 1894 and 1905.
But in France and in Germany and in Austria,
what one has by the end of the 19th century
is the foundation of actual anti-Jewish political movements
calling for the reversal of emancipation
using either cultural or economic or racial arguments
to do so with.
There wasn't a single thing that Adolf Hitler,
who walked the streets of Vienna before World War I,
truly added except a kind of demonic consistency
because Vienna, before World War I,
was the home of both Adolf Hitler and Sigmund Freud
at the same moment.
Still, on the eve of World War I,
things seemed to have quieted down a bit
for the Jews of Western Europe,
almost all of whom were acculturating,
and the Jews of Eastern Europe were fleeing to the United States
or England or Argentina or anywhere else
that would have them as quickly as they possibly could.
Unaware that they would soon have the supreme opportunity
to prove their loyalty in battle,
which they overwhelmingly did with the same joy
and patriotism as the rest of their peers,
the worst lay ahead.
Thank you.
