Demographic pressures, most Jews were confined to the Polish segment of Russia.
Economic stagnation, combined with riots and repression,
sent over two million Jews to the United States between 1880 to 1924
when severe American quotas limited the entry of Eastern Europeans,
and it was intended to be mainly against Jews,
and Southern Europeans, and it was intended to be mainly against Italian Catholic Sicilians
and people from Naples because the dominant American stock felt it was being overwhelmed
by these millions of immigrants who wanted to come to the United States,
even as Emma Lazarus, an acculturated American Jew,
had written the poem on the Statue of Liberty,
Give Me You're Tired and You're Poor.
The parallel danger signs in Western Europe were a kind of potential long-term time bomb
which might never have exploded even as it became more lethal,
but for the impact of World War I,
and these things accumulated and became transformed
and more widespread and more radicalized over time.
As indicated earlier, even where emancipation was more organic
and perhaps more widely accepted,
mostly in areas where citizenship was seen as individually based,
part of an inalienable right, a matter of law and constitution,
rather than in primarily ethno-linguistic, cultural forms of nationhood,
which had a volkish character to it primarily in Germany.
In those areas, and in the constitutional areas even,
it had many opponents, mostly among conservative and religious elites and among the masses,
but even amongst socialist elites as well.
Anti-Semitism could draw from both the left and the right,
and indeed Karl Marx, self-hating in a sense,
said of the Jews, their God is gold and he hated Christianity equally,
but since Judaism created Christianity and Christianity was the opening of masses,
there you have it, it enters into socialism on some level as well.
Even in an increasingly secular age,
these nations, their fundamental culture was primarily Christian
and not multicultural in any manner.
However, over time, most British, French, Dutch, Italian, Jews,
acculturated, became largely middle class,
did not need to convert in order to reach positions of power and influence in their societies.
Although some still converted,
Disraeli for example, was converted by his parents so that he would have equal opportunity,
except he made it clear as he became even a politician what his cultural roots were.
However, in the Germanic areas and especially in areas among those elites
who rejected the message and the changes brought by the French Revolution
and by industrial capitalism and urban modernization,
among many other negative things,
these changes were viewed as Jewish victories over the traditional native culture,
destroying the religious, spiritual, historical, ethno-cultural foundation of society.
And now we add racism as well, which of course will make it much worse.
German nationalism in particular was more focused in nature,
especially among conservatives and those who were anti-French,
but even among many liberals as well.
Rights, freedoms were understood more in communal than in individual terms,
and society was deeply Christian in nature, whether Catholic and the South were Protestant in the North.
Although Jews were emancipated in Austria and Germany by 1870,
they were never viewed as part of the core nation by either most of the upper elites or by the masses.
Significantly, even after obtaining legal equality, even converted Jews
were often excluded from positions of power, especially in the army,
but also of all places in universities and in much of cultural life,
and conversion was the sine qua null of access,
even when Jews began making massive contributions as individuals
to the burgeoning splendor of Berlin, Vienna, Prague and Budapest.
