But Picard believed that the army stood for justice.
And when Picard found out that the treason was continuing,
opened up the dossier, saw that there was nothing in it,
and that what was in it was probably forged,
brought it to the heads of the military.
They said, please, please hold your peace.
Maybe there are two guilty people, Dreyfus and the next one.
And he said, no, he's innocent.
He said, you don't understand.
We want you to keep quiet.
And he refused.
So they sent him to a colonial post hoping he would be killed.
What transformed the case into the affair in January of 1898
was the family's continuing pressing for some public re-hearing
and George Clemenceau and Emile Zolaas opening up the case
by Clemenceau publishing Zolaas inflammatory letter
j'accuse in Clemenceau's newspaper, L'horreur,
ushering in a protest of the intellectuals on behalf of a retrial
because treason was clearly continuing
and Dreyfus, it seemed increasingly to more and more people,
was clearly a Frenchman caught in the wrong place at the wrong time
who happened to be Jewish.
What it came down to in the end were two different views of France
and of the Republic and of the whole history of 19th century France
which is why this is so important.
And historians often say it is the glory of France that it ended the way it ended
and it's the dishonor of France that it took place.
Dreyfus Sards inheriting the mantle of 1789 believed that the rights
of the individual, a French citizen, were paramount
and that even the army, France's most sacrosanct institution,
had to be governed by the same laws of justice as the rest of the French state.
Dreyfus was innocent, a military reason of state cannot superimpose itself on law.
For anti-Dreyfus Sards, Dreyfus, the alien, was existentially guilty
whether he was technically innocent or not.
Protection of the army's honor, even by forged documents and flawed procedures
was appropriate because the real France, the France of soul, the France of history
was being destroyed by the legal France behind which the Jews hid their ugly heads
trying to control everything, perhaps a plot hatched by Jews, Protestants, Freemasons
and what have you.
For three years, amidst considerable public disorder and fear of a civil war,
Frenchmen argued with other Frenchmen in their own very special way
while in 1899, Dreyfus was again convicted with quote-unquote
extenuating circumstances. The minister of war got up before the court
and he said, in this trial, someone is obviously guilty
and it is either Dreyfus or it is me and I am innocent.
So he ordered the court martial to convict Dreyfus which they did
but with extenuating circumstances.
A new president came into being in 1899, the other one died of a heart attack
and this new president finally pardoned Dreyfus.
Many of his supporters didn't want him to accept the pardon
but he was basically broken physically and mentally at that time.
He accepted the pardon and then he was fully exonerated and rehabilitated
by the highest court in the land in 1906 and what did he do?
He went back into the army where he served until and even during part of World War I.
More important than any of the particulars was the dramatic impact this experience had
and I'll use clarification within the entire French society and body politic.
This was a widespread issue. This was like the clarification that took place
in the American Civil War only in some ways even more widespread
because it was ideas fighting ideas although it was also people fighting people.
