Lecture 24, The Third Republic, France, 1870 to 1914.
Turning to the second of our great powers in the 1870 to 1914 era, today we encounter
the fascinating history of the Third Republic of France from 1870 to 1914, a time in which
the Republic really came into its own.
Following the disastrous double experience of defeat in the Franco-Prussian War and then
in the Franco-French Civil War known as the Commune of Paris in 1871, the Third Republic
went through a series of fairly distinct, troubled, very French, complicated phases of
development from which it finally emerged triumphant, relatively functional and also
relatively free and prosperous.
The first phase, lasting from the actual experience of the Civil War until the seeming
triumph of the Republic in 1879, represents the still highly conflict-laden nature of
French political culture, indeed the residue of 1789 itself.
Following the defeat of the French in the Battle of Seydant, largely democratic and patriotic
forces continued to fight.
Paris was besieged for about four months.
People ate animals, including the zoo elephants and rats, and when the government that formed
in the provinces finally sued for peace, Paris, having gone through extreme and greater
privations on a certain level than the rest of France, disaffected and fearing that a
real republic would not be established and a monarchy would be restored, wishing for
a republic and greater decentralization, had a coup d'état in a sense by Jacobins and
socialists and some anarchists who had suffered in Paris, formed their own municipal government
standing against the rest of France.
They represented basically a desire for a republic and a decentralized form of government, but
they also had tinges of socialism and anarchism.
These communards, as they were called, were disheartened by what they believed was the
craven capitulation of conservative France to the might of Germany, and they were further
scandalized when the provisional government, set up under old or leanest workhorse Adolphe
Thierre, decided to meet in Versailles rather than in Paris.
Further actions by Thierre, terminating the moratorium on Parisian rent and debt payments,
canceling pay for the National Guard, seemed to indicate that Thierre was either deeply
insensitive to the special needs of Paris or was indeed provoking a conflict in order
to demonstrate his willingness to impose conservative dominance on republican radical
Paris and to gain the support of conservatives in the process.
Thierre, who had been a liberal monarchist and it was his banquets that provoked the
revolution of 1848, now we're already in 1870, he's still fully functional.
He also was a great historian of writing a multi-volume history of the French Revolution.
Thierre had come to believe that the republic was necessary for France in a particular way,
however, as he said, the republic is the form of government that divides Frenchmen the least.
What a way to go. The republic is the form of government that divides Frenchmen the least.
It doesn't unite them, it divides them the least. To which he added, the republic will
be conservative or it will not be. In other words, the only way to hold France together
and make it functional was to have a conservative republic.
