Although the anti-derifey sards, including unfortunately loud voices within the church and the military and among many of France's economic, intellectual and political elite, held their ground.
In fact, they called the forgery a patriotic forgery, and then some of them began to found early proto-fascist and even national socialist political platforms and movements
during and after this series of events, the majority of the political elite, the majority of France, seeing the evidence played out in newspapers day after day after day,
chose to reconfirm the meaning of 1789 and to reconfirm the meaning of a republic, equality of the law, sacred rights of the individual, even if they happen to be Jewish, and civilian authority over the military.
Although the political center of gravity shifted temporarily somewhat to the left as a result of this affair, the drama actually made socialists more moderate and responsible, showing them that things that they considered bourgeois actually mattered, due process of law mattered,
whether France was a republic mattered. Fighting for the republic and fighting for due process, even on behalf of a wealthy bourgeois Jew, was worth doing.
This is one of the curious things most of all. The Dreyfus family came from Assas Lorraine. They were wealthy. They didn't want to be under German control. They moved to Paris and set up their affairs there.
And he was the fellow who didn't want to run the family business. He wanted to be a Frenchman and to be a Frenchman, a real Frenchman, meant being in the army.
In a punitive reaction that went too far, for a time it was dangerous to be a practicing Catholic in the military, because if you were a practicing Catholic in the military, you wouldn't get promoted because they feared that you would be anti-Republican.
The church and state were finally separated in 1905. In other words, in 1905 France finally achieved what we achieved in the beginning of our national experience.
And separation of church and state in 1905 probably worked better for both groups, both the church and the state, as the church began to focus much more directly on its internal needs and on the needs of the French people.
The aftermath of the Dreyfus affair could have been even more disastrous, because certainly initially it led to increased tensions between Catholics and secular Republicans, between the military and the civilians, except for the bellicose nature of German diplomacy.
And this is a very, very curious and unfortunate thing, fortunate for the French, unfortunate for Germany, in the end unfortunate for everybody.
But what basically happened is that in the two Moroccan crises of 1905, 1906, and then 1911, Germany threatened France so directly and profoundly that the French had time to recover from this horrible, intellectual and moral civil war and to heal.
And the time period, the decade before World War I is known as a time period in which the revival of French patriotism occurred, including a reconciliation between the military and civilian authorities in the face of the threat of Germany.
So that this was something the French were very, very fortunate to have.
Stepping back from this, they also had a period of relative prosperity from 1900 to 1914, of somewhat more generally stable government, and a period in which tempers did cool, even though syndicalist strikes continued.
But the shadow of Germany was more powerful than anything else happening internally in France.
Looking back over the whole time period in question with respect to France, to someone in the United States or to someone studying British history, it looks pretty disruptive and it looks pretty far-fetched.
However, the history of the Third Republic also in a certain level was positive.
They had a values clarification in which they did clarify values.
The country with all this turmoil was actually relatively well-governed and free.
It was a democratic country.
Over 8 million of the 40 million French people or 39 million owned real estate or land.
There were 14 million savings accounts in France.
This is significant.
The country recovered from the defeat at the hands of Germany, paid off its indemnity within three years, rebuilt its army and reconstituted its soul, and despite all of the disruptions, reconstituted a firm center of gravity.
Thank you.
Thank you.
