These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by the teaching company.
These lectures are titled The Long Nineteenth Century, European History from 1789 to 1917,
Part 3.
Chapter 25, Bismarckian and Wilhelminian Germany.
Having spent the last two sessions discussing Great Britain and France, we now move towards
Central Europe and begin with Bismarckian and Wilhelminian Germany.
Given the nature of the dominant personalities involved, even though there were a number
of significant continuities, it's really easy to separate the pre-war history of Germany
into two components, the Bismarckian era from 1870 to 1890, at least after the Franco-Prussian
War, and the Wilhelminian era from 1890 until the middle of World War I, indeed until the
end of World War I.
Although undone under Bismarck, Germany experienced political stability, tremendous economic growth
second only to that found in the United States, and extraordinary scientific and cultural
creativity, the same was not true, unfortunately, with respect to the maturation of Germany's
political culture, and one of the reasons for that, at least, was Bismarck's intentions
themselves.
As during the 1860s, Bismarck had no intention of sharing decision-making power with others.
The German Empire's limited constitutionalism was seen as a means, not as an end, as a mechanism
of control rather than a shared policy of making, of a shared policy-making institutions.
Indeed, Bismarck is often viewed as a consummate pragmatist.
He was a pragmatist, but he was also an ideologue, and his ideology was to maintain the conservative
structure of the German Empire, keeping the monarchy as powerful as it possibly could be.
As was the case in foreign policy, Bismarck often overshot the mark with respect to perceived
enemies.
He often undertook cures that were worse than the perceived disease, and he had almost no
ability to view those with whom he disagreed as part of a loyal opposition.
For the Israeli quote, no government can be long secure without a loyal opposition,
Bismarck would feel no government can be secure with an opposition, because the opposition
is inherently disloyal just by the fact that it is the opposition.
The guy played hard, and he played for keeps.
During most of the 1870s, in alliance with the moderate National Liberal Party, and he
was capable of allying with any party for his own purposes in a particular context, Bismarck's
main domestic policy consisted of his attack on Catholic internal enemies, represented
by the Church in southern Germany, the Catholic Center Party, and Polish Catholics in East
Prussia.
This attack is known as the Kulturkampf, the cultural struggle.
Now, it's one thing to have some sense that the Catholic political sensibilities may be
different than yours, especially as the Catholic political party in Germany was more liberal
than Bismarck would have liked at that time period at least, but he feared an alliance
of Catholic internal forces with perhaps Catholic Austria, Catholic France, Catholic Italy,
and really saw enemies all over, and as a result of his policy even succeeded sometimes
in creating enemies when they didn't exist in a pure form.
Fearing they constituted a state within a state that they were subject to external meddling
by the Vatican, including with respect to foreign policy issues concerning Italy or France,
or that the Church might foment resistance to the state among Polish Catholics in the
East.
