At the same time, and here we come into contact again with his brilliance, at the same time
realizing that the pace of industrialization with all of its potential abuses was bound
to lead to workers' grievances legitimate even, Bismarck passed pioneering social legislation
in the 1880s, sickness in 1883, accident 1884, and old age insurance in 1889, giving Germany
the most well-developed social net of any state in Europe far ahead of the other great
powers.
Now we should not imagine that this social legislation protected people in the same way
as we are protected, or Europeans even more are protected today, but it's a beginning.
However, as in the case of the center party, the anti-socialist legislation only strengthened
the discipline and quote-unquote the heroic nature of the socialists whose popular vote
tripled between 1878 and 1890 when they also achieved 35 seats in the Reichstag, indeed by
1912 it had almost tripled again with 4.2 million votes and 110 seats making the socialists
Germany's single largest political party, which was not surprising because of the concentration
of Germany's industries and the size of its new industrial proletariat.
However, although the social democrats adopted a Marxist platform in 1891, a unified platform
they tended to work in cohesion, their parliamentary practice and the practice of the German unions
was already revisionist in nature.
Given Germany's general economic expansion, in which workers also benefited, and Bismarck's
social legislation, German workers had a great deal more to lose than their chains and they
surely recognized this at least implicitly.
Moreover they too were proud to be Germans.
Ironically, ironically, however, the very political system Bismarck had developed and
defended with all of his intensity and all of his might was to lead to his own undoing
in 1890 when the new Kaiser, young, brash, intemperate Kaiser Wilhelm II and Bismarck
came to loggerheads over domestic and foreign policy issues and really over who was to rule
Germany.
Although socialists and unions continued to gain in strength, Bismarck wanted to maintain
the anti-socialist campaign as well as to continue Germany's close relationship with
Tsarist Russia, which had been formulated recently in an 1887 re-insurance treaty in
Bismarck's continued attempt to balance off Austria and Russia at the same time and more
on this soon.
Frustrated by the continued difficulty of managing parliament, Bismarck might even have
been considering some form of anti-parliamentary coup as well at that moment and the Kaiser
found out that he was beginning to have conversations with various political elites about how the
pressure of the Kaiser to perhaps allow this to happen.
Young, brash, ready to set out on his own, Wilhelm believed he could appear much appeal,
much better to Germans of all tendencies and create more national solidarity without Bismarck's
anti-socialist legislation.
Moreover, leaning far more to the Austrian realm, he favored closer relations with Austria
than with Russia and believing that implicitly the Austrian alliance and the Russian alliance
on some level were inconsistent, he was not willing to continue with an alliance with
Tsarist Russia even though the states had so much in common.
So having controlled Germany's destiny for 28 years and still the most powerful statesperson
in Europe.
