Bismarck engineered a series of anti-Catholic laws and campaigned publicly against their role in society throughout much of the 1870s, indeed, even into the beginning of the 1880s.
Specifically, in 1872, the Jesuits were expelled. Well, that happened in lots of countries in the 1870s.
While throughout Germany, between 1873 and 1875 and within Prussia, the state was given more control over education, bishops were deprived of disciplinary powers, civil marriage became mandatory,
and a number of religious orders were dissolved, leading to the papacy's breaking off of relations with Prussia.
In other words, Bismarckian policy in the 1870s was like Republican French policy in the 1880s, but for different reasons.
Besides actually strengthening the Catholic center party by giving it a greater sense of discipline and solidarity, leading to gains in the election of 1877,
the anti-Catholic campaign also finally upset many Protestant conservatives who feared that this might be a prelude to greater secularism and an attack on all religion.
Simultaneously, and again this is typical of Bismarck, the national liberals were demanding more of a say in policy formulation by the late 1870s and more important cabinet positions,
while the Social Democratic Party now forming and adopting its platform in 1875 won 12 seats in the elections in 1877.
At that point, Bismarck received the gift that many others received at the same time, which was the papacy of more liberal Pope Leo XIII in 1878,
allowing him to shift gears, toning down the Kulterkopf before ending it, and then reaching an alliance with the German conservative party, now making the socialists his new bentoire, his new enemy.
This political reconfiguration also involved economic policy changes that would have a European wide impact and one that was negative,
bowing to pressure from Junker, agrarian interests, and also to large industrial concerns in the face of the moderate European depression that began in 1873 and lasted until about 1893,
but not continuously, it had ups, it had downs. Bismarck introduced a protective tariff in 1879, thereby cementing the marriage between rye, the agrarians, and steel, very heavy industry,
and that set off tariffs elsewhere, which made foreign policy even more competitive.
Bowing further to conservative concerns, Bismarck acknowledged that Germany was and ought to be a Christian state, and he did nothing to counter the rising combination of diverse anti-Semitic forces in Germany in the early 1880s,
although he did not agree with their stridency, indeed he did not agree with their racialism at all. Bismarck again in the gendered language quipped, if you want to produce someone who was part of a better species,
harness a German thoroughbred to a Jewish mare. We don't want to talk that way today, so we're using Bismarck's words, and that's how he actually thought though.
He respected the role that Jews played in Germany for the most part, except when they were liberal or radical. With respect to Bismarck's anti-socialist campaign, it had two parts.
On the one hand was repressive legislation, which forbade associations and publications with quote unquote socialist tendencies, causing the Social Democratic Party to go underground, crippling unions for a while,
and also leading to the immigration of a number of leftists, which Bismarck was very, very happy about the more who left the better.
At a time in which socialist political parties and unions, however, were becoming normative in France, and beginning to become normative in Great Britain, and in a number of other countries, including smaller countries,
this legislation testifies to the real constraints on civil liberties in Bismarckian Germany.
