The historian Momsen said that this was a kind of pseudo-constitutionalism, quote-unquote,
which our spineless people has accepted.
It was pseudo-constitutionalism at best.
The Germans were not spineless, but they were not sufficiently politically active enough.
Even in parliament, even parliamentary liberals didn't have the courage and confidence to
take responsibility and really stand up to the Kaiser, even when they seemed to almost
have the power to do so.
So perhaps part of Momsen's immediate reaction to this era is partly true.
Since the worst mistake was the belligerent move toward a policy of veiled politic, world
politics, and a place in the sun imitating Great Britain by challenging Great Britain
all over, leading to five naval bills between 1898 and the war, finally converting pro-German
sentiment in Britain into pro-French sentiment, the British, at the turn of the century, were
much more favorably disposed to Germany, with whom they felt they had far closer religious,
cultural, and even racial ties than to the French, who they had difficulty taking seriously,
and though they respected them in certain ways, they looked at them with paternalism.
But this continued policy forced the British to reconsider, and they ended up swallowing
hard and reaching agreements with France, agreements that became a de facto alliance
out of the need to maintain the balance of power in the face of perceived German irresponsibility
and real threats.
As early as 1899, near the height, actually, of pro-German and anti-French sentiment in
Britain, and there was almost a war between Great Britain and France between 1898 and
1900, we'll talk about this later, Lord Salisbury, at the end of his career, he finally gave
up the foreign ministry in 1903, Salisbury minuted on a dispatch from Berlin in which
the Kaiser had reported hostile French intentions to Great Britain.
It was actually true the French were hostile, but the Kaiser had induced them to make these
hostile statements.
Being a troublemaker, Salisbury minuted in his own hand, I think I have heard some of
that before.
In other words, the British elite, even when they were trying to reach an alliance with
Germany between 1899 and 1902, had no trust for the Kaiser who they looked upon as really
a teenager, and a dangerous one sometimes.
Even his grandmother, Queen Victoria, felt that way about him.
He was a rat.
The Kaiser could simply not be trusted to keep his peace or to act responsibly, or to keep
his mouth shut.
This such as the Kruger Telegram in 1896, the Daily Telegraph Affair in 1908, and the
Tsebern Affair in 1913, among others, were just the more public examples of the dangers
of a nearly absolutist monarch without real checks and balances, especially in what had
come to be Europe's dominant military and also strongest economic power.
In the Kruger Telegram in 1896, the Kaiser had congratulated the Boers in defeating an
attempt at a takeover from neighboring South Africa, the British part of South Africa.
There was nothing for him to say.
It wasn't his business.
He shouldn't have said anything, but in saying this, he put the British on notice that they
could be criticized.
In 1908, and this is the most curious of all, it's really extraordinary, the Daily Telegraph
Affair, Europe really faced war at that point.
Austria and Germany were facing down Russia, Russia supported by Britain and France in
a crisis over the Balkans.
The Kaiser gave an interview to the Daily Telegraph in which he said that he had helped
the British win the Boer War by giving them the military plan with which they used to
subdue the Boers, and furthermore, the British people didn't have to worry, even though the
German people didn't have very fond feelings toward the British.
The Kaiser did, and he would protect the British people from the German people.
This is not the kind of thing you want from your king.
And finally, in the Tsebern Affair, German military and Alsace in a small village had
scuffled with civilians, putting a number in prison, harming a number of others.
The Kaiser thanked them for their patriotism, and it created a storm.
In fact, all three of these things created increasing storms in the German parliament,
and even when motions of no confidence in the Chancellor were passed, a motion of no
confidence in a Chancellor who was defending the Kaiser means nothing because the Chancellor
does not derive his power from the parliament, but rather directly and exclusively from the
Kaiser.
