The fact that the Czechs sent a delegation to a Panslav Congress in Russia as early as 1867 was already a warning of things to come.
But this was not nearly as dangerous as the agitation among the South Slavs, mainly in Hungary on the eve of World War I,
motivated by real economic, political and cultural grievances, substantial and substantive grievances,
and also aroused by the nationalist passions and propaganda emanating from bordering Slav state Serbia,
which saw itself as the piedmont of the Balkans and wished to do what piedmont had earlier done in Italy with respect to pushing out the Austrians.
What made the compromise even more dangerous, the Ausgleich, and barring radical action on the part of Franz Josef, ruler from 1848 to 1916,
emperor of Austria, king of Hungary, what made it eventually untenable was the unwillingness of the Hungarian magnates,
even more than the German elites in Austria, to countenance any real ethnic reform or power sharing in their region,
and for very understandable, if sure cited, political and economic reasons.
Like their Prussian-Junker counterparts and the pseudo-constitutional German political apparatus,
in an age of industrial modernization and considerable change, especially in the Austrian half of the empire,
the elites hoped to keep the clock from ticking forward. They were not interested in real power sharing.
Adding further tensions within the empire, even between the dominant in-groups,
was the fact that the western Austrian half experienced more rapid and more successful industrialization,
coming to have a more normative late 19th century, variegated social structure,
while the Hungarian half was far more rural with all that that implied, including huge estates.
In Austria, a good deal of liberal legislation was passed in the 1870s and the decade following the Ausgleich,
including reforms in education, the judiciary, civil liberties, civil marriage, the secularization of education,
while around 1900 trade unions were legalized, social insurances were passed,
and in 1907, universal male suffrage was granted in the Austrian half of the empire.
In other words, we're talking about the same kinds of things that were happening elsewhere in relatively liberal states,
except that, as with Germany, the cabinet and the prime ministers were not responsible directly to the parliament,
but rather to the emperor, so the constitutional structure itself was surely not as sound nearly as what existed in Great Britain or in France.
But real change was taking place in the Austrian half.
At the same time, Austrian political culture could be rough and tumble,
sometimes pitting class against class, ethnic group against ethnic group,
and a modernist, urban worldview against a romantic, anti-urban populist mentality.
If Carl Lueger, the populist and openly anti-Semitic mayor of Vienna between 1897 and 1907,
and he pursued a number of policies like Joseph Chamberlain in England earlier, except Chamberlain didn't have the anti-Semitism,
if Carl Lueger could just, I decide who was a Jew,
