Even such eminent philosophers as Wilfredo Pareto and Gaetano Mosca called for new, more
heroic elites, while passionate young artists under the lead of Filippo Marianetti issued
a futurist manifesto in 1909 exalting the glories of war, adventure, speed, youth, and
calling for the destruction of museums and the subjugation of women.
If you don't believe me, listen to their voice.
The initial manifesto of futurism, February 1909, we shall sing the law of danger, the
habit of energy and boldness.
The essential elements of our policy shall be courage, daring, and rebellion.
There is no more beauty except in strife, no masterpiece without aggressiveness.
They continue.
My favorite section.
We wish to glorify war, the only health giver in the world, and many in many other countries
would have agreed with us.
Digital militarism, patriotism, the destructive arm of the anarchist, can't they even be consistent?
The beautiful ideas that kill the contempt for women.
We wish to destroy museums, the libraries, of course, they weren't yet in the museums
and the libraries.
And then the oldest amongst us are 30.
We have therefore 10 years at least to accomplish our task.
Be careful of what you ask for.
They did end up trying to accomplish their task in the graves of World War I.
It was attitudes such as these combined with great power pretensions and jealousies and
announcements previously made or rather agreements previously made with the French that encouraged
Italy to go to war with Turkey in 1911 over Tripoli or Libya, as it's now called, which
set off the series of Balkan wars between 1912 and 1914 that were the immediate precursor
to World War I.
Essentially, by the turn of the century, the French and Italy had lessened their antagonisms
and that became a positive economic relationship and Italy, essentially, though remaining within
its alliance with Germany and Austria and continuing to update that, essentially let
the French know that their relationship with them and the British was of equal or greater
importance and that they would not enter into a war against France.
Moreover, Italy would accept French occupation and forward movement in Morocco if the French
would accept Italian forward movement in Tripoli when the time was right.
And in 1911, Italy thought the time was right.
Italy wisely took a pass on World War I in 1914 in the beginning.
Nationalist, imperialist, and irredentist sentiments pushed her more cautious political
elite over the brink, a mistake that was to be devastating and more than undermine all
of the gains made since 1900.
These irredentists wanted territory on both the Adriatic coast and in southwestern Austria,
abutting Italy, where there were Italian cultural and ethnic enclaves and thought that she would
get all of this as a result of the war and got part of it and was not satisfied with
what she got or with the cost that it demanded.
With her economy in shambles, her nationalists enraged that the 1.5-plus-million casualties,
half of them deaths, brought on by the war and compensated by what they saw as scant
rewards, her cities and countryside destabilized by urban and rural unrest, strikes, occupations,
and five short-lived coalition ministries between 1919 and 1922, none of them able to
get a handle on the issue and stabilize things, fearing that what had happened in Russia under
the Bolsheviks could happen in Italy, Italy's elites were finally satisfied to allow Benito
Mussolini, now an ultra-nationalist populist fascist, a man of the people, attempt to create
stability for them, doing their dirty work for them, convinced they could remove him
from office if he went too far or whenever he had gotten the job done.
Sadly, although Italy faced severe and complicated problems throughout, so many of her gravest
problems were largely self-inflicted, not that she was terribly alone in this category.
Thank you.
