Lecture 26, flawed states, Austria-Hungary and Italy.
Having just finished our encounter on Bismarckian and Wilhelmene in Germany, one subject with
two clear compartments, today we're going to do a reversal and deal with two subjects
on one day and see if we can do it.
The Austro-Hungarian Empire and Italy from 1870 to 1914 or so.
By the late 19th century, two of the six European great powers, the historic Austrian or Austro-Hungarian
Empire, as it was known after 1867, and the more recently created state of Italy, were
clearly on the bottom of the pile, attempting to play the role of great powers, but having
considerable difficulty doing so for very different reasons.
Both needed wise and capable leadership almost for survival, and neither was to get what
it needed at least not insufficient quantity.
Upon being excluded from the affairs of the Germanic states by her defeat by Prussia at
the Battle of Sedala in 1866, the Austrian monarchy reached a historic compromise with
its Hungarian or Magyar, landed aristocratic elites to the east, who had long sought autonomy
or independence, some form of equality within the empire or leaving the empire.
Known as the Ausgleich or dualism, this agreement created two anomalies within the context of
contemporary Europe.
On the one hand, this was a dual monarchy, combining two independent equal states under
one ruler, one army, but with each state having a separate parliament, separate cabinets, and
therefore having joint ministries for foreign affairs, military affairs, and finance.
It was cumbersome to say the least.
To make matters more complicated, especially in an age of expanding nationalism, neither
of the two dominant groups in this compromise, neither the Germans in Austria nor the Magyars
in Hungary, constituted half of the population in their own sphere, less than half, and as
the population expansion occurred in the late 19th century by 1914 with over 50 million,
perhaps even 53 millions of subjects, in the second largest state in Europe, second only
to Russia, there were still just about 10 million Germans and 10 million Magyar Hungarians
while the other nationalities over 10 or 12 of them in large quantities had actually increased
their population more quickly than the dominant ethnic groups.
As historian Lawrence LaFour says in a wonderful book on Austria-Hungary called The Long Fuse,
and it's very, very much worth turning your attention to, LaFour says, Austria was not
a national state and incapable of behaving like one, and that was the central core of
its structure, how to weld this diverse population into some kind of functional going concern
of national integration.
This in the end was a conundrum that they could not solve, partly because the elites
including Franz Josef, the emperor, did not really try to do so in a systematic way which
would have required enormous sensitivity and courage and hard work which did not occur.
This compromise between these two dominant groups was in a sense conceived against the
interests and even later against the will, the conscious will of many of the other minorities
who by 1914, some of which wanted to secede in one way or another from the empire especially
the Slavic groups in the Hungarian half.
