In Holland, in Norway, in Great Britain, there is a common European culture at the end of
the 19th century and a common set of experiences and problems and responses to those problems.
And it's fascinating to think about it because it's just as important when it happens in
a smaller country as in a larger country in terms of recognizing what were the dominant
problems, what were the dominant issues, and what were the dominant ways in which elites
attempted to attack these problems and these issues.
Under the more focused leadership of Giovanni Geliti for most of the 1900 to 1914 era, Italy
experienced not only economic expansion, substantial economic expansion, but educational
reforms.
Again, as the middle class increases, educational reforms and even for the working class, factory
regulatory measures, a more active state involvement, the liberalization of trade union laws, again
trade unions become more able to operate in the industrial parts, less government censorship,
always an issue representative of a state that is modernizing and responding.
And this legislation culminated in the granting of nearly universal male suffrage in 1912.
Women would wait until after World War II.
Of what good is universal male suffrage of a large part of the men who may be believing
Catholics won't participate?
We can ask ourselves the same question today, can't we?
Another major positive trend, finally, was the lifting of the papal ban on participating
in Italian political life, leading in 1913 to the founding of a Catholic political party,
the Papulari Party.
These pre-war positive developments were unfortunately counterbalanced by the continued recognized
corruption in Italian politics, especially in elections, but also in what happened after
elections, and by the radicalization of a number of powerful voices both on the right
nationalist and elitist, and on the left, syndicalist and socialist.
In particular, and here again we go toward the issue of late 19th century cultural norms.
In particular, what many of these advocates shared was the violence of their language
and the uncompromising nature of their programs, whether it was the popular figures of Corridini
and Denunzio, great poet and writer and activist, on the right, or young Bonito Mussolini then
on the left.
Many people do not realize that Mussolini began not just as a socialist, but as a radical
socialist as an anti-nationalist who during the Italian war against Tripoli in 1911, rather
against Turkey taking Tripoli in 1911 said, the national flag is a rag that ought to be
planted in a dung hill, so much for consistency.
By World War I, he's pushing for Italy to get into the war, and by the end of the war,
he's a national populist fascist.
