The lack of focused government action in any society need not be that problematic.
Again, if we remember British laissez-faire, a government ideology, the less government, the better.
However, post quote-unquote unification Italy needed more than just the imposition of Piedmontese administrative procedures, taxes, and military conscription on the rest of the country, and especially on the underdeveloped overpopulated south.
The tragic irony is that what kind of legislation Italy needed, it generally did not get in this early time period, and the legislation it didn't need, it did get.
Worse, much of the government policy that was implemented was nationalist, imperialist, and militarist in nature.
The costly and self-destructive attempt to make Italy a great power to give Italy recognition and legitimacy among the great powers, based on more than Roman and Renaissance glories and memories,
and therefore to fashion national integration out of foreign policy success, all of the countries were trying to do it.
In some cases it was a mild problem, and in some cases it was disastrous, and in the case of Italy it was disastrous, more disastrous, and finally, more disastrous, rather than on the more difficult and complex process.
And it is difficult, and it is complex, of social, economic, and political reform and modernization, because when you reform and you modernize, you're always gouging someone, and the people being gouged are usually powerful people, so they chose not to gouge them for the most part.
So instead we get, in 1888, a costly tariff war with far more powerful France following a quarrel over Tunisia in the early 1880s.
The Italians had eyes on Tunisia as their colony, closer to Italy than to France. The French were more powerful. They took it first, in 1881, the Italians were angered.
They expressed their anger. They joined the Triple Alliance with Austria and Germany, and then they engaged in a tariff war with France between 1888 to about 1900.
Who do you think did better in the tariff war? Obviously the French did. It was just not good policy.
Following that, we have the humiliation and the defeat of the Italian armies in Africa versus the well-armed and more numerous Ethiopians in 1896, forcing Francesco Crispi to resign in failure, leading to even more political instability.
As our friend LCBCman states, quote, only if words are used in the narrowest and most legalistic sense is it permissible to say that Italy was united in 1860 and for decades thereafter one could add,
for the new regime was rejected spiritually and politically by the more pious Catholics and rejected physically to the point of open warfare by southern peasants.
Not surprisingly, following the debacle in Ethiopia and the fall of the popular, previous, Crispi, Italy even endured a two-year military dictatorship with martial law under General Luigi Palou between 1898 and 1900,
before once again returning to civilian rule and parliamentary government, which did continue for the next 15 years or so.
For the better part of the next 15 years, from 1900 to Italy's entrance into World War I in 1915, Italy experienced a number of positive developments, even if some negative holdovers from the past intensified.
And when we begin to talk about these developments, we see that they are again very, very similar to some of the things that were happening in Austria at the same time, that were happening in Germany at the same time, indeed in France.
