By holding the Russians off, the Turks were able to allow time for public opinion and diplomats to be immobilized and focused in Great Britain and in Austria, and actually that's where the word jingoism comes from.
We don't want to fight, but by jingo, if we do, we have the men, we have the ships, we have the money, too, said the British.
Attempts at real constitutional or economic reform, however, were undermined by the disloyal nation of the sultan and his advisors to play by the rules, yield power, share authority, and by the multinational, multi-religious nature of the regime in some ways like the Austrian Empire, the Austro-Hungarian Empire,
and like the Russian Empire itself, which was, after all, multinational, multi-religious, multi-racial, multi-cultural, but also by the spendthrift nature of the regime leading to over-indeadedness to Western creditors.
And what the sultan would do, Sultan Abdul Hamid II would do, is he was very good, he became very good at dividing the powers and playing them off at one after another, or on another, granting them internal concessions, economic concessions, promising reform, suspending the reform, getting away with it until the next crisis developed.
This was maddening to Turkish elites, intelligentsia, younger nationalist, educated officers who knew that the clock was ticking and understood that if something really wasn't done, the Ottoman Empire would simply really collapse, have nothing left in Europe, and then become a prey, especially to the neighboring Russians who truly wanted to dominate it.
By the time of the Young Turk Rebellion, a nationalist and military and political coup in 1908 that greatly reduced the power of Sultan Abdul Hamid II and initiated a more focused process of reform, the Ottoman Empire had already lost the bulk of its territories in Europe itself.
Following a long independence struggle, Greece became independent in 1831, of the first of the Balkan states to finally become independent.
Following numerous insurrections, Serbia gained autonomy in 1829, this was guaranteed by the Treaty of Paris in 1856, which ended the Crimean War and gained complete independence in 1878 at the Congress of Berlin,
called by Bismarck to mediate the Russo-Turkish War before the English and the Austrians or the British and the Austrians would intervene, as did Montenegro and Romania gained this in 1878.
Bulgaria's fate was even more complicated. Caught between the Ottoman Empire and Russia, it became virtually independent in 1878, and then completely so in 1908, following the Austrian annexation of the provinces of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which had been under Austrian control as of 1878, and this annexation blocked Serb designs to expand their territory and also blocked them from the Adriatic.
Albania also on the Adriatic became independent in 1913, after another series of wars further blocking Serbia's quest for access to the sea.
All of these small mini-states suffered from economic underdevelopment, poverty, illiteracy, political instability, and irredentist claims on each other's territory.
So, no sooner did they achieve something that simply wetted their appetite for something more.
