Industrialization was necessary and Vitta understood revolution would either occur from above or it would occur from below.
Either the regime would grab the problem by the horns and work it through,
or Russia would either be defeated in another war or simply overwhelmed by revolutionary fervor.
With the French only too happy to provide public and private loans,
especially after the conclusion of the Franco-Russian alliance between 1891 and 1894,
Russia began a process of rapid industrialization and urbanization,
especially with respect to railroads and military-related initiatives under Count Vitta's guidance.
However, this placed the regime at an even greater potential internal risk
as hundreds of thousands of new workers and others streamed into teeming cities and large factories
within adequate facilities and little protective state regulation of their working and living conditions,
while rural overpopulation continued unabated in a nation of about 125 or so millions of people by 1900 and closer to 150 by 1914.
What made this even more dangerous was the rapid growth of constitutional and revolutionary groups,
often underground and the growth of illegal union activity as well, spontaneous forms of protest,
including widespread strikes in 1903 following severe economic conditions actually from 1899 or so until 1903.
Among the many groups were moderate liberals to Democrats,
multiple forms of social Democrats and other socialists, Bolsheviks, Mensheviks,
and social revolutionaries more attuned to the peasant needs and a variety of other protest movements.
With virtually endemic rural starvation, especially during drought and crop failures,
violent rural protest was also common as well.
And if there wasn't starvation, there never was real planting.
Although industrial productivity increased greatly under Vitta, his enemies at court, recognizing rightly that his policies would inevitably change
the traditional conservative nature of Russia, finally ousted him in 1903,
deciding to use nationalism and imperialism to bolster the regime rather than this forced pace of industrial modernization.
Unfortunately, Russian provocations in Manchuria threatened Japanese interests in Korea and Manchuria
and led the Japanese who had industrialized more completely to initiate a war which they won between 1904 and 1905
during which the Russian armies and navies were trounced and the nation humiliated by their defeat at the hands of the quote-unquote
racially inferior Asiatics. It was one thing for Italy to suffer that kind of defeat.
Russia was a huge great power and the Japanese were Asiatics and everybody felt that way.
Amidst war-induced additional domestic hardships, which led to strikes and the regime's brutalness handling of a January 1905
workers' protests near the Winter Palace, led by Father Gapal, Russia began to collapse internally during the course of 1905.
Faced by further military setbacks and mutinies, including in the Navy, spreading rural and urban unrest,
an organization, both a peasant union and the first Soviets emerged, councils of workers and soldiers.
Tsar Nicholas II concluded peace with Japan in September 1905, Teddy Roosevelt intervened, and issued the October Manifesto
which finally broke the force of the revolutionary movements, creating and promising some form of parliamentary structure and constitution
and the moderates who accepted what the Tsar offered were known as the Octoberists while the cadets were somewhat more liberal
and there were Democrats and multiple groups of socialists, but the Manifesto, creating a Duma or a parliament, broke the unity of the revolutionary onslaught.
