Although the Tsar had no intention of suffering a truly constitutional regime, the government
reorganization, at least initially, brought greater freedom of the press, freedom of speech,
freedom of assembly, a duma or national parliament elected with broad suffrage and a western
style council of ministers.
In that moment, in fact, Vita came back as the prime minister and immediately demanded
that Pobodinovcef be removed as well as several other people, and the Tsar, when he did remove
one of them, he just put them into another place in his internal cabinet, and in less
than a year, Count Vita was forced to resign because he recognized he simply could not
do nothing with this mess.
The Tsar was simply not willing to work with a duma in any meaningful way.
When the dust settled, the police were then unleashed, legalized unions were repressed,
dumas were either dissolved or pro-rogued or undermined, their powers and electoral
base diminished, members of parliament even harassed and sometimes imprisoned, and more
over, the conservative forces rallied and organized more effectively, while Father Grigori
Rasputin rose to power at court in 1907 via his growing sway over Zarina Alexandra and
their hemophiliac child.
In the context of the bizarre melange of forces, including reactionary and revolutionary
terrorist organizations, waves of anti-Jewish pogroms, the arrest of parliamentarians, Count
Peter Stilipin, who I usually call the agrarian Count Vita, tried to work with a duma and
did, achieving some agrarian reform, the first real agrarian form since the emancipation
in 1863, 1861 and 1863, allowing peasants to leave the mere the village commune and
go into the cities to be a more ready labor force.
Stilipin was assassinated in 1911, seemingly by the regime itself.
On the eve of World War I, while rebuilding its military and expanding its railroads,
Russia was seething with discontent both quiet and demonstrative.
Having been double-crossed by Austria and threatened by Germany during the dangerous Bosnian crisis
of 1908-1909, at which time Austria annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina before Russia could
get its part of the bargain more control over the Straits, in the Balkans, Panslav nationalists
took pride in Russia's military recovery, financed largely by France, hoping for better
days ahead.
What made the region adjacent to Russia even more unstable was that the Ottoman Empire
and the whole region of the Balkans were in disarray during much of the 19th century.
On the defensive from the early 18th century and facing intermittent conflict with its
increasingly powerful Austrian and Russian enemies, and also overextended throughout
the Balkans and North Africa and the rest of the Middle East, the Ottoman Empire came
to be known as the sick man of Europe during the 19th century, while the quote-unquote
Eastern question was understood by everyone to mean what would be done to or for or with
the Ottoman Empire.
A very dangerous issue because of its geography and the historic role it had played.
The issue was complicated by the strategic position of Constantinople dominating the
passage from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean, the security of which was essential for the
British Empire and for French trade routes, especially after the Suez Canal was developed
in the late 1860s, and by the fact that growing nationalism among the frequently misgoverned
Christian subjects of the Ottoman Empire in the Balkans led to repeated rebellions and
the quest for independence.
