Serbia in particular saw itself as the Piedmont of the Balkans.
Destined to liberate the South Slavs, entrapped in the repressive Austro-Hungarian Empire,
and also to reclaim its patrimony in Bosnia-Herzegovina and in Albania,
denied it in 1908 and 1913, respectively.
After 1908, its claims were generally supported by Russian Panslavists,
who favored the Union and the commonality of interests and culture of all Slavic peoples,
and was opposed by Austria, backed ever more forcefully by Germany,
and by Pan-Germans, who, from the German perspective, favored the same kinds of things,
although it wasn't necessarily the Pan-Germanists that was forcing this German policy,
but rather the fear of encirclement and the reality that Austria, by that time,
was only definite and loyal ally, and if Austria-Hungary were weakened,
then its validity as a support, even a weaker support, for the German Empire would be invalidated.
In this turbulent region, cooperation between the great powers was absolutely essential,
if peace and stability were to have any chance of success.
The powers did attempt from time to time to truly cooperate,
and in the issues that were related to the Ottoman Empire,
in the issues that came to the fore, every time there were a series of rebellions,
as in the mid-1870s, or a Russian action against Bulgaria in the mid-1880s,
actually kidnapping its king and then forcing him to abdicate,
the powers did attempt to cooperate and stabilize the region in one way or another.
Concert was essential, but the most important element of concert
that had the most weight in this region was the concert that could possibly exist
between the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Russian Empire.
The ability of the British to threaten or push the ability of the French even more so
to threaten or stabilize was severely limited by geography
and by other issues that constrained them.
The best and nearly only way to stabilize the Balkans came through Austro-Russian cooperation.
If that Austro-Russian cooperation degenerated,
it was virtually impossible to put the rest of the puzzle together without it,
because what one would do, the other would resent.
What one would do would be supported by one set of allies,
and what the other would do would be supported by another set of allies,
and the issue would escalate.
In the middle of all of this, actually by 1900, Germany became the most powerful presence
in the Ottoman Empire, standing in when France and Britain no longer had the willingness
or the power or both to do so, which is one of the main reasons why in World War I,
the Ottoman Empire Turkey ended up being an ally of the Central Powers,
most notably Germany.
But it was the conflict between the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Russian Empire
over the Balkans, and most importantly, the Austrian conflict with upstart Piedmont-like Serbia,
which was going to become the main focus from which World War I was to develop.
And during the ensuing encounters, this particular element of international politics
will be developed in greater detail than you might want to know,
simply because understanding it is essential to understanding the origins of World War I.
Thank you.
