Lecture 27, Russia, Turkey, and the Balkans
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
If in our last encounter we went for double or nothing dealing with the Austro-Hungarian
Empire and Italy, today we're going for the hat-trick dealing with Russia, Turkey, and
the Balkans, multiple to be sure.
To refresh our memories just a bit, remember the phase of reform under Alexander II who
took over Zardem while Russia was losing the Crimean War in 1854, 1855, and from 1856
until the middle of the 1860s underwent or led Russia in a series of dramatic reforms.
If this represented a promising start following his assassination in 1881 when he was perhaps
on the eve of moving further with some kind of national body, national parliament.
The two last Russian Tsars, Alexander III from 1881 to 1894, and Nicholas II from 1894
to 1917, returned mostly to the disastrous policies of Tsar Nicholas I who ruled from
1825 to 1855, that is to autocracy, orthodoxy, and nationalism, except enforced to do otherwise,
which did happen, especially under Nicholas II.
Alexander III curtailed the rights of those Zemsvosts, those local and regional councils,
and also of the Dumas, the town councils that existed.
He dramatically increased censorship and police activity all over, although they weren't all
that efficient, neither were the prisons all that airtight, because most of the revolutionaries
did time and then escaped, and Alexander III dropped any further constitutional initiatives.
All of these policies were initially worsened under Nicholas II, including the severe anti-Semitic
policies of the Tsarist regime, the pale of settlement under Alexander III, confining
Jews to the westernmost part, the Polish part, and pogroms that, generally speaking, were
outbreaks coming from below, but were not put down from above, except when they seemed
to get out of control.
And this was a manifestation of the nature of the regime, unfortunately, just one manifestation.
Severe repression on all levels was supported by the Tsarist closest advisor, who, not surprisingly,
was the head of the Holy Synod, also, Konstantin Pobobtinovcev.
If you can spell it, you're better than I am.
But listen to his voice for a moment.
Among the falsest of political principles is the principle of the sovereignty of the people,
the principle that all power issues from the people, and is based upon the national will,
a principle which has unhappily become more firmly established since the time of the French
Revolution, back to basics, back to the beginning of our course more than twenty encounters
ago, back to blaming the French Revolution and everything it brought to all of the ills
undermining traditional and conservative and religious European society, felt most strongly
in Tsarist Russia.
At the same time, it was recognized by Russia's prophetic finance minister, and later prime
minister, Count Sergei Vita, again, Count Sergei Vita, also an aristocrat, who was finance
minister between 1892 and 1903, that Russia really had no choice, and the most wonderful
book to read on this basis is Theodor von Lauer's Why Lenin, Why Stalin, who shows that
Russia was damned if it did and damned if it didn't, it had to reform in order to keep
up with its competitors, but if it reformed, it would inherently change at a basic level
and the elites would not be able to live the way they had lived before and to maintain power,
the way they had maintained power before.
But if only for security reasons forget the life and health of their people.
