What became clear is that neither Austrian nor Britain could tolerate this level of Russian gain and the Russian imposed Treaty of San Stefano.
Bismarck stepped forward as an honest broker and called the Congress at Berlin at which they could try to iron out these issues.
Now he was an honest broker on one level.
He wanted to preserve the peace.
He wanted to restore the balance of power.
He wanted for war not to break out, but in a crunch, Bismarck chose the interests of Austria over Russia as the Germans would continue to do so until World War I.
And the largely imposed Treaty of Berlin denied Russia the most important of the gains that she had made in this war.
And what particularly galled her, as some authors have explained, is that she did all of the fighting.
England walks away with honor and cypress in her pocket, and Austria makes some gains, and Russia is partially humiliated and revisionist.
She's not going to be happy, and she's not going to want to keep this.
But what it really means is that Bismarck's concocted Three Emperor's League is obviously, temporarily, a dead letter.
If this is the way Austria was going to treat Russia, and moreover, if this was the way Germany was going to treat Russia,
then Russia was not going to be interested in the Three Emperor's League to take care of the interests of Austria and Germany.
Still, this is what Bismarck wanted. He wanted Austria and Russia bound to Germany and balanced.
And he doggedly and brilliantly, at least from a technical stance, went after it in his inimitable fashion, raising the stakes.
No Three Emperor's League, he concludes a clear defensive diplomatic and military alliance with Austria in 1879, a permanent alliance in time of peace.
Now, on the one hand, he was very, very happy to have that alliance, which was permanent and renewable, but the purpose of it, again, was multi-fold.
He also wanted to force the Russians back into the fold, as well as to tie down the Austrians, and it worked.
And once again, he wanted to make it sure that the dog would wag the tail, not the tail wagging the dog.
Chasen, the Russians indeed returned to the fold, joining a slightly stronger Three Emperor's League in 1881,
after which Italy chose to join the German-Austrian dual alliance, making it the triple alliance, while Romania also associated itself with that alliance in 1883.
This is very, very complicated. It's breathtaking, actually.
Italy joins because of its anger against France. Bismarck is happy to have Italy join because if she's joined to Germany, she can't be joined to France.
And if she's joined to Germany and Austria, she can't be at war with Austria over irredentist claims. That works nicely.
Romania also balancing Romania out against Russia, who had claims on territory that Romania also wanted to add to its newly independent kingdom.
During this time period, of course, Bismarck did other things. He didn't just reach these alliances at the Congress of Berlin.
He whispered in the French ear that he wouldn't oppose French expansion in Tunisia. Perhaps France should seek imperial grandeur in place of Alsace-Lorent.
He didn't say that. He didn't have to. The French understood. Not only did they understand, they took him up on it and they did it.
But, of course, that upset the Italians, separating the Italians from the French and indeed engaging them in a long-standing dispute over French primacy in Tunisia, which was developed in 1881.
Now, some scholars believe that this structure created between 1879, 1881, 1882, even 1883, although Romania didn't matter that much.
Some scholars believe that this represented the pinnacle of the Bismarckian alliance system. But more was yet to come.
