Russia was the strongest democracy on the continent.
Russia was the greatest monarchic conservative state.
Listening to each other's national anthems with your hat off was a bitter, bitter pill to swallow.
Being isolated and threatened by Germany was an even more bitter pill to swallow.
Even during the last years of Bismarck's rule before he came into a head-long conflict with the New Kaiser,
it was becoming more and more difficult for him to get the Russians to behave the way in which he expected them to behave in the Balkans,
and he had already begun to use mechanisms of economic blackmail against the Russians,
closing the German market to them, pressuring banks not to give them loans.
Well, guess what? The French market opened up immediately.
The French extended those loans as Bismarck used economic blackmail.
The French used economic inducement France had to come out from the cold.
And that's the whole main difficulty with the alliance system itself.
Once one set of powers have it, the others need to have it simply to feel comfortable and indeed to be protected.
Well, I don't know if I can promise this to be sure.
I'm going to try.
I think we're probably just about finished with Bismarck,
although his name might pop up again in the future.
I'll do my best to repress it.
So it's a good moment to take a look at him for one last time.
And one nice way of doing that is to begin with Bismarck himself, Bismarck on Bismarck.
In a moment of self-reflection and deep honesty, Bismarck said the following.
The Prussian official is like a member of an orchestra, but I want to play only the music which I myself like or no music at all.
With all the disruption, contemporaries were generally very, very complimentary towards Bismarck.
Certainly in terms of his technical genius having a sense of what he had accomplished and also recognizing that he did not undertake that preventive war against France.
He did act as an honest broker at the Congress of Berlin.
He did try to balance Russia and Austria off in the Balkans.
He did try to preserve the European peace.
And indeed, Bismarck was also one of his own greatest supporters because after resigning in 1890 or being fired in 1890, he had the time to write his reflections, his reminiscences, which lied through most of what he had done along the way,
letting it be known he had planned everything in advance.
He had pulled all the strings behind the scenes.
He knew exactly what he was doing, and believe it or not, at least an entire generation of historians believed him and took his reminiscences as being accurate.
Ironically, even World War I did not totally shake this set of interpretations.
What happened after World War I, which most Europeans believed was mainly caused by Germany, most Europeans except the Germans, that is.
Bismarck's extreme policies began to be criticized, but most people still were generally positive about his core achievements, including a number of British historians who still saw his core achievements as being essentially valid in the context of the nature of nationalism in 19th century Europe.
Why should Germany be denied what the other great powers already had?
That is a nation, an army, and maybe more.
The rise of Adolf Hitler, with whom Bismarck should not be compared, even though he did continue in motion some of the worst trends in German civilization, which made an Adolf Hitler possible.
Although, remember, Adolf Hitler was born in Austrian and remained in Austrian until about 1929-1930, but the rise of Adolf Hitler brought into question among many scholars the whole nature of Bismarck's achievements and everything that it had represented.
Especially in terms of the legacy of a further addiction toward power and toward military success and toward certain kinds of unnecessary diplomatic and domestic procedures that Bismarck did use along the way.
And a new generation of scholars with the reunification of Germany is reinterpreting this material as we sit here this moment, which is the most fascinating thing about history as a whole.
Thank you.
