Between 1879 and 1890, the agreements he reached were more definitive, continuing to intend
to preserve the status quo in Europe, to isolate France, protect Germany.
However, these agreements were so complicated and intricate that it was very, very difficult
for anyone after Bismarck to maintain them, even if they wished to do so.
Indeed, at the very end of his tenure, after 1887, it was becoming even difficult for the
great manipulator, Bismarck, to maintain this complicated welter of agreements.
Throughout this policy, Bismarck always sought to align Germany with at least two of the
other really great powers, to be a trois with the three, rather than to be had to be with
the two, and again, to balance the interests of Austria and Russia, making both in some
manner dependent on Germany.
And this is something we very, very much want to remember later.
The tail was not supposed to wag the dog.
The dog was supposed to wag whichever tail it chose to wag.
In the early 1870s, Bismarck reached a loose diplomatic agreement known as the Three Emperors
League with Austria and Russia, using all the tools at his disposal, monarchical solidarity,
conservatism, stability.
But he soon discovered that even this limited agreement was difficult to maintain.
In 1873, much more quickly than anyone expected, even the French, in fact, the French paid
off their war indemnity, which required the German troops to leave France, and the French
began to rebuild their army.
Bismarck's first response was to test the waters.
In what came to be known as the War Scare of 1875, it seems that Bismarck induced the
publication in the press of a series of articles, including one entitled simply, Is War in Sight?
And something Bismarck might even have been considering a preventive war against France
before it recovered too quickly, although his really carrying it out seems a little
bit farfetched, but we can't really be sure, because the reaction of the other great powers
set parameters.
Both Russia and Britain let Bismarck know they did not want a further diminution of French
power, and they did this directly, and it didn't need further clarification.
But Israeli was very clear about his feelings.
He wanted Germany to understand that it wouldn't be good for the balance of power for France
to be further diminished, and the Russians essentially gave Bismarck the same information,
even though there was a three-emperors league, but remember, that was defensive, not offensive.
Indeed, the French even played with the War Scare, with the French Foreign Minister pretending
he really believed that Germany was going to attack France to see what the British and
the Russians would do, and the French got the answer they hoped to get, which meant
they weren't totally isolated, and that there were limits to what Germany would be allowed
to do by the other European great powers.
Another more significant and more traumatic was the Russo-Turkish War, which was stimulated
by Turkish repression of a Bosnian and Herzkivinian rebellion in 1875, and a Bulgarian rebellion
in 1876, known as the Bulgarian horrors because of the level of Turkish repression, which led
to our oft-mentioned Russo-Turkish War of 1877, 1878, during which the Turks, who had been
already despised by the West for their repression, then got back into the West's good grace
by standing up to the Russians at that Battle of Plevna, following which when Russia finally
seemed to be winning, and really was almost outside of Constantinople, and was going
to impose a harsh peace on Turkey with some serious annexations, and the creation of a
large Bulgarian state, which would have been a large Russian client state in the Balkans,
ironically, at that point Bulgaria was the Russian client state, and Serbia was actually
the Austrian client state in the Balkans.
That would reverse later.
