And of course, the radical impact conquest leading to political, economic, and cultural
domination had on the exposed areas and civilization, making possible that second phase of what
Habsburg talks about, and we introduced his ideas earlier in the course as the possibility
of a dialectic between the various parts coming to some new conclusion later.
Let's listen to their voices just for a moment.
Benjamin Disraeli, the Crystal Palace speech of 1872.
I appeal to the sublime instinct of an ancient people.
The issue is not a mean one.
It is whether you will be content to be a comfortable England modeled and molded upon
continental principles and meeting in due course and inevitable fate, or whether you
will be a great country, an imperial country, a country where your sons when they rise rise
to paramount positions and obtain not merely the esteem of their countrymen, but command
and respect of the world, or the poet Ruskin at Oxford.
This is what England must do or perish.
She must found colonies as fast and as far as she is able, et cetera, et cetera.
Ten years later, some folks from Australia came to British diplomats and said the following
thing, and a British diplomat is describing this.
The Australian agents have lately come to me with their government with a request that
we would annex or at least undertake the protectorate of New Guinea, the New Hebrides, Samoa, the
islands lying north and northeast of New Guinea.
These last are mostly unexplored, in all bigger than France and Germany, and peopled by cannibals.
I asked them whether they did not want another planet all to themselves, and they seemed
to think it would be a desirable arrangement if at all feasible.
The magnitude of their ideas is appalling to the English mind.
Well, perhaps so.
In the suddenness of this new imperialism, the role it played in the minds of contemporaries
and the level of its impact on the Europeans and on world history, both contemporaries and
countless scholars have attempted to capture its essence and understand its causes.
Sometimes they even define imperialism in ways associated with its cause itself, creating
the legacy of enormous historical debate, often in fact usually ideological, that scholars
still wrestle with today, although perhaps less today than when I was in graduate school.
Vladimir Lenin, writing in the midst of World War I and 1916 in an essay on imperialism,
and very much narrowing a broader study written by British leftist Hobson in 1902, they didn't
have rules of intellectual property as well developed at that point, but it's clear plagiarism,
and Hobson's work is better than Lenin's, but Lenin proclaimed imperialism the, quote-unquote,
monopoly stage of capitalism, leading almost inevitably to war as well.
So Lenin felt imperialism was inevitable, that it was in fact monopoly capitalism, and
that it would lead to war as he thought it had done at that point.
Joseph Schumpeter, writing after the war in 1919, stressed the irrational sociological
and psychological forces which he thought were adivisms, holdovers from the past aristocratic
domination, indeed directly contrary to what he thought was rational capitalism, and he
called imperialism the objectless disposition of the part of the state to unlimited, forceable
expansion.
Yet a generation later, the great diplomatic historian, the great American diplomatic historian
William Langer, returned to a more nuanced, multi-pronged approach, more like Hobson pointing
out the need for a case-by-case study of the multiple causal factors involved in each
specific country, but concluding that imperialism was, quote, synonymous with the appropriation
by the western nations of the largest part of the rest of the world.
For example, how can one talk about monopoly capitalism, or even Hobson's finance capitalism
in the state of Italy or in the state of Russia, both striving for empire, neither with excess
capital?
So you have to be careful, and it's best not to be ideological.
