Most contemporary scholars, although far from all, stay closer to Langer's nuanced approach.
And they emphasize the role of nationalism and the striving for great power status.
Always, and this is the peculiarity of Europe, within a competitive state system.
So that when one starts and the others see what they're doing, the race is on.
Also impregnated by social Darwinian and racialist assumptions.
As well as the role of powerful economic forces, including the shock of the early depression in the 1870s.
As well as the implementation of tariffs from 1879 on.
Once you put tariffs around your empire as well as around your state, other countries can't get equal access to it.
And that made the control of colonies potentially far, far more essential and valuable.
Other significant factors were the use of imperialism for domestic purposes.
Often as a substitute for democratic or social reform.
A kind of bread and circuses, tribal satisfaction, playing to our primitive nature.
And even Hobson talks about the primitive thirst and lust for domination.
And unfortunately I'm afraid it does have to do something with human nature, with what the species is all about.
Because there are empires as far back as recorded history goes.
And in terms of the pace and the scope of the venture and even its feasibility.
One also has to add the huge advantage industrial and technological modernization provided.
Especially in terms of its relationship with Africa and Asia.
One scholar Daniel Hedrick wrote a book called The Tools of Empire.
And he shows very, very clearly that before about 1860, explorers who went to Africa, tough explorers who went to Africa.
After five to ten years died of malaria.
Well, along comes quinine and it's possible to survive and to dominate with small steamboats.
And machine guns and repeating rifles and all the rest that Europeans had by the end of the century.
If scholars still debate the causes of imperialism, they also disagree on its impact.
Even with respect to its relationship with World War One.
Although many scholars, both earlier and later, consider imperial conflict a major cause for World War One.
Because it led to tensions and conflict between nations helped stimulate an arms race, especially the Anglo-German naval race.
And helped reinforce negative social Darwinian elements within Europe's culture.
Others consider imperialism to have been a kind of safety valve for overflowing European energy and dynamism.
Indicating that most conflicts between European powers over imperial issues were settled by compromise.
Because what you were compromising on was obviously someone else's territory anyway.
And that the immediate crucial sources of the war were concentrated in Europe.
And grew more intense in fact after the conclusion of the high imperial race about 1905.
And I do want to quote from Rudyard Kipling also.
We all know about the white man's burden poem.
Another anti-imperialist Ed Morel wrote a book at the end of the 19th century called The Black Man's Burden rather than The White Man's Burden.
But after the Boer War Kipling wrote this.
Let us admit it fairly as a business people should.
We have had no end of a lesson.
It will do us no end of good.
350,000 Brits against 60,000 Boer gorillas who had to be put into concentration camps to subdue them.
England's thirst for empire subsided as a result of its experiences as well as as a result of the fact that there really wasn't much left to value to take.
But for example.
