When Russia was checkmated by Japan and Asia in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-1905, Russia shifted her focus back to the Balkans.
Soon entering into conflict with Austria there.
And Austria was the only great power that did not seek an extra European colonial empire.
Indeed, this was the most incendiary issue in Europe.
And also the one where compromise was most difficult.
Because even though conflict in the Balkans was a kind of imperial conflict,
it wasn't the value of the territory involved that was most significant,
but what it represented in terms of national status and pride.
However, even if imperial adventures may have acted as a temporary safety valve, and I think that they did,
this could not go on forever.
Meanwhile, tensions, alliances, arms races, and all sorts of national antagonisms resulted
making it even more likely that if war came, it would be European-wide,
but also worldwide and with global implications.
The most obvious case in point here would be the negative impact that Germany's new imperial
weltpolitik world politics had requiring a first-class navy in terms of its relationship with Great Britain
and even in terms of its relationship with France.
Now Germany already had, at best, a negative relationship with France,
but Germany had a positive relationship with Great Britain at the end of the 19th century.
Turning to the final question, imperialism's impact on the areas in question,
especially Africa and Asia, but also the Near East,
all of the largely Islamic areas of North Africa and Muscat,
as well as those places that are more well-known today such as Persia or Iran,
Afghanistan and Tibet and the Brits and the Russians were arguing over Persia,
Afghanistan and Tibet at the end of the 19th century and dividing spheres of interest there.
It's clear that imperialism had an extremely disruptive impact on the largely traditional cultures of these areas,
forcing them to confront modernization at an enormous disadvantage and at a pace generally not of their own choosing
and leaving scars and severe problems that are still all too evident today.
Especially since the forms of control, direct annexation, protectorate in which you take over all of the affairs of the place,
control by commissions, extraterritoriality, working through native elites,
and the technical means of domination were far more direct and more well-developed than in any previous era,
the pace of historical change in dominated areas was accelerated rapidly.
And we can already see this happening in the early 1880s in Egypt, for example,
when there is an attempted proto-nationalist rebellion against the British.
The British come in and subdue it and over time it leads to phases of the development of a more modern
and self-conscious Egyptian nationalism.
This goes through later phases that lead to an even more conscious and self-dominant and self-aware revolutionary perspective.
And this kind of thing happens worldwide.
Take a look at Jeffrey Barakloff's The Origins of Contemporary History.
If you want an easy and even if it's 30 years old, an easy and really, really interesting analysis of the relationship between imperialism,
the growth of nationalism, and the growth of revolutionary ideologies,
and then the fusing of nationalism and revolutionary ideologies in an anti-European way.
