Lecture 29, The New Imperialism
Having said goodbye to Bismarck in our last encounter, although not totally, I realized
as I began to preview my notes, we turn today to that radical change in temperament and tone
of European international politics, at least with respect to the rest of the world, that
is sometimes called the new imperialism, which accelerates from the 1880s until around 1905.
Although forms of expansionism leading to the domination of one civilization over another,
that is imperialism, are as old as organized human history, the causes, the nature, and
the impact of this process often differs, given the nature of the particular civilizations
involved.
Indeed, much of the history of European civilization, from the late 15th century to the late 18th
century, especially in the West, was interconnected with the process of discovery, exploration,
and conquest, leading to the creation of a variety of colonial empires on the part of
Spain and Holland, England and France, Portugal, throughout Latin America, North America, India,
Indonesia, islands, and in the Pacific Ocean, and parts of the coast of Africa.
And that's usually known as colonialism, rather than as imperialism, although the distinctions
that people make between the two do not affect me all that much.
I see them as more related than separate because they all have to do with imbalances in power
and with expansionism and with domination.
Motivated among other things by the trilogy of gold, God, and glory, Europeans established
outposts and empires worldwide, often mercilessly uprooting or destroying entire native cultures
and civilizations, imposing European economic and cultural and religious domination on them,
and transferring aspects of European civilization worldwide through that process, including
positive aspects of European civilization, to be sure.
However, the establishment of the slave trade resulting in the uprooting and death of many
millions of Africans, the destruction of such well-established civilizations as those of
the Aztecs and the Incas, and the deaths of millions of natives either from disease or
beastly forms of forced labor, especially in silver and gold mining, requiring the
bringing of Africans to replace the deceased natives, are tragic events.
Most Europeans and most of us have often preferred to forget, at least until more recent years.
Surely one major element that lent early modern powers their particular dynamism was the economic
exploitation of their vast empires, with the British Empire grandest of them all eventually
winning the lion's share of the spoils.
Now ironic that the increasingly dynamic English middle class slash aristocratic synergy leading
to enhanced constitutionalism and greater tolerance for minorities was partly or largely based
on the harsh and sometimes murderous exploitation of others and especially of people of color.
As the great 18th century British Prime Minister William Pitt explained during one of the frequent
colonial wars with the French and with others, he said, when your trade is at stake, you
have no retrenchment, you must either defend it or perish.
However, the era from European history from the late 18th century until the 1880s is often
thought of as a relatively non-imperial age or an age in which imperial expansion did
not have that much importance.
True.
