The European powers continued to expand, as the French did in such areas as Algeria and
Southeast Asia and Senegal and Africa, while the British consolidated their direct control
over India and they expanded in South Africa, while the Russians fought continuous wars
of conquest to the east and south, and we conquered a continent calling it Manifest Destiny.
It's ordained by God, it's self-evident, one doesn't even need to explain why it occurred,
except to the people over whose territory we expanded.
Still, with the British loss of the 13 colonies, followed by the colonial losses in the Americas
that the French and the Portuguese and the Spanish endured, mainly as a result of wars
of independence, the average European, and even the elites, turned their attention to
the more immediate and proximate concerns raised by the French Revolution and the Napoleonic
Era and made possible by the industrial revolutions and the growth of constitutionalism and nationalism.
These were the primary focus of European civilization from the time of the French Revolution until
the early 1880s, even as their particular large states continued to expand.
I don't remember any of them giving up territory during that time period.
To the British, especially with their industrial advantage, free trade rather than direct domination
seemed the way to go, it seemed more efficacious.
Even if the free trade was imposed by force, if advantageous, as in the two British-French
wars against China in the 1840s and in the 1850s, and one can actually read the letters
by the Chinese emperors saying to the British, saying to Queen Victoria directly, how would
you like it if somebody tried to sell opium to your people and considered it the laws of
God and free trade?
But the British did consider free trade to be part of natural law.
And when we opened up Japan, we opened it up.
We also were expressing the same basic understanding of the rules of the game.
How then does one explain the quote-unquote new imperialism during the late 19th century?
And indeed, that new is justified.
What were its primary causes as far as we can tell?
What impact did it have on Europe as a whole and on the new areas that came under European
domination?
In 1880 and 1905 or so, the European great powers, except for Austria-Hungary, and she
did attempt to expand and did expand somewhat in the Balkans, including some smaller powers,
including the king of Belgium himself, joined by Japan and the United States, rushed to
claim virtually every available chunk or morsel of quote-unquote unclaimed or conquerable
territory in Africa, in Asia, in Southeast Asia, the Pacific Islands, or just to expand
their economic advantage in these areas as Germany did in the Turkish Empire.
What was new about this, given the lower importance imperialism played in the previous
era, was the frenzy pace of this competitive expansion, the vastness of the territories
occupied, including the previously relatively untouched area of interior Africa and the
less touched areas of Asia, the variety of the forms of colonial control and domination
that were exercised, the extent of the control achieved, the general public acceptance of
the process, not everyone, but the general public acceptance of the process and its centrality
in the minds of European leaders and supporting elites.
The historian Robert Gildia speaks in his book of almost a religion of imperialism,
the number and variety of the powers involved and its impact on European and world diplomacy.
