However, this Franco-Russian alliance did force the German General Staff to consider the likelihood of a two-front war leading to the Schlieffen Plan, which was completed in December 1905, which was later to have such disastrous diplomatic and military consequences.
And Bismarck had even considered the possibility of this earlier in thinking about what would happen if Germany got into a war with Russia requiring it to send lots of troops to the east.
Wouldn't it have to destroy France anyway just to make sure France didn't attack Germany from the west, even if not allied with Russia?
So keeping Russia and France apart was pretty basic to German security, and they blew it.
During the second half of the 1890s, indeed, on the surface, at least, until 1904, things still seemed to be going Germany's way.
As Europe's attention shifted to the Ottoman Empire, where the first Armenian massacres were occurring in 1895 and 1896,
and that moment, Lord Salisbury, British Prime Minister, actually thought of running the Straits to force the Turks to reform, and his cabinet refused to allow him to do so.
And in the rebellion in Crete in 1896, leading to a Greco-Turkish war in 1897, while all of this disruption was happening, Germany became more powerful at the port, helping to block decisive European intervention and gathering economic advantage from Turkey as well.
So during a time period in which Turkey needed more pressure to reform in some way, it would have been helpful and certainly should not have been allowed to carry out these massacres.
Germany, in a very quiet, subterranean way, played its cards and played them successfully. In fact, the Kaiser visited Jerusalem in the middle of all of this.
Moreover, a childish and unprofessional French attempt to challenge the British in Central Africa at Fashoda in the Sudan in order to force Britain to end her 1882 occupation of Egypt, which to the French was a perceived affront to their grandeur.
Although the British had asked them to go in on the deal to stabilize Egypt before together, this brought Britain and France to the brink of war in 1898 and 1899, right in the middle of the worst phase of the Dreyfus Affair, leading to a French humiliation and much ill will on the French part.
And forcing the French or pushing the French to initially seek revenge against the British fortified with support from the Russians.
Now this is really curious because Delcasse had a very powerful and magnificent diplomatic career, but during this time period he really wasn't thinking clearly or he was taking enormous risks because what the French actually wanted to do
was to get to Fashoda first and actually block the waters of the Nile perhaps, forcing the British to come to an international conference at which their role in Egypt would be discussed.
Ludacris, dangerous, done quietly, leading to humiliation, reading the British documents is extraordinary.
Salisbury Minutes, we have to find some way of getting the French out of this terrible situation they have gotten themselves into.
Our people won't accept our just negotiating with them until they remove their flag from Fashoda.
But we don't want a war over this.
Meanwhile, not only in 1898 and in 1899, but even in 1900, the French are still fortifying their ports, fearing the British would attack.
Immediately thereafter, gold and greed got in the British way.
In fact, it got them way over their heads in their expansionist war against the Dutch wars and the Transvaal, part of South Africa, where between 1899 and 1902, most of the British army was tied down, subduing the tough fundamentalist Dutch settlers at great expense in money,
great expense in blood, and great expense in status, while Britain's jealous imperial competitors indulged in an orgy of gleeful criticism, soft blackmail, and unopposed imperial expansion of their own.
