And the Brits couldn't do anything about it. They were really stuck and they were overextended.
And they were also overextended in the east, pushing up against Russia and Persia, Afghanistan and Tibet.
And that really scared them much more than the German navy at that juncture.
During this critical moment, with German tempting, Britain seemed poised to abandon
what it openly referred to as its quote-unquote splendid isolation in favor of an alliance with Germany
only to be rebuffed by Germany in a public display of recrimination between German Chancellor Bernhard von Budeau
and British colonial secretary Joseph Chamberlain, the most popular British statesman at that time.
And indeed, this also was extraordinary. It's very understandable why Germany would not want to have an alliance with Great Britain
because Germany would bear the brunt of all the problems facing Russia or facing France.
But by the end of the 19th century, the British recognized or the younger generation of new British states people recognized
they were overextended while the elders still liked splendid isolation, no encumberments.
The youngers got the better of the deal because the British were bogged down and Britain began to look for allies.
The Germans stuck their hand out. They began to negotiate. The Germans thought the British would never fully grab that hand and have a real alliance.
And so over three years, the hands were going back and forth until the British pushed their hand all the way over and said,
hey, let's have a full alliance at which time Buleau pulled back and essentially said, no, thank you.
Now, this is reported weekly in the press. Everybody has an expectation that something real is going to be achieved.
Don't start if you can't finish. That's why international conferences finish most of their work before they're held
because you have a conference to deal with a problem and all you do is talk and nothing happens.
Things don't get better. Things don't get the same. Things get worse. They don't stay the same. They get worse.
Coming on the heels of the first two German naval laws in 1898 and 1900 and they didn't bother the British that much at that point.
But they quietly set Germany on a course of unnecessary, intense naval competition with Britain.
This diplomatic debacle undermined the considerable extensive pro-German sentiment in Great Britain, preparing the way for the growth of pro-French sentiment instead.
A person I worked on once said, if you can't have what you like, you got to like what you have and that's what began to happen between these two powers.
First, however, the British actually reached an alliance with Japan in 1902 because that's what they could have expecting to use Japan, not against Germany,
but to prevent Russian expansionism in Asia under British guidance. The Japanese, however, fooled everybody and had a mind of their own.
Not only were the Russians irresistibly pressing in on Britain's sphere of influence in Persia, today's Iran, Afghanistan, still Afghanistan and Tibet,
inching toward India, but the Russians were pressing in on China as well and especially on its province, Manchuria, also sought by Japan,
from which the Russians were supposed to leave after they had occupied it during the Chinese Boxer Rebellion in 1900.
However, also during the Boer War, the Kaiser made another serious faux pas with respect to France, tempting Delcasse with the prospect of embarrassing the British
by calling an international conference over the Boer War and then perhaps introducing the question of Egypt as well, that would be a real double whammy.
But the Kaiser asked the French to agree, first, on a new treaty, guaranteeing the territorial status quo in Europe, totally inoffensive, except what it really means is guaranteeing the loss of Alsace-Lorenne in writing.
No French politician could have survived that. I don't even know if any French politician could have survived it physically, signing a treaty of territorial status quo.
There are certain things one does not talk about.
