This was the last time the French Foreign Minister took seriously any kind of real agreement with Germany, not that he wanted disagreement, but he could not have agreement, because the price was too high,
which almost inevitably forced him to seek better relations with Great Britain in order to obtain some compensation for accepting the British occupation of Egypt.
The British had gone in in 1882, they really didn't want to stay, the further they got in, it was like quicksand, it became more disruptive, and they couldn't leave and still defend their investments.
Forced in this direction, after having first brought about a diplomatic reconciliation with Italy between 1900 and 1902, in which Italy not only promised France support for its forward movement in Morocco next to Algeria, already a part of the French Empire,
in return for French support for Italian expansion in Tripoli or Libya when the time came, Italy also indicated that its relationship with Germany and Austria was very, very porous, and that France need not worry about Italy being part of a German-Austrian war against France under almost any circumstances.
By that time, 1902, Delcasse was being pressed by his most powerful diplomatic advisor, Ambassador Paul Campbell in London, who had a diplomatic career that went from about the 1880s all the way to 1922.
Campbell pushing Delcasse to seek a colonial reconciliation with Britain almost literally all around the globe, because they both had colonies all around the globe, and they both had different interests, and they had tensions everywhere they had colonies.
In other words, they had something in substance about which one could compromise because it was real.
Now, what forced the pace of this colonial adjustment and the negotiations took an entire year, what forced the pace and raised the stakes in this Anglo-French negotiation was the surprise Japanese attack on Russia in February 1904,
which could have degenerated into a war between France and Britain as well had they really gotten unlucky.
The French have an alliance with the Russians. All right, it doesn't say anything about Japan. The British have an alliance with the Japanese.
If either side of the other would help its ally, the other one would be forced to come in, or this could really have degenerated, and this took place in the context of public visits, the French president going to Britain, the English king going to Paris.
All kinds of continuous talk and writing about it, you couldn't afford to have this colonial settlement fail, and it came close to failing, but you couldn't allow it to fail in the middle of a Russo-Japanese war.
However, before finally concluding this widespread colonial settlement, the most important segment of which was French support for the British occupation of Egypt in return for British support for France's growing presence in Morocco,
the British and the French, having both been abused by Germany, not only decided not to seek German approval for their transaction, the cost would be too high, they feared bribery,
but also to offer each other diplomatic support should a problem arise, and this last set of discussions occurred almost absentmindedly at the very last moment.
The delayed action German response to the Anglo-French Entente was the first Moroccan crisis between 1905 and 1906, and it soon converted an inoffensive colonial settlement into a virtual diplomatic alliance with military implications.
The French and the British never signed an actual alliance, but their Entente, their colonial settlement, became so much stronger as a result of the German challenge that the Entente was virtually as good as an alliance.
An alliance is not only good if no one fulfills its potential, fulfills its promises. The Italian participation in the German-Austrian alliance did them no good when Italy chose not to fulfill its promises.
