Adding insult to injury in 1906-1907, the French helped broker an Anglo-Russian colonial settlement.
Their disputes were not as widespread as the disputes between France and Great Britain,
but their disputes were in some ways even more dangerous because they abutted onto India,
which was Britain's largest imperial area.
So the French helped broker a settling of zones of conflict between the British and the Russians
in Persia, Afghanistan and Tibet, and this added an Anglo-Russian entente on top of the Franco-British entente,
now known as the Triple Entente pitting Britain, France in the Middle and Russia against Germany and Austria
with Italy somewhere out in Neverland in the new diplomatic alignment in Europe.
And this made Germany feel even more uncircled, encircled.
However, the circle was still really, really flimsy.
The British and the Russians never had much empathy or sympathy for each other,
and the Russians didn't live up to their part of the bargain,
but they continued to work together because they had to, because they were facing a bully.
Equally serious was the fact that the Kaiser had brought serious mistrust upon Germany
without any gain in strength or any real compensation.
The deceased Bismarck must have been tossing tormentedly in his grave,
but with a wry smile on his face or with an angry scowl on his face.
At the same time, others tried to make sense of what had really, really happened during this entire process.
Again, turning to Lord Gray, starting even in 1906,
he said the following before the Conference of Algecerus began to meet.
If there was a war between France and Germany, it will be very difficult for us to keep out of it.
If the expectation of British intervention is disappointed, the French will never forgive us.
He added later,
and on taunt between Russia, France and ourselves would be absolutely secure.
If it is necessary to check Germany, it could then be done.
The present is the most unfavorable moment for attempting to check her.
In other words, even Britain and France trying to check Germany with Russia being in its weakened state
was not a very, very good idea, but one that they had to contemplate nonetheless.
Additionally, in 1907, a young British diplomat wrote a memorandum
that has become henceforth famous after his name known as the Crow Memorandum.
In it, he talked about the recent history of Germany.
He talked about the way in which Germany was unified by act of war
and military daring, and the fact that Germany now was really beginning to be a threat to Britain everywhere.
Not so much because of its navy, but because of the texture and the nature and the process of its diplomacy.
Listen to his words.
There is then perhaps another way of looking at the problem.
It might be suggested that the great German design is in reality no more than an expression of a vague, confused
and unpractical statesmanship not fully realizing its drift.
A charitable critic might add by way of explanation that the well-known qualities of mine and temperament
distinguishing for good or for evil the present ruler of Germany
cannot improbably be largely responsible for the erratic, domineering and often frankly aggressive spirit
which is recognizable at present in every branch of Germany's public life, not merely in the region of foreign policy.
He continued talking about the fact that Germany was blackmailing Britain at many points in the globe
and it wasn't a very, very good idea to give in to blackmail, the blackmail would not stop that way.
