In time of war, the British would set their fleet in the North Sea and the Atlantic.
The French would set their fleet in the Mediterranean, so Germany and France got involved in a war.
Even if England was not in that war, England took responsibility for protecting the coasts of France.
You can see how seriously things were developing.
These agreements were, actually, unconstitutional in nature, secret and totally unbeknownst to parliament.
An Italian-inspired war with Turkey initiated, in fact, more than inspired, over Tripoli.
In 1911, in the middle of the Moroccan crisis, the Italians wanted to get their peace,
led to a series of Balkan wars in 1912 and in 1913, during which the entire Balkan region was further destabilized,
while Serbia and Russia were further humiliated in these Balkan wars.
A series of Balkan states attacked Turkey, did pretty well, then they argued over the spoils.
In each of these cases, Serbia gained more territory, particularly in what is now the state of Albania.
Where did the state of Albania come from?
It was created in 1913 by the powers in concert blocking Serbia from the Adriatic,
with the Russians forced to push the Serbs to give back the territory they had conquered,
and this was done at the Treaty of London in 1913.
So the Serbs had done well militarily in these wars, Russia had supported them morally in these wars,
and then because of Austrian objections backed by Germany, Russia was forced to get the Serbs to give up their gains
with France and England hoping and pressing the Russians to play this particular role,
because it wasn't worth a war, and there was going to be a war over the issue of Serbian expansion,
which now was blocked twice, both in Bosnia and in Albania, but also in each case, Russia was humiliated.
By this time, the Austrians wanted a showdown with Serbia once and for all,
either to break her diplomatic independence or to break her militarily.
The Kaiser at one point finally said, we can't have a war because of Albania.
However, in circle Germany, in quotes, although it was now encircled, although the circle could still have been broken,
all Germany had to do is back off a little bit, and the circle could have been broken,
but the encircled Germans, in order to save their only quote-unquote dependable ally,
and or to achieve their goals, vague or concrete, depending on which interpretation one wants to take,
the Germans were ready to back Austria, or occasionally even to push her, believing in a worst case scenario
that Russia and France were still beatable rather easily, although the gap was fast closing.
Many believed that war would come. Some wanted it, so that although Albania was not a just cause for war as far as Germany was concerned,
more in Austria would have wanted to use it at that point.
After this crisis, the bulk of those people who mattered in the German government and in the military especially
believed that this was going to happen sooner or later that Austria had to settle with Serbia and Germany
would back Austria in her settling with Serbia, but that wasn't the right moment for it.
