The French now, by 1913, were tired of blackmail and bullying.
They feared the collapse of the Russian alliance if they didn't support Russia more forcefully in the next crisis.
And the French military was also confident that it could get the job done.
Its plans were as direct and as offensive as the Germans, its courage was as strong as the Germans, and not only that,
they were tired of having civilians weasel out and making compromises under the barrel of a gun.
They were tired of being bullied, and they had completely recovered of their pride and their status that they had lost
during and immediately after the Dreyfus Affair, the French military, was ready to go and even anxious to go.
The Russians were vengeful and angry and humiliated, unwilling to accept further humiliation and pressure of the kind that they had experienced,
and they believed that their army had sufficiently recovered from the Russo-Japanese war that it could do what was expected of it in a moment of crisis.
And by the way, remember that the Kaiser and Nikki, the second are cousins, and they call each other Willy and Nikki,
so if the British and the French let the Russians stray too far, Willy and Nikki might just get together again as difficult as that might be, it was possible.
The British, more than any of the powers, wanted peace.
Now obviously they had gotten the lion's share of the imperial wealth, and peace was good for them, peace was good for business,
but the British sincerely hoped for peace, but they knew they could not allow France to be crushed by a seemingly uncontrollable Germany.
If France were crushed, Britain would also virtually lose its complete independence and integrity.
All of the powers were facing serious financial and political pressures, stemming from a perpetual arms race.
While many diplomats, fatigued by the plethora of increasing continuous crises, were losing some of their trust, even in their own capacity to settle things.
And in terms of these military expenditures that we've just mentioned, they doubled in the five years.
In each of the great powers, they doubled before the war.
Remember this was the very moment in which the British were carrying out their national insurance scheme.
Germany was going into debt because of the unwillingness of the aristocrats to pay the taxes that would have covered those military expenses,
and not just the aristocrats, the industrialists, the upper bourgeoisie as well.
So most of the militaries were ready to go, and for some, the sooner, the better.
What essentially happened in the summer of 1914, following the assassination of Austrian heir apparent Franz Ferdinand by Serbian nationalist terrorists,
is that Austria-Hungary, backed and pushed encouraged by Germany, decided for war, localized if possible, Europe-wide if necessary.
When the Austro-German decision makers, for whatever reason or reasons, decided not to accept Serbia's highly conciliatory response to the Austrian ultimatum sent on the 23rd of July and returned on the 25th,
Austria declared war on Serbia, and for good measure bombarded Belgrade its capital, even though the Austrians wouldn't be prepared for war for two more weeks, the die was cast.
Given the time-based imperatives of the German Schlieffen plan, by 1913, Germany's only operational military plan, repeated British attempts to intervene were bound to fail.
In short order, Russia backed Serbia, Germany backed Austria, France backed Russia, Germany invaded Belgium, which was neutral, the fastest route to France, allowing Britain without serious discussion to declare war on Germany.
The whole house of cards simply collapsed. As British Foreign Secretary Lord Gray said at that moment, quote, the lights are out in Europe. I do not believe we will see the light in our day.
The worst of all possible circumstances had happened. It had all collapsed and exploded.
