However, in the second Moroccan crisis, the Germans send a gunboat to Algeria, to Morocco
rather, when the French have occupied Fez, moving forward in their hope to control Morocco,
talking about the independence of Morocco, but then calling for large compensation indeed
all of French Congo in Africa. So on the one hand, the gunboat goes there to demonstrate
the independence of Morocco, but if we can't have the independence of Morocco, we want
a large compensatory bribe. In fact, what seems to be happening at that point is that
Germany either wants a territorial bribe for French forward movement in Morocco, or
it wants to show both the British and the French that they cannot do anything without
taking Germany into consideration, or it shows that they are once again trying to show to
the British and to the French that their entente does not give them sufficient basis of protection
and they're trying to break that entente. In other words, it's still unclear to scholars
what Germany was trying to do in Morocco at that moment during the second Moroccan crisis.
Now what resulted from that was not what they expected. In the middle of the Moroccan crisis,
in fact in the beginning of the Moroccan crisis, David Lloyd George, who had become himself
probably the most popular person in Great Britain and who had pacifistic tendencies because
he was far more interested in domestic social legislation, the minute this thing really
broke out, he gave a speech known as the mansion house speech in which he said directly to
the Germans, what do you think you're doing? Don't you dare? But he not only threatened
the Germans, he threatened the French. Don't you dare concede to Germany a port on the
Atlantic coast so that Germany will have access. In other words, a pacifistic Brit responded
to this crisis immediately supporting the French and stating clearly that the British
would stand behind the French. And so discussions occurred. There was at that time a French
prime minister who was conciliatory. Germany did get part of the French Congo part, which
was relatively useless territory except for the people who lived there. But tensions were
exacerbated further. Now in the wake of this, what the British attempt to do is to diffuse
this tension by sending their minister of war, Haldane, who was a German scholar, spoke
German to Germany in early 1912, to attempt to diffuse especially the Anglo-German naval
race. And by the way, this naval race had gotten far more expensive and far more dangerous
in 1906 when the British introduced a larger, far more powerful new battleship, the Dreadnought,
which the Germans then were easily able to build also, which meant that the huge British
lead in the naval area was immediately erased because they were starting from point zero
in terms of these new battleships. And the British still were trying to build two to
one at least over the Germans. And that, of course, is extremely expensive and very irritating.
What happens after the failure of this Haldane mission, following the context of this second
Moroccan crisis, is that the British and the French increasingly began to share military
secrets to distuss strategies and contingencies in case of war. Britain was a powerful naval
power, the most powerful the world had ever seen, but its army was not all that strong.
And so the British began to strengthen what was called the BEF, the British Expeditionary
Force. Where was the expedition going to be? Not in Africa, but in France. And simultaneously
in the course of 1912, the British and the French reached two secret naval agreements
and accords, essentially mandating conflict with Germany on the seas, even if Britain
was not at war with Germany in actuality, or if France was not.
