Although many of the above forces were clearly in play before 1907, they had not yet reached
a critical point unless one adopts the view that Germany was bound to provoke World War
sooner or later, either because of the incoherent nature of its government and leadership or
because some of its actual goals mandated the war or some combination of these two ideas
which I do not accept.
After 1900, quote-unquote, coping with Germany, however, was clearly a difficult, but not
impossible task.
Pre-World War I Germany, though greatly conflicted, does not appear to have been suicidal in nature,
although it may have been in some general ways schizophrenic.
For this reason, a careful analysis of what changed after 1907 is essential, particularly
with respect to the Balkan region, source of the immediate Austro-Serve conflict that disintegrated
into World War I.
Most importantly, until 1907, the central hopeful situation in the Balkans was the Austro-Russian
decision reached both in 1897 and in 1903 to keep the Balkans on ice, that is, to stabilize
it, cooperating there if difficulties would happen to arise.
Given the nature of the alliance system and the way in which any local conflict could
then get out of control, as during the Russo-Japanese War, which could have gotten out of
control, Austro-Russian concert, especially in the inherently unstable Balkans, was an
essential element in preventing a wider war.
As of 1907, however, two situations developed that made the quest for stability desirable
were no longer prevalent.
Having been checkmated by Japan as we've indicated in the Far East, Russian nationalists, also
wanting to use foreign policy success to buttress the weakened monarchy, now switched their
attention to the Ottoman Empire and the Balkans as their main target of opportunity with lots
of Panslav sentiment behind them.
By 1907, the Austro-Serve conflict had degenerated into a near-free-for-all, with the Austro-Hungarians
determined to checkmate Serbia one way or another before the Serbs disrupted the Empire
itself by inciting rebellion and civil war in its southern Slavic areas, especially in
Hungary, or by actual warfare.
It looked to them like the former Austro-Piedmontese conflict, but with much higher stakes.
What had happened is that a new dynasty came into power in Serbia in 1903, changed from
a pro-Austrian to an anti-Austrian policy, and that in 1906 to 1907 there was actually
a tower for between Austria and Serbia, which the Serbs survived, known as the Pig War,
because that's one of the main things that was going from one place to the other, and
now it simply continued to fester.
Ironically, the situation that provoked what became a faithful Austro-Russian conflict
began in 1908 as an attempt at concerted action between them, but not of a stabilizing kind.
Having a reformist nationalist military coup in the Ottoman Empire in July 1908, both the
Austrians and the Russians agreed in September to make their gains against the Ottoman Empire
together before the Ottomans were able to reassert their authority.
In other words, for personal reasons, they wanted to move before stability returned and
before the Ottoman Empire got stronger.
The Austrians would annex the Slavic provinces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which had been under
their control since 1878, which were in a sense Piedmont's Lombardy and Venetia, those
areas that the Austrians had controlled in northern Italy that the Piedmontese coveted
and finally got.
And by annexing Bosnia and Herzegovina, they would block Serb hopes and also cut them off
from the sea.
