Butcher 32, The Origins of World War I.
Having spent our last four encounters trying to understand and mainly a narrative but also
an analytical way, the intricacies of European diplomacy on the eve of World War I, today
we're going to step back, try and refocus, take a longer view, and make sense of the
whole thing since its breakdown brought upon Europe the greatest tragedy in all of modern
European history.
In seeking the underlying and immediate causes of World War I, and especially as to the
why of a seemingly local conflict between the Austro-Hungarian Empire and Serbia degenerated
into a traumatic wider conflict, historians analyze a variety of broad underlying developments
and then focus on the final crisis of June and July of 1914, and this area of modern history
is one of the most closely and carefully and meticulously studied areas of all.
It's a lot easier to understand the origins of World War II than World War I.
Unfortunately, but not surprisingly, the underlining causes read like a litany of much that was
askew in European civilization at the end of the 19th century.
Perhaps the most dangerous feature is that European nationalism had gradually become
more exclusivist, Darwinian, and even racialist, even as it generally spread eastward and into
the Balkans, and even as it also became a more mass-based phenomenon.
In a word, it went from sleeping beauty to Frankenstein's monster.
Indeed, nationalism became the dominant secular religion of the century, even among those who still maintain
traditional religious beliefs, and it had become something like a tribal team sport as well,
in an age in which sport was beginning to become important as was reading.
Therefore, not only did nationalism motivate elite behavior, but it could be used to justify
in cautious policies as well as a mechanism by which to co-opt the masses, even as a substitute
for serious political reform, such as expanded suffrage, responsible government, fairer taxation,
social betterment, all of which were things that all of the European societies needed
on the eve of World War I.
Making this more parallel growth in nationalism so dangerous was militarism, which had many
dangerous implications.
Although the growth in universal military conscription following the Franco-Prussian War also served
to integrate the masses into the nation, and to widen their horizons away from their
local culture, it further enhanced nationalism, and it brought increasing power to the military
itself, now frequently the most powerful symbol of the nation, even in democratic France,
even ten years after the Dreyfus Affair.
Moreover, with the increasing technological nature of warfare, especially during and after
the era from the Crimean War of the 1850s and the wars of Italian and German unification
in the 1860s, during which military success made or broke regimes and states and nations,
the Dreyfus Affair became more the domain of supposed or real experts, who were also
the highest caste in society, and among the most powerful monarchies, almost a state within
a state.
So that many an earlier leader from Frederick the Great to Napoleon was his own best general,
but now the generals and the military in general had a kind of technical knowledge that gave
them an advantage in terms of the advice they would give in time of crisis.
It's much, much more like our world.
