In the immediate decades before the war, not only did military expenditure increase radically
because of the arms race, but military plans were developed with specific war models in
mind.
These plans, and especially the German Schlieffener Plan, narrowed diplomatic flexibility in time
of crisis and even placed military, quote-unquote, imperatives above political and diplomatic
vision.
Once it came to be assumed that war of any kind was likely, and perhaps even desirable,
military necessity and military timetables took precedence over other variables.
Moreover, since the upper military elite was increasingly more politicized and nationalized
and nationalist as well, and often believed that could, quote-unquote, solve problems
better than the politicians, military pressure for action became a powerful force itself,
especially in time of crisis.
The last thing any politician wanted to do was to have an argument that became public
with a powerful and well-known military leader.
This was true among all of the great powers, more or less, but even more prominent and
more dangerous in the monarchies where the upper military elite, all aristocrats, were
inseparable from the regime itself.
In fact, they were the ultimate foundation of that regime.
Intimately with both nationalism and militarism were the prevailing Darwinian and racialist
cultural assumptions of the age.
Competition and struggle were dominant motifs, even among and especially among the educated
elites.
I don't think the peasants were as affected by this, in fact, I'm sure they weren't.
And war was seen by many, including intellectuals and scholars and even sometimes people who
said they were religious and media gurus as the ultimate test of manhood leading to spiritual
growth and to creativity.
In an earlier lecture, we talked about the futurists, those wonderful young Italian artists
who talked about their belief in speed, adventure, sport, war, the destruction of museums and
contempt for women.
It wasn't just the Italians who were at it, it was nearly everybody.
In a series of essays written in 1912, two French young intellectuals Henri Massis and
Alfred de Tarde wrote a book called The Young People of Today.
They talked about the lack of courage, the cowardice of their parents, who had not stood
up to Germany, who had allowed Alsace-Lorend to remain forsaken, who were pessimists because
they were materialists and believed too much in science rather than in spiritual Catholicism,
in willpower, in emotion, in purpose.
And they said their generation was different, that their generation had revived.
And this is what they thought about war.
War, the word has taken on a sudden glamour, they said in 1912.
It is a youthful word, holy new, adorned with that seduction which the eternal bellicose
instinct has revived in the hearts of men.
These young men impute to it all the beauty with which they are in love and of which they
have been deprived by ordinary life.
Above all war in their eyes is the occasion for the most noble of human virtues, those
which they exalt above all others, energy, mastery, and sacrifice, for a cause which
transcends ourselves.
With William James they believe that life, quote, would become odious if it offered
neither risks nor rewards for the courageous man.
