The assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife by Serbian nationalists slash
or terrorists correctly assumed to be true, although not proven at that moment, while
visiting a next Bosnia in late June was a perfect opportunity with which to bring Serbia
to heal.
But before bringing Serbia to heal, let's see how the Serbs felt about it.
One of the conspirators was a man named Cevčić, and this is what he wrote.
How dared Franz Ferdinand, not only the representative of the oppressor, but in his own person, an
arrogant tyrant, enters Sarajevo on that day.
Such an entry was a studied insult.
June 28th is a date engraved deeply in the heart of every Serb, so that the day has a
name of its own.
It is called a villanon.
It is the day on which the old Serbian kingdom was conquered by the Turks at the Battle of
Amseldsfeld in 1389.
It is also the day on which, in the Second Balkan War, the Serbian arms took glorious
revenge on the Turk for his old victory and for the years of enslavement.
There is plenty of guilt to go around in all the European states and among all the peoples
in creating a situation from which this war developed.
Following the growth of the encirclement psychosis among the German military and the German political
elite, and Bismarck suffered from paranoia about this also except he went out of his
way to make sure it didn't materialize, in the aftermath of Germany's isolation except
for Austria-Hungary.
During the 1906 Algecerus Conference, Germany began to support the more radical actions
of its ally because it had become its sole ally.
What Bismarck had most feared had come into being.
The tail was now wagging the dog or the interests of the tail and the survival of the tail was
determining the policy of the dog and the dual alliance increasingly was becoming more
offensive than defensive in nature.
For the most part, eschewing a policy of trying to undermine the triple entente with honey
and it could have undermined the triple entente with honey.
It could have lessened the naval race.
It didn't have to have the second Moroccan crisis with France.
That was consummate stupidity, irresponsible behavior.
Germany strengthened the triple entente with threats and needless crises while also simultaneously
coming to believe that the great power status of the Austro-Hungarian Empire had to be preserved
at all costs.
Moreover, on the eve of World War I, the German military backed by much of the political
elite, placing all of its bests on a two-front imperative schlieffen plan, had not only come
to believe that a larger showdown was likely, but that it should come sooner rather than
later before Russia had fully recovered from its defeat by the Japanese.
For the German military, the Kaiser and his immediate advisers, the assassination was
a golden opportunity, either Serbia would be radically weakened one way or another,
or Germany's Russian and French enemies would be taught a lesson in a war that could be
sold to the German public.
On the event of a wider war, the Kaiser and his generals hoped Britain would stay out,
although Leshnowski, the German ambassador, told them not to count on this.
Even the weather cooperated with those who wanted war.
It was warm and dry, and the crowds loved it, and they didn't think about what it would
be like to serve in mud and filth.
Unfortunately, by 1914, neither the Russians, nor the most involved French politicians and
military leaders were willing to back down again, since a showdown seemed likely to them
as well, and they believed they would also win the war and also in a cost-effective manner.
Angered and humiliated by recent German and Austro-Hungarian actions, pressed by Panslavist
sentiment and fearing the domestic backlash from further humiliation, Russia was prepared
to hold her ground.
Angered by German blackmail from two Moroccan crises, hoping to finally regain Alsace-Lorraine,
fearing that failure to support Russia in another Balkan crisis would disrupt their
alliance, France held its ground, and did not encourage Russia to compromise.
This time, all of the wrong cards fell into place, including Germany's invasion of neutral
Belgium, allowing Britain to decide for war as well with little discussion.
The worst of all worlds had come into being, miserably worse than even the most pessimistic
contemporary could imagine.
Thank you.
