However, during the five years before World War I, the alliances hardened, they calcified
in nature, with ever-increasing, binding military implications, with military officers talking
to one another even without the support or the knowledge of their states.
At one point, one Austrian general said to another, who was governing Germany, because
von Molten was telling von Hötzendorf things that the German government hadn't already
approved of, making it almost inevitable that any war between single members of each block
would lead to a generalized European war.
Each successive international crisis placed the alliances into greater focus and put them
under greater pressure.
Neither side could afford to see one of its partners beaten or broken or even further
humiliated because it would have had an unacceptable impact on the fragile balance of power, which
was really, really fragile, and no one wanted to be left out in the cold.
In the most immediate sense, given the peculiar and increasingly unstable structure of the
Austro-Hungarian Empire, because of its multinational nature, but also of the Russian Empire for
different but equally powerful reasons, this brings us back to the most immediate, but
also long-term, forces and situations that led to war in 1914, both the Austro-Serbian
War that they wished would be limited, and World War I as a whole as well.
If the Tsarist Empire was also multinational and multi-religious in nature, at least there
was only one dominant national group, whereas the Austro-Hungarian Empire had two groups
even in tension with each other, and even united, they still formed only 40% of a population
ruling over all of the rest.
Making this far more dangerous was Hungarian unwillingness to lighten up with respect to
the South Slav peasant masses.
To do less magurization, to share wealth opportunity, while neighboring Serbia, viewing itself as
the peat mountain of the Balkans, sought to destabilize the Austro-Hungarian Empire while
also expanding its territory to the Adriatic Sea, and here we have this incredible situation
of this tiny, relatively new state trying to destabilize an historic empire that is
part of the structure of the whole balance of power in Europe, almost preposterous except
that they had made that decision as a society and they were going for it.
Now the Austro-Hungarians twice blocked Serbia's westward advance before the war by annexing
Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1908 and creating Albania in 1913, and again these wars have
to just crash in on your mind because we're still talking about some of the same places
today just as we're talking about Persia and Afghanistan and Tibet for a different reason.
In both cases with German support and Russian humiliation, their military elite and many
political leaders had come to believe that Serbia had to be either broken or made subservient
at the earliest possible opportunity.
