Directly across to the border, there was a German writing about the same time, General Friedrich
von Bernhardt, who wrote a book called Germany and the Next War, even far more influential,
since Bernhardt had already retired, was a very, very deeply respected general, whose
father had been an even more respected general.
And what did he have to say about war?
From this standpoint, I must first of all examine the aspirations for peace, which seem
to dominate our age, and threaten to poison the soul of the German people, according to
their true moral significance.
I must try to prove that war is not merely a necessary element in the life of nations,
but an indispensable factor of culture in which a true, civilized nation achieves the
highest expression of strength and satisfaction.
Can you believe that 65 million Germans would sink to the level of 40 million Frenchmen?
He added, both of these publications occurred, not surprisingly, in 1912, two years before
the war.
Combined with what has been called the short war illusion, the belief by most that any
conflict would be decisive and glorious as the Franco-Prussian War or the Austro-Prussian
War, war could even be seen as a cost-effective problem-solving policy.
The Germans expected the Schlieffen Plan to work quickly.
Indeed, they expected to enjoy Christmas in Paris, the most beautiful of all cities.
While the French, with their Plan 17 and their belief in élan vitale vital energy, they
expected to be to Berlin and back to Paris for Christmas, because who would want to celebrate
Christmas in Berlin?
I've been to Berlin for New Years, and it's quite a celebration.
It's probably not a coincidence that the British, having experienced the brutal war between
1899 and 1902, were least taken with either the short war illusion or war's cost-effective
nature, and of all the great powers were most involved in trying somehow to mediate and
preserve the peace.
And by the way, I could give you statements from Teddy Roosevelt that are not all that
different from these French or German statements, because we hadn't had a real good war since
the Civil War, although Roosevelt's were less blood-curdling than these Italian, French,
and German statements.
On a certain level, in a non-clinical way, one can even say that European culture had
become somewhat schizophrenic in nature.
On the one hand, layer after layer of society had been given greater individual rights and
protection, including women, children, Jews, while on the other hand, struggle, war, and
death were seen as potentially glorious, liberating collective experiences, and the
kind of experiences that enhance culture itself, as well as the moral fabric of the species.
Overall, certain elements of an earlier, liberal, universalist worldview which privileged
tolerance and rationality and compromise were surely in decline in the decades prior to
World War I, in this civilization that had so much commonality, although in their schools
they were literally teaching hatred and fear of one another in the decade prior to World
War I.
