With a stepped up level of seemingly unlimited American supplies and the introduction of
almost an almost unlimited equal number of fresh American troops, even if untested troops,
the great German spring offensive of 1918 was almost bound to fail, even if it had succeeded
more completely during its early phases. With America really in, the allies were bound to
win. It was a question of time and numbers of additional dead. The final outcome was
not really in doubt once America joined the war. Fearing a collapse of their armies in
August 1918, or a Russian style revolution at home, General Hindenburg and Ludendor frantically
demanded an armistice from their government, which was finally signed on November the 11th,
1918 by Republican civilian authorities who had replaced the monarchy. Even prior to that time,
civil war had broken out in Russia, British forces had routed the Turks in the Middle East,
and the Austro-Hungarian Empire was struggling to survive, having declared itself a multinational
federal state, and having reached an armistice with the allies in early November prior to the
German armistice. The fronts were collapsing on all areas. Although most of Europe was finally
at peace, or rather what I would call the absence of war, because war of a different kind was
really continuing. By November 1918, it was rather the peace of the dead. Of the approximately
65 million soldiers mobilized during World War I, and I've seen numbers as high as 75 million,
somewhere between 8 and 10 million had died, usually the number is over 9, and easily double
that number had been wounded with many permanently maimed. There were almost as many permanently
maimed as those who had actually died. If the Russians and the Germans suffered higher losses
than the French actually, the French suffered by far the highest percent of irreplaceable
losses because of their smaller population. About half of the French men between the ages
of 20 and 32 in 1914 were killed in the war, with a total French war dead somewhere close
to 1.4 million. And when I teach this material, I usually turn to the young folk in front
of me, and I point to them directly and let them know that had they been 18 year olds
in France, half of them would be dead four years later, and those who had survived would
not be anything like what they had been before, because another quarter of them would have
been maimed permanently. Sixty-three percent of the 1914 graduating class of the prestigious
St. Cyr Military Academy in France died during the war, sixty-three percent. In a real sense,
France was never the same again, at least not until well after World War II. The German
losses were about 1.8 million, some say 2 million out of a population of about 65 million.
While the Russians suffered about 1.8 million deaths, many, many more wounded and permanently
disabled out of a population of somewhere between 130 and 150 million people, although
they would lose millions more during the Civil War from 1917 to 1921, and then millions
more during the Stalinist era. How they survived and held together is very, very difficult
to comprehend, because during World War II, they would do it again.
What needs to be remembered is that the war often worked in a reverse social Darwin-ing
mode. Those most fit served and often died, particularly among the elites and the middle
classes. This was not a war fought primarily by the poor. It was the middle classes who
were the officers, and it was the officers, the junior officers, who stood up on the parapet
and blew the whistle and led the charge, and were mowed down in the process.
