Moreover, in addition to the dead and the physically maimed was the tragedy that French
poet Paul Valérie called, quote, the wounding of the mind, unquote, both among combatants
and many others as well.
If you want to get a sense of this really more deeply than you can get from me or than
you can get even from the books, I would advise you to go to the nearest library.
And take a look at either or both of the series of magnificent tape collections that we have
on World War One.
One was made in the 1960s and the narrator is Robert Ryan.
And like most of the 1960s, it's blood and gore, battle after battle after battle, narrated
by Ryan's sonorous voice.
And you get a sense of what it must have been like to be in those trenches and to feel the
ground around you simply shake and people literally went mad even before the hand to
hand combat even began.
In the mid-1990s, another set of tapes was put together in a different historical era
and I use both of them in a course I teach on World War One.
Indeed, they show you how perception changes over time.
We get both the battlefield scenes as well as an equivalent reproduction of the war
behind the war, including in the mental institutions in which these war shaken soldiers went when
they were on relief, sometimes going back to the very same battlefield afterwards and
sometimes just spending half of the rest of their life literally shaking.
And we also get the pictures of the whole industry of the creation of metallic masks
that was done after the war to put on the faces of people who otherwise looked like
gargoyles and simply could not go out in public.
They were called simply Les Mutile, the mutilated ones, and they could be seen everywhere in
Europe after World War One, even in a sense more than after World War Two because of the
different nature of the combat here.
And so having a chance to see some of these things firsthand is the most powerful way
to really perceive and comprehend the magnitude of everything we're talking about, even more
than reading these books I'm suggesting and even more than listening to these comments.
It was not until I used these materials and taught that course for three successive summers
that I fully began to understand the depth of it.
Now of course again we think about the military part of it, but most of the 65 to 75 million
soldiers who were mobilized for this conflict spent most of their time, at least on the
western front, not in bombardment, not behind a machine gun, not even with a rifle, not
in hand-to-hand combat, but in the disgusting, infested, sick trenches living with the dead,
with the weather, with lice.
Listen to one of their voices, a British soldier on the western front, lights out, now the
rats and the lice are masters of the house.
You can hear the rats nibbling, running, jumping, rushing from plank to plank, emitting their
little squeals behind the dugout's corrugated metal.
It's a noisy, swarming activity that just won't stop.
At any moment I expect one to land on my nose.
And then sometimes they would come out of these soaked trenches and be either attacking
or retreating, and they would hear the words, the pleas of fallen comrades stretch out to
them as they literally walked over them as the fallen literally sunk into the mud, which
had become a kind of quicksand that was all over them.
If you get a chance, go to France, go to Verdun, visit the trenches, visit the ossuary with
hundreds and hundreds of thousands of bones still there in land which 80 years later nothing
really can still grow.
