Eric Maria Remarque's main character, Paul Belmer, reflects the reality of this experience
just prior to his death in his classic anti-war cry All Quiet on the Western Front.
And if you have only three hours, pick up All Quiet on the Western Front.
And if you've read it, read it again in view of the preparation we've now had together.
Increasingly, by 1917-1918, its fresh soldiers coming to the front, the older ones have died,
Remarque feels more and more isolated.
He goes back during the war to be with his family on a leave.
He can't talk about it to his mother.
He's ill and starving anyway.
He can't talk about it to his sister.
His father wants to talk about it.
His father wants to hear that the German soldiers are ready to attack again as they pour over
maps and as the old men decide how the young men will die, he finally can't stand it anymore.
And he goes back to those comrades who are left in the trenches, trying not to make new
friends with the younger fellows coming up, because by that point, on the German army,
the army included people from the ages of 15 to just about 60.
And Remarque voices his feelings before his death.
He says, had we returned home in 1916, out of the suffering and the strength of our experiences,
we might have unleashed a storm.
Now if we go back, we will be weary, broken, burn out, rootless, and without hope.
We will not be able to find our way anymore.
And he continues, and men will not understand us.
For the generation that grew up before us, those who were older, that is, though it has
passed through these years with us here, already had a home and a calling.
Those people who had families could at least go back to their families.
And the war will be forgotten, he thought.
But the generations that have grown up after us will be strange to us and push us aside.
We will be superfluous even to ourselves.
We will grow older, a few will adapt themselves.
Some others will merely submit, and most will be bewildered.
The years will pass by, and in the end, we shall fall into ruin.
Mark wrote another book, simply called The Road Back, the main theme of which was there
was no road back.
Now where Mark's book in 1929 became a best seller, made into a film, won an Academy Award,
was banned in Germany for a while because the war veterans and the right wing forces
literally opposed it radically and totally.
And in fact, it stimulated a reaction, an anti-pacifist reaction, coming precisely at
the wrong time during the major impact of the Great Depression on Germany after 1929,
getting worse year by year by year, so that by 1932, 6 million Germans were unemployed
representing about 40% of the workforce.
Equally telling, however, where the responses of Benito Mussolini and Adolf Hitler now
remark had been a soldier, but he had not been on the line in a way that Adolf Hitler
had actually been on the line from the very beginning of the war, and often on throughout
the entire duration of the war.
People sometimes make fun of Adolf Hitler, indeed in the beer hole putsch in 1923 in November.
Didn't he hit the ground?
Well, if somebody's shooting at you, I suggest you hit the ground.
Praised though he was, he was a brave soldier, and worse than that, he loved what he was
doing.
For him, he had never simply found the kind of comradeship anywhere else in his pathetic
previous life than in the trenches, and even a number of men who became pacifists after
the war did fondly remember the camaraderie and the wholeness of their experience, the
intensity of it, which went beyond anything else anyone could experience in any other
area of their life.
For some of these people, Mussolini and Adolf Hitler, the war had actually been a peak experience
leaving them thirsty for more.
