Seemingly bereft of any alternative and frantically attempting to somehow break the stalemate in
the West, German General Erich von Falkenheim secretly introduced another new method of
warfare that came to symbolize the entire Western Front and whose very name still evokes
horror, Verdun. Choosing a place the French had to defend for historic and psychological
reasons, the Germans intended to, quote, bleed the French white, not because taking Verdun
was inherently essential, but because the French could not break off the battle and
survive psychologically. In a grotesque series of almost predictable attacks, lasting from
February 1916 until the late fall of that year, relieved somewhat by the equally grotesque
British Somme offensive from July to November in order to reduce pressure on the French
at Verdun, the French were nearly bled white, but so were the Germans. And the French lines
and spirit held, buoyed up by the more prudent generalship of General Philippe Pétain, who
later was to disgrace himself and France by introducing anti-semitic legislation on his
own as authoritarian dictator of France after France lost its battle in World War II. At
Verdun and the Somme, hundreds of thousands of lives were lost with an equivalent number
of wounded. The British suffered, and this is a low estimate, 23,000 deaths and 25,000
wounded on the first day of the Somme offensive alone. Collectively, and I say this advisedly,
these battles were the Auschwitz of World War I, but there were others as well, such as the
French Nevelle offensive in 1917 and the British Haig offensive of 1918. Other theaters of the war
saw equally deadly although different types of engagements. The infamous Gallipoli campaign
of 1915 pitting mainly the British and the Australian and New Zealander forces against
the Turks in an attempt to take Constantinople finally and relieve pressure on the Russian
armies, though noteworthy for heroism on both sides was a disaster for the Allies,
but one that they could still absorb. The Russians, meanwhile, were suffering decisive
defeats in a more traditional war of movement in the East, Missouri and Lakes in February 1915,
Galicia May 1915, with their only major victory coming during the early phase of the Brusellab
offensive in June of 1916. Underarmed, underfed, frequently poorly led, they sometimes lost as
many soldiers from the elements and from lack of medical treatment as they did from the battles
themselves. And if you think you can tolerate it, take a look at Solzhenitsyn's book, August 1914,
700-800 pages long, very, very worthwhile in terms of having a sense of what the Russians were
enduring on the Eastern Front. With their hopelessly under-equipped armies retreating,
collapsing, and their home front collapsing simultaneously, the Tsarist regime collapsed
in March of 1917, followed by a Bolshevik coup in November of 1917. The Russians and the Germans
signed an armistice in December 1917, and a peace in March of 1918, the peace of Brest-Litovsk.
Although Brest-Litovsk was a Punic peace, requiring, therefore, some German forces to
remain in the East, this still freed up large numbers of troops to shift to the Western Front
for what Generals Hindenburg and Ludendorff hoped would be their final offensive,
or at least strong enough to reach a compromise peace, which would mean a German victory of sorts,
since the German armies in 1918 were still in France and had complete control of Belgium virtually.
This would have been a conceivable outcome, except for the terrible gamble the German military
imposed on the civilian authorities in February 1917, when they reintroduced
an unrestricted submarine warfare hoping to starve Britain, but which led to America's entry in the
war in April of 1917.
