Lecture 33, The Great War, A Military Overview.
Having spent the last four sessions together considering the origins of World War I, we're
going to go through an even more traumatic experience of considering the immediate and
long-term impact of that war, which was the prism through which most of the 20th century
passed.
Although a consideration of the numerous megabattles of World War I and Europe and elsewhere on
land and air and sea would be a fascinating and important enterprise, and we will discuss
some of the specific battles, our emphasis rather will be on the critical battles and
military decisions that determine the outcome of the war and that best represent its nature
and its impact.
By far the most important battle was the first battle of the Marne, which took place in France
in September 1914, leading to a stalemate on the western front.
Considering the German defeat of invading Russian forces at the Battle of Tannenberg
in late August, and the simultaneous steady German advance through Belgium and into France
against Franco-British forces, the German schlieffenplan, risky to be sure, seemed to
be working.
Only the French victory at the Marne saved the day, determining as Barbara Tuchman has
indicated, not that Germany would ultimately lose or that the Allies would ultimately win
the war, but that the war would go on.
What followed in the west was the race northward to the sea in attempted unsuccessful outflanking
movements, followed by the frenetic digging of that first hasty trenches and then complete
trenches all along the western front from the channel all the way down the Switzerland.
For want of decisive victory at least in the west, the powers were facing Terra Incognita,
new uncharted territory in which they didn't really know what to do.
To make matters worse, what now followed was what the French historian political scientist
Ramon Aran first called the hyperbolic nature of the war following the quote-unquote technical
surprise.
The realization that none of the planned estimates for guns or shells, material, fuel, food had
been vaguely sufficient and was all being used up within the first month.
Since as it turned out in the west, the two sides were roughly equivalent in expanded
industrial capacity, all that meant was unleashing a more rapacious industrial war machine on
Europe's youth and then on Europe's middle-aged men as well.
Moreover, besides the fact that the generals had had no experience in managing millions
of troops in this kind of war with little maneuver possible, defensive weapons turned
out to be superior to offensive weapons in the field.
Machine guns, barbed wire, trenches and other fortifications forced attacking armies to
suffer dreadful losses for scant gains.
Even increasingly murderous preparatory bombardments in order to soften the enemy also gave the
enemy notice of the attack preventing any real surprise.
What was left then was to introduce ever-gastlier weapons, the Germans generally taking the
lead with flamethrowers, several forms of poison gas, submarine warfare, dirigibles
and airplane encounters and the Allies quickly following and catching up except for tanks
which the British introduced especially in 1918 with good effect.
