It made even well-intentioned individuals less willing, less able to accept similar but more truthful claims during the 1930s and even during World War II.
So that for example, in the 1920s at the very beginning, we get Kane's book on the Treaty of Versailles that we'll spend some more time talking about which rips up the whole fabric of the Treaty of Versailles saying that it was just a dead letter with no sense to it whatsoever.
Well, what happens later when Hitler begins to break the clauses of the Treaty of Versailles and the whole legitimacy of the Treaty of Versailles has been undermined by England's greatest economist?
Or what happens when Sidney B. Fay and Bernadotte Schmidt and Harry Elmer Barnes write books on the origins of the war showing that the Allied powers also were responsible for the outbreak of the war and not just the Germans,
and that therefore Article 231, the war guilt clause of the Treaty of Versailles is weak.
So the treaty is on a bed of sand because Germany was not alone responsible, although we know from our own studies that Germany did have major, in fact, perhaps the major responsibility in the outbreak of the war.
Well, what do people believe next time? What happens when they find out that all of the atrocities that Germany supposedly had committed during the war and it did commit some were not true when people start reporting atrocities elsewhere in World War II?
Well, they must be exaggerated.
Indeed, my family in Eastern Europe, in Poland, was in the middle of the war zone where the Russian and German soldiers went back and forth, including my grandmother and my mother and many of my cousins.
And when the Russian soldiers came through the village, there was rape and theft and brutality and everything else.
In this particular place when the Germans went through the village, they were basically well ordered and they paid for what they took in many cases and the memory of the Germans was positive and the memory of the Russians was the memory of horror.
25 years later, it would be a different story, but people live by their memories.
All things considered, the effective prosecution of the war behind the war, especially in the West, and here's the rub, not only facilitated the continuation of the battlefield carnage, but marked a further decline in the limits of the power of the state,
making possible later experiments in both interventionist state activity that would work in a positive way and in totalitarian efforts that would work in a negative way.
Because what people do in time of crisis is they return to models that they have previously experimented with.
Mussolini developed an ideology that was later called totalitarianism. In this ideology, the state was all important. Nothing could exist outside of the state.
No individual experience made any sense outside of the state. No human value could be achieved outside of the state. The individual had to totally submerge oneself in the community. The community was represented by this overarching state.
Well, that's how the state looked during World War I. Doing somewhat of the same thing, Adolf Hitler, who believed, unlike Marx, that all history was the history of racial struggle rather than all history is the history of economic struggle, Adolf Hitler felt the same way about the state.
Nothing could exist outside of the state, but the state existed to protect the race rather than for the power and glory of the state itself. But still, it was the dramatic imposition of the collective over all rights of the individual.
In Leninist, Stalinist Russia, which pioneered in totalitarian models, which Hitler even watched develop and marvel at, all history was the history of the class. The state had all power.
It was totalitarian because it protected the interests of the proletariat, the class. No individual initiative outside of the collective.
