Totalitarianism was far more dangerous and powerful than authoritarian 19th century dictatorial
models because totalitarianism rejected any outside authority on the actions of the state
itself, not from above, not from the past.
The state was the be all and the end all, whether it defended the nation as in Italy,
whether it defended the race as in Germany, or whether it defended the class as in Russia,
and all those magnificent inalienable rights that the British had pioneered in thinking
about in the 17th century, and the French had pioneered and copied in the 18th century,
and much of the Europeans had put into practice in the 19th century, all these things gradually
were wiped away by the increasing encroachment of the state on the rights of the individual
during time of peace at the end of the 19th century, radicalized by World War I.
Now many of those things were bound to happen anyway because industrial society was complicated
and the state had to take action in the face of changes in civilization and changes in
history.
The state had to regulate working conditions on some level.
The state had to regulate education on some level.
The state had to ensure that there was food for citizens, that there was work for citizens
on some level.
That was sensible, and that became normative in virtually all the societies in Europe and
especially in Western and Central Europe during the latter part of the 19th century.
But during the war, the state went beyond all bounds.
There were other changes in this war behind the war.
Think about the roles of women.
By 1918, close to 38% of all the workers in those crop factories were women.
In England, in transport, in the beginning of the war, there were about 18,000 women
engaged.
By 1918, there were almost 120,000 women engaged in transport.
About 10,000 women engaged in banking at the beginning of the war.
Over 60,000 women engaged in banking at the end of the war.
About a half a million women engaged in commerce in the beginning of the war.
Almost a million engaged, or almost 950,000 engaged at the end of the war, dressing differently,
smoking, seizing opportunities and possibilities, and giving everything they had, as much as
did the men, to make sure that their country had a chance of winning.
What were we going to do with those people after the war?
Well in France, even, where there was democracy still, there was a powerful natalist movement
that said women go back in the home, produce those children, to give us back the flesh
and blood that is French manhood, book after book, pamphlet after pamphlet, laws, trying
to push women back into the home and make them produce, well they succeeded in pushing
them back into the home to a certain extent, but the women refused to produce more children.
So the French level of population still remained relatively constant, and they had to allow
in lots of immigrants to make up for the losses in the war.
But again, fascism in Italy, fascism in Germany was radically anti-woman as well, and they
pushed them back into the home where they belonged, and in World War II, Hitler preferred
to use slave labor than have women working in factories, even though that did happen
to some extent.
Ironically, Lenin and the Russians emancipated women more than anybody else, but since in
some ways no one was emancipated from the power of the state, women and men were now
at least on an equal footing in this new totalitarian environment that so tragically became the
environment of Europe during the next 20 years.
Thank you.
