Still, a third area of shared wartime experience was the domain of thought control.
Particularly pernicious, but understandable given the nature of the carnage and the stakes
involved, this not only involved press censorship, but a propaganda campaign to vilify and demonize
the enemy, creating what was called enforced enthusiasm for the war.
As Modrus Ecksteins says, truth became falsehood, falsehood became truth.
At least in the beginning of the war, these efforts were virtually unchallenged on the
part of most citizens, including radicals, including socialists, including in some cases
anarchists.
Not only did most Germans social democrats vote for extraordinary war credits at the
outset of the war, when it came down to it they were German, they had a fatherland, but
most of French radicals who were on a special suspect list for surveillance known as the
Carné B volunteered for military service and died with their comrades.
Significantly, even in Great Britain, with probably the strongest tradition of civil
liberties among all the combatant states even compared with France, the Defense of the
Realm Act was passed in 1914, Dora, and it was later amended to include the prosecution
of those who uttered harmful defeatist statements in public, teaching in a classroom I could
have been put on notice for violating Dora if I had become defeatist in my interaction
with my students.
Generally telling with respect to the history of Great Britain, however, this act was occasionally
violated in England, including by some of the political elites who had come to recognize
the words madness by 1917, but what was one to do?
Suppose it was even 1914 in the middle of the year, of 1915 in the middle of the year
hundreds and hundreds of thousands, indeed millions of people had already been killed
or wounded, do you just stop it?
And one of the reasons that none of the mediation attempts by the United States was successful
was because all of the civilian and military leaders on the home front and on the battlefield
were terrified that if you stopped it to talk, you could never get these kids to fight again.
Tragically, this essentially quote unquote ideological warfare had both expected and
longer term horrible, unanticipated results.
Not only did it undermine the possibility of the mediated peace, but it also undoubtedly
contributed to the harshness of the Treaty of Versailles as well.
And we'll spend more time talking about that and talking about it in the context of what
was possible and comparing it to the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk's that Germany imposed upon
Russia in March of 1918.
Since effective censorship deprived even members of parliament in Germany from realizing that
they were losing the war even in the summer of 1918, two months before it ended, it made
the soon to emerge Dulstos lesson, the stab in the back theory, blaming the wars lost
on domestic enemies, communists, socialists and Jews, and both Kaiser Wilhelm and von
Hindenburg propounded that myth, it made that myth more credible, especially among those
predisposed to believe such rumors, unable to take responsibility, unwilling to take
responsibility for the loss on their own shoulders, even though Germany had done its utmost and
had gone beyond its utmost in its attempt to win that war.
When far more accurate information about the propaganda exaggerations emerged in the 1920s
