Lecture 34, The Home Front During Total War
If so many countless volumes of history have been written about the wars of World War I
and all other wars, a newer generation of scholars has tended to place just as much
emphasis on the home front itself during this age of total war because the home front
would have just as much to do not only with winning or losing the war, but also of what
the world might look like after the war as the battlefield itself, as difficult as it
is to comprehend that.
So today we'll spend time talking about the home front during this age of total war.
The stalemate that quickly developed during the early phase of World War I had a significant
and impact on domestic developments as it actually had on the battlefield itself.
Indeed, one can even say that more radical innovations, including effective ones, occurred
on the home front than anywhere else.
Quickly faced by the realization that domestic mobilization could have a determining impact
on the outcome of the war, the combatants, and especially those rather equally matched
in the West, Britain, France, and Germany, engaged in policies historian Gordon Craig
has termed political centralization, economic regimentation, and thought control.
Political centralization, economic regimentation, and thought control, and I would urge you
to read any of Craig's books on modern Europe.
His text from 1960 in a country by country detailed narrative is still one of the best
places to go if you want to know what happened as far as we can tell.
And he has been writing for four to five decades of clear, wonderful prose.
Clearly, each of these states proceeded along particular lines within the context of their
own political culture and their own perceived needs.
However, since these were the most industrialized and well integrated states, each with its
own peculiar set of advantages or disadvantages, here, too, neither side could gain decisive
advantage over the other.
There the path of extending state power and control escalated somewhat paralleling the
escalation of the war itself.
With respect to political centralization, the path was somewhat more erratic, although
three states experienced political truces in the beginning of the war, which tended to
break down in 1916 or 1917.
This was perhaps best represented by the Kaiser's assertion in the beginning of the war, whether
real or for effect, and I think it was probably real at that moment.
I recognize political parties no more.
I recognize only Germans.
It was perhaps the most intelligent thing he had ever said, if he had only said it earlier
and meant it and worked on it, maybe the war wouldn't have occurred.
Indeed, actual political life in Germany in some way followed its pre-war patterns but
with curious and telling twists.
If the monarchy expanded its powers in action during the first years of the war, by 1916
Germany was becoming a military dictatorship under the control of Generals Hindenburg and
Ludendorff, while the Kaiser tended to fade into the background, unable to handle the
tension and the weight of the decisions that had to be made.
