Lecture 35, The Impact of World War I, New World Disorder
Although the two previous encounters already have set the pattern for the impact of World
War I, they are only at the beginning of our discussion. Indeed, World War I was the
prism through which at least the first half of the twentieth century would evolve, much
of the second half as well, and even until our own day. This becomes all the more understandable
if one recognizes the powerful connection between World War I and World War II. If the
first did not determine the second in an absolute sense, it made it a very distinct possibility,
so much so that scholars now speak about them as a unified experience, a second-thirty-years-war,
and they argue whether or not it really was a separate thirty-years-war, or still should
be considered two distinct occurrences with tremendous connections. Although it is somewhat
artificial to break down the war's impact into separate categories, since so many of
its components are interrelated, it's helpful to break it down as a means of getting a clearer
hold of the depth and scope of its impact and then putting it all together and stepping
back and taking a look at it. Besides the familiar magnitude of the human losses that
we've spoken about, both physical and internal psychological, and the expansion of state authority
which was never completely deregulated, discussed in our last comments, the next and very obvious
area to consider is the political and diplomatic ramifications of the war. Here the most obvious
developments were the structural and the territorial changes associated with the collapse of four
empires, three historic and one more recent. Austria-Hungary collapses, the Russian Empire
collapses, the Ottoman Empire finally collapses, and Germany also lost major segments of its
territory and the German Empire collapses. Britain and France supposedly the big winners
divided up German territory in Africa and Turkish territory in the Middle East, while
Japan and Italy also made gains at the expense of these losers. In terms of the immediate
aftermath of the war, the changes in Europe were most dramatic, although the long range
impact of Turkish losses and British and French gains in the Middle East, the mandate system,
the Balfour Declaration encouraging a Jewish homeland in Palestine make it dramatically
clear that we're still feeling the impact of some of these developments today. Within Europe,
a number of states made minor losses or gains, while the breakup of the German and Austro-Hungarian
and Russian empires saw the rise of a series of new or changed states such as Austria and Hungary
separate now Czechoslovakia and a new state of Poland, Poland over 30 million, 33 million
people, and these small states, Poland wasn't small, but the others were especially the
previous states of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, this process is sometimes known as the Balkanization
of Eastern Europe. Large segments of Slavic lands in the Habsburg
Empire were now also finally attached to Serbia in the large state of Yugoslavia until the 1990s.
This created a kind of vacuum of power in Eastern Europe and adding further to the instability
of the region is the fact that Germany was revisionist and Russia was revisionist and these
new small states in between not only had large ethnic minorities, severe economic problems,
but claims on each other's territories just like the Balkans prior to World War I, so it was easy
to play them off one against the other.
