Here, precisely, is the rub.
While all sorts of expectations had been raised by the war and promised during the war by
all of the war leaders, even amongst the greatest European victor powers, Britain and France,
the actual capacity of states to satisfy these promises and these expectations, or even
to provide a modicum of financial stability was undermined by the cost of the war itself,
the way in which it had been financed, and the changed global economic balance of power
that ensued.
For example, the British were the most responsible in the way in which they financed the war,
but only 30% of the war was paid for by British taxes.
The French paid for about 20% of the war by increased taxes, and as soon as the war
ended, American loans also ceased.
In 1914, Great Britain, France, and Germany were the world's greatest creditor nations.
In 1918, they were the world's greatest debtor nations.
Britain and France, because of debts owed to the United States, Germany, because of
reparations payments imposed by the Treaty of Versailles, partly in order to enable
Britain and France to repay their debts to America.
Now, we were angry at the French for demanding such high reparations, but we were not prepared
to cancel the war debts to the British and the French, and the things are tied together.
Meanwhile, both the United States and Japan, as well as a number of neutral states, had
captured many of the international markets previously dominated by Britain and France
and Germany, while the Soviet Union did the best of all.
It simply canceled the loans the Tsarist regime had received from the French government and
from millions upon millions of French citizens.
More French citizens before the war invested in Russia than in anything else because an
investment in Russia was both an investment and an act of primary patriotism, and Lenin
simply said with a smile on his face, the Russian people did not take these loans.
The Tsarist government took these loans.
Go get the Tsarist government to repay for them after the Tsarist government was down
and the Tsar was dead.
So the Russians simply said, no, thank you, no, it's over.
All of the European combatants had financed the war costs from internal and external loans
and could not possibly have financed them even based on increased taxation alone.
The amounts were too great, and not only the amounts were too great, the men who would
have made the money to pay the taxes were fighting the war.
You can't take a husband, a son, a brother, cousins, and take all the money that a family
needs to live, especially since inflation increased during the war itself.
The collective impact of all of these economic developments, in addition to a number of irresponsible
post-war economic policies, led to severe inflation in France and to runaway inflation
in post-war Italy and galloping inflation in post-war Germany.
So that, for example, in 1928 or so, Raymond Poincaré, who had been president during the
war, was then prime minister, and he finally stabilized the franc, taking away from it
80% of its value, 80% would have been magnificent in Italy, and 80% would have been unheard
of in Germany, where it was requiring trillions of marks to buy things by 1923.
And the French actually did the very best economic recovery of all the major powers
involved in the war.
There's no question about that, and we don't usually realize it.
The French recovered economically more quickly and more totally than any other state.
Now Britain suffered less inflation, but experienced chronic unemployment throughout
the 1920s.
