Socio-economic destabilization, runaway inflation helped bring Mussolini into power in October of 1922.
Five separate governments didn't know what to do and couldn't take bold responsibility for concerted action while the countryside and the cities were collapsing.
Devastating inflation in Germany during 1922-1923, worsened by an attempt by the government to repay reparations with debased inflated currency, ravaged the German middle class and had as much impact on a certain kind of level as aspects of the war itself.
It undermined the trust in the Weimar Republic itself and it temporarily created a fertile environment for Adolf Hitler's early career.
Although a measure of economic stability and even prosperity returned to segments of Europe, including Germany, when the United States finally intervened with large-scale loans in 1924 through the Dawes Plan,
facilitating a measure of political stability as well that was only possible with the return of some economic stability, this came to a screeching halt with the stock market crash of 1929.
Because we had extended to the Germans a number of short-term loans and they had invested those loans in many cases in long-term investments and when we pull the rug, it collapses.
The economy most intimately tied to America by the most recent loans, namely Germany, suffered an economic demise similar to America's.
In 1932, the American response to the Great Depression, the American political response, was the election of FDR.
In 1933, January the 30th, the German political response by the elites was allowing Adolf Hitler to form a ministry in the belief that they could control him against democratic reform, against social reform,
because the party that had expanded the most next to the National Socialists was the Communist Party during the depths of the Depression with 6 million unemployed and with the elites simply not knowing what to do in the situation because they weren't willing to really have social economic reform.
So by 1933, Germany was going to get one thing or another basically. It was either going to have a traditional military-style dictatorship with martial law or it was going to have Adolf Hitler and the elites preferred to allow Adolf Hitler to do their bidding,
thinking they could control him rather than to take the direct responsibility and do it themselves. And as they looked southward, they saw Mussolini, who had already been in power for 10 years by 1932,
Gee, didn't they realize things could get out of hand? Well, they actually didn't get out of hand because the elites did very well under Mussolini as long as they didn't oppose the regime. Mussolini did their dirty work for them and he didn't go much further than that.
Adolf Hitler was a different, different kind of beast.
Of course, another factor that conditioned German and pan-European politics during the 1920s was the Treaty of Versailles, imposed by the victors on the vanquished in the spring of 1919 and thereafter.
During the course of a worldwide influenza pandemic, which killed twice as many people as were killed in the battlefield itself, and during the massive political instability that came with the end of the war and with the impact of the Russian Revolution elsewhere in Europe,
