With respect, especially to Germany, especially Versailles, and that's the treaty with Germany, was Draconian,
since she was seen as the main cause of the war, but also as the main potential future destabilizer of the peace,
the defeated power most capable for paying for the costs because of her powerful economy as well.
Hence, the severe limits on her military power and the huge financial reparations bill, $33 billion,
which if the Germans had really paid according to the young plan in 1928, they would have been paying off till 1988,
but don't worry, they canceled them in the early 1930s.
Indeed, John Maynard Keynes' critique of the economic segments of the treaty, its lack of a plan for a post-war economic reconstruction of Europe,
that part of his analysis rings true even today, in that sense he was correct.
Where he was wrong is simply not understanding the cultural and psychological and political wider impact in which the treaty was being negotiated
and during which it was probably about the best the Germans were going to get.
Maybe they had signed an armistice based on Wilson's 14 points, but the French hadn't ratified the 14 points
and the war was fought on French territory.
So the treaty, including the reparation clauses, were a direct result of the total nature of the war itself,
including the way in which the war was financed.
And it was certainly that less draconian than the peace of Brest-Litovsk, Germany had imposed on Russia in March 1918,
in which it was annexing more than 30% of its resources and population,
or in the treaties that Germany would have imposed on the Allies if it had won the war,
which would have included the annexation of most of Belgium, the French coast, much of central Europe.
In other words, the Treaty of Versailles was the logical result of the radical nature of World War I.
I don't even consider it to really be a treaty.
I consider it to be a kind of continuation of the war by other means for a time.
At least some semblance of an acceptable peace between Germany and France was finally achieved between 1924 and 1926,
and that's really when I see the war actually coming to a close with the Dawes Economic Rehabilitation Plan in 1924.
The Locarno Treaty in 1925, when Germany and France agreed to mutually accept each other's boundaries,
at least in the West, and the French agreed not to intervene physically to compel reparations,
and German entry into the League of Nations in 1926 would signify its acceptance again.
After the wars of Napoleon, France could be brought back rather immediately.
After World War I, which was a war of peoples on a totally different level of magnitude, that was not possible.
Sadly, when Germany joined the League of Nations,
neither the Soviet Union, which did not enter until 1934, nor the United States were members of that body,
although it was one of the more positive structures President Wilson had managed to achieve at Versailles.
Unfortunately, and understandably, we, the Americans, were not yet prepared to play the role that World War I had actually bequeased us.
We had become economically, and also were on the path of becoming, even militarily, World Power Number One.
And the disinclination of the United States, its inability to play that role,
until the Japanese did us the favor of attacking us, bringing us into World War II,
just added another tragic collective whammy to the impact of World War I itself.
In March 1936, Adolf Hitler remilitarized the Rhineland, the part of Germany bordering on France,
that was supposed to remain demilitarized as a result not only of Versailles, but the freely negotiated Locarno Treaty of 1925.
Take a look at current history for the spring of 1936.
No, the American scholar Alan Nevin said, well, it's only Germany's own backyard.
It's their country. They're free to do what they will with it.
René-Albrecht Carrier, writing a book about the origins of World War II in the 1950s or so,
simply said about the United States during the Rhineland crisis and thereafter,
the United States was wondering whether or not it really belonged to this world.
But the whole nature of the Industrial Revolution, the Transportation Revolution, the Communications Revolution,
the subs, the airplanes, and everything else that went with it,
meant that British splendid isolation was a thing of the past,
and so too was any possibility for the United States to be isolated as well,
and it would require the United States to try to put this world back together for the world to have a chance of making a better go of it.
Thank you.
