On the socioeconomic level, even more difficult to analyze with equal certainty, the changes were equally profound.
As in the political diplomatic arena, the primary socioeconomic impact of the war was the destabilization of established structures.
The destabilization of norms, the destabilization of patterns of operation, the undermining of traditional values, including traditional cultural assumptions.
This was true even when certain social developments that occurred during the war were liberating, as was the case with respect to the role of women in wartime society and in wartime economic life.
Replacing men at essential tasks and enabling larger numbers of men to go to the front to continue the war.
Without the role of women, the war could not have continued as long as it did because there simply weren't enough men to go around for both the home front and for the trenches.
Even the political emancipation of women in Britain, Germany and the United States and the Soviet Union, part of a longer historical pattern, but possibly accelerated by the war, led to radical anti-feminist postures in many places and especially among fascist-like movements.
Even in France, there was an especially strong pro-natalist campaign to force women back into the home so they could do their duty and replenish the nation's lost manhood.
This was so intense in between the wars that Virginia Woolf and a tale of two guineas said, why should I go to Italy or Germany to fight fascists when I'm surrounded by male fascists everywhere I go?
And that was real. An equally liberating yet destabilizing struggle also accelerated in the British and French empires and elsewhere, where the assumption of European cultural superiority was fractured by the nature of the war,
while hundreds of thousands of colonial troops who had served in the French and in the British armies expected more rapid advancement than the imperial powers were willing to allow.
Now these people had paid a high price for helping France and Great Britain survive, whether they were Indian or whether they were Senghalese.
They were trained in use of military equipment. They had in some cases really passed through Europe itself extensively and they were supposed to go home and expect to tolerate inferior status,
not temporarily but over the long haul, the anti-colonial movement against European empire radically expands in between World War I and World War II and then the self-destruction of Europe in World War II finishes the ability of the European powers to maintain their dominance.
World War I and World War II were the suicidal European civil wars that radically accelerated the process of anti-colonial action.
But this was also the case for the larger millions of front-line European soldiers who had risked life and limb for their nations and had frequently been used as cannon fodder and had come to have much less respect for authority of any kind.
Soldiers also had a far greater sense of self-worth with the expectation that their sacrifice and that their heroism would at least be rewarded with a decent job and a level of respect for what they had endured.
