Barbara Tuchman parallels this saying, the deadlock, that is of the war, fixed by the
failures of the first month, determined the future course of the war, and as a result,
the terms of the peace, the shape of the interwar period, and the conditions of the second round.
It was certainly not a straight line, and it did not have to be.
If only one of those bullets in November of 1923 had happened to hit Adolf Hitler in
the wrong place, history might have been different.
However, so many of the positive developments within Europe during the 19th century had
already been undermined while so many of the negative developments were exacerbated
by World War I, that the seemingly unimaginable came to pass, not only a second world war
of even greater magnitude with 50 to 60 million total dead, but a second meticulously planned
genocide of even immensely greater proportions.
By then, the European great powers, even with their remaining empires, had had enough.
The fate of the earth, at least for a time, would be decided by the two superpowers who
reaped the world win, and each of which, by the 1970s, had 25,000 or so separate nuclear
weapons.
It is indeed a miracle that we survived the short 20th century from 1914 or 1917 to 1989.
Although our world is not exactly a joyride, what could have happened, given the level
of destructive potential, especially during the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962, boggles
the imagination, leaving us, still, the time and leisure to ponder further our troubled
past and our uncertain, but hopefully exciting and wonderful future.
I would like to say that I have truly enjoyed being with you in this set of engagements
and encounters, and that it has been a pleasure to go through and prepare for and carry out
this program.
The process of history itself is inherently fascinating.
My close friend, Albert Jenda Bean, who died at age 88 several years ago, used to say,
I think I pretty much understand how we've gotten to where we are, and the only thing
that bothers me about passing on is that I'd really like to know how it ends.
And I learned so much from him, I learned more from him after he retired than while
we were working together, because he showed me how one can age with dignity, and as he
said at the very end explaining his behavior, I have no malice.
A younger generation of new historians is rethinking everything I've mentioned today
and before.
One of them, Joe Newberg, is about to publish a new book on exactly the topic of our conversations
together.
I've begun to do some proofreading for it.
I would urge you to look for it when it comes out.
A new generation of scholars, and this is the most exciting thing about the past, will
reinterpret it once again for us, wearing different colored glasses.
I'd like to thank the people of the teaching company.
They are wonderful folks.
They are professional.
They are friendly.
They are focused.
They are a joy to be with and a joy to work with, and I would encourage you to continue
to work with them and to look for everything that comes out from their enterprise.
I'd also like to encourage you and invite you, if you wish, to come through Tilafiat
College where I spend so much of my life, to look me up, and especially if you have children
or grandchildren, send them to me.
I'll try to help them, and I will be glad to teach them.
And I'd like to thank my own children and my wonderful wife, Sandy, for tolerating the
eccentricities that have come together with my academic life and to tell them very much
that I love them dearly.
Thank you.
