Think about what the bicycle did for women, allowing them to dress differently, almost
forcing them to, and then allowing them to travel away without chaperones for the first
time.
Older elites, even the aristocrats, who were able to adapt and stay at the front if they
played their cards wisely, were often disaffected or dismayed by these developments.
While the more numerous artisans and even the newer white collar groups often found
themselves caught between larger collectives, big business, or large unions not having a
sense of stability themselves, and all of this was particularly intense in the new urban
environment, if you remember even in the United States, the clash between rural and urban
areas at the end of the 19th century, this thing was certainly even more prevalent in
the much more condensed areas of teeming Europe, where urban areas represented everything
new and changing and impermanent, while rural life continued to change but at a much slower
pace and one thinks about the conflict between rural and urban France as during the Commune
of 1870, and then one thinks about the conflict between rural and urban Germany and its endless.
And what about some of the former outcasts, and especially Jews, who seem to benefit from
all of this, sometimes jumping to the front of the line in considerable numbers, or challenging
long accepted cultural norms, with what people saw as their lack of rootedness, passion
for learning, their wit, their psychic energy.
Before the rise of Hitler, Jews constituted about 1% of the German population.
They had garnered about 30% of the Nobel Prize is won by Germans.
That symbiosis between European Jews and Germany was one of the most incredible events that
occurred in modern cultural history or indeed of all of civilization's cultural histories.
Little did most others realize that all almost most Jews wanted or achieved was to try to
adjust, just like everybody else, to do somewhat better and to enjoy the safe anonymity of
middle class life.
But this was not how it was perceived.
Of course, it was the changed relationship between modernized and traditional societies
as a whole, and especially between Western Europe and the United States and Japan, which
caught up quickly and the traditional civilizations of Africa and Asia and somewhat later the
Middle East, where the gaps were the greatest and the unsolicited and the unwanted attack
of modernity was the most extreme.
Although Europeans abolished the slave trade and then abolished slavery in their empires
in most places during the pre 1850 era, the radical encroachment of European industrial
power during the second half of the 19th century and especially the last third of the century
was almost without precedent, except for the period of the first ages of exploration and
conquest of the Portuguese, Spanish and Dutch empires in the end of the 15th and 16th and
first half of the 17th century.
Surely these empires and later European imperialism brought medicine and Christianity and railroads
and the later imperial expansion even sometimes came with somewhat more restraint and conscience
than the ravages of the earlier conquests when the first explorers were wondering whether
or not these natives had a soul because if they had a soul you had to try to convert
them and if they didn't have a soul you could exterminate them and the church decided they
had a soul so it was important to convert them and you should not exterminate them.
This European intervention was unwanted sometimes opposed with hopeless futility and of course
profoundly destabilizing.
