By what scales does one weigh the pluses and the minuses of westernization, or modernization,
or globalization, and who has the right to judge these things?
Under any circumstances, couldn't it have been done somewhat more gently, especially
by the generally liberal and even democratic and clearly still religiously-based societies
in which so few Europeans gave the justness of their cause the slightest thought?
Even the German socialists believed, many of them, that imperialism was a good thing
for the progress of humankind.
Of course it is here that European expansion, although based on neutral industrial technological
advantages, also joined forces with perhaps the inherently most dangerous 19th century
developments, hypernationalism combined with social Darwinism and scientific racism.
As it's often said, and I've said it several times, I think nationalism began like sleeping
beauty and ended up like Frankenstein's monster, even during the Napoleonic period, the nationalism
that was being spread by the French was coming out of the barrel of a gun and it looked more
like conquest than liberal nationalism.
That is to say, it began at least with a liberal, universalist appreciation of the nature of
European civilization in which, under Metzene, it was believed that every people, every ethnic
group could play its own tune and be part of the symphony of European civilization, and
then in the second half of the century it became more strident, more competitive, more
survivalist, and more racist.
When this is set in the complicated and unstable competitive state framework in which the three
most conservative great powers still essentially have governments that have no checks or balances
on their monarchs, and in which the most powerful of them all, Kaiser Wilhelm II had some kind
of delusions of grandeur on some level as well, World War I was probably more likely
than not, especially after the Austro-Russian antagonism was added to the after effects
of the Franco-Prussian War and the Anglo-German naval race.
Once you get these three developments into one place, war on some level somewhere for
some cause is likely, although not inevitable.
But once the die was cast and the decisions leading to war took place, given the relative
balance of power between the two armed camps, and the fact that they all had been preparing
for the possibility of the war for the previous five to ten years as best as they were able
to, the stalemate in the West at least was also likely in some way.
And as they say, the rest is history, but not quite.
Being ahead from this point, the arguments presented by two of the most powerful analysts
of the impact of the First World War on the rest of the century, that is to say Raymond
Aran, the Frenchman, great political scientist, and Barbara Tuchman, the American, each put
it this way.
Aran says the following in his book The Century of Total War, very, very much worth your attention,
though it was written immediately after World War Two.
Aran says the principal causes of the Second World War resulted from the prolongation of
the First World War and above all of the Russian Revolution and the fascist reaction to it
in Italy and Germany.
