As for religious minorities, still, depending very much on the country, the better part of religious equality was achieved during the course of the 19th century, certainly in western and central Europe, even though enormous resentments and social exclusion often remained.
And indeed, it's incredible to see how long in duration this problem was.
Catholics as a minority in Protestant England, Protestants as a very small minority in largely Catholic France, the smaller number of Catholics in southern Germany versus the larger number of Protestants in northern Germany.
Peter Pulser in his book on Germany, and it's a book very, very much worth reading, especially the thin little book that he's written on Germany between 1870 and 1945, even says that his latest after World War II Protestants in northern Germany had a far higher economic and social and opportunity profile than Catholics going back to things that had existed almost a century before.
And Jews as well in all of these countries, even under duress, were becoming largely middle class, acculturated citizens of their states, except in eastern Europe where things were really still very, very shaky and in some cases, in some cases, really getting worse.
Now, if we factor in the miracles of science and technology, and the beginning of modern medicine really at the end of this period, life was surely almost without question, materially and culturally better.
With the power of science and medicine, even middle class people could live longer in 1900 than aristocrats lived in 1800.
And one of the readings in the Cary primary source reading that I hope you've taken a look at is a reading of a woman having a mastectomy in 1810 or so without anesthetics.
If I take off my glasses, I can't see.
With my glasses, I can.
I would be virtually blind in the 18th century.
Still, not everyone at that time would have agreed with the variables I've chosen or with how one would weigh them.
The process of change itself was incredibly destabilizing.
It was not always continuous.
The perceptions did not always match reality.
And as we've already seen, several highly dangerous new developments were emerging, paralleling modern medicine and modern science.
Like it or not, industrial society was a society of movement and change, and especially of urbanization.
Not only did it create the new, but it uprooted the old.
And those people who for whatever reason favored tradition, localism, continuity, and a deep sense of community,
what sociologists at the end of the 19th century called Gemeinschaft gradually were giving way to the demands of markets,
productivity, and a cash nexus through contracts called Gizelschaft.
For better or for worse, the ideological, the material, the scientific developments of the 19th century also led to far greater secularization
and to the breaking down of established barriers between communities within nations.
And many people were scandalized by such developments, seemingly unstoppable, all the more traumatic because they just seem to continue.
Within industrializing societies and between those industrializing at different paces, industrial modernization challenged power relationships of all types,
pushing some groups or some nations forward, leaving others behind or disadvantaged, pushing some within a certain national community forward,
and leaving others behind.
Consider the illiterate farmer whose daughter in 1875 in France got primary education so the farmer could understand something about the laws of France.
What is going to be the relationship between the daughter who reads and the father and mother who are illiterate?
