Lecture 36 Looking Back Thinking Ahead
It simply would not be fair or appropriate to end our time together simply with the end
of World War I and its traumatic impact in every sphere of European life because that
would not best represent what the nature of the 19th century was about for most of its
experience even though it happened to end that way which was not necessarily the way
it was going to end.
Most scholars rightly look at the 19th century in general as a time of tremendous progress
and development in European and even in world history.
It's inappropriate therefore to end just with a series of commentaries on the catastrophic
outbreak and impact of World War I usually considered the greatest tragedy in modern
European history.
Here again however we need to return to some of the comments I made at the very beginning
both in terms of how we define the long 19th century and what situational blinders color
our appreciation of its meaning especially in terms of gains and losses.
For example, if we were to have taken a more conventional chronological approach to this
century say from the Congress of Vienna 1814-1815 to the outbreak of World War I 1914 then it
was at least for Europe overwhelmingly a time of incredible peace between the great powers
with only the Crimean war and the smaller German, Austrian, German, French, Italian, Austrian
wars having been the most noticeable exceptions all of which pale when compared with either
the long Napoleonic wars or the industrial slaughter that was World War I.
However, even if we begin with 1789 the French Revolution and the early industrial revolution
and we continue until 1917 the two Russian revolutions, the American entry into World
War I as well as the breakdown of the war front with mutinies in Britain and France and
the home front as well with the beginning of politicization and demonstrations again
we are still left with a long core middle era of remarkable peace.
Compare this for example with the 17th century which included the 30 years war 1618 to 1648
fought mainly in Germany in which a half of the population in some regions was despoiled
the economy is ruined and in other regions only 20% of the population was destroyed.
Or with the long reign of Louis XIV that came afterwards from 1654 to 1714 half of which
was spent in war or the reign of Peter the Great of Russia in 1685 to 1715 also half of which
was spent in war. The business of being a monarch in the Ancien regime was the business
of being a warrior and if you weren't a good warrior you didn't get high ratings for being
a good monarch but you better win those wars.
Our analysis becomes somewhat more complicated if we turn to those blinders I mentioned at
the outset issues of ideology, issues of class, issues of gender, ethnicity, race, religion
and even whether one considers oneself at all European in origin still for most Europeans
at least in terms of their material culture and what made it possible the 19th century
was an extended era of incredible progress.
Take for example several basic indices combining quality and quantity of life issues on a macro
all European level.
