Okay, good morning, everyone. I think we can start. Our fourth and plenary talk will be
given this morning by Michael Levin. Michael Levin is a professor of biology and biomedical
engineering at Tofts University in the US. Like many of you, perhaps, I first got to
know of Michael's work through his papers on the Xenobots, a very interesting collaboration
with Josh Borngard. But it was actually after I managed to catch his interview in Lex Fritzman's
podcast that I really became very intrigued on the possibility of his work. Michael is
a very accomplished academic. He has the Vannevar Bush Distinguished Professorship and he is
the founding director of the Allen Discovery Center at Tofts and the co-director of the
Institute for Computer Design Robotics. His work is at the intersection of developmental
biophysics, cognitive science, and computer science. I am very excited about this talk.
So without further ado, let's welcome Michael.
Thank you so much. I'm really pleased to be able to share some ideas with you today.
I appreciate the invitation. I will try a completely new way of giving this talk today.
So let's see how it goes. This is a very different way to tell these stories than I've ever done
in the past. And it goes along with John Searle's comment that you have to allow yourself to
be astounded by things that any sane person takes for granted. And we're going to go over
some of these things today. I want to start by asking what this is. So it's a small biological
that seems to traverse an aqueous path. So this is filled with water. It moves down the
path on its own. It's completely self-driven. It moves down the path. It takes the corner
without bumping into the opposite wall. So it takes this corner. And then spontaneously,
it turns around and goes back where it came from. So what is this? Well, one thing you might think
is that this is a kind of a ciliated organism that you might have found in a pond somewhere and
it would have an invertebrate genome. And that's definitely not correct. You might say that it's
a xenobot. This is a biological proto-organism and a kind of biorebotics platform that's made of
frog epidermal cells. And this is true. You might also say that this is a vehicle for exploring
anatomical morphospace and actually a visualization tool for a kind of diverse intelligence
research. And I think that would be deeper and closer to the truth. But today, I'm going to talk
about another way of thinking about this, which is that it's just one part of a very heterogeneous
composite entity, which consists of biological cells, artificial intelligence in a computer,
and also for human scientists. And so in order to try to understand this kind of composite entity,
I want to first show you a few unconventional examples of biology. And we're going to talk about
a kind of multi-scale competency architecture, which is related to a concept of polycomputing
that Josh Bongard and I have been working on. I'm going to show you that functionality in living
systems is often cryptic, and it's often hidden by reliable, robust outcomes. And it has to be
uncovered. I'm going to tell you that in biology, every part is constantly hacking all of the other
parts. And I'll show you some examples of this. And we'll talk about plasticity, we'll talk about
virtualization, and we'll talk about using a sort of hardware-software lens to understand what these
biological systems are doing. The first thing I want to point out is that while we're very comfortable
detecting intelligence of medium-sized objects moving at medium speeds in three-dimensional
space, such as birds, primates, and so on, biological intelligence actually exists in many
diverse spaces that are very hard for us to recognize. So for example, living systems routinely
solve problems in navigating gene expression spaces, in navigating the state of physiological,
the space of physiological states, and also the space of possible anatomical configurations or
anatomical morphous space. And there are some remarkable examples of which I'll only have
time to show you a few of problem-solving in all of these spaces. One of the things that we want
to talk about is how organisms hack each other or control each other's behavior. So you've probably
all heard of this zombie ant fungus, which infects these ants and causes them to do a
certain behavior, which is to crawl up on these leaves and freeze and later be eaten. There's
another parasite, which has this kind of quite complex life cycle, where it spends part of its
time in certain animals, part of its time in other animals that eat the former animals and so on.
And one of the things that this parasite does in order to make sure that the host gets eaten by
by the next one is that it reduces its risk aversion. So if it finds itself in a rodent,
for example, these rodents will lose fear of cats and they will come out in the open,
they'll get eaten by the cat and the parasite goes there. So what happens in humans who spend
time hanging out with cats when they get infected is that it makes you more entrepreneurial and it
also makes you drive your motorcycle too fast for conditions. Basically what it does is it lowers
risk aversion and it's been found that people who have crashes, for example, motorcycle crashes,
also various captains of industry and things like this tend to have high rates of being
infected by this parasite. It literally hacks high-level behaviors. And what's interesting
is that in order to understand this creature, it is not enough to just study the creature itself,
you really have to understand the whole cycle, you have to understand what else it's doing,
what is affecting the creature's behavior and it might be an entirely different living organism
and so on. And so this theme that it's not enough to just look at the organism to understand what
it's doing, either here or here, you have to understand all of the aspects of its environment,
some of which are agential organisms themselves. And not only do creatures hack each other's
policies for navigating three-dimensional space of conventional behavior, but they also do it in
anatomical and physiological spaces. So here, for example, and this is not Photoshop, this is real,
there's this insect called gonurella tritans and what it has is it has an image of ants
on its wings. And when threatened, it flaps its wings in a particular pattern that looks
to predators as ants scurrying around and then nobody wants to mess with these ants. And so
it uses them to scare off predators. Now, this is fairly remarkable. This creature is running a
kind of stripped-down morphogenetic program, a sort of two-dimensional low-resolution morphogenetic
program of these ant shapes. And it's pretty amazing. The first time I saw this, I was just
floored until I realized that, yes, this is amazing, but of course, not more so than the actual fly
anatomy, the fact that these cells, yes, these cells can make something that looks like this,
but even more impressively, they actually make something that looks like this. This is a much
more, the actual host is a much more complex creature. But this is a kind of virtualization.
These cells are able to make various different shapes. Now, we are generally not drawn to these
kind of ideas because we think of reliable development. Development is very reliable and
robust. After all, acorns always give rise to oak trees. And we think that this sort of thing
is what a genome does. It makes the oak genome that comes from the acorn is able to make this
nice flat green structure. But what you might never guess is that actually it can also make
these kind of structures. These structures, which are called galls, are made of the plant cells themselves.
They are induced by a parasite, in this case, a particular wasp, hacking these plant cells,
releasing certain signals that get these cells to build this kind of very unconventional structure.
So by looking at something like this, you would actually have no idea. I mean, this is incredibly
reliable and robust. You would actually have no idea that these cells are, in fact, capable of
making something completely different instead of a flat green leaf. They make this round,
spiky, colorful structure. There's a very wide range of these gall structures.
And so what we're getting is a couple of concepts. One being that these cells are
actually capable of much more diversity than what they normally do when they're impacted by other
agents. And the other thing is that because of this, you really have to understand more broadly
the outer world in which these things live in order to understand what they are capable of.
And so we can ask ourselves, we look at this frog and it has a certain kind of body and it has a
certain kind of cognitive structure with behavior. And so we say, okay, here is the organism. This
frog is an organism. But I'm going to argue that we think this is an organism because we have really
fairly tiny spatiotemporal portals through which we see the world. We don't see the whole evolutionary
cycle. And I think that's something like a xenobot is an amazing device that collapses this much
bigger picture into a scale that we can actually appreciate. So whereas this is kind of the simplistic
view, what really is an organism is the physical body, but also its relationships with various
aspects of the environment, all of the affordances which may be high or low agency. So there may be
other creatures ranging from scientists to microbes that are there to manipulate this thing.
There are physical chemical features of the environment. There's an evolutionary cycle that's
wrapped around all of this. There are parasites, there are exploiters, there are conspecifics.
All of this is actually what we need to understand to understand this organism because we need to
know what all of these things can do and how the hardware responds to this in order to be able
to predict, control, understand, really rebuild and create and relate to these kind of complex
structures. So as we think about a xenobot, then this is the story I want to tell in the first
half of the talk. What really is a xenobot? What does the expanded ecology of the xenobot
really look like? So what is a xenobot? Well, this is a project done in collaboration with
Josh Bongard's lab. As you'll see, the other people involved are Douglas Blackiston, who's a
scientist in my group, and Sam Kriegman, who did all the programming, did all the biology.
So what we decided to do was to ask this question of what would somatic cells, so perfectly normal,
genetically normal cells, do in a different context, would they be able to reboot their
multicellularity? So this is the embryo of the frog, Xenopus lavis. In about eight hours,
the cross-section looks like this. These cells up here are fated to be epidermal or skin cells.
So what Doug does is take off these cells, dissociate them, and put them in a separate
environment away from all these other cells. Now, they could have done many things. They
could have died. They could have spread out and moved away from each other. They could have made
a two-dimensional monolayer like cell culture. Instead, this is what they do. Now, when you
dissociate the cells and plate them in this little hole, overnight, they coalesce together
like this. And they make this round little structure. And what the structure does is it begins to swim
because it has little hairs. The skin, the tadpole skin has little hairs called cilia on it. The
hairs rotate. And the normal function is to move the mucus down the body of the frog to keep the
pathogens and everything else flowing away and preventing it from grabbing hold. But in this
configuration, what it can do is use those same cilia. It can repurpose that hardware for a different
functionality. It can use them to swim. And so what you can see here is a single one swimming.
Here is some collective behavior. This one is kind of going on a long journey. Some of them
are doing nothing, just sitting there. These two are interacting with each other. And there's all
kinds of shapes that you can make. Here, Doug made this donut kind of shape, which swims along.
There are others that have this kind of motion. This one was made by Pi and my group. And they
have all sorts of different shapes and motions. Remember, this is just skin. There's nothing
there other than skin cells. In fact, if you do some calcium imaging, this is the same kind of
imaging that one would do on a brain for looking at the physiological activity of signaling in
brains, what you'll see in these Xenobots is something kind of similar. You see lots of
activity. And of course, you can imagine all of the tools of information theory being applied to
ask how much integration is there within the bot, how much communication might there be between
bots and so on. Actually, the cognitive capacities are being studied now. So I'm not going to talk
much about that. So stay tuned for that. We have all kinds of experiments on asking what can they
learn? What do they sense? What are their preferences? All of that is to come. They can also
regenerate after damage. So if you cut them almost in half, look at this basically right here. Look
at that hinge and how much force it takes to squeeze the whole thing through that 180 degree hinge
back up into the new Xenobot shape. So they have many really unexpected behaviors for a
bunch of skin cells. But one of the most amazing behaviors was discovered by AI. So what Josh's
lab did was to create a simulation environment where they could test out different shapes of
these bots and different activities and also look at what the predicted kind of behaviors
would be if they were put in an environment where there was loose material in the vicinity. Now this
material can be passive particles such as this or it can be other cells. And if you provide them
with cells, it turns out that what happens is that they basically implement Von Neumann's dream of
a robot that goes around and builds copies of itself from materials it finds in the environment.
So these white flecks here are individual cells and what the bots do is they run around
and they collect the material into little piles. They sort of, both collectively and individually,
they shape the cells into smooth little piles. And because they're working with an
agential material, meaning these are cells that actually have competencies and tendencies for
certain kinds of behaviors, what ends up happening is that these kind of balls that they make
mature into the next generation of xenobots. So you have the first generation, the second,
the third, and so on. And now what you'll notice is that the first one has this interesting pacman
shape. What the AI discovered through simulated evolution is that this kind of shape would be
very efficient at building these things. And so Doug was able to actually make them and so you
can see them here. And so much like us as bioengineers, the reason this worked in the first
place is because we are working with an agential material, these cells, they're not passive particles.
And so I'd like to propose the idea that what the xenobot really is, is not just this thing,
the xenobot is actually all of this. There are multiple components to what actually makes up
a xenobot. It's a composite system consisting of Doug, who physically manipulates the cells
and myself and Josh and Sam, who implement the evolutionary cycle, set up the particular
environment that allows this thing to explore morphospace, the space of possible anatomical
and behavioral configurations, and do things that these skin cells otherwise would never do. The
cells, of course, themselves have an evolutionary history down to our last common ancestor,
but the proto organism that they make is completely different than what normally happens.
And so there's this composite entity of the AI that actually did the evolutionary simulations to
figure out what the manipulations should be to get the cells to do this. And then the other
features of the environment, so particularly the four of us, are features of the xenobots environment
that are hacking it in exactly the same way that I showed you the other biology hacks each other.
And one of the key parts of this is that we are not hacking it by putting in any kind of synthetic
biology circuits. There is no genetic change here. There are no novel transcriptional circuits.
There's no nanomaterials. What we're doing is providing signals that take advantage of the
competencies of the creature, just like in those gals that I showed you and in the various other
examples. Now, this here is a really strange kind of entity that's a sort of distributed
being that consists of kind of biological parts and then some fairly high agency kinds of manipulators
and some AI and so on. But the reality is, and so this is all together, this kind of thing is a
really kind of strange unconventional collective intelligence. But actually, so are we, because
it's important to remember that not just ants and termites and beehives and things like this,
not just they are collective intelligences, but so are we. In fact, in fact, all intelligence
is collective intelligence. There is no such thing as some sort of indivisible, unified
diamond of intelligence that doesn't have any parts. In fact, you know, René Descartes was
really interested in where in the brain one could sort of attach this unified kind of intelligence
that we feel, the unified experience of humans. And he really liked the pineal gland because he
said that there was only one of them in the brain. So that fit this idea that there should be one
place where the unified cognition of the human resides. But if he had access to good microscopy,
what he would have seen is that there isn't one of anything. And inside that pineal gland is this.
So lots and lots of little cells. And inside each one of those cells is this stuff. Look at this,
look at this amazing structure. All of this is what works together to result in the competencies
of single cells, and all of them together in the, for example, in the brain, but also in the body,
working together result in emergent competencies and cognitive systems of higher types of
creatures. Now, this is, so we are all made of cells. We all take this amazing journey across
the Cartesian cut, starting off as just physics, a little pile of chemicals in an unfertilized
OSI. And then slowly and gradually through this process of embryonic development, we become
something like this, or maybe even something like that. And this is really key. This process is very
slow and gradual. There is no specific special point in embryonic development where you go from
physics to mind, it's all kind of a gradual thing. And this is what our components are made of. Now,
this is this happens to be a free living cell, but all of our cells used to be free living
organisms at one point. This is called the lacrimaria. Notice a few things, there's no brain,
there's no nervous system, the control over the morphology, this is real time, the control over
morphology is unbelievable. If you're into soft body robotics, you should be drooling right now,
this is an incredible level of control. All of it is handled in one cell. So all of its local
physiological anatomical and metabolic needs are handled here at the level of a single cell as it
feeds in its environment. If you cut off this little portion of the cell this head, it will simply
reform. And so what we have in biology is this idea that we are not just structurally nested that
is made of organs, tissues, cells and molecular networks, but actually each of these layers
is competent to solve various problems in its own space. So this is a multi-scale competency
architecture. The molecular networks, the cellular networks, the organs, the whole bodies
and swarms all solve problems in various spaces, the space of morphogenesis, the transcriptional
space, physiological space, and then in our case linguistic and social spaces as well.
And so because all of the parts of the body have their own competencies, their own abilities to
solve problems, you can think of the brain-body kind of connection as an agential prosthetic.
The idea is that we not only have various effectors that we can use in the anti-Clarke sense of the
expanded mind and so other types of sensors and effectors that your mind can use,
but actually these are agential prosthetics. They are ones that have agendas of their own and so
together they form kind of a more global integrated high-level system. Now that allows for some
amazing types of robust problem solving. I'll show you a few examples. One is this. So this is
a tappel of the same frog that we were talking about before. Here's the mouth, here are the nostrils,
here's the brain, the spinal cord, and here's the gut. What you'll notice is that there are no eyes
here, but there is an eye on its tail because what Doug Blackiston did here is to take some cells
from the early embryo that are going to make eye, remove them from their primary location so there
are no eyes here in the head, and stick them in the tail. Not only do they form a perfectly good eye,
even though they're in a weird location next to a bunch of muscle instead of
being next to the brain where they belong, they put out one optic nerve. That optic nerve comes
out and it synapses here. You can see where it ends. It synapses on the spinal cord. It does not go
all the way up to the brain, but what we found by building a machine that automates the training
and testing of visual learning behavior in these animals, these eyes can see perfectly well.
Without any additional evolutionary adjustment, this radically different sensory motor architecture,
now the brain for millions of years was used to having visual input from these locations,
now you've got this weird itchy patch of tissue on the back that provides
some kind of stimulation onto the spinal cord. How does the animal even know that's visual data,
but they do perfectly well in visual learning tasks. This has many interesting consequences.
For example, this kind of robust ability to deal with large scale changes to the structure of
the organism, the fact that these cells are perfectly happy to build an eye wherever they
will find some interesting place to connect to and so on. During evolution, this massively
buffers the negative consequences of mutations because if your eye happens to be moved somewhere
else, no problem. Your fitness is not zero after that. You still have quite a degree of behavioral
success, so this allows evolution to explore positive pleotropic effects of various mutations
in effect, a kind of creativity. It also means that this kind of evolutionary process doesn't
need to solve a huge dimensional micromanagement problem of how to direct every cell. What it
actually could search and navigate is the space of hacking signals, signals that get
various cells to do various things. We think that that's a much more tractable space.
In this case, what we've done is something quite different. We in my group study bioelectrical
signaling. This is voltage-based signals between all cells, not just neurons, but all cells actually
exchange these electrical signals. One of the things we've learned is a kind of bioelectric
subroutine call that says, build an eye at this location. We can make many different
organs. We can make brains and limbs and hearts and inner ear organs and so on, but I'm going to
show you an example of an eye. What we do is early on in embryogenesis, we inject here a kind of
ion channel RNA. There are no electrodes, there's no waves or fields or anything like that. We inject
RNA to control the interface that these cells are actually using to communicate with each other,
which is voltage across the membrane. When we put the appropriate potassium channel RNAs,
that sets a voltage pattern that causes any cells in the body to make an eye. In this case,
the gut is making this eye. Here are all the layers that they have, so retina, optic nerve,
everything's fine. There's a couple of interesting things here. First of all, what we see here is the
incredible high-level control. We don't provide all the information needed to make an eye.
Eyes are incredibly complex. We provide actually a very simple piece of information that's basically
a high-level subroutine call that says, build an eye here. Everything else is folded within that,
and the system takes care of all of it, the size control, the different structures relative to
each other and so on. All of this is discovered. We didn't program this really. The system does
most of the heavy lifting here. There are many remarkable competencies to be discovered in
these multi-scale systems. For example, this round thing is a lens sitting out in the tail of a
tadpole somewhere. The blue cells are the ones that we actually injected with this ion channel RNA,
so the blue cells are the ones that we tell, you should make an eye, but there's not enough of them,
and so what they do is they actually recruit their neighbors. All the brown and clear cells
were never, in fact, targeted by us at all, but what these cells do is recruit their neighbors
to participate in this morphogenetic event because they can tell there's not enough of them to do
it by themselves. This is a common property of these distributed intelligences like ants and
termites and so on. When there's a task to be done, they recruit their buddies to scale up to the task
at hand, and that's what happened here. There are two levels of instruction. Here's us instructing
these cells that there should be an eye here, and then these cells take care of everything else,
including redirecting and behavior shaping a bunch of their neighbors so that they will go and help,
and instead of making skin and everything else that belongs in the tail will help them to make
this eye. So these kind of competencies are there to be discovered in these multi-scale systems.
I want to show you another example in this animal. This is called a planarian. It's a flatworm.
It has a true brain, central nervous system, lots of different organs, quite an interesting creature,
fairly complex, and it has a number of remarkable properties. First of all, it's highly regenerative.
So you can cut this guy into pieces. The record is something like 276. Every piece will grow
exactly what's needed, no more, no less, and give you a perfect tiny little worm. Because of this
regenerability, they are also immortal. There's no such thing as an old planarian. They regenerate
any senescent cells, and so they just continue to rebuild themselves as far as we can tell forever.
They're also very cancer-resistant, but all of this takes place in the presence of an extremely
messy genome, because the way these guys often reproduce is they just tear themselves in half,
and each side regenerates, and now you've got two worms. This means that unlike for the rest of us,
who do not pass on any mutations that we get in our body, we don't pass them on to our children.
In these guys, they keep every mutation that doesn't kill the cell, and in fact it's propagated
into the new body after they regenerate, and have to rebuild larger bodies. So they accumulate
mutations, and what happens in these guys is that they've basically perfected the algorithm that
evolution isn't expecting the hardware to be robust. The hardware is assumed to be
highly variable and faulty. Every cell in these guys can have a different number of chromosomes.
They're mix-aploid, so you really can't count on the hardware very much. What you have to have is
an algorithm that builds a perfect worm no matter what's underneath, and that's why they're resistant
to disorders of aging, of cancer. In fact, of transgenesis, they don't even have transgenic
planaria or lines of mutant worms that don't exist, because these guys will build a perfect
worm under a huge range of various conditions. But one thing you can do is you can target
that morphogenetic machinery. In fact, how do they know how many heads, how many tails they're
supposed to have? If all of this is happening, all this unreliable hardware is underneath,
how do they remember what's going on here? So we studied this process, and we're able to
track using voltage-sensitive fluorescent dyes. We were able to do a kind of imaging. It's a
sort of akin to neural decoding, except it's not for neurons, it's for the rest of the body.
We're interested in decoding the memories of the collective intelligence that makes up this
morphogenetic process of rebuilding and so on. And so what we found is that there's a voltage
pattern that literally tells the animal how many heads to have. This is the wild type pattern that
says one head, one tail. And so when you cut an animal like this, in fact, you get one head,
one tail. What we were able to do is to take this animal, perfectly normal one-headed worm,
with a gene expression just like the normal one, meaning the anterior genes are on and the head,
they're off in the tail. And what we've been able to do is using ion channel targeting drugs is to
rewrite this pattern so that instead of one head, it says two heads. It's actually kind of messy,
but the technology is still being worked out. And so what you have here is this idea that a
single planarian body can store at least, probably much more, but at least one of two different
representations of what a correct planarian will look like. That representation is used as
the set point of a homeostatic remodeling process so that when you do cut this animal,
this is what it builds. Again, not Photoshop, these are real two-headed animals. Again,
this bioelectric pattern is a map of this one-headed body, not of this one. So it's actually even a
counterfactual memory. It doesn't do anything until you go, until you cut off the head and the tail.
And then that information is used to drive morphogenesis. So we now, much like neuroscientists,
are able to do some neural decoding and try to understand what the electrical patterns in a
living brain entail about the memories, the preferences, the goal states and so on of the
human or animal subject. We can do this with the collective intelligence of the body,
read out the pattern memories, understand what it's going to build if it gets injured,
and in fact rewrite them. And so when you do rewrite them, the reason I call this a pattern
memory is because once you do this, if we change it to a two-headed state, that electric circuit
that sets up that pattern actually has a memory to it. When you change it, it holds. And so these
two-headed animals, if you keep cutting them, keep cutting off the heads, they will continue to rebuild
as two-headed forever. Here's what they look like, these two-headed animals you can see.
So this has all the properties of memory. It's long-term stable, it's rewriteable,
it has conditional recall, I just showed you that, and it has two discrete possible behaviors.
Now notice that in planaria, there are no mutant lines, there are no
transgenic worms, people have been trying for many decades. When you change the genetics,
nothing happens because these animals are already built. The algorithm assumes that the
structural genome is unreliable, but what you can do is you can produce permanent lines of
aberrant two-headed worms, so this is a permanent line, but it's not genetic. It's done by rewriting
at the software level. Now, not only can we make worms with the wrong number of heads,
we can make worms with the wrong species shape of head. So you can take this triangular kind of
species, Dugizia derata cephala, cut off the head, treat them with a drug that
confuses the bioelectrical circuit, and as a result, they will make flat heads like this
Pifelina, round heads like this S. Mediterranean, or of course, they're normal heads. Not only the
shape of the head, but actually the shape of the brain and the distribution of stem cells
becomes just like these other species, about 100 to 150 million years of evolutionary distance.
So what you see is that the exact same hardware can visit attractors in this anatomical morpheus
base that normally belongs to other species. Normally, this other genetically specified
hardware is what lives there, but you can prompt this group of cells to visit them as well
if the appropriate information is there in the physiological control circuits. So head shape,
head number, you can go well beyond that, and actually we can make planaria with shapes that
don't look like flat worms at all. You can explore really diverse regions of this latent
morpheus base. So you can make these spiky worms, you can make this kind of cylindrical thing,
and you can make these hybrid forms. So again, the idea is that you can get cells to visit
really far regions of that anatomical morpheus base, given the right set of signals.
And by the way, the DNA here, in all of these examples, there's nothing altered about the
hardware. The DNA is exactly the same. We haven't changed it. Similar to here, the DNA in these
geysers is exactly the same as in the rest of the leaf. If anybody, the next slide is a little
gory. It's a picture of a surgery. If you're a squeamish, you might want to not look at the
next slide. I want to talk about this idea of hacking and how we and how other creatures
manipulate each other as part of this relationship. And so this is an example of a surgery where you
can see people talk about all the time whether living things are machines or not. I mean,
there are a number of approaches. This is a very machine-like approach. This is something, here's
what it ends up being, the surgery. There's an integration of living material and a very
kind of low agency passive material, which is all it does is hold its shape. But this is, of
course, not the only game in town as far as manipulating living matter, because after we do
this, we rely on the body to, quote, unquote, heal. All of the things that happen after this are
things that we really don't have much control over. In fact, in molecular medicine, really the
only successful interventions, permanent interventions, are things that work against
the low agency invaders of the body, such as microbes, cancer, things like that. So antibiotics,
chemotherapy, those things work well. But actually, in biomedicine, we have very few things
that treat the body itself in a permanent way, being able to fix it, not just target symptoms,
but actually fix it in a permanent way. There are very few things that actually do that.
And that's because we are still groping for ways to interact with truly agential materials,
which living bodies are. So we've been engineering with passive materials for
thousands of years. And now we're coming into some active materials and even active matter
and some computational materials. But bodies are all the way to the right of this kind of
continuum of, I call it an axis of persuadability, as far as different types of technologies that
you need to optimally relate to these different systems. Even molecular networks have six different
kinds of learning that they can do. And so all up and down this kind of scale of different levels
of sophistication by Wiener et al. We start to find different ways to relate to these systems to
try to change their function. Individual cells here, these are the individual cells of which
xenobots are made. So you can see here this little, we call it the little tiny horse here.
These are, all of these are just loose skin cells. And you can see they move as a collective.
There's all kinds of interesting behaviors. The lightning flash, by the way, is calcium
that you're going to see here. This is a calcium signaling when it connects.
Those cells have individual behaviors. They have collective behaviors on a scale much smaller
than even a xenobots at a larger scale. Again, here's our planarian. One of the things that
you don't see in this planarian is the pharynx. The pharynx is this muscular tube that it uses to
pick up food. And the pharynx is normally not seen. It's sitting quietly, passively inside the animal.
But much like with the xenobot, where we released the skin cells from the instructive influence
of the other cells, when you remove the pharynx from the rest of the body,
here is what happens. These are individual pharynxes. They're actually very active. They
have a life of their own. This one is going to try to eat. This is liver. This is going to try
to eat a piece of liver. Of course, it's just a tube. So the liver comes out the other end.
So all it ends up doing is borrowing through. They have their own independent life and they live
for quite some time, if very differently than what they do inside. And Wilhelm Ruh called it
the struggle of the parts back in the early days of developmental biology. The idea that
because we are multi-scale competent systems, all the parts have to be controlling each other
all the time in order for our emergent cells to appear. And so when we think about, when we go
going back to this idea of xenobots, when we think about what did evolution actually learn
in producing the Xenopus lavas frog? So here's the genome. Most of the time, what it does is this.
It makes these embryos with a standard developmental sequence that they end up being
tapels with a standard set of behaviors. And if one just looks at the natural course of things,
this is what you think evolution has learned. It has evolved a frog, which is a solution to
a kind of a froggy environment as a problem. And it's highly, highly adapted, very fit, very nice.
But it turns out that in a different scenario, these exact same cells with this exact same genome
can make a xenobot. These xenobots have different shapes. They have different developmental
sequence. So this is about a month old. It's turned from this into something like this.
And they have a completely different set of behaviors. So this provides us with an interesting
challenge. Typically, for any given animal, when you ask where does its shape and behavior come
from, the answer is evolutionary selection. And for eons, it's been sculpted by evolutionary
forces and selection to have certain properties. But there's never been any xenobots. There's
never been any selection to be a good xenobot. All of this is completely emerging. So the cells,
of course, evolved in the frog lineage, but the evolutionary pressures on them were completely
different. So everything, including this kinematic self-replication, this idea of the ability to
make copies of themselves when all of the normal frog kind of reproductive machinery is removed,
this is just skin. They don't have the ability to reproduce the normal way. They come up with a
different way. That's, to our knowledge, never existed in evolution before. So what's happening
here is a kind of really engineering by subtraction. What we did was we removed the other cells that
normally basically bully these skin cells into having a boring two dimensional life on the
surface of the animal. In the absence of those signals, you get to see what the cells really
want to do, which is this is the default behavior of those cells when they're not being
hacked and influenced by their neighbors. This is what they're actually going to do.
And all of these competencies are incredibly non-obvious, and they allow us to have these
model systems with which we can start to develop a science of predicting the goals, the behavioral
repertoire, and so on of complex, multi-scale systems from knowing the properties of the parts,
which we still really don't know very well. So I'm going to just to kind of summarize what we
have here. And this is a sort of obvious homage to Doug Hofstadter's classic book. The idea that
what you have in the Xenopus genome is the ability to, under various circumstances, to produce
different kinds of creatures. And in fact, we don't know what else it's capable of doing. This
hardware, I want to float the idea that a biological evolution doesn't just produce
solutions to specific problems, but it actually makes problem-solving machines.
It makes very versatile hardware that can solve problems in multiple spaces and has different,
very surprising behavior, and that actually collaboration with AI and with human scientists
is what's allowing us to start to catch a glimpse of what else is possible. So the main points
that I tried to transmit today are that all biological life is a kind of collective intelligence
of multi-scale competent agents. And the implications of this, and this is, I call this the TAME
Framework TAME for technological approach to mind everywhere, has many applications from regenerative
medicine to understanding evolution, to novel robotics and AI to really start to take on board
the deep lessons of biology in terms of how the hardware and the software relate to each other
and how they implement ability to solve novel problems. And that these biological robots are
really an exploration tool. They're a kind of device, really, that we can use to explore new
spaces, to explore morpho space, to find these unexpected capabilities. And that it's really
now on us to learn to recognize, predict, control, understand, participate in, because I think,
for example, Josh and Doug and Sam and I are actually part of this novel about creation,
to create and to ethically relate to radically different composite beings.
And I also think that when Darwin had this famous phrase, endless forms, most beautiful,
you know, he was kind of really impressed at the wide variety of living forms that he saw.
Everything that he saw, that end of one example of the tree of life on earth,
is a tiny corner of this massive option space of possible beings, possible bodies and possible
minds, because, because biology is so highly interoperable, because biological systems will
find a coherent way to exist, even when mixed at every level with foreign DNA and nano materials.
And so every combination of evolved material, designed material and software is some kind of
plausible agent. So we have cyborgs and hybrids and chimeras and all kinds of hybrids. Many of
these already exist, they will increasingly exist. And this has huge implications for ethics, because
the old way of figuring out how you're going to relate to something, which is where did it come
from? Meaning, was it evolved or designed? And what does it look like? What's inside? Is it a
human brain? Is it soft and squishy? Is it made of metal? Those kinds of criteria are basic. I
mean, they were never any good really, but they served okay in prior ages. They're not going to
survive the next couple of decades. It's a completely different game looking into the future, where
we're going to have to find ways to relate to beings that are nowhere on the tree of life relative
to us, and that are completely different in terms of their providence and their structure and behavior.
And so we're going to have to figure out a way to relate to them. So I'll stop here and just
say that all of this, if you want to see more, there are a couple of interesting
papers here. This one with Josh, some stuff on machines, some stuff on engineering with
agential materials. And so I want to thank the people who did all the work. So this is the
Zenabot team, Doug Blackiston, Sam Kriegman, and Josh Bongard. I have to do a disclosure because
Fauna Systems is a spin-off company that was formed around the whole Zenabot technology.
Payan and Sherry did the eye work that I showed you. This was our worm team, and our various
collaborators, our funders. Jeremy Gaye did all the amazing diagrams, and always the animals.
They do all the heavy lifting. They teach us everything of importance. So yeah, thank you
for listening, and I'll take questions.
