To begin today's lecture, I'm going to tell you another family story about a scary tick-borne
illness incident that occurred with my youngest daughter.
Several years ago, when I went to pick her up at a summer camp, I learned that she had
been ill for 48 hours with a variety of flu-like symptoms, except it was in the middle of summer.
She had been at the camp in southern Indiana for a week, and her symptoms included a fever,
headache, muscle aches, dizziness, and nausea.
After 24 hours of worsening symptoms, we actually ended up in the emergency department, about
to endure a perplexing five-day ordeal in the hospital.
We discovered a small bite wound on her chest, suggestive of a possible tick bite, although
she didn't remember getting bitten.
She had been hiking in a heavily wooded area, with many forest animals, mosquitoes, and potentially
hidden ticks.
After she was admitted to the hospital, routine and tick-specific diagnostic tests were ordered.
We played a heart-wrenching waiting game to see if she would improve, and since her headache
was fairly severe, a spinal tap was even performed to exclude a diagnosis of bacterial meningitis.
In the meantime, an antibiotic, Doxycycline, which is effective for tick-borne pathogens,
was started.
In the early 2000s, diagnostic tests for tick illnesses were much less reliable than they
are today, and false negative tests were common.
Often a diagnosis had to be made on clinical manifestations and clues from the epidemiologic
history rather than relying on a positive blood test.
And just to frustrate us even further, her diagnostic lab tests were normal.
Now, this can happen with any blood tests performed during the first week of an illness,
there may not have been sufficient time for her immune system to mount an antibody response.
But the general consensus of my infectious disease colleagues was that she had what was
known as the, quote, summertime flu.
And this is caused by intracellular parasites, known as either ehrlichia or anaplasma, both
of which are transmittable by ticks.
My daughter's scenario could happen to any of us who go camping or hiking, or even just
living or working in wooded areas or prairie with long grass.
Tick-borne diseases have now been deemed to be a serious public health problem in the
United States.
The incidence of infection is rising and accounts for tens of thousands of cases each year.
Ticks are also expanding their ranges into new areas across the country.
And ticks are known to be the vectors for at least 14 different illnesses with a wide
range of illness.
New tick-borne illnesses are even still being discovered.
We'll talk today about several of these as we examine these small arachnids that cause
so much trouble.
Let's talk a little bit more about the details of tick bites.
How do we first attract ticks?
Remarkably, ticks can sense our breath and smells, as well as our body heat and vibrations.
They have special sensory structures known as poups, and these enable ticks to detect
an approaching host.
Then, they place themselves in a convenient place to hitch a ride when a host comes by.
Most people don't know that ticks insert a small amount of saliva through the skin that
has an anesthetic effect so you don't even feel a tick bite.
And ticks also have a pair of knife-like structures known as calissari that cut open the skin
and a barb structure called a hypostome that they insert through this opening.
Now let's picture a deer in the Indiana wilderness.
Both white-footed mice and white-tailed deer are common asymptomatic reservoirs carrying
tick-borne diseases.
Next, a tick latches on to the white-tailed deer, bites the deer, and acquires the germ.
While the deer was sleeping, the tick sought shelter in the grass.
Next, sensing a new host, the tick hopped on board and proceeded to bite my daughter,
passing Ehrlichia on to her.
This is an example of the zoonotic cycle of transmission from a reservoir, meaning the
deer and the mouse, through the vector, the tick, and into the host, the human.
There are many diseases that can be transmitted from tick vectors.
The type of tick that bit my daughter was probably the Lone Star tick, which is easily
identifiable due to a white spot on its back.
Here are some different types of ticks that can cause diseases in the United States.
The western black-legged tick, the Rocky Mountain wood tick in northwestern states, the Lone
Star tick found in southeastern and south-central United States.
The brown dog tick found throughout the United States, a black-legged deer tick in the north-eastern
and upper-midwestern states, and the American dog tick, mostly east of the Rocky Mountains.
Today, we're going to discuss several prevalent tick-borne diseases.
Let's start with Ehrlichia and Anaplasma, since they have similar tick hosts and similar clinical
characteristics.
But the geographic domains of these two species are somewhat unique in the United States.
Ehrlichia is found most commonly in the central eastern and central midwestern states and
Anaplasma in the northeast and north-central states.
Both Ehrlichia and Anaplasma, which are neither bacteria nor viruses, are intracellular organisms
in white blood cells, with Ehrlichia living in macrophages and Anaplasma in neutrophils.
Both cause similar clinical symptoms, including a fever, headache, and other flu-like symptoms.
And neurological symptoms can be more severe and can include confusion mimicking encephalitis,
which is an infection of the brain, or even meningitis.
The Lone Star tick is the primary vector for Ehrlichia, while Anaplasma has both the western
black-legged tick and the black-legged deer tick as vectors.
The two diseases were not differentiated from one another until 1990, when a unique case
emerged in Wisconsin.
A patient developed a high fever following a tick bite and actually died two weeks later.
There were clusters of intracellular organisms in the patient's neutrophils, not the monocytes.
And blood testing did not identify Ehrlichia as the pathogen.
Several other cases surfaced in the Midwest over the next few years, and it was thought
that the new form of Ehrlichia had emerged.
Originally, the disease was called human granulocytic ehrlichiosis, but it was eventually renamed
as a new species called Anaplasma.
Now, due to the ever-increasing number of vectors like deer and mice, Ehrlichia and Anaplasma
incidence is increasing in the United States.
In the temperate climates, cases occur throughout the year, but cases are more common in the
northern climates from May to August, as you would expect.
Now, after inoculation, the germs enter the circulation, where they multiply inside the
target white blood cells.
They reprogram the host cell mechanisms similar to viruses.
The germs occasionally cluster together in the white cells in the shape of mulberries,
forming microcolonies known as a morula.
This structure, although rarely visible, is diagnostic of these infections.
The diagnosis, as we saw in my daughter's case, often relies on clinical judgment, since
the rapid diagnostic tests are often not available, and antibody formation may take weeks.
One such rapid test is called the polymerase chain reaction, or PCR technology, which amplifies
DNA.
RNA tests to confirm the diagnosis can be performed at serial time points, four weeks
later, for example, to look for an increase in the antibody immune response.
Fortunately, as we saw with my daughter's case, the treatment with the antibiotic doxycycline,
which affects the ribosomal protein synthesis of the organisms, is effective.
Doxy's organisms lack a cell wall, antibiotics that attack the cell wall such as penicillins
are not effective.
And the prognosis worsens if the treatment is delayed, and therefore it's important
that the doxycycline be started immediately if the clinical illness is supported by the
findings.
Next, let's move on to a disease that you've all heard of, Lyme disease.
It's estimated that there are over 300,000 cases of Lyme disease in the United States
each year, and our family has not been lucky with Lyme disease either.
Our two dogs contracted Lyme disease when we lived in rural Connecticut.
We noticed that they became lethargic, sometimes stumbling up the stairs, and Lyme antibody
tests revealed that they had contracted the disease.
This was our first experience with Lyme disease, but not our last.
In 2009, my wife contracted Lyme disease, probably from a tick in our Wisconsin property,
which tends to attract deer at night.
I can vouch that the disease is every bit as miserable as it is said to be, with the onset
of a stiff neck and meningitis probably being one of the worst symptoms.
My wife said it felt like having a thick band of steel compressing her neck, and she
could barely turn her head.
Now, Lyme disease is the most common tick-borne infectious disease in the United States.
It's caused by a spirochete known as Borrelia burgdorferi, through the bite of a specific
tick, the black-legged deer variety.
It's important to know that the tick has to be attached for more than 24 hours to begin
transmitting the spirochete, so it's definitely worth checking yourself each time you're in
a wooded area so you can remove ticks as quickly as possible.
This can also provide reassurance, since if it has been less than 24 hours from your tick
exposure, Borrelia transmission is unlikely to occur.
The acute phase of Lyme disease includes symptoms that usually begin 3 to 14 days after infection,
and they include headache, fatigue, fever, and a telltale bullseye rash known as erythema
chronicum migraines.
Now this rash is found in nearly 80% of Lyme cases and can be at one or more locations
on the skin.
The rash should not be confused with a few centimeters of redness that is often produced
around the site of the actual tick bite.
The rash of Lyme is usually so characteristic that it also establishes a clinical diagnosis
without the use of any blood tests.
Now up to 20% of people with acute illness may also develop a focal neurological deficit,
especially a Bell's palsy of the face, which fortunately is reversible.
Mild forms of meningitis, which are not fatal, similar to my wife's illness, can also occur.
And much more rarely, an abnormally slow heart rate can lead to dizziness and fainting
before a diagnosis is made.
You might be surprised to know that some individuals that have been exposed to Borrelia never
have had any symptoms.
Up to 5% of residents of certain Lyme prevalent states may have a true positive blood test
but no recollection of illness.
So up to 5% of patients may also have a false positive test due to the nonspecific nature
of the IgM immune response mounted to any infection, not specifically Lyme disease.
A second confirmatory test, known as a Western Blot test, is used to confirm the first true
antibody test as being a true positive result.
You might be wondering, is it possible for someone who has been infected with Borrelia
to have a negative Lyme serological test?
Many people who receive antibiotics early in their illness may not develop Lyme antibodies
until several weeks later, but they almost uniformly will ultimately have a positive
test.
And this is a common misperception of the general public.
You may have also heard that there may be deficiencies in the blood antibody test for
Lyme and a negative test does not exclude having contracted clinical Lyme disease.
This can become an issue of contention in individuals who believe they have ongoing
symptoms of Lyme disease but lack any serological evidence of infection.
The infectious disease community holds relatively firm to the position that only patients with
documented positive Lyme tests have the possibility of developing late sequelae or after effects
of Lyme, while other advocate groups disagree with this position.
Lyme positive test results also usually persist for life, but the magnitude of the test result
does not correlate with any later symptoms.
This makes Lyme disease more complicated to diagnose if individuals become reinfected.
And note that if a pregnant mother contracts Lyme during pregnancy, the fetus can be infected.
If the mother isn't treated, the placenta can become infected, resulting in a possible
stillbirth.
If the mother gets treated with antibiotics, however, there are usually no serious side
effects to the fetus.
My advice to pregnant women would probably be to avoid, if possible, any outdoor areas
where ticks are prevalent, especially in the high-incident summer months.
There are several oral antibiotic treatments, which commonly include doxycycline and amoxicillin
for Lyme.
Patients with certain more severe neurological illnesses or heart forms of the illness may
require intravenous therapy.
In high-risk Lyme areas of the country, single-dose doxycycline prophylaxis has commonly been
implemented for patients with tick bites that have been attached for longer than 24 hours.
And this 24-hour measure is as effective as 10 days of medication for prevention.
Now, left untreated, rare patients can develop late manifestations of Lyme, which are cause
mostly by a nonspecific generalized immune over-response.
And this may include a debilitating arthritis or rarely nerve damage.
Since these are immune-mediated, chronic long-term oral or intravenous antibiotics are not effective
and they are not recommended.
Now, why is there no Lyme vaccine if it's so prevalent?
There is a canine vaccine for Lyme, and my dogs are vaccinated every year.
But why is there no human vaccine?
Two pharmaceutical companies developed the human vaccine for Lyme disease, and this was
proven to be 50-70% effective after two doses.
However, over time, the number of vaccinations requested fell from 1.5 million to only 10,000.
And the vaccines were discontinued due to a lack of public interest.
Also, there were some legal disputes where patients actually claimed they developed autoimmune
symptoms from the vaccine itself.
This created a disincentive for pharmaceutical production and development, and production
was halted.
There are some companies in the process of testing new Lyme vaccines, so perhaps it will
come back into favor.
So, with so many cases in the United States every year, and seeing my wife's symptoms
of Lyme disease, I might be the first one in Lyme for this new vaccine.
Remember, once you test positive for Lyme, you will likely always test positive for Lyme.
While it is recognized that Lyme disease does not, quote, reactivate months or years later,
reinfection is possible with a new tick carrying Borrelia.
These cases may be more difficult to diagnose, especially if there is no ECM rash.
Let's examine another tick-borne disease by using a clinical case scenario.
Let's pretend it's early August in Kentucky.
A two-year-old is taken to his pediatrician after one day of fever.
The fever in itself, of course, shouldn't be a major cause for alarm.
However, on examination, the child had a popular or raised red rash on his legs, arms, trunk,
and back.
Since viral rashes are so common, an unspecified viral syndrome was diagnosed.
But during the next four days, the child continued to spike fevers up to 103 degrees and had a
worsening rash.
The child was taken to the doctor again because of lethargy and refusal to walk.
Laboratory tests showed a low white blood cell count and a low platelet count.
Well, what's your diagnosis?
Is this ehrlichia, anaplasma, or some more ominous illness?
The next day, the child was admitted to a local hospital and treated with penicillin-based
antibiotics, perhaps with a leading diagnosis of meningococcus bacterium, which also causes
this type of rash.
Unfortunately, his condition deteriorated and death resulted from multiple organ system
failure.
Did the child just get treated too late for a bacterial infection and die of overwhelming
infection?
Well, a diagnosis was made, but too late via a blood sample collected while the child was
in intensive care.
This tested positive for IgM antibodies reactive with R. rickettsiae, the cause of rocky mountain
spotted fever.
The child's mother was also hospitalized two days before her son's death.
She had dizziness, headache, and two days of fever, also with a new rash.
However, she was given doxycycline antibiotics and she survived.
And two weeks later, her blood test showed a marked increase in the levels of IgG antibodies
reactive with R. rickettsiae.
Now, can you figure out why the mother survived and the child did not based on the antibiotics
administered?
Since this turned out to be a rickettsiae illness, these germs have no cell wall to
disrupt and penicillin derivative antibiotics won't work.
However, doxycycline, which works on the ribosomes responsible for protein synthesis, would be
and was effective for the mother.
The environment for tick-borne illness to occur was ripe since the family lived in a
densely wooded property.
However, the mother did not remember either of them being bitten by a tick.
Well, rocky mountain spotted fever is a rickettsiae illness.
Its name is a misnomer since the disease can be found in many areas of the United States
outside the Rocky Mountains.
The American and brown dog ticks and the Rocky Mountain wood tick are the vectors for this
disease.
Unfortunately, as we saw in our case, it is the most common fatal tick-borne disease in
the country.
Also, it is not unusual to have family clusters of the disease since families are outdoors
at the same time in areas where the ticks that are carrying this unique germ are located.
The classic triad for many tick-related illnesses includes the tick bite, a fever, and a distinctive
rash.
But from what we now know about ticks, it may be difficult to diagnose tick illness,
because first, either a person doesn't remember they were bitten by a tick, or they get ill
five to seven days later and didn't realize it was due to a tick, or the symptoms resemble
many other illnesses, or early blood tests in the first week are usually negative.
For all tick-borne illnesses, a history of a known tick bite occurs in less than 50%
of cases, so we really have to take into account the epidemiological clues.
Does the patient live or visit in an environment where ticks are prevalent?
And or did they perform any, quote, high-risk activities like walking through tall grasses
or gardening?
If a doctor uses his clinical and diagnostic skills correctly and starts doxycycline right
away, most patients will get better.
Now tick-borne illnesses can result from other germs.
The Heartland virus is a newly identified flebovirus that was first isolated in 2009
from two Missouri farmers hospitalized with fever, low white blood cell count, and low
platelet counts.
Based on the patient's clinical findings and their reported exposures, their illness was
suspected to be transmitted by ticks.
And after this discovery, the Center for Disease Control worked with local health authorities
and learned that the Heartland virus was found in the Lone Star tick.
This disease is relatively rare, but during the 2012 and 2013 season, six additional confirmed
Heartland virus disease cases were identified.
So physicians should consider the diagnosis of Heartland virus in patients who develop
fever with low white blood cell and platelet counts without a more likely explanation and
who have tested negative for ehrlichia and anaplasma or who have not responded to doxycycline
therapy.
After the discovery of this virus, I really started to wonder if my daughter's illness
in Indiana was really due to this virus.
But we never did have her blood tested years later.
Lastly, a tick-borne disease without a known cause.
STARI stands for Southern Tick-Associated Rash Illness, thought to be transmitted by
the Lone Star tick.
Those infected develop a bullseye rash very similar to Lyme disease, but the illness does
not respond to the antibiotics used to treat Lyme.
Since we haven't identified the cause of STARI yet, there are no tests nor are there
any definitive treatments.
Currently, there do not appear to be any late after effects such as those that may occur
with Lyme.
Now, preventing tick-borne illnesses can be difficult in certain areas, but you can reduce
your risk by following these steps.
Avoid direct contact with wildlife, even if you think it's cute.
Use insect repellents in heavily wooded and grassy areas.
Wear treated clothing.
Several companies now make insect repelling clothing lines that could be useful for hiking
in wooded areas.
These usually are treated with permethrin, which has been approved by the Environmental
Protection Agency or EPA for use in clothing.
Check for ticks after you've been in areas at risk.
If you find one on you that you can't recognize, you can save it in order to identify it through
the state health department.
Note that ticks at very young stages are only about the size of a poppy seed.
Bearing light-colored clothing can also make it more easily for ticks to be seen.
Now, one safety note.
If you don't like using the chemical DEET, the EPA has approved a natural formula made
from lemon eucalyptus oil that targets mosquitoes and ticks.
Products with this plant-based oil can be found in many stores.
The EPA has ruled DEET to be safe if used properly, but not in babies less than two
months old and never in concentrations of more than 30%.
In 2010, Consumer Reports recommended six products, four of which contain DEET, one
with picardine and one with lemon eucalyptus.
All of these products repel deer ticks and mosquitoes for at least seven hours.
Well, what about products that contain sunscreen mixed with DEET?
Just realize that you may be getting more DEET than you want if you reapply the sunscreen
more often.
So keep alert if you are in areas where ticks are prevalent, use precautions, and keep
yourself and your loved ones well.
Next time, we will be moving to our section of the course divided by body organ systems.
I will wet your appetite first with the discussion of gastrointestinal illnesses.
See you then.
