The topic of our lecture today is stay out of the hospital.
It's an imperative phrase not only designed to get your attention, but to make you ask
why. First though, I have an announcement to make. As your doctor, you shouldn't be
surprised if in the future I don't shake your hand when I meet you, or if I'm not
wearing the traditional white coat. I may not be wearing a tie, a watch, a wedding
ring, or carrying scissors or a pen. Why? Because if I were, I might be putting
patients at risk for serious hospital-acquired infections. The white doctor's coat has been
a symbol of the medical profession for over a hundred years, giving credibility to those
who wear it. But hospitals around the world are starting to ban this tradition, training
it for our short-sleeved, scrub-type outfits. Ironically, the white coat came into being
in the 19th century partly to prevent cross-contamination. In fact, in 2009, Scotland banned all white
coats, ties, and the accessories mentioned previously to try to prevent infection. Some
hospitals in England have already switched to tunic-like scrubs for all doctors. Why
has this become such a big issue? Well, several studies have shown that health care provider's
clothing is contaminated with a variety of pathogenic germs. Physicians' white coats,
as well as nursing uniforms, may serve as breeding grounds for germs that can be transferred
to other health care providers or even patients. In addition, other studies showed that 33
percent of neck ties were contaminated with staph aureus and other germs, some of which
can also be pathogenic. But you believe that two reports found that 70 percent of physicians
admitted never having cleaned their ties. So, in addition to changing my outfit, I will
now apologize for not shaking your hand when I meet you. Since the 20th century, handshakes
have been associated with the transmission of infectious diseases by transferring germs
from one person's hand to another. It's hard to believe, but handshakes may become a thing
of the past. Another item that is a possible germ transmitter is the stethoscope. Most physicians
and nurses do not disinfect their stethoscopes frequently, in fact, not even once a month,
and certainly not after each patient contact. Think about the number of times that they're
used every day. They come into direct contact with the skin and may harbor thousands of bacteria.
One study from the Mayo Clinic found that the contamination level of the stethoscope
tube was higher than the germs on the back of the examiner's hands. It is thought that
cross-contamination occurs via manipulation with contaminated hands, so the decontamination
of both the tube and the diaphragm, or listening piece, is needed. Therefore, stethoscopes are
likely to be a significant vector of transmission of non-harmful germs, but also potentially
pathogenic bacteria. Patients in isolation already do have a dedicated stethoscope in
their rooms, so it keeps germs somewhat contained. In this lecture, we'll be talking about ways
that patients can acquire hospital-based infections, what is being done by the healthcare
system to prevent them, and what you can do to protect yourself if you're unlucky enough
to require hospitalization. Now, before I critique hospitals, we must first give credit
to advances in modern medicine. Hospitals have the advantage of offering specialized care,
as well as specialized technologies. If you are ill and need hospitalization,
it's great to have a coordinated team of physicians, nurses, and other healthcare
providers with experience in treating hospitalized patients. For example, our hospital is designated
as a level one regional trauma center so that all trauma within 100 miles is directed to my
medical center by ambulance or by helicopter. Having an experienced trauma team can certainly
make the difference between life and death. Similarly, our medical center has specialists
and subspecialists in all fields that enable patients to get the state-of-the-art medical
attention. Eighty percent of the infectious disease consult cases that I see are hospitalized
patients that need consultation. So, with all these great modern medical resources at our
disposal, why do I continually tell my own mother to avoid being hospitalized unless
absolutely necessary? Well, there lurks a dark side of the hospital, one in which a
patient can actually contract an infectious disease that they didn't have at the time that
they were admitted. From 2014 national statistics, we know that four percent of patients will acquire
an infection after arriving at the hospital. The reason for this is complicated, and throughout
this lecture I will try to scrutinize these individual risks that exist. Some infections in
the hospital are given a special name known as nosocomial infections, meaning hospital acquired.
Most nosocomial infections are bacterial, but some can be viral. The major causes are pneumonia,
surgical wound infections, and gastrointestinal or GI infections, each at about 20 percent of the total.
Of the pneumonia cases, nearly half are associated with being in the intensive care unit
and connected to a breathing machine known as a ventilator. Since patients often have catheters
placed in their bladders to monitor urine output or catheters in their arms for intravenous fluids
and medications, these anatomical sites are also prone to infection. Urine and blood infections
account for an additional 10 percent of these cases. Pneumonia and bloodstream nosocomial infections
though have the greatest potential for severe consequences, even death. An increasingly important
cause of nosocomial GI infections is clostridium difficile, often abbreviated as C. diff. This
is the single most common intestinal pathogen, causing 12 percent of all nosocomial infections.
C. diff can be transmitted by the fecal oral route with poorly sanitized hands.
Now, resistant bacteria play a more prominent role in nosocomial infections, as many germs have
been kind of hanging out in the hospital environment, such as the bedrails, the sinks, and the bathrooms.
So, some examples include multiple drug-resistant gram-negative bacilli and methicillin-resistant
methicillin-resistant staph or MRSA. Now, let's say you get a call that a friend of yours is in the
hospital. Unfortunately, he was in a car accident and he had multiple injuries. When you walk into
the room to visit him, he has cuts and bruises everywhere. Since we know that the skin is the
first barrier defense against invasion of microbes, it's not surprising that he would be at risk for
nosocomial infections. He has multiple intravenous lines, a tube down his throat, and a catheter
in his bladder. All of these potentially could provide an easy portal of entry for bacteria.
To potentially compound the risk, you, as a visitor, could also bring in more germs.
The importance of nosocomial infections has always been known to physicians. However,
the general public was first introduced to these concerns with a report from the Institute of Medicine
in 1999. The report concluded that from 44,000 to 98,000 deaths per year in the United States
were due to preventable medical errors in hospitals, and a sizable proportion of these
were deaths from nosocomial infections. In fact, by August of 2007, our government's
Medicare Central Healthcare Agency said it would no longer pay for the added cost of
certain nosocomial infections, which included catheter-associated urinary tract infections,
and more recently, bloodstream catheter-associated infections. The hospital would have to take
the medical, legal, and financial responsibility for such infections. Note that each catheter-associated
urinary tract infection costs in about an additional $10,000, and a bloodstream infection
about $30,000 in added healthcare costs. Hospitals are also now required to report the
incidents of catheter-associated urinary tract infections, catheter bloodstream infections,
ventilator-associated respiratory events, and surgical wound infection rates to the
central healthcare agencies, and they are benchmarked against their peers.
Teams have been at work at hospitals over the past two decades to reduce the incidents of
nosocomial infections, and from 2010 to 2013, there has been a 17% decline.
The vast majority of nosocomial infections are device or procedure related. We have a good grasp
of how these infections happen and are actively seeking ways to prevent them, and we are making
progress with device-associated infection rates. For urinary devices, efforts are focusing on not
even placing catheters in the first place, or if needed, to remove them as soon as possible,
since the risk of infection is proportional to the number of days the catheter is in place.
For pneumonia, there is a bundle of interventions, such as keeping the head of the bed elevated,
and using special disinfectant mouth washes to reduce the infection risk.
Let's take a closer look at the statistics regarding catheter-associated bloodstream
infections in the U.S. There are 200 million intravenous catheter devices in use every year.
500,000 device-related bloodstream infections in the U.S. each year, with 25,000 deaths.
Having a catheter in a vein provides a direct entry route for bacteria to enter the blood.
These bacteria can crawl down the side of the catheter and into the vein. Alternatively,
bacteria can crawl down the inside of the catheters and into the bloodstream.
When a vascular catheter is inserted directly into a large blood vessel,
the risk of infection is higher than those on the arms.
On a broader scope, in order to prevent all types of nosocomial infections,
the Centers for Disease Control, or CDC, has developed a 12-step plan for preventing infections.
The 12 steps are centered around four major principles, preventing transmission,
reducing the risk of infection, using antibiotics wisely, and effectively diagnosing
and treating infections if they occur. First, each hospital, no matter how big or small,
has a department known as an infection control. Sounds pretty simple, right?
But there's really an entire healthcare team that's looking out for your health
in the hospital behind the scenes, in addition to your primary care physician.
The team includes at least one epidemiologist and one or more nurses
to coordinate efforts to reduce infections. Now, I'm one of the three hospital epidemiologists
for our hospitals team. And there are basic infection control principles that healthcare
providers must follow to protect both you as a patient and themselves from
transmittable pathogens. These are known as standard or universal precautions,
and can be used both to protect healthcare providers and for preventing transmission
to patients. These measures include hand washing, implementing isolation restrictions,
and protecting against blood-borne pathogens with personal protective equipment,
like gloves, gowns, and face shields. Let's start with the most basic one, hand hygiene.
In order to do this, concept justice, we have to take ourselves back more than a century to Vienna
in 1847 and tell you a true yet tragic story. We need to honor another physician of the 1800s
who was instrumental in saving the lives of many mothers who became the father of hand washing.
His name is Ignaz Semmelweis, and he worked in a maternity clinic in Vienna in 1847.
There were many infections in his maternity wards during the time due to an illness known as
pure pearl fever, also called childbed fever. It affected women within three days after giving birth.
It wasn't known at the time that this infection was actually caused by contaminated doctor's hands
and unsterile instruments after his hospital started an anatomy lab two decades earlier.
Now, how bad could a lack of hand washing be? Over a period of months, Dr. Semmelweis noted
that the mothers who were tended to by medical doctors, all men, had more than three times the
rate of death than those tended by midwives, and also a comparison hospital in Dublin, Ireland,
without an anatomy lab. He also noted that pregnant mothers who did not have internal pelvic
exams survived, and hence he began to suspect a contagious agent. When one of his male medical
colleagues died a few days after pricking his finger during an autopsy on a young mother,
he observed the colleague's body at autopsy, and it had the same type of damage that was seen with
childbed fever. Dr. Semmelweis now recognized the connection. He observed that doctors often went
from touching infected corpses in the cadaver dissection lab to the maternity ward where they
examined women and delivered babies without hand washing. He directed the doctors of the hospital
to use a chlorinated lime solution on their hands prior to and after touching the women,
and with this procedure, when it was followed, the maternal mortality rate went from 13%
down to 1% over the next two years. Unfortunately, hundreds of women had died
before hand washing became standard practice, and Semmelweis, rather than being appreciated,
suffered attacks by the medical profession for his ideas, just as Hippocrates had.
He died a sad and tragic death after being tricked into going into an insane asylum
where he was beaten, put in a straight jacket, and confined to a dark cell, and he died two weeks
later at the age of 47, never having received credit for his extremely important work.
Today, however, he's recognized as the pioneer of antiseptic theory, and he's known for his book
The Ideology, Concept, and Prophylaxis of Childbed Fever. And today, there's a metaphor called the
Semmelweis Reflex for certain human behavior, mainly rejecting new knowledge because it goes
against beliefs that are so heavily entrenched in society. So after hearing this story, which is
taught to all medical students, you would think that 100% of physicians and other medical personnel
would automatically wash their hands between contact with patients. Well, that's not the reality.
I would like you to try to guess the answer for two questions.
First, are physicians or nursing staff better at hand washing compliance?
Secondly, what is the true percentage of hand washing when medical care providers are observed
in the hospital? I already told you it wasn't 100%, but how low is it? I'll tell you the answers
later in this lecture. Now, there are special forms of isolation in the hospital,
including contact precautions where providers will need to wear gowns and gloves to protect
themselves from acquiring germs on their hands and their clothes. Secondly, droplet isolation
when providers wear a mask. This is used for patients with suspected viral respiratory illnesses,
such as influenza. Next, airborne isolation, where special masks are worn and hospital rooms
with special airflow control are needed for diseases, such as chickenpox and tuberculosis,
where the germs can spread beyond six feet. The infection control department is responsible
for ensuring that appropriate level isolation is instituted with every patient that's admitted.
For example, a suspected Middle East respiratory virus case, or MERS, would require airborne
and contact isolation from the very first suspicion of the disease. It might be interested
to know how hospitals prepared for the possibility of admissions for Ebola virus in the United States,
since these measures were much more stringent than healthcare providers had ever seen before.
We began with specialized training on how to put on and take off suits, gloves, and other special
protective gear. This has to be done in exactly the correct sequence to prevent any contact with
Ebola blood or virus-containing fluids and bare human skin. We also spent thousands of hours in
preparation, and we were named by the CDC as one of the 35 regional Ebola centers.
Next, let's discuss a special type of isolation necessary for patients known to be positive
for C. diff. This is enhanced contact precautions. This includes wearing gowns and gloves,
but also special mandatory soap and water hand washing to remove spores from healthcare
providers' hands. C. diff produces spores which contaminate the hospital environments such as
beds, guardrails, and intravenous pumps. Spores are not only highly contagious, but they also
cannot be killed with alcohol alone, hence the need for soap and water hand washing.
This introduces yet a different dimension of infection control, sterilization and disinfection.
When surgery is performed, it is not unusual to enter sterile body spaces such as the inside of
the abdomen. We're all familiar with medical shows where physicians are standing in the operating
room with sterile gloves, a sterile gown, and a mask to prevent them from coughing or sneezing
into the wound. What preparations are necessary for use of instruments in the operating room?
Well, there are three types of sterilization that can kill both bacteria and spores.
Instruments undergo either high-temperature steam sterilization in an autoclave,
gas sterilization with low-temperature ethylene oxide gas, or hydrogen peroxide gas plasma.
Disinfection is one step short of sterilization and cleaners used have all the elements that give
hospital their unique smell. Common bleach when diluted one to ten with water and not used directly
on the skin is an excellent disinfectant. And while we're talking about the operating room,
there's one additional principle infection prevention that I'd like to discuss,
antibiotic prophylaxis and surgery. Nearly 50 years ago, it was found that laboratory animals
given penicillin before a procedure where staff germs were introduced had a much greater survival
rate. It was subsequently shown to be valuable in humans. In nearly all surgery, there is some
minor contamination of the wound, no matter how well the surgical site is scrubbed with
antimicrobial soap, and no matter how careful the surgeons are in operating. So by having
antibiotics in the tissues of the surgical wound, when that minor contamination might occur, has been
shown to greatly reduce the risk of infection. In fact, we know that tissue concentrations of the
antibiotic peak between one to four hours after administration of the antibiotics. So surgeons
administer their preoperative antibiotic in the one hour window before the surgical knife actually
cuts the skin. Let's return to our CDC program to reduce hospital infections.
We've talked about preventing transmission, but another one of the major steps is to
diagnose and treat infections effectively. This becomes particularly challenging when we're
dealing with diseases that are not mainstream, like the newly emerging diseases of MERS,
SARS and bird flu. One of the problems we had when Ebola first entered the United States
is that it was not immediately diagnosed. Without the correct diagnosis and treatment,
many others became exposed, including healthcare workers. Also, one of the most difficult decision
making processes for physicians caring for patients with suspected infections is to decide
which germs are really causing an infection versus which are just inhabiting their normal
environment. Treating bacterial colonization, not infection, is responsible for a large amount
of antimicrobial overuse. Another CDC initiative is use antimicrobial agents wisely. Stopping
antibiotics when infection is unlikely or cured is essential. Now, we talked about the infection
control department, but who in the hospital is responsible for watching over antibiotic usage?
There's a relatively new program for hospitals that has been effective for the past decade
known as antimicrobial stewardship. I work diligently on a daily basis on this hospital
quality assurance measure. Sometimes we're referred to as the antibiotic police, and some
people definitely don't look forward to calling us for antibiotic approval since they have to make
their case for it. Some would like a lawyer at the trial. Now, the two main goals of antimicrobial
stewardship are to eliminate unnecessary antibiotic use and to improve the quality of its use through
constructing hospital guidelines for antibiotic use, restricting last resort antibiotics to cases
that are absolutely necessary, educating physicians and other staff why all of this is necessary.
And finally, the fourth major component to the CDC program is preventing infection.
This requires that all medical personnel proactively anticipate when an infection might occur
to reduce its risk. For example, leaving a urinary catheter in place for only short periods of time.
Now, I promised we would return to the hand washing questions we posed for you from the
beginning of the lecture. The CDC most recently published guidelines for hand hygiene and had
two major new recommendations. The first involved the use of hand sanitizers for routine hand
disinfection and only washing with soap and water when hands were visibly dirty.
And secondly, establishing monitoring programs for hand hygiene compliance. Using alcohol-based
hand sanitizers has enabled hygiene to become more convenient and less time consuming.
The Joint Hospital Commission, another healthcare governing agency, made hand washing compliance
a national patient safety goal. It requires hospitals that are seeking accreditation
to develop both compliance monitoring and improvement programs. So, to finally answer
the question, hand hygiene compliance is at best around 90%, but it's more typically in the 70 to
80th percentile. Also, nurses, perhaps not unexpectedly, are more judicious about hand washing
than physicians, as they're more directly involved with the day-to-day patient care management.
Lastly, what can patients do to protect themselves in the hospital? If you're in the hospital,
discourage visits from people who are ill. You can also ask visitors to sanitize their hand
and follow hospital isolation precautions when they come into your room. In some instances,
they will be asked to wear a gown and gloves. These are simple but effective ways to help
control disease spread. Everyone who provides care for you should also clean their hands.
Now, if you don't see your caregivers clean their hands when entering your room,
please ask them to do so. It only takes a few words like these to help support this healthy
habit. Excuse me, did you clean your hands? Or, I saw that you cleaned your hands. Thank you.
We all have a role to play in people staying healthy as possible when they're in the hospital or
even in the medical clinic. If you're coming to a medical clinic to visit, with a cough,
ask for a mask to protect yourself and protect others while they're ill.
By working together, patients, visitors, and healthcare workers can lower the hospital-acquired
infection risk. But for now, my advice is the same that I gave my mother. Stay out of the hospital
if you can. Join me next time for the start of our Global Health section, which includes malaria,
tuberculosis, travel illness, and diseases of war. We will start by looking at an ongoing pandemic
that 33 million men and women are living with around the world and has already killed
25 million people since 1981. Stay tuned.
