Today, we'll be talking about infections of two different organ systems, the respiratory
tract and the central nervous system.
A common thread between these two organ systems is their propensity for infectious diseases
to become deadly.
First we'll start our lecture with the disease of historical interest to many of you.
Let's imagine you're in Chicago for a romantic getaway weekend.
You get a hotel room in a five-star hotel where you enjoy the pool, spa and the hot
tub.
There's a coffee bar near the beautiful fountain in the main lobby and you spend the weekend
enjoying the sights and sounds of Chicago.
When it's time to go home, you're still talking about what a great weekend you had except
that five days later you start feeling ill.
You're having fevers and chills and muscle aches and it's not flu season.
A couple of days later you start coughing and the cough becomes painful.
You become short of breath and you have difficulty going up the stairs in your house.
You think you just have a bug that's going around and never stop to think your illness
might be linked to your romantic weekend.
So which infectious disease might you have contracted?
I'll give you a hint.
In 1976, hundreds of individuals at a convention in Philadelphia were struck down by a mysterious
illness that at the time had no known cause, was not necessarily infectious and had no
name.
Later it was named after the group at the convention, the American Legionnaires.
Although legionella bacteria are present in most water systems at low levels, including
your home, in 1976 it unfortunately became a dangerous situation because there was a
lack of proper water quality maintenance at the hotel.
This led to large numbers of bacteria being occultly aerosolized.
Now when others in Chicago who stayed at the same hotel started to report similar illnesses,
an epidemiologic investigation was launched.
This found that the fountain, locker rooms, swimming pool and hot tub all tested positive
for the legionella bacterium.
This true incident actually resulted in three deaths.
We'll return to the tale of Legionnaires' disease and how its mystery was solved towards
the end of our lecture.
Well, how worry should you be about acquiring this infection?
Well, some pneumonia can be contracted by directly breathing in droplets contaminated
with aerosolized bacteria.
This is one reason that hotels, but especially hospitals, need to pay strict attention to
water quality in showers, pools, air conditioning systems and hot tubs.
Let me tell you a quick story about my own hot tub.
When I bought my current house, there was a hot tub and the kids were thrilled.
However, when we asked the previous homeowner about how to maintain the hot tub, he told
us that he had never changed the water in eight years.
In fact, we learned that he had actually built the deck around the hot tub that prevented
access to the maintenance panel.
The first thing we did was drain it and run bleach through the jets, and we may have prevented
our own legionella outbreak.
Now, let's take a further look at how this germ, when aerosolized, can cause pneumonia.
The mucous membranes of the throat and respiratory tract are very important at stopping inhaled
substances from entering into our lungs.
However, if you have a chronic lung condition or you smoke regularly, these membranes and
attached cilia are damaged and they can't perform their innate immunity properly.
Legionella bacteria can then make their way deeper into the lungs and enter the alveoli,
the balloon-shaped structures which help us exchange oxygen.
The bacteria continue to multiply in the alveoli, causing pneumonia, an invasion of the alveoli
and the adjacent lung tissue.
Now, while failure of the respiratory defenses is common in individuals with underlying lung
disease, you don't need to have abnormal lungs to develop pneumonia.
The common physiology of almost all pneumonia is what is known as aspiration from the mouth,
throat, and teeth bacteria via gravity into the lungs.
And this has nothing to do with inhaling bacteria like legionella.
You'll be surprised to know from studies done more than 30 years ago in medical students
that half of us aspirate while we're sleeping.
Investigators painted the back of the students' throats with a harmless nuclear medicine tracer
material.
The students then slept on beds where there was an equivalent of an overhanging Geiger
counter and the investigators looked for the tracer in the students' lungs.
What prevented them from getting pneumonia was their normal ciliary clearance mechanisms
of the upper and lower airways.
Let's use another case study of a respiratory illness gone bad to elaborate further about
pneumonia and meningitis.
Starting innocently in the respiratory tract, the bacteria leads us through twists and turns
ending up in the central nervous system where it threatens to cause death.
Remember, normal bacteria colonize the back of the throat and usually don't cause any
mischief.
And one of these is called streptococcus pneumonia, or strep pneumo for short.
Don't confuse this strep with group A streptococcus which causes sore throats and rheumatic fever.
In fact, the most common cause of pneumonia in adults is in fact strep pneumo.
The germ has several means to elude our normal defenses, especially a very thick sugar capsule
that makes it difficult for our macrophages to swallow the bacteria.
Not only that, but there are more than 20 different variations on this sugar capsule
and we need specific immunity to each one to protect us from most strains of strep pneumo.
Now, our hypothetical patient likely had a silent aspiration vent approximately 48 hours
before becoming ill.
If strep pneumo gets past the upper and lower respiratory defenses, it will cause pneumococcal
pneumonia.
By now, the bacteria are fiercely multiplying at the alveolar space.
After a certain number of critical bacteria are reached, our patient becomes ill with
fever, increasing difficulty breathing, and a cough.
If the cough is strong enough, it can actually force out a sputum sample that we can examine
under the microscope to determine the cause of pneumonia.
At this point, the patient will likely seek medical attention.
The healthcare provider will listen to the patient's lungs and hear abnormal sounds,
especially decreased breast sounds in the area of the lung that is filling with white
blood cells and other inflammatory cells to fight the pneumococcus.
A chest x-ray will show that x-rays that normally passed through the air in the lung are now
blocked by the inflammatory response, and the x-ray will be abnormal with a white zone
that defines the pneumonia.
Now, if medical attention is sought at this point in time, there's probably a good chance
that the infection can be managed with supportive care and appropriate antibiotic targeting
pneumococcus.
Patients can usually be discharged home with careful medical follow-up with the mortality
rate of only 1%.
Sometimes depending on the severity of the illness, the patient's age, social factors,
hospitalization may be required.
The mortality rate for patients hospitalized with community-acquired pneumonia increases
to 12%.
Now, let's say instead of seeking medical attention, our patient is more stubborn and
won't listen to the advice of family members and friends, or they live alone without frequent
contacts with others.
It's likely that the infection will become more severe and develop into a body-wide systemic
infection.
The most common cause of invasive body-wide infections age 65 and older is invasive pneumococcal
disease.
This is why it's so important to get pneumococcal vaccines if you're 65 or older.
Now, the situation can get even worse.
As the pneumococcus creeps out into the bloodstream, it initiates a more advanced inflammatory
process called sepsis.
Now the mortality rate has climbed to 40%.
Additionally, the pneumococcus has the propensity to attack the linings around the brain and
the spinal cord, causing a condition known as bacterial meningitis, and this is precisely
what happens to our patient.
Let's take a closer look at the anatomy of the head so you can understand where the central
nervous system infections like this reside.
The outside head bone is the skull, and there's a membrane barrier located just beneath it
called the meninges.
The ribospinal fluid totally surrounds the brain, protecting it from injury, and is contained
by the meninges.
Inflammation of the meninges is referred to as meningitis.
If the actual nerves of the brain or spinal cord become infected, the condition is known
as encephalitis or myelitis.
With meningitis, since the fluid is a normally sterile body site, a rapid and significant
inflammatory response occurs.
The white blood cells and other chemical mediators of inflammation or cytokines also migrate
into the spinal fluid, where a major battle begins between the bacteria and the body's
immune system.
One of the consequences of this battle is increased water pressure on the brain and
spinal cord, and this leads to impairment in our patient's ability to communicate, and
is severe enough an actual coma.
When the infection reaches this dangerous threshold, our patient's life is certainly
in jeopardy.
The inflammatory response in the lung may be serious enough that the patient may even
require the assistance of a breathing machine to provide extra oxygen support to improve
their chances of survival.
Even though the antibiotics may be working, the inflammatory response in the blood may
lead to multiple organ system damage.
Well, not all cases of pneumonia, even bacterial pneumococcal pneumonia, end up becoming the
serious where life and death are at stake, and there are many other bacterial germs that
can cause pneumonia, and even viruses such as influenza, as well as in-between organisms
called mycoplasma pneumoniae or chlamydia pneumoniae that can make us sick.
Before we discuss these other germs in more detail, you might be wondering what our patient
could have done differently to prevent such a serious medical situation.
Well, there is a common sense element as to when you should abandon home care and seek
medical attention.
That quote breaking point is obviously different for each of us individually.
The threshold for seeking medical attention should get lower as we age due to immune senescence.
Also, if you have other medical conditions that can compromise your immune system, such
as having lost your spleen or taking high doses of a steroid immunosuppressant named
prednisone, your threshold should be low.
The good news here is there are two vaccinations for streptococcus pneumoniae that are available.
A conjugate vaccine with 13 pneumococcal capsule sugar types and another vaccine that is intended
to recognize 23 different capsule serotypes of pneumococcus.
It is recommended that children receive the conjugate vaccine in the first years of life
and it's recommended that all adults 65 and older now receive both types of vaccine once
after the age of 65.
Some individuals with chronic medical conditions, especially of the heart or lungs, need to
receive these vaccinations at least once before the age of 65.
You should be aware that there are limits to the efficacy of vaccinations.
Not all sugar capsule types are captured with the vaccines, although they are intended to
capture about 85% of the types causing invasive disease.
Secondly, your body's individual immune response may result in antibody production for only
some of the serotypes in the vaccine, but not all of them.
It is still estimated that the standard 23-valent pneumococcal vaccine leads to a risk reduction
of illness of about 50%, not perfect, but helpful.
With the addition of the conjugate vaccine recommendations, the risk of acquiring pneumonia
should become even lower.
It is important to realize that you should still seek medical attention for what might
be pneumonia and not believe you're invincible just because you receive the vaccinations.
Same principle holds true for the yearly influenza vaccine.
While bacterial pneumonia is most common in adults, the most common cause of pneumonia
in children under the age of five is actually viral.
Many snotty-nose viruses that children carry can occasionally end up in their lungs.
Unless this is influenza virus, it is usually not life-threatening, nor does it usually
require hospitalization or antibiotics.
From about the age five through the teenage years, the most common cause of pneumonia is
mycoplasma pneumonia, a germ that's halfway between a virus and a bacteria.
This condition is usually suspected on clinical grounds in the appropriate age group and usually
does not require hospitalization.
It's often referred to as, quote, walking pneumonia.
Antibiotics that are active against protein synthesis at the ribosomes, such as erythromycin
and tetracycline derivatives, are typically prescribed for treatment.
Remember, since this germ does not have a cell wall, a moxicillin and cell wall antibiotics
would not be effective.
Another cause of pneumonia in adults is chlamydia pneumoniae.
This germ is very similar to mycoplasma, but is more likely to affect middle-age adults,
and the antibiotic treatment is similar to mycoplasma.
Now, getting back to our very sick patient, since the patient developed meningitis, let's
discuss the full scope of illness associated with meningitis.
Most conditions which cause fever, headache, and a stiff neck, symptoms of meningitis,
are not due to bacterial causes and are usually not life-threatening.
This medical condition is known as, quote, aseptic meningitis, and the main cause is
usually the result of a viral infection.
And while it may not be as severe as bacterial meningitis, it can still make you feel miserable
for five to seven days.
80% of aseptic meningitis are caused by enteroviruses.
The root of the word entero means intestinal, and these viruses cause intestinal symptoms
to begin with, but then travel through the bloodstream to the meninges where they can
cause meningitis.
Enteroviruses belong to the family of viruses that includes poliovirus, which we already
know can attack the nerves, but has other cousins called echelivirus and coxacivirus.
Fortunately, our body is usually able to overcome the viral infection without serious consequences.
There are no antiviral medications that can be used for most viral meningitis, and vaccination
efforts are only beginning for enteroviruses.
On very rare occasions, the virus can actually invade the brain tissue, causing encephalitis
and the illnesses more severe with signs of altered consciousness or coma.
One of the animal or zoonotic infections transmitted from robins to mosquitoes to humans, known
as West Nile Virus, can cause encephalitis.
And herpes simplex viruses that usually move forward and cause fever blisters can actually
travel backwards towards the spine and cause aseptic meningitis or less commonly encephalitis.
And finally, aseptic meningitis can occur from some of the tick-borne diseases, especially
the Lyme spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi.
So if you have a tick bite and you have a severe headache and a stiff neck, it is most
likely that you have aseptic meningitis.
It's very important to know the symptoms of infections around the brain and spinal cord
so you can act quickly.
The need for medical attention should not be minimized.
Although the odds are in your favor that an unusually severe headache is not life-threatening,
you should not make that determination on your own.
I strongly encourage all of you to seek medical attention for a complex of symptoms that includes
fever, a severe headache, irritation of vision with bright lights, and a stiff neck or a stiff
back.
Now we're going to shift our attention back to other forms of upper respiratory tract
infections.
There are several sinuses in the front of the face which also connect with the respiratory
passages of the nose and the back of the throat.
A viral infection causes thickening of respiratory and sinus linings and also a loss of cilia
clearance mechanisms.
But the illness is usually viral for the first 10 to 14 days and treatment is control of
the symptoms and not antibiotics.
All too often at the first sign of a runny nose and congestion leading to pressure over
the front of the face, a phone call is placed to the primary care physician's offices
requesting antibiotics for an infection.
To test the hypothesis that antibiotics have virtually no role in the treatment of sinus
infections for the first 10 to 14 days, randomized double-blind placebo-controlled studies were
done.
These demonstrated no difference in the shortening of duration of symptomatic complaints with
or without antibiotics.
The official recommendation of the Infectious Disease Society of America and of the American
Academy of Otolaryngology then is initially not to treat sinus irritation with antibiotics.
There are of course exceptions that might need antibiotics earlier including symptoms
suggesting early bacterial infection, such as fever more than 101 degrees with severe
pain, but these symptoms are not the norm.
To be honest, with all the drug resistance issues, the less antibiotics you and your
family take, the better.
Okay, to complete our knowledge base of upper respiratory infections, we need to learn about
bronchitis.
The bronchi are the airway tubes between the mouth and the lower lungs.
They can also be infected by infectious organisms in a manner similar to the ears and the sinuses.
Rhinovirus, or the common cold, is the most common infectious disease condition in the
U.S.
These viruses have a propensity to attack the mucous membranes of the nose, throat, and
especially the bronchi.
It's not unusual to have nasal congestion symptoms a couple of days before complaining
that you now have a chest cold, manifested by a clear and usually non-productive cough
which sometimes keeps you awake at night unless you sit in an upright position.
Does this sound familiar?
Well the main point is that bronchitis, except for in patients with chronic lung diseases
such as emphysema, is also exclusively a viral illness and does not require antibiotics.
Similar placebo-controlled trials of antibiotics versus no antibiotics were conducted years
ago for bronchitis with results similar to the sinus studies we just discussed.
The manic care of your cough, likely with decongestants and over-the-counter cough suppressants,
is the recommended treatment for bronchitis.
It will still be a nuisance and it will last a week to 10 days, but unless you have symptoms
that would suggest that you're getting a bacterial pneumonia, antibiotics won't help.
Well, I promised that before we concluded this lecture we would return to Legionnaire's
disease.
This is of special interest to me since I was taking a college class in immunology when
the outbreak occurred, and it wasn't clear that the outbreak was actually due to an infectious
agent.
I began writing my term paper on all the possible causes of the illness, which included chemical
exposures in the environment, and toxic metal poisoning.
The convention had around 2,000 members of the American Legion at the Bellevue Stratford
Hotel in Philadelphia celebrating the country's 200th birthday.
What was unique about this population at risk was the large numbers of veterans who had
been heavy cigarette smokers and had underlying emphysema lung disease.
There were 182 reported cases and 34 deaths.
The bacterium, which was subsequently named Legionnella pneumophila, did not grow on standard
culture media.
The Pennsylvania Health Department and CDC launched an intensive investigation.
However, it wasn't until three months later that the growth conditions for this, quote,
new bacterium were identified and Legionnella was found in abundance in the water cooling
towers of the hotel, eventually seeding the air conditioning system.
Legionnella bacteria actually live in harmony inside amoeba that are themselves harmless
to humans.
They are found in many aquatic systems, and they thrive at normal thermal temperatures,
or even at water temperatures up to 110 degrees Fahrenheit.
When inhaled in the lung, germs are captured by macrophages of our lung, but are still
able to live intracellularly in these immune cells.
The pneumonia caused by Legionnella tends to be more severe.
In 1976, the original germ was thought to be a newly identified bacterium.
Once the organism was cultivated, the CDC compared the bacterium with samples of an
unknown illness from years past called Pontiac fever from Pontiac, Michigan, and they found
that the bacteria were identical.
Since the original outbreak, there have been over 600 reported outbreaks of Legionnaire's
disease worldwide, even some that have originated inside hospitals.
Hospitals and hotels are required to perform one of several types of disinfection for Legionnella.
ction methods include chlorination, copper ionization, or more commonly, quote, superheating
water to 140 degrees Fahrenheit, and then flushing the water storage tanks every month.
Now, while Legionnaire's bacterium is of great historical interest, it is still one of the
top five causes of bacterial pneumonia in the US.
Not really from any outbreak situation, but because it's ubiquitous in most water environments.
Estimates of the disease in the United States are approximately 10,000 sporadic cases per
year.
As an infectious disease specialist, I have to maintain a high index of suspicion in patients
presenting with more severe forms of community-based pneumonia.
Now, fortunately, there is a urine test that can detect the equivalent of the shedding
skin from the bacteria, which can detect around 80% of Legionnella cases.
However, there are some species that are not detected by this urine test.
Also, since the germ does not routinely grow in the microbiology lab and requires special
media, the diagnosis has to be made clinically.
Treatment with antibiotics that are effective for intracellular bacteria, for example, erythromycin
or quinolones, are usually started when there's a suspicion of Legionnella.
A retroactive diagnosis can sometimes be made by looking for a significant antibody rise
in serum antibody levels over a four to six-week time interval.
So in today's lecture, we've come to appreciate how complicated respiratory infections can
be and how deadly severe pneumonia and bacterial meningitis can become.
You've also learned about how to recognize the symptoms of pneumonia and meningitis
and when to seek medical attention.
In our next lecture, we'll continue to examine infections by organ systems next time the
skin and bloodstream.
If you've ever wanted to know about what all the hype is about MRSA or Methasilum Resistant
Staph aureus, please join me.
