Today, we will take a look at infectious diseases spanning six decades.
In the Leavitt-Beaver era of 1950, aside from poliomyelitis, it seemed like only a
few other infectious diseases were in nuisance to the American public, streptonsylitis, childhood
ear infections, and the common cold.
We felt triumphant in our efforts to defeat several childhood diseases like mumps and
measles, and including the introduction of polio vaccines.
Tuberculosis, influenza, and pneumonia were also at an all-time low.
So really, the most pressing infectious disease issues of childhood, aside from polio, were
fairly mild ones.
Some scientists believe that the worst was over.
Let's take a closer look at some of these seemingly benign infections of the 1950s.
First, let's look at tonsillitis.
My middle daughter seemed to have a sore throat at every family holiday gathering for years,
where she had trouble swallowing due to pain, her tonsils were swollen and enlarged.
She would also have swollen and tender lymph nodes in the neck.
In children, the most common cause of tonsillitis is group A streptococcus.
Now, before we move forward, I would like to ask you whether or not you think antibiotics are
useful in the treatment of streptococcal tonsillitis?
Well, the answer would seem to be pretty straightforward.
Yes, but the answer is more complicated.
Let me explain a little bit more.
Since strep is a bacterium, it will respond to antibiotics, but it might surprise you to know
that almost all tonsillitis will actually get better on its own.
Antibiotics do shorten the duration of sore throat symptoms, but only by about 24 hours.
The main reason we use antibiotics for streptococcal tonsillitis is because if left untreated,
there is a small chance of developing rheumatic fever.
Well, this is an autoimmune disorder where the body attacks itself,
and this is more serious than tonsillitis.
Rheumatic fever was a leading cause of heart problems in the United States,
and is still the leading cause of heart disease in children from developing countries,
affecting over 6 million children in India alone.
The strep germ has a special component on its outer surface known as the M-protein,
and the body may resent the M-protein, leading to the creation of immune proteins
called antibodies, which attack the body.
The attack may include the large joints of the knees or the shoulders,
but especially concerning are the valves of the heart.
If this rare autoimmune event is going to occur, it usually happens about 2-6 weeks later.
Symptoms include a fever, including aching joints, sometimes a rash,
and if the heart is involved, there might be symptoms of heart failure, such as sluggishness
and fluid in the lungs.
Rheumatic heart disease is still a key cause of heart disease,
is still a common cause for the need for artificial heart valves.
You probably know someone who had rheumatic fever or worse rheumatic heart disease.
Now, due to a change in the biology of the M-protein over the last several decades,
the incidence of rheumatic fever has dramatically fallen in the United States
to less than one case per 100,000 population.
So, in adults, the risk of developing rheumatic fever after streptococcal pharyngitis
is now significantly lower, estimated at a chance of 1 in 5,000.
Another circumstance that has dramatically changed over the past 50 years
is the frequency of tonsillectomy in children for recurrent sore throats.
In older days, most children, including myself,
had their tonsils removed, but now it's fairly unusual unless there are consistent problems.
In fact, the official position for tonsillectomies suggests performing this procedure
only if there are recurrent throat infections for more than 12 months
or the patient has a sleep disorder breathing problem.
Now, even with these guidelines, there are more than half a million tonsillectomies
in the United States each year.
Another important fact about pharyngitis in adults to remember is that only 5%
is due to group A streptococcus, so over 90% are due to viral illnesses.
The percent may actually be a little higher for streptococcus
if there's a household contact diagnosed with strep.
Now, this means that adults will rarely need antibiotics,
and they're usually not at risk of developing rheumatic fever.
So, how does your doctor know if it's just a sore throat or something more?
Well, the rapid office tests for streptococcus are very reliable.
Another common illness from the mid-20th century was group A strep scarlet fever.
Several days after a sore throat,
children broke out with a lacy, almost imperceptible rash on their entire body.
In the 1950s, with penicillin available,
children were usually kept home from school for a few days.
In contrast, before the antibiotic era, this disease had almost a 25% mortality.
Now, these days, 24 hours of penicillin, or similar antibiotics,
is considered enough time to render a child non-contagious to others.
This is due to the rapid bactericidal killing by penicillin,
so the numbers of surviving germs are so low in 24 hours as to be considered non-contagious.
Next, let's talk about ear infections.
Now, childhood ear infections are almost uniformly initially the result of a viral illness,
and we have learned that antibiotics are usually unnecessary.
Children under two are more prone to secondary late bacterial ear infections.
Why is this the case?
Well, this relates to anatomical differences in the ear, among the angle of the inner ear.
The eustachian tube and the back of the throat.
Under the age of two, the angle formed is more than 90 degrees,
making it more difficult for accumulating fluid in the ear to drain into the throat,
and this increases the risk of bacterial infection.
Now, as children age, the ear angle becomes more obtuse,
closer to 135 degrees, and this allows for easier drainage.
Still, it's difficult to listen to children screaming in pain from ear infections,
so the best thing that you can do is have the child checked out by their doctor,
provide pain relief for their symptoms, and antibiotics only if the doctor thinks that
they are necessary.
Now, changing our focus from bacterial infections,
let's examine some facts about one of the most annoying illnesses
that children average six episodes a year and adults average three times a year, the common cold.
Colds are caused by rhinoviruses. They pester us for about a week, and you know the symptoms.
But let's clarify a few issues about colds.
You are most contagious during the second and third days when the viral burden is highest,
and coughing, sneezing, and congestion are at their peak.
In adults, symptomatic over-the-counter cold medications can improve symptoms,
although they are not recommended for small children.
It's important to know that the symptoms of colds last for more than seven days
in 25% of those afflicted. So, unless you suspect a complication of the cold,
you can probably ride out the illness through the second week.
Now, is the legend true that if you go outside with a wet head or without a jacket when it's cold
out that you will get sick with a cold? Not really. However, the flu virus, on the other hand,
does seem to thrive when it's cold and dry, and using a humidifier during the winter to a relative
humidity of 40 to 60% could help deter the flu virus. Also, have you ever heard of the adage
free the cold, starve a fever? The maxim was actually in the dictionary from 1574.
It was thought that eating food would generate warmth during a cold,
and not eating food would keep you cooler during a fever.
Doctors now believe that you should both feed a cold and a fever for two reasons.
Food provides energy to fight the cold, and during a fever, your metabolism has increased,
you burn more calories, so you need to eat more for energy.
Now, if you have a sore throat and you don't feel much like eating and drinking,
maybe some of mom's homemade soup could change that. Well, chicken soup has actually been called the
quote, Jewish penicillin, which was recommended for respiratory illnesses in the 12th century
by Egyptian Jewish physician Moshe Ben Maimon. Around the world, there are various remedies
for basic illnesses like a cold or the flu. In Israel, it's mint tea. In Russia, it's a drink
called Gogol Mogul, and is made from raw eggs, honey, warm milk and butter, and topped off with a
shot of rum or cognac. In Japan, it's a sour pickle plum called Umeboshi. Is there really any
benefit to these remedies? Most have not been scientifically researched thoroughly, but they
probably can't hurt, and possibly they could help. The best recommendation is to get extra rest,
stay hydrated, and treat the symptoms of the illness. Now, you might be wondering why,
after all these years, we don't have a cure for the common cold. One huge problem is that there are
over 100 known cold viruses, so it's difficult to make a drug that could target all of them.
There are actually three flavors of a cold virus, A, B, and C, and the protein code of the C virus
was unmapped until recently. Since 50% of cold infections are caused by the C variant,
a vaccine targeting the surface proteins was ineffective. So, to summarize, the 1950s was a
decade of belief in science and its ability to conquer disease. The 1960s was a whole different
era and would shake our confidence. The hippie generation of the 1960s brought some
special infectious disease challenges, particularly related to risky behaviors.
Now, sexual relations with multiple partners set the stage for a boom in sexually transmitted
diseases, abbreviated STDs. Intravenous drug experimentation led to the sharing of needles
and the rise of hepatitis, which means inflammation of the liver. Tattoos created with
incompletely sterilized needles were another way that blood sharing behaviors resulted in hepatitis.
There's an alphabet soup of hepatitis viruses, and hepatitis A is usually associated with
contaminated food and drinks, and is spread by the fecal oral route, but fortunately,
does not cause permanent liver damage. Hepatitis B, on the other hand, is transmitted through
contaminated blood and sometimes through sexual contact. Fortunately, a hepatitis B vaccine
was developed in the mid-1980s, and eventually universal vaccination for hepatitis B has become
the norm. The incidence of hepatitis B infections in the U.S. is on a dramatic decline,
although the disease remains prevalent in several countries of the world, especially China.
Now, hepatitis C is usually acquired via a contaminated blood and rarely sexual contact.
Intravenous drug experimentation and blood transfusions, before a test for the virus
was available in 1989, are the major means of acquisition. Although a large number of
baby boomers contracted hepatitis C in the generation of the 60s or 70s, the disease was
not actually identified until 1989. Since the incubation period of the clinical illness is
usually 20 to 30 years, this illness remained under our radar screen for a couple of more decades,
since those infected were usually asymptomatic. Now, worldwide, thousands of deaths are currently
caused by hepatitis B and C from eventual liver failure from decades of chronic infection.
Today, hepatitis C is estimated to affect up to 3 million Americans, and the recommendation
from the Center for Disease Control, or CDC, is that all of the baby boomer generation adults
should be tested at least once. Since hepatitis C can occasionally be transmitted
via sexual relations, just because you didn't get a tattoo or experiment with intravenous drugs
doesn't mean you should exempt yourself from testing. In addition, the main cause for liver
transplants today in the United States is liver failure from hepatitis C.
Antiviral medications were trialed in the 1990s for hepatitis C, including the drug
interferon. This is an interesting remedy because it's a naturally produced product for
humans in response to any viral illness, so this has general antiviral properties. Did you ever
wonder why you don't get sick with two virus infections at the same time? It's because the
interferon produced in response to one infection protects you for a short time from the other.
Eventually, interferon was commercially produced by recombinant DNA technology
and became available for hepatitis treatment. Disappointingly, the clinical success rate
of interferon for hepatitis C, even when combined with another antiviral medication
known as ribavirin, was no better than a 50% remission. So even if a patient shows to be
treated, they were essentially flipping a coin as to their possible success. Other breakthroughs
in treatment occurred after 2010 with the development of the protease inhibitor class of drug that
blocked the virus as it tried to exit the liver cells. It's a tribute to modern medicine
that we now view hepatitis C as a viral condition that has the potential for cure.
These protease inhibitors, when taken for 12 to 24 weeks, now give hepatitis C victims a chance
to live virus-free. In the 1970s, the outlook for emerging infectious diseases,
even those that could start epidemics, appeared good and we relaxed a bit.
By relaxing, I mean that the U.S. was optimistic that it could handle whatever infectious diseases
arose. We had improved sanitation, increased vaccination programs, and had enough antibiotics
that infectious diseases were on the decline. The financing for eradication of infectious
diseases was now being diverted to other pressing diseases like chronic heart disease and cancer.
However, the tide was about to dramatically change again. The end of the 1970s brought
legionnaires disease, and the early 1980s brought us the recognition of another silent
sexually transmitted disease, genital herpes, and the slow discovery of human immunodeficiency
virus or HIV. These three diseases urgently created a flurry of scientific activity to
stem the tide of contagion and death. What was all the fuss about genital herpes?
Herpes received significant national media attention, even appearing on the cover of Time
Magazine in 1982, calling it, quote, the new sexual leprosy, unquote, and later deeming it,
quote, the new scarlet letter, unquote. The big problem with this infection is that only about
10% of the people that have the virus actually know that they're infected,
meaning the other 90% might continue to infect other people unknowingly over time.
There are over 700,000 new cases of herpes simplex virus 2 in the United States every year,
and over 24 million people in the United States have been infected, one out of every six Americans
ages 14 through 49. What about the HIV crisis in the 1980s? It took a while before healthcare
providers began sharing stories of a strange new illness in gay men in 1981. The CDC reported in
its weekly journal summary on five cases in previously healthy young gay men with unusual
infections, whose immune systems were dysfunctional. Now, within the next six months, 270 cases had
been reported, and there were 121 deaths. So the AIDS epidemic was born. The HIV infection
started out in gay men, but then it found its way into the blood bank supply. And after that,
into young women by infected heterosexual partners. The discovery of HIV as the cause for AIDS and
the subsequent blood tests that was developed for HIV in 1985 were major achievements in medicine
in a very short time. However, those of us training in infectious diseases had to care for
patients with AIDS without any medications to treat the root cause, the HIV virus. We were
fortunate if the patient had a bacterial infection, as we could provide them with hope by using
antibiotics to at least cure their bacterial infections. And HIV rose to celebrity status
when Rock Hudson died of the disease in 1985. And by that time, he had donated money to set up the
American Foundation for AIDS Research chaired by Elizabeth Taylor. Over 36 million people have died
from AIDS related illness. And it is still the most common single cause of infectious disease,
death in the world. There was somewhat of a reversal in public attitude towards AIDS,
as it spread throughout the world. We were facing a worldwide epidemic of AIDS,
along with several other concerning infectious diseases. This was just the beginning of new
emerging infectious diseases that would plague the world for decades to come.
The 1990s brought some new medical developments like chickenpox vaccines, as well as novel
antiviral drugs to treat both hepatitis and HIV. But we were also learning more about viral
illness that has infected nearly all of us today, the Epstein-Barr virus or EBV. This virus got its
name in 1964, when Sir Michael Epstein and Yvonne Barr discovered it. A few years later, the virus
was linked to infectious mononucleosis. You probably know it as the, quote, kissing disease,
since it's usually transmitted by saliva. You are likely familiar with a teenager complaining
of generalized fatigue lasting for more than a few weeks, accompanied by a persistent sore throat
that tests negative for streptococcus. They would have fevers, and on closer examination by medical
personnel would have enlarged lymph node and possibly an enlarged spleen. The teenager would
be miserable for weeks, often missing school and having to perform remedial classroom studies.
Gradually, over two to eight weeks, the team would emerge from their illness in a more healthy state.
But the fatigue might persist for months afterwards. And yes, my youngest daughter
really contracted EBV in her first semester as a college freshman after her roommate was diagnosed
with it. Sharing cups or glasses or athletic team water bottles certainly mimics the kissing part
of contagion. In fact, in the 1990s, we were exploring another disease state called chronic
fatigue syndrome, which was thought to be caused by Epstein-Barr virus, but to this day has not
yet been found to have an infectious cause. Well, here's another surprising fact about EBV.
90% of us actually had a short clinical illness before the age of five with EBV, and neither we
nor our parents ever knew that we were ill from EBV. The major discovery in the 1990s about EBV
was true for all herpes viruses, the ability to establish a dormant or latent infection,
somewhat like chickenpox coming back as shingles. EBV was also found to have the ability to cause
cancer, a trait that we call oncogenic. There have been several malignant tumors linked to EBV,
including Burkett's lymphoma, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and Hodgkin's lymphoma.
So what did the new millennium bring for us? When we crossed the millennium, another major
achievement of modern medicine was accomplished. We were able to give premature babies as young as
28 weeks old a chance at survival. These premature infants had virtually no immune system of their
own. This made them vulnerable to many infectious germs, but especially to a virus known as respiratory
sensational virus abbreviated RSV. RSV is an RNA virus, which is known to cause
giant conglomerations of virus particles. More importantly, the lungs of these premature
newborns had such immature airways that the children were vulnerable to RSV attacking the lungs,
closing off the airways, and leading to death, with no treatment available.
Eventually, an antiviral medication, Ribavirin, was used for treatment if infection developed,
and immune serum was given weekly for prevention, and this saved many infants' lives.
Now, you might be wondering, what in the world a premature infant has to do with you?
The answer is, we know that RSV also affects children under the age of five in daycare settings,
and is extremely contagious. RSV can persist on the hands for 30 minutes and on environmental
surfaces for many hours, and there are many opportunities for parents and grandparents
to be exposed to RSV, and even another emerging virus called Metanomavirus.
Both have become an important cause of unrecognized respiratory viral illness in adults over the age
of 60, sometimes requiring hospitalization for pneumonia. As we turn the page of the millennium
further, we are forced to confront a viral nemesis that remains of epidemic magnitude,
but it's not influenza. Do you have any guesses as to which virus I'm thinking about?
If I gave you the hint, quote, cruise ships, I think most of you would know
that I'm talking about norovirus infections. You might be surprised to learn that norovirus on
cruise ships is literally the tip of the iceberg, as only about 1% of norovirus infections
are related to outbreaks on cruise ships. This is an illness that all age groups are susceptible
to since it's a foodborne illness. Norovirus, which are small round viruses, are the most
common cause of foodborne disease in the United States, and the most frequent cause of intestinal
illness. They produce nausea, and vomiting, and often a rapid onset of diarrhea. Fever is common
for 24 hours. Fortunately, the illness lasts for only about 48 to 72 hours with a rapid and full
recovery, but without any long lasting immunity. So unfortunately, you can get this again.
Norovirus causes an estimated one in 15 U.S. residents to become ill each year,
resulting in almost 2 million primary care visits. Now, deaths can actually occur in young
children and the elderly due to severe dehydration. The illness is so prevalent that it's not even
counted in the statistics on foodborne illness from the CDC. Food handlers cause 70% of norovirus
outbreaks by contaminating food, by touching fruit, vegetables, and bread with their ungloved hands.
I won't tell you the full story, but my whole family was taken down 24 hours after a Sunday
brunch in years past with norovirus, along with approximately half of the brunch participants.
Norovirus is extremely contagious as it can survive on surfaces for days. You actually need
to wash your hands with soap and water and not rely on alcohol gels. It can also survive freezing
and cooking temperatures above 140 degrees. And to make matters worse, within the past year,
one in five restaurant workers admits to having reported to work sick with vomiting or diarrhea.
This has led the CDC to recommend paid sick leave be offered as an incentive to stay home
and be symptom free for 48 hours before returning to work.
Well, I wish I had a crystal ball to see the future of infectious diseases. Who would have
ever predicted the roller coaster ride we've been on since the 1950s? I do predict, however,
that there will be some more harrowing moments as we see new emerging diseases and possibly
worldwide epidemics on the horizon. We'll be talking next about the prevention of diseases
through the use of vaccines, and also talk about vaccine development for these emerging diseases.
Until next time.
