Our immune systems are intricate collections of specialized cells, tissues, and molecules
that work together to protect us from infectious diseases.
When our immune system is working well, we stay healthy.
When it's not, we may become susceptible to deadly infections, or even develop autoimmune
disorders.
Today we'll be exploring questions like, what are the components of the immune system
and how do they work together to protect us?
What causes fever and is it harmful or beneficial?
What happens to the immune system as we age?
And what can we do to boost our immune system?
Let's take a closer look at the components of the immune system and how they try to protect
us from dangerous infectious diseases.
The immune system has several structural components that we will examine individually,
but then we'll combine the components and see how they function together.
The four structural components of the immune system include the thymus, a specialized organ
in front of your heart and behind your breastbone.
It's responsible for producing T lymphocyte white blood cells, where T stands for thymus.
Secondly, the bone marrow.
Three different types of cells are produced in the bone marrow.
Red blood cells, blood clotting elements called platelets, and two different types of white
cells.
The marrow is the center of our bones.
Thirdly, the spleen on the left side of the abdomen.
It synthesizes proteins known as antibodies and also gets rid of antibody-coated bacteria
and old red blood cells.
Lastly, we have the lymph system.
This is part of our circulatory system.
It's made up of a network of small vessels that carry clear fluid called lymph.
It works in tandem with lymphoid organs, especially lymph nodes.
Lymphocyte immune cells are passed through this system and converge in the lymph nodes
throughout the body.
There are two functional divisions of the immune system that we use to fight infection.
Inate immunity and adaptive immunity.
Let's look at our innate immunity in more detail.
We have certain built-in, hence innate immune features that help protect us when under attack.
These may surprise you since we often take them for granted.
First, there are physical barriers to invasion from microbes, including the skin and mucous
membranes.
These defenses do not target specific germs, but are all-purpose.
Having intact skin and membranes helps prevent foreign invaders from entering the body.
For example, if there's a break in the skin, thousands of normal staphylococci or streptococcal
germs on the surface of our skin have the ability to breach the skin layer.
The germs enter the subcutaneous tissue and cause a skin infection or cellulitis.
Or worse, they can reach our blood vessels and actually cause an infection of the bloodstream.
Another example when mucous membranes are breached is the ability of diphtheria to destroy
the membranes of the throat.
Some viruses disrupt the linings of the respiratory tract, causing viral bronchitis or even viral
pneumonia.
Other physical barriers include tears, mucous and stomach acid.
You might be wondering if I take medications to decrease my stomach acid, are you increasing
the chance of some infections?
Well, for some diseases like salmonella and tuberculosis, the answer may be yes.
Here's a mucous containing an enzyme called lysozyme that can dissolve bacteria.
Another barrier, saliva, also has antibacterial and antiviral properties.
Also think about your nose and throat.
We have mucous and hair cells, known as cilia, which can trap germs and move them away.
So all of these barriers that we've been taking for granted are actually crucial to keeping
us well.
We have a couple of other lines of defense in our innate immunity.
Our bodies have common inflammatory responses to invaders or injury.
Damaged tissues release substances that start the inflammatory process.
There are four cardinal signs of the inflammatory response, and they've been written about
since 3000 BC and still carry their Latin name origins.
Rubor or redness, which is caused by increased blood flow, dolor or pain, cholor or warmth,
also caused by increased blood flow.
And finally, tumor or swelling caused by the movement of fluid into the area.
So for example, if you were to get an infection of your hand, you would notice the hand getting
red, swollen and painful.
It swells because the blood supply increases and the walls of the blood vessels become
more porous.
This allows infection fighting white cells to enter the infected tissues.
With this swelling comes the pain that you feel since the nerves are compressed.
Now this response occurs within seconds, is short-lived, and importantly does not involve
any long-term memory of the intruding germ.
There are five types of white blood cells that help us with the innate immune response.
But I'll just mention one for now, neutrophils.
Neutrophils are one of the first lines of defense against foreign invaders and make
up the largest number of white blood cells in your body.
You can think of them as, quote, first responders, they're produced in the bone marrow, then
become positioned along the margins of our circulatory system, and in the blood, acting
as a reservoir of infection fighting cells.
But remains of neutrophils that are dead are what we know as pus.
Another innate line of defense involves fever, raising the body temperature, meaning using
the weapon of heat against the pathogen.
There are many misperceptions of the benefits or dangers of fever.
Now fever impairs the ability of bacteria and viruses to replicate, creating an inhospitable
environment for the invading organisms.
By turning up the heat, invading microbes' metabolism and reproduction are skewed.
Well how does this fever occur?
Elevation of body temperature is part of the physiological reaction involving the synthesis
of special proteins called endogenous pyrogens.
The area in the brain located behind the bridge of the nose, known as the hypothalamus, seems
to be pivotal as the thermostat involved in body temperature regulation.
When there is a foreign stimulus for fever, our immune system secretes endogenous pyrogens,
for example, prostaglandin.
When this pyrogen reaches the hypothalamus area, the body's thermostat gets reset to
a higher level.
If you ever experienced chills while being sick, this response results as the body is
trying to increase heat production through muscle contraction.
Products such as acetaminophen and aspirin block prostaglandins.
This subsequently inhibits the production of endogenous pyrogen, which also leads to
a reduction in fever.
You should be aware that some people, such as alcoholics, the extreme elderly, and the
very young, are less capable of generating a fever.
These individuals may even experience a drop in temperature in response to severe infection.
In my opinion, fevers should be considered less worrisome than they appear.
They're actually beneficial in many cases.
Clinical patient data, supportive of the benefits of fever, has slowly accumulated.
For example, patients with syphilis of the nervous system used to be injected with malaria
parasites to induce fever as a means of actually curing syphilis.
Moving on, the last component of the innate immune system is the complement system.
This is a series of small protein molecules that help recruit inflammatory cells and enhance
the destruction of germs.
It works in tandem with neutrophils and proteins, known as antibodies, to engulf invaders.
So to summarize, the innate immune system is the initial defense against pathogens and
uses a variety of tools to accomplish this goal.
Besides innate immunity, there is a companion, the adaptive immune system.
One difference between the innate and adaptive immunity is that innate responses are nonspecific,
meaning they do not target specific pathogens.
Another difference is that innate immunity has no memory of previous actions against
the pathogen.
The two systems, though, work hand in hand.
The adaptive immune system is composed of highly specialized cells that adapt to and
learn from prior invaders.
This is a system that remembers, for example, that you had measles as a child and will protect
you for life against measles.
The adaptive system has two major branches, the cell-mediated system and the antibody-mediated
humoral system.
Note that humor is an old word that describes body fluids, like lymph and blood.
Lymphocytes, another of the five types of white blood cells, carry out the immune responses
in both branches of the adaptive system.
Lymphocytes are divided into B cells and T cells.
Fetal primitive stem cells that continue to mature in the bone marrow become B cells.
Those complete their growth in the thymus and become T cells.
Importantly, each B and T cell are specific only for one antigen, so they can only bind
to one particular molecular structure.
Note that antigen is short for antibody generator and represents any foreign substance.
B cells work in the humoral immune system to mount a very specific antigen response.
B cells can also inactivate viruses by neutralizing them before they can enter host cells.
Some B cells become memory cells, allowing a quicker, more specific immune response the
next time the body encounters the same infection.
T cells, on the other hand, are part of the cell-mediated immune response and can be divided
further into T helper cells and cytotoxic T cells.
In the case of HIV or human immunodeficiency virus, the virus replicates rapidly and destroys
the T helper cells, resulting in more infected cells than healthy cells.
Now, cytotoxic T cells attempt to destroy the HIV virus, but over time the body's ability
to fight off infection is severely depleted, making people with HIV highly susceptible
to infections.
T cells also activate B cells, and they can destroy microbes that are inside cells.
Some T cells also transform into memory cells so that they will recognize their invader
if it ever attacks again.
Now, macrophages are another type of white blood cell, and they're kind of similar to
the Pac-Man video game, with macro, meaning big, and phages, meaning eater.
They are present in essentially all tissues of the body and are critical in both innate
and adaptive immunity.
Antibodies are the other major component of the humoral system.
Antibodies are produced by B lymphocytes that have matured into plasma cells.
They can perform several functions, including neutralizing bacterial toxins, binding to
viruses to prevent entry into cells, and obscenization, in which the coating of antibodies increases
the effectiveness of neutrophils trying to engulf bacteria.
Antibodies are analogous to the pincers of insects and are generally Y-shaped.
There are four main types of antibodies, immunoglobulins M, A, E, and G.
Immunoglobulin M is a very large protein that clears foreign substances from the bloodstream.
IgM antibodies are part of the body's general first line of defense against invaders.
IgA is found in the secretions of the saliva and mucus, and IgA provides a mucosal first
line of defense.
They would be the first defenders that a common cold would encounter.
IgE is involved in immediate allergic responses and sometimes parasitic infections.
IgE combines with a special cell known as a mass cell to release a chemical called histamine
which leads to swelling.
Think of the swelling associated with a mosquito bite.
Finally, the most important immunoglobulin is IgG.
IgG antibodies are formed in response to specific invaders and they usually last a lifetime.
They do take 7 to 14 days to be produced, however, so unless they were previously present,
we can't rely on them as a first line of defense.
IgG antibodies are the type we want to produce in response to vaccination, but the two-week
delay explains why vaccination cannot be used as immediate treatment strategies for infection.
But during the Ebola outbreak, we saw another use of antibodies.
After treatment and cure of the first American who had Ebola, doctors used the antibodies
from his blood as a way to treat other patients with the Ebola virus.
The antibodies were transfused into the newly infected patients in a process called passive
immunization, providing immediate antibodies instead of waiting two weeks.
A similar process is used after some tetanus exposures.
For those individuals who have unusually severe allergies, immunotherapy is also possible.
This treatment involves the intentional introduction of foreign allergic antigens under medical
supervision to decrease IgE and increase IgG and IgA production.
The net result is an improvement in allergy symptoms.
Next, let's look at an example of how our immune system functions in an adaptive fashion.
Let's say as a child, you get the live measles vaccine.
What happens after vaccination?
The vaccine with measles antigens stimulates B cells to mature into either an antibody-secreting
plasma cell, which within a couple of weeks produces IgM and IgG antibodies, or memory
B cells.
This is also known as the primary immune response.
The antibodies' levels will gradually decline once the threat is over, but the memory B
cells remain dormant but present in the lymphatic system.
Now, let's say as an adult, you were exposed to measles again.
The memory B cells remember the measles virus as part of the secondary immune response.
Similar to waking a bear out of hibernation, the cells will rapidly, within hours, start
producing large amounts of measles-specific IgG antibodies.
Immunities will attach themselves to the virus before they can attack healthy body cells.
The memory immune lymphocytes would also recognize a pathogenic germ and assist in its destruction.
This is an example of adaptive immunity because it has the ability to learn information about
invaders and remember them for future attacks.
Remember that adaptive immunity is also antigen-specific.
Importantly, however, the duration of immunological memory is different for each microbe.
There are enough variations in the antigenic structure of pathogens, like the influenza
virus, which is constantly evolving, that the immune response may be incomplete the second
time around.
It's imperative that there is communication and teamwork between the innate and adaptive
immune systems to effectively fight off infection.
So, how does the immune system coordinate this complicated innate and adaptive immunity?
The answer is relatively complicated, but one term you should know is cytokines.
These are chemical messengers that are secreted by various cells of the immune system, act
on other cells, and coordinate this immune response.
Well, what does this term autoimmune disorder refer to?
With an autoimmune condition, the immune system can't tell the difference between healthy
body tissue and foreign antigens.
The result is a T-cell immune response that attacks normal body tissues, causing disorders
such as lupus and multiple sclerosis.
Some but not most autoimmune disorders have an infectious trigger, like rheumatic fever.
Next, let's shift our attention to the immature immune system of newborns.
Such of a newborn's immune system is dependent upon the transfer of immunity from the mother
to the newborn before or during birth.
For example, immunoglobulin protection is exclusively of the IgG type that is small
enough to cross the placenta.
The fetal immune system is derived from primitive stem cells, which arise from inside of the
bone structures of the developing baby.
These stem cells later differentiate into specialized cells as the immune system matures.
It takes the newborn's immune system a minimum of four to six weeks to develop individual
responsiveness.
Since children's initial vaccination series is not usually complete until after one year,
children up to one year of age are much more vulnerable to infections.
Now, paradoxically, there are concerns known as the hygiene hypothesis that we are doing
a potential disservice to the developing immune system by creating too clean of an environment.
The developing immune system may need to be properly exposed to germs to function optimally.
If the baby's environment is too clean, for example, the production of T helper cells may
not be adequately stimulated.
In a study conducted at Johns Hopkins, scientists also found that the timing of exposure to
germs was crucial, and that exposure during the first year of life was the most important.
Their findings were based on an allergy and asthma study in inner-city environments where
children were exposed to rodent and pet dander, household germs, and insect allergens.
If exposed during their first year, the children were less likely to have allergy and asthma
problems three years later.
There also appears to be a slight benefit from growing up in a large family with more
germs as well as growing up on a farm.
Well, what about aging and its effect on the immune system?
While some people age in a healthy manner, the elderly are far more likely to contract
infectious diseases.
Respiratory infections, influenza, and particularly pneumonia are the leading causes of death
in those over the age of 65.
No one knows for sure why this happens, but most scientists agree that the increased risk
correlates with a decrease in T cells, possibly from the thymus shrinking with age and producing
fewer T cells to fight off infection.
The aging body also responds more slowly to challenges by infectious agents.
Changes in our overall immune system as we age are known as immunosinescence.
Research has shown that with age, our innate defenses lose some of their ability for the
cells to communicate with each other.
When this happens, it makes it difficult for the cells to react quickly and appropriately
to invading germs.
As a consequence of reduced production of lymphocytes, vaccination is not likely as to
produce a strong immune response, both B cell and immunoglobulin.
The response may even be below the threshold for protection.
But despite the reduction in efficacy, vaccinations for influenza and pneumococcal pneumonia have
significantly lowered the rates of sickness and death in older people when compared with
non-vaccination.
One exception to poor vaccine immune response appears to be a good response to the shingles
vaccine at age 60.
Since one in three individuals over the age of 60 will develop shingles, it's important
to get this vaccine.
Since shingles is a reactivation of chickenpox, it relies on our lymphocytes to remember prior
viral exposure.
Since we know this immune response will dwindle, if you have not gotten the vaccine, you need
to be very fastidious about recognizing the signs of shingles within 72 hours of symptoms.
Why 72 hours?
Well, this is the window of opportunity for prescribing an antiviral drug for shingles.
Medication may be effective in reducing both acute symptoms and the incidence and severity
of post-herpetic neuralgia.
Be on the lookout for these signs and symptoms.
Early twinging pains, itching, or unusual nerve sensitivity that is not attributable
to an injury.
Burning of the skin that is persistent in a limited area, followed by a red patch of
skin without typical blisters.
For shingles of the head and the eye, a sensation that there is something irritating your eye,
but you can't find an eyelash or foreign object.
As you may already know, one of the significant consequences of shingles, aside from the nuisance
of the blisters and acute pain, is the dreaded post-herpetic neuralgia, which occurs more
frequently above the age of 60.
This is intermittent or continuous pain of the nerves that were reactivated with infection.
Antiviral medication cannot alter the course of this pain if it's not given in the first
72 hours.
Now post-herpetic neuralgia can last for many months and make the activities of daily living
very difficult.
I can't emphasize enough the importance of recognizing the signs and symptoms of early
shingles.
Aside from the natural decline of the innate and active immune response, immune changes
can also be the result of chemotherapy, radiation exposure, environmental exposure to toxins,
and long-term stress.
So what can we do about our declining immune systems?
It's difficult to boost your immune system precisely because it is a system made up of
many different types of cells.
We're not sure exactly what kinds of cells and how many of them would be a perfect system.
If you do an internet search for, quote, how to boost your immune system, you will find
various suggestions, which may or may not be verified scientifically.
But the most prevalent advice by doctors is to, one, eat a healthy diet.
Which is focusing on the connection between nutrition and immunity.
As people age, their diets are less varied and may lack certain vitamins and nutrients.
This could put them at greater risk for infections.
Secondly, exercise.
Exercise is thought to benefit the immune system in several ways.
It helps decrease stress, it increases the rate at which antibodies and white blood cells
circulate in the body, and surprisingly results in a greater intestinal microbiome diversity.
Also, avoid smoking.
Control your blood pressure.
Get your annual flu shot.
And get your shingles vaccine at age 60 and the pneumonia vaccine at age 65.
You need to check with your doctor at routine health visits for medical conditions that
would require early vaccination or even additional boosters, since these recommendations are
frequently changing.
Also, we want to reduce stress.
One thing that has been added to the living healthy list is practice meditation.
Transcendental meditation has been recommended by the American Heart Association as a proven
means to reduce blood pressure.
Studies have shown this method of meditation, practice 20 minutes twice daily, also has
a positive effect on reducing stress.
Over 350 peer-reviewed studies on this technique have been published with encouraging results.
Mindfulness meditation techniques may also be effective.
Well, I hope you've enjoyed our intricate look at one of the most complex yet fascinating
systems in our bodies, the immune system which continuously protects us from diseases.
We'll use the knowledge you've gained to help us understand how our bodies fight diseases
that jump from animals to humans in the next lecture.
