These lectures are not designed for use as medical references to diagnose, treat or prevent
medical illnesses or trauma.
If you have questions about the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of a medical condition
or illness, you should consult your personal physician.
Your lecture is Dr. Barry Fox.
Dr. Fox is a clinical professor of infectious disease at the University of Wisconsin School
of Medicine and Public Health.
He received his medical degree from Vanderbilt University and is board certified in internal
medicine and infectious disease.
He currently practices in clinical infectious disease.
Dr. Fox has been recognized as one of the best doctors in America and made the list
of America's top physicians compiled by the Consumer Research Council of America.
He is extensively involved in medical educational efforts and has authored or co-authored numerous
articles in peer-reviewed journals.
To most people, Ebola was a distant word, rarely spoken and even unknown to some in
the United States.
It was a virus that people in rural Africa dealt with, but not Americans.
But during the Ebola outbreak of 2014, the unfathomable happened.
Ebola crossed oceans and eventually made it to our shores.
Predictive models suggested exponential growth, sparking fear among healthcare workers and
public health officials that we might be unable to control it.
But along with that fear and all the uncertainty that comes with a virulent disease outbreak
came some positive outcomes.
First, we as citizens have a newfound interest in and appreciation for public health.
We've learned that we can't take public health for granted and all of us play an important
role in keeping our country safe.
We realize that globalization means that the rate at which an epidemic can spread throughout
the world is now only a matter of days and being on the other side of the ocean doesn't
keep us safe.
We are now better aware of the needs for quarantine to stop the spread of diseases and have seen
how breaking the rules can put an entire country at risk.
We also saw firsthand the multiplication factor of disease that starts with one infected person.
This understanding and the misfires that occurred when Ebola entered the United States has resulted
in improving our capabilities to defend ourselves against future invaders.
And we're going to need them.
We are much better prepared as individuals.
Individuals have better systems and protocols in place and hazmat suits and precautionary
items are well stocked.
The Centers for Disease Control has had a dry run and it's changed the way it handles
the response to outbreaks.
The Ebola outbreak also sparked many innovations.
Look what happened with drug development, for example.
An international crisis sparked an unusual response from the Food and Drug Administration.
Rulebreaking, untested and unproven treatments were given to both Americans and Africans
who were on the brink of death.
In other words, they were willing to do whatever it took to save lives in spite of strict protocols
and regulations for drug development and drug trials.
It's unclear what effect this will have on the future of drug development, but it was
inspiring to see how the global community pitched in to try to stave off complete disaster
and save lives.
Other positive outcomes were new technologies or the use of old technologies.
Sometimes this was in the form of social media or apps to spread the word of pockets of disease
outbreaks or the culling of key words from the Internet searches to try to put the pieces
of a larger puzzle together.
This increase in the pace of communication resulted in better synchronization around
the world of information gathering, which also resulted in better response times.
Infectious diseases are unique in the sense that unlike chronic diseases, they have the
potential for explosive global impacts.
We have seen this phenomenon over time with some of the infectious diseases of yore.
As you will see, infectious disease spread both past and present is largely dependent
on how we interact with one another, the environments we live in, and even our interactions with
the animal world.
During the Ebola outbreak, epidemiologists and other scientists were called in quickly
to try to determine the cause and origin of disease.
They looked for patient zero, traveling backwards to determine where the very first human case
originated and then tried to find the ultimate source of the disease.
In this case, cultural practices, especially funeral rites, were a major source of transmission.
They tracked contacts to determine how the disease was passed from person to person,
how it spread so quickly to neighboring African countries.
Having specific protocols to track disease patterns allowed the virus to be somewhat
contained.
Historically, when these protocols did not exist, the consequences were severe.
Well, why should you be interested in learning about infectious diseases?
Well, on a worldwide scale, infectious diseases accounts for 26% of all deaths from all causes,
secondary only to cardiovascular diseases.
Although HIV, tuberculosis, and malaria are the top individual killers, combining all
respiratory and diarrhea-related diseases accounts for about 10% of all deaths worldwide,
roughly 6 million people.
Today, we'll learn about three diseases, plague and malaria, which are two of the oldest
infectious diseases, and polio, a disease of the mid-1900s.
Like Ebola, these diseases greatly impacted the state of public health, often spreading
through countries and confidence unchecked.
Many people suffered and died due to the lack of knowledge of germ theory, or without
the tools for diagnosis of illness.
Best guess hypotheses abounded on how people contracted and spread disease.
We'll look at some of these theories, some primitive treatments, and even how basic
quarantine measures affected the outcomes.
infectious diseases have played a significant role in changing the course of human history.
In Erwin Sherman's book, 12 Diseases That Changed Our World, he discusses diseases that
have had major social and political influences on populations.
One example from his book is the Black Death, which originated in the Hunan province in
southwest China in 200 BC, and then was spread by Italian merchant ships to the rest of Europe
in the 1300s.
Ironically, one of our favorite nursery rhymes, Ring Around the Rosie, is allegedly a testimony
to this terrible illness.
One of the symptoms of plague was a rosy red rash in the shape of a ring on the skin.
People who believe that the plague was transmitted by bad smells carry posies to protect themselves,
and the ashes refers to the cremation of bodies upon death.
The last line of the song, We All Fall Down, pretty much says it all.
Now, after I heard this interpretation, I felt the nursery rhyme would never again bring
to my mind visions of joyful children holding hands and singing.
The Black Death, also known as the plague, swept through Europe, the Middle East and
Africa and was probably one of the greatest health disasters in recorded history.
Estimates are that nearly 200 million people worldwide died of the plague and that it took
Europe four centuries for its population to recover.
Let me paint a grisly picture for you.
In one form of the plague, known as bubonic plague, the victim's lymph nodes became hugely
swollen and were called bubos, giving bubonic plague its name.
Bubos were hard, painful, burning lumps, and they often turned black, hence spawning the
name black plague, and they split open and they ooze pus, I know, not a pretty sight.
This disease was incredibly painful and patients rarely survived more than three or four days
before dying.
And of course, antibiotics were not discovered into the 1940s, so death was imminent.
In the 1900s, the plague even spread to the United States via rat-support steamships that
had sailed from infected areas.
This resulted in around 1,000 cases in the U.S., predominantly in the western states,
and where sporadic cases still occur today.
But most present-day cases of plague occur in rural Africa, a couple of thousand cases
yearly.
But could you imagine the terror people felt as they watched family members die from this
terrible disease?
Why was the plague so deadly?
Where did it come from?
And how did it spread?
Well, theories abounded, including the miasma theory that bad air, poor hygiene, and contaminated
water were the cause.
This was the predominant theory of disease transmission up until the 1860s.
Some interesting but naive treatments for plague included witchcraft, quote, place a
live hen next to the swelling and draw out the pestilence from the body, unquote.
Lansing the lymph nodes, quote, the swellings associated with the Black Death should be
cut open to allow the disease to leave the body, unquote.
Exotic concoctions to put on the lymph nodes, quote, a mixture of tree resin and roots of
white lilies should be applied to the places where the body has been cut open, unquote.
In the 1800s, the founder of modern-day nursing, Florence Nightingale, was one of the staunchest
believers that filth and unsanitary conditions were a prime component of disease transmission.
She brought strict new standards of sanitation to areas filled with plague and malaria.
Even without fully understanding germ theory, she saved many lives by just improving sanitation
and quarantining sick patients.
It became clear that plague was contagious, but up until the mid-19th century, the concept
of germ theory did not exist.
So five centuries after plague appeared, only with the invention of the microscope, where
we were able to identify microscopic organisms or germs as the culprits.
With this discovery of microorganisms, we celebrate France's Louis Pasteur and Germany's
Robert Koch for learning to assign a specific microbe as the cause for a specific disease.
And over time, we've learned that disease outbreaks are sometimes caused from bacteria
or viruses like influenza or parasites like malaria.
We are now able with modern technology to determine the causes of most infectious diseases.
But where did all these germs originate in the first place?
Germs are frequently transmitted from animals to humans.
In fact, over 60% of diseases are thought to have their origins in animals, like monkeys,
birds, bats, and rodents.
This is the case with Ebola as well, as fruit bats are the most likely culprits.
And there's evidence that influenza and HIV started in other species.
Beware the major cause of this transmission capacity is the increased human activity in
wilderness areas, for example, where rainforests are being cut down.
During an outbreak of plague in Hong Kong, Pasteur sent Alexander Yersin to try to identify
the germ.
He drew fluid from a dead man's bubo and looked at it under the microscope.
He identified the bacterium, later named after him, called Yersinia pestis.
Next, he injected the germ into guinea pigs.
The pigs died a few days later, and he became convinced that he had identified the plague
germ.
He also tested some of the dead street rats and found that they contained the same bacteria.
The one thing left to figure out was how the germ was transmitted, and Pasteur sent a French
army physician, Paul-Louise Simone, to try to figure out the vector of transmission.
Simone determined that the real culprit for disease transmission was a little flea, which
fed on a rodent that carried the bacteria.
And the flea became the vector of the disease, transmitting it from animals to humans.
You can see how easily rat-infested ports of call around the world could serve as the
impetus for spreading diseases.
Why was the plague so hard to eliminate?
It could remain alive and potentially deadly, even up to three days later in a dead body.
In addition, there are more than 80 species of fleas that can transmit plague.
Fortunately, with control of the flea vectors and with antibiotics given in a timely manner,
today we can cure 85% of plague cases.
So we see that efforts to stem the spread of plague were severely hampered by the lack
of knowledge of germ theory and lack of tools like microscopes to be able to identify this
pathogen.
Let's turn our attention to a dangerous parasitic disease, malaria, and look at its tremendous
global impact.
Malaria is a parasite transmitted by mosquito bites, which affects the functioning of our
red blood cells, which controls the delivery of oxygen to the body.
Malaria is one of the oldest infectious diseases, nearly half a million years old.
And we've had plenty of time over thousands of years to conquer malaria, yet malaria still
manages to infect one out of every 21 human beings on the planet and 300 million humans
yearly.
It kills nearly one million humans year after year.
While the vast majority of global malaria mortality is in Africa, malaria frequently
occurs in Southeast Asia and the Amazon region of South America.
Interestingly, malaria was still present in the southern United States in the early 20th
century.
And malaria has also changed the course of human history.
Let's wind back the clock to the building of the Panama Canal in the early 1900s.
The wet and hot environment was the perfect breeding ground for malaria and another viral
illness called yellow fever.
Malaria killed over 30,000 workers.
In 1897, the link between the mosquito and malaria disease transmission was proven and
Dr. William Gorgas set out to eradicate the insects by eliminating standing water, pouring
oil on immature malaria forms called larvae, and by fumigation of living spaces.
The reason malaria is so difficult to eradicate is that there is a continuous cycle of infection
occurring.
First, the infected mosquitoes carrying the malaria parasite bite a human and inject the
parasite causing illness.
Meanwhile, another mosquito that is not infected bites a human who is infected and the mosquito
becomes a new carrier continuing the cycle of transmission.
Environmental factors like global warming are thought to predict a dismal future for
malaria, which thrives in a warm environment.
This makes for an uncertain future of malaria.
There are ongoing efforts today by the World Health Organization or WHO to try to prevent
and reduce malaria illness.
However, in spite of all of our current efforts in Africa, one child still dies every minute
from malaria.
Unfortunately, as a harbinger of the problems with anti-microbial resistance, mosquitoes
have developed resistance to treatment drugs from widespread misuse.
The mosquitoes also seem resilient to widespread pesticide applications, even DDT.
This is a preventable and curable illness that is still causing unacceptable death rates.
So even with the advances in medicine, new diagnostic tools and treatment, malaria continues
to be a deadly disease.
We know what the vector of the disease is, how it spreads, how to cure it, but we're
unable to eradicate it.
And like many other global issues, it's largely dependent upon persistent efforts by dedicated
organizations and their partners to raise money to enhance global containment.
Does this mean that you should postpone or cancel that trip to Tanzania to visit Jean
Goudal's research station?
No, but I would suggest that you check with your health care provider or travel clinic
before departing.
Let's move on to a newer infectious disease of epidemic proportions of the 20th century,
poliomyelitis.
My mother-in-law, now 92 years old, walks with a limp and has a smaller right foot.
She has right-sided leg weakness as well.
Why?
Well, she was a childhood victim of poliomyelitis at the age of four in rural North Carolina
in the late 1920s and a lucky survivor.
In his book, Polio, An American Story, David Oshinsky describes the first recorded outbreak
in the United States in 1894 near Rutland, Vermont.
Outbreaks of the disease increased rapidly in the early 1900s, including New York City.
In 1916, all children leaving New York City were required by the health department to
get a travel certificate proving that they were polio-free.
An epidemic continued to spread, including Hyde Park, the elegant home of Franklin Delano
Roosevelt.
And I'll tell you a little secret.
FDR had his wife and five children remain out of the U.S. on an island off the Canadian
coast during the summer of 1916 to keep them from getting the virus.
Now, 27,000 Americans died that summer, 80 percent of which were children under the age
of five years.
And in 1921, FDR himself would acquire polio.
10 years after contracting the illness, FDR founded the National Institute for Infantile
Paralysis, transforming the landscape of polio research.
The foundation, which later changed its name to the March of Dimes, was the first private
large-scale effort against the single disease.
Do any of you remember donating to the March of Dimes?
You inserted a winged Liberty head dime into a small cardboard slot, and the money went
towards scientific research to cure polio.
Not until the 1930s, with the invention of the electron microscope, did scientists identify
this mysterious virus.
It struck quickly without warning, causing mass hysteria among the people of the community
that it invaded.
People watched children struck down with paralysis, having no idea how it was contracted, how
it spread, or what to do about it.
Polio was first described in the medical literature several hundred years ago, and polio is actually
an intestinal virus infection.
It is spread person to person through contact with fecal waste, unwashed hands, shared objects,
and contaminated food and water.
Polio enters the body through the mouth, travels into the digestive tract, and is eventually
excreted.
The main breeding ground for the virus is the small intestine.
Surprisingly, the most common infection it produces is actually an asymptomatic infection,
meaning with no signs or symptoms, or with minor symptoms such as nausea and a headache.
But in a small percentage of cases, the virus travels via the bloodstream to the brain or
the spinal cord, destroying nerve cells called motor neurons, which are responsible for stimulating
muscles to contract.
The extent and permanence of the resulting paralysis is difficult to predict, as some
infected nerve cells will fight off the virus, and others will die.
At its worst, polio causes irreversible paralysis, most often of the legs.
The majority of deaths occurred when the breathing muscles were immobilized.
You likely remember pictures of patients being kept alive on machines, known as iron lungs,
an early feat of biomedical engineering, where patients were confined in a tank respirator.
The first iron lung was developed in 1927 at Harvard University, powered by a pump and
two vacuum cleaners.
The pump changed the pressure inside the airtight metal box, pulling air in and out of the lungs,
and this invention was responsible for saving many lives during the peak of the polio epidemic.
In addition, there was an intense effort to develop a vaccine against polio.
In 1953, just after an epidemic year where 58,000 new cases of polio were reported, an
American medical researcher, Dr. Jonas Salk, announced on radio that he had successfully
tested a polio vaccine from killed virus strains.
He even tested it on himself and his family.
Now, after conducting clinical trials in over 2 million school children, the vaccine was
deemed safe and effective.
It was widely distributed, and amazingly, the total number of polio cases dropped below
6,000 in the U.S.
In 1957, the first year the vaccine was widely available.
In 1962, another scientist, Albert Saban, developed a live, weakened oral polio vaccine.
But this vaccine had to be tested abroad since the Salk vaccine was entrenched in the United
States.
Now, interestingly, Saban was able to conduct extensive polio vaccine trials in the Soviet
Union at the height of the Cold War because the fear of polio was stronger than political
differences.
In the first five months of 1959, 10 million children in the Soviet Union received the
Saban Oral Oral vaccine, and he received a medal of gratitude from the Russian government
during the height of the Cold War.
Both scientists donated the rights to the vaccines, unpatented as gifts to humanity.
In the 1960s, the Saban Oral Live vaccine would supersede the Salk vaccine in the United
States and eventually worldwide.
And in 1987, the WHO launched a global initiative to eradicate polio from the planet within
15 years.
Since remaining worldwide cases were in limited geographic areas of Asia and Africa, there
was reason for optimism.
And by the year 2000, there were fewer than 2,000 cases worldwide.
As of 2012, as a result of global efforts to eradicate the disease, only three countries
– Afghanistan, Nigeria, and Pakistan – have polio cases.
And this was reduced from more than 125 countries in 1988.
Now, paradoxically, during the course of live vaccinations, there were actual cases of polio
that were caused by the polio live vaccine.
Therefore, in the United States, the vaccine was reverted to an efficient, killed version
of the vaccine, like the Salk vaccine.
But even in 2013, eradication of polio remained elusive, and the virus, like Ebola, was spreading
via international travel.
In spite of knowing the epidemiology of the disease, the world's population is still
at risk.
Polio reappeared in Syria after a 15-year absence and continues to persist in Pakistan,
Afghanistan, parts of Africa, and Iraq.
It is particularly concerning in war-torn areas where, even with vaccines available,
people are difficult to reach, or people are refusing vaccination.
Fortunately, we have a much stronger public health system with partners around the world
pitching in to eradicate diseases.
Innovative technologies are providing better and faster tools for diagnosis, which enables
us to contain many outbreaks before they spread throughout countries and continents.
But does that mean we have to sit back and just enjoy our progress, trusting that everything
will be okay?
The answer is a resounding no, since various diseases like measles and whooping cough have
made a recent resurgence.
And exotic diseases like monkeypox and bird flu continue to emerge.
We will have to stay vigilant and rely on our surveillance systems around the world
to be on the lookout for outbreaks that have the potential to become the next global infectious
disease.
In the meantime, I will leave you with this tidbit.
The study of infectious diseases relies on skills similar to those that Sherlock Holmes
uses, a penchant for searching for clues, studying all aspects of a case in the minutest
of detail, assimilating multiple sets of incoming information, and coming up with a conclusion
which can be proven by scientific means.
Did you know that Sir Arthur Conan Doyle included infectious diseases in his Sherlock
Holmes series in the 1880s, the Golden Age of Microbiology.
He even wrote about bioterrorist acts long before we were worried about them.
In The Adventure of the Dying Detective, a fatal infectious disease, likely plague, but
called tapenuli fever, is used as a biological weapon.
A criminal named Culverton Smith tries to infect Sherlock with it.
He even used the postal system to deliver the virus.
Sound familiar?
In our next lecture, I'll begin to introduce you to some of the basic elements of germ
theory, beginning with bacteria, how it attacks our bodies, and how they can be deadly.
Stay tuned.
