Welcome back.
I would like to start out today's lecture with a startling statistic.
By the time we finish this lecture, 30 children will have died from malaria and 75 people
will have died from tuberculosis.
These diseases are two of the oldest known to man, with malaria a whopping half a million
years old and tuberculosis, or TB, at least 6,000 years old.
One third of the world's population has been exposed to TB.
In recent years in the United States, there were still around 10,000 cases of TB.
These are still the deadliest killers in the world, in spite of the multitude of global
efforts to decrease their mortality rates.
And we've had plenty of time over thousands of years to conquer malaria, yet malaria still
manages to infect one out of every 21 human beings on the planet, 300 million yearly, and
kills nearly one million humans year after year.
Malaria first tweaked my interest in infectious diseases when I was a third-year medical student
at Vanderbilt University.
One of my very first patients was admitted to the hospital with a diagnosis of a fever
of unknown origin, abbreviated FUO.
She had been traveling in the Caribbean and had been taking weekly malaria prevention
medicine.
However, instead of taking the medication for the recommended four weeks after returning
to the United States, she stopped after two weeks.
Three months later, she was sick with an FUO and the Caribbean vacation seemed like a
remote piece of history, yet there it was.
When I looked at her blood smear under the microscope, I could see the malaria parasite,
and I was hooked on the world of infectious diseases.
Let's take a glimpse at the historical importance of both diseases.
On many occasions, they have changed the course of human history.
For example, malaria may have contributed to the fall of the Roman Empire.
The Romans were used to being infected with a non-fatal strain of vivax malaria, but later
encountered a new mosquito species that brought the much more deadly falciparum malaria form.
In World War II, many battles in the South Pacific between the U.S. and Japanese armies
were solely for the purpose of securing islands that supported the growth of quinine, the first
and most important anti-malarial compound at the time.
More soldiers were dying in the South Pacific from malaria than actual combat.
With respect to TB, in the middle of World War I, there was so much disease among the
troops that 150,000 French troops were sent home.
In 1917 alone, countries involved in World War I lost over a million citizens to TB.
So you can see that both diseases have had quite a devastating effect during wartime.
Now the name malaria is derived from the Italian, mala aria, meaning bad air.
In 1717, a link was suggested between the illness and poisonous swamp gases.
It's fortunate that a British physician in India named Ronald Ross took a keen interest
in malaria.
In 1894, he headed to Bombay Civil Hospital to assess malaria patients, and he spent
two years studying the disease and even contracted the illness himself.
He decided to pay malaria patients to let eight mosquitoes bite them in order to test
his theory that mosquitoes were responsible for malaria transmission.
After the bites, Ross dissected the mosquitoes.
He noticed tiny round cysts that were attached to the mosquito's stomach wall.
He realized that the cyst was actually the malaria parasite.
Discovering that mosquitoes were the transmitters of malaria was a huge breakthrough.
This and other malaria research eventually earned him the 1902 Nobel Prize in Medicine.
Let's look further at the culprit responsible for the spread of malaria.
The Anopheles mosquito species of malaria is the only one of hundreds of mosquitoes that
carries the malaria parasite, known as Plasmodia.
Only the female is responsible for malaria transmission.
There are five species of Plasmodian parasites that affect humans.
The most virulent is Plasmodium falciparum, which causes 50% of infections and 95% of
deaths.
Plasmodia are so specialized at survival that they have both sexual and asexual forms of
reproduction.
The mosquito is an insect that annoys us at dawn and dusk or when we're out in the woods
or damp areas.
The females sense us in many ways, including smelling the exhalation of carbon dioxide,
the excretions from our sweat glands, and tracking the heat of our bodies, all from
about 150 feet away.
Well, why do they bite us in the first place?
The female mosquito needs the proteins from our blood in order to develop her eggs.
In other words, we keep her bloodline going.
Her saliva contains proteins that are transferred to you as she feeds.
These provoke an immune response in the form of local inflammation or your basic mosquito
bite.
When female mosquitoes feed on the blood of an infected human, it absorbs gametocytes,
the sexual elements of the parasite, the equivalent to a sperm or eggs.
The gametocytes combine to form oocytes that burrow into the mosquito's stomach, the little
round cyst Ronald Ross saw.
Growth and division of each oocyte produces thousands of actin malaria forms called sporozoites.
Over a week or two, the oocyte bursts, releasing sporozoites that invade the mosquito's salivary
glands.
And the next time the mosquito bites, it releases these sporozoites from its salivary glands
into the new human host.
Well, what happens next?
The parasites move through the bloodstream directly to the liver, where they establish
a parasitic stage, taking over the liver cells and replicating thousands of times.
But their ultimate destination is not the liver.
They break out of the liver cells to attach to and invade the red blood cells of the circulatory
system.
The malaria parasites are also resilient and they enhance their multiplication by taking
over the red cells and using sexual reproduction to proliferate even further.
The immune system is triggered, causing a resetting of the body's thermostat.
This causes fever to destroy the invaders, but even though it kills some, most remain.
Their surviving parasites in the red blood cells are feeding on the hemoglobin as a
nutrient source and continuing replication.
The red blood cell counts fall and there's reduced capacity to transport oxygen, which
produces fatigue and weakness.
At this point in time, what happens to the individual human is dependent on the species
of the malaria parasite causing the infection.
If the species is Plasmodium vivax or a valet, they cause mild symptoms and they return to
the liver.
Approximately 72 hours later, they usually produce another wave of parasites that invade
the blood.
Usually there are two or three waves of blood invasion before they settle into a hibernating
state in the liver or the spleen.
They can remain in the liver to enter the blood weeks, months, or occasionally years
later.
This 72-hour time cycle is important because victims feel remarkably well in the two days
between the three-day parasitic cycle.
The fever pattern is actually a major clue to the diagnosis of malaria.
Each time the parasites are released into the blood, there is a loss of oxygen-carrying
red blood cells.
The liver and spleen also enlarge, since these organs act like giant lymph nodes, trapping
red blood cell-laden parasites.
One of the reasons malaria has survived as a parasitic disease for thousands of years
is that P. ovale and vivax usually do not kill the human host.
Instead, they act as a reservoir for transmission to others.
You may be surprised to know that sickle cell trait found in some African descendants actually
presents a survival advantage since malaria does not attack deformed red blood cells.
The deadliest malaria species is falciparum.
During the blood stage, falciparum species has the ability to alter the red blood cell
surface, causing them to stick to the blood vessel walls.
This causes a sludging of red blood cells and impairment of oxygen exchange to the brain.
If untreated, the brain begins to swell and malaria has reached its most deadly phase.
By this time, so many red cells have been destroyed that the vital functions of the
heart and lungs start failing and the immune system is overwhelmed.
Often this scenario results in coma and then death.
One child in Africa dies this way every minute of every day from malaria.
Now you might have thought that this only happens outside the US, but malaria was actually
present in the US until the 1930s.
The malaria problem in the US was so concerning that the Centers for Disease Control, or CDC,
was founded specifically to fight malaria.
In order to destroy mosquito habitats, 3 million acres of southern wetlands were drained and
30,000 miles of drainage ditches and canals were dug.
Further spraying with the pesticide DDT also helped, as did building public health infrastructure
to treat patients.
So malaria has had quite a grip on the US in the past.
Actually there are still around 2,000 cases each year of malaria in the United States
with somewhere between 6 to 8 deaths.
Malaria cases in the US reached a 40 year all time high in 2011.
Almost all of the nearly 2,000 cases were contracted abroad, mostly in Africa and India,
and brought back to the United States.
Believe it or not, you can even get malaria without leaving the United States.
Malaria cases have occurred close to US airports, likely with a stow away, infected mosquitoes
infecting innocent US citizens.
Now what about malaria treatments?
A treatment for malaria was discovered in Peru in the 1600s.
It came from the bark of the Sincona tree and has been used as an inexpensive cure in
some parts of the world.
We know it is quinine, and I mentioned its value in World War II already.
Later, this ingredient was chemically modified into chloroquine, the first synthetic anti-malarial
medication.
All malaria used to be sensitive to chloroquine, however malaria adapted to chloroquine and
developed resistance over the course of a few decades.
Now there are only a limited number of geographic locations in the world, only the Caribbean
and Latin America where chloroquine is still effective.
Other malaria medications are available, and they are mainly targeted towards the prevention
of falciparum malaria since it's the deadliest.
These include weekly treatments with mefloquine, or daily malarone, or doxycycline.
It's interesting to note that an ancient Chinese document called 52 Remedies, a folk remedy
for malaria from the Qinghao plant, also known as wormwood, was described.
This active ingredient is a compound we know today as Artemisian.
It's a key ingredient in several current valuable anti-malarial treatment drugs today.
In our international community in Madison, Wisconsin, our infectious disease department
usually sees about a dozen cases of malaria every year, making our travel medicine department
a fairly popular place.
I personally care for university students who have traveled abroad without preventative
medications, which nearly cost them their lives.
Obviously, I do recommend preventative malaria medications when traveling to endemic areas.
Malaria is still prevalent in 106 countries.
There are ongoing efforts today by the World Health Organization to try to prevent and
reduce malaria.
For example, by distribution of treated mosquito netting, educational efforts for the native
population, aggressive medication treatments, and the spraying of insecticides to reduce
the mosquito population.
But this is not enough.
Let's take a look at some novel ideas and innovations that are moving forward to eradicate malaria
worldwide.
The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has spent more than a billion dollars in an effort
to eradicate malaria.
They believe that the means to success will be by a total eradication of the mosquito.
This changes the game plan.
This means that it's essential to use new technologies to develop and to deliver sustainable
response to the mosquito population.
One effort involves genetically modifying the male mosquito and its ability to transmit
the X chromosome.
Male species need two X chromosomes, and at the Imperial College of London, scientists
are injecting a biologically engineered gene into the male mosquito.
This wipes out the X chromosome's DNA, and thereafter, the males can only donate the
Y chromosome, consequently reducing female populations.
In their trials, 95% of the offspring were males, who then passed on the modified gene
to the next generation, and over time, when released into the wild and allowed to breed
with wild mosquitoes, theoretically this would lead to a reduction in the wild female population.
Another technique using genetically engineered sterile mosquitoes in the Cayman Islands
wiped out 80% of the mosquito population there in 2010.
But are there risks associated with this type of intervention?
As always, there are caveats to bioengineering.
If you wipe out one species of mosquito, will another species population rise?
What effect will change in the region's ecosystem have over the long term?
Only time will tell.
Well, what about vaccination?
There is also hope with trials of an RTSS vaccine that contains part of the sporozoite protein.
This is the stage of the malaria that's inoculated by the feeding mosquito at the first moments
of infection before malaria gets to the liver.
Males resulted in a 50% reduction in malaria in African children.
And this falciparum malaria vaccine hopefully will substantially reduce malaria in African
children.
Development of vaccines and the eradication of mosquitoes will continue to be the two
most important efforts to prevent deaths from malaria.
Let's move on to our next deadly killer, mycobacterium tuberculosis, abbreviated TB.
Worldwide, one person is infected with TB every second.
So you see, it's just as big a problem as malaria.
TB has been found in mummies in Egypt, India, and China from thousands of years ago.
Scientists think it originated in the cradle of Africa and migrated just like we did out
of Africa over time.
But another more recent study has suggested it was carried to the new world by an animal,
seals.
You might have heard TB called consumption, which was a name that described how bacteria
seemed to totally consume people in the form of severe weight loss and eventually death.
Sweeping through the crowded towns and cities, it took the lives of thousands of people,
including John Keats, Emily Bronte, and Frederick Chopin.
Our old friend, Robert Koch, finally identified the TB germ in 1882, and he named it Koch's
bacillus.
In 1905, he won the Nobel Prize for his discovery.
In 1895, the X-ray was invented, which helped confirm diagnosis by providing images of TB
in the chest.
Why is it that TB has been around with us for thousands of years, and why is its incidence
of infection so high?
Well, the main reason relates to the high contagious potential of the bacteria.
The size of the TB germ is about three microns in size.
That's exactly the same size as the dust particles in the air.
So when someone with active TB coughs, they generate an aerosol of germs that does not
sink to the ground in the six to eight foot radius like normal, larger germs.
And the TB germs actually ride the air currents and can be spread over long distances.
Now when individuals are exposed to air currents with TB, there's a high probability that
TB will enter the lungs and settle in the furthermost passages of the airways.
This exposure begins a complex immune response by several different types of cells to attempt
to contain TB to the lung.
The germ is called mycobacterium, which differentiates itself from normal bacteria with a special
outer membrane made of mycolic acid.
This makes it more difficult for our immune system to kill the germ, so TB can continue
to live inside of cells.
Active primary TB infection from germ inhalation is prone to occur if there's large numbers
of TB germs inhaled, if your immune system is compromised, or you have the HIV virus.
Under most circumstances, however, active TB does not immediately occur.
What the best that our immune system can provide us with is to wall off TB in a highly organized
layer of cells known as a granuloma.
This usually leads to a non-contagious disease state known as latent TB.
More than 90% of people who inhale TB will carry a dormant TB bacteria their entire lives.
Their bodies will show an immune response with antibodies and reactive lymphocytes, resulting
in a positive tuberculosis skin test.
Up to one third of the world's population carries TB in a latent form.
However, this is not necessarily the end of the story for latent TB cases.
Especially in the first three years after inhalation, there is still a risk of developing
active TB until the immune system gains further control of the original infection.
More importantly, as our immune system ages, a small percentage of those with latent TB
will actually lose containment of the TB that has been inactive for decades.
This leads to a condition known as reactivation TB.
To reduce this risk with aging, patients with latent TB are usually offered a chance to
take TB medications, usually called isoniazid, to reduce the risk of reactivation TB.
So what's happening inside the body of people that develop active TB or reactivation TB?
Well, the bacteria actually leave the lungs, enter the bloodstream, and can settle anywhere
in the body as disseminated or miliary TB.
Most patient germs also return to the lung, combining with the site of the original infection,
leading to active lung tuberculosis.
To make matters worse, with a large burden of TB in the lung, the lung architecture can
be destroyed, leading to cavitary TB, an actual hole in the lung.
With a hole in the lung filled with TB germs, medications have difficulty getting to the
site of infection.
It also makes this individual highly contagious to others, as every time they cough, germs
leave the lungs.
In US hospitals, when patients are admitted with cavitary pneumonia, they're automatically
placed in special isolation rooms where germs cannot enter the hallways to infect others,
just in case they have TB.
Over the past 30 years, since a large percentage of the African continent is infected with
HIV, there's been a resurgence of TB as a major worldwide disease, the result of devastation
to the immune system.
It's estimated that over 11 million people are infected with both TB and HIV.
Ironically, since we now have the means to treat HIV, those people may be more likely
to die from TB than from AIDS.
In the US, it's estimated that up to 20% of patients with active TB are also HIV positive.
Part treatment of TB is complicated for several reasons.
First, mycobacteria do not rapidly divide like normal bacteria.
As a general principle, germs are only vulnerable to antibiotics when they're in the growth
stage.
Therefore, treatment usually needs to be extended to a minimum of six months, but can be as
long as two years.
TB usually requires treatment with four medications to start off with, as each medication has
a specific target in the cell layers within the granuloma surrounding the TB germs.
The drugs are usually isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol.
People who do not follow through with taking TB medications completely usually don't get
well, and they increase the chances of developing drug-resistant TB.
Or by taking medications in a haphazard fashion, low concentrations of the drugs will give
multiplying germs a chance at genetic mutations that will favor the emergence of resistant
strains.
This is another emerging health threat in Africa, the Indian subcontinent, Eastern Europe,
and Russia.
For the first time in 40 years, though, the FDA has approved a new agent to treat resistant
TB, known as bedokvulin.
There are several other new drugs under development with the support from the Gates Foundation
and others.
So what is the effect of global travel on the spread of diseases like TB?
Can you contract TB on an airplane?
There actually could be some risk if you are in the seats around someone with active TB,
because it's so contagious.
Maybe you remember the case of Andrew Speaker, who flew against doctors' orders to Europe
for his wedding in honeymoon and then returned to the United States.
He had a drug-resistant form of TB, and afterwards became the first individual subjected to CDC
isolation order since 1963.
Rather than containing and treating TB, prevention efforts with vaccination should be a priority,
just like malaria.
There is a vaccine called bacillus calmet geren, or BCG, which is used in many countries
outside the United States for vaccinating small children.
This vaccine is a weakened form of a cow strain of TB.
Its protective effect may reduce the risk of developing active TB by about 50%.
What do we do for TB treatment before the discovery of streptomycin, the first TB antibiotic
in 1944?
In 1864, a novel idea of treatment for TB emerged, the ideas of sanatoriums.
The most famous U.S. sanatorium was built in the Adirondack Mountains by Dr. Edward
Trudeau, who also had TB.
He built what was called cure cottages to accommodate other TB patients.
He put them on a strict regimen, a three-months-of-bedrest, a strict diet, and exposure to fresh air.
One of his patients who stayed there was Robert Louis Stevenson.
While actually not a cure for the disease, it served to isolate the sick from the well.
It also ensured that people got rest and nutrition, which enhanced their strength to fight TB.
Sixty-three of these cure cottages are still in existence and have been named national
historic sites.
One has even been turned into a bed and breakfast.
So here we are, left with two troubling devastating diseases, malaria and tuberculosis, affecting
a huge portion of the world's population.
Both are endemic in over a hundred countries, and both are ruthless killers.
Our health and world health are inextricably linked together by the globalized world that
we live in, whether we like it or not.
An innovative leap in the mobile healthcare movement, referred to as mHealth, may help
diagnose patients with malaria, HIV, or TB in as little as 15 minutes.
A British-based company developed a pocket-sized device, which not only tests for these diseases,
but also has a GPS tracking system for collecting disease tracking information.
This ensures the appropriate medication for a specific disease can be delivered to an
exact location, an exact patient, and provides helpful epidemiological information to public
health systems.
Next time, we'll continue addressing global health infectious disease issues and the toll
they take on populations, especially during times of war and natural disasters.
We'll also learn about travel health risks and what precautions you need to take to stay
healthy.
See you then.
