Today, we're going to talk about how seemingly benign infections of the skin can turn deadly.
Most of us are familiar with the untimely death in 1990 of Muppet's creator Jim Henson.
His illness started off with a sore throat.
This should not have been particularly worrisome since 95% of pharyngitis in adults is not
caused by streptococci.
But in line with his celebrity work, he had significant contact with many children under
the age of 10, which increased his probability of having strep.
Even a small number of germs in the wrong place at the right time can lead to a serious
infection.
Group-based streptococcus and staph aureus are two germs that have the potential to
cause virulent skin and bloodstream infections.
From what we can piece together regarding Jim Henson's death, the strep moved from his
throat into his lungs, causing pneumonia.
Unfortunately the strep bacteria did not stay confined to the inside of the lung.
They broke out into the pleural space between the lung and the chest wall.
This would make it hurt every time he tried to take a deep breath, since it causes irritation
of the muscles that control respiration.
Well if the infection had stopped there, we would likely still be enjoying his talented
puppet creations.
However, the bacteria didn't stop, they attacked the blood vessels in the lung and the pleural
space and got into the bloodstream.
Bacteria in the blood is called bacteremia, also known as blood poisoning.
And when serious bacteria create an immune response, the condition is known as sepsis.
When this happens, it can lead to leaky blood vessels and clots.
This can impair blood flow and damage major organ systems to the point where the patient
dies.
Unfortunately this happened to Mr. Henson.
Another outbreak of septic infections presented itself in the late 1970s and early 1980s,
when large numbers of younger women were severely ill with the sepsis syndrome.
They were hospitalized in the intensive care unit.
When cultures of the blood were taken, the physicians were surprised they could not find
germs in the blood, and they were a bit stumped.
What they then finally decided after seeing many similar cases was that something drastically
changed that was causing this new phenomena to occur.
Soon, a common hypothesis was proposed, since it was noted that all the women were users
of tampons, and that vaginal cultures showed staph aureus.
There was a new type of tampon being marketed at the time with superabsorbency that could
be left in place for an extended period of time.
It turns out that one of the ingredients of the superabsorbency tampon was magnesium,
and this was responsible for a change in the biological properties and growth of staph aureus
that favored this toxin formation.
This has the ability to elaborate a protein toxin that can cause bloodstream infections
in place of the actual bacteria.
This toxin has the ability to initiate the sepsis syndrome as well, and hence the term
toxic shock syndrome, or TSS, came about.
You would be surprised to know that TSS can also be caused by group A strep, since there
are areas of similarity between the toxin structure shared by both staph and strep.
I'm happy to report that TSS from tampon use is a rarity today because of educational
efforts and quick diagnosis, but TSS can happen due to skin infections, burns, and occasionally
after surgery.
This accounts for approximately 9-10% of all deaths in the United States, and approximately
10% of all admissions to hospital intensive care units are from sepsis.
However, with efforts geared towards the early recognition of sepsis and intensive care unit
support, the fatality rate has been reduced by 50% over the past two decades, from 35%
to 18%.
You might be surprised to know that the median age of those hospitalized with sepsis is around
70%.
The 18% mortality is skewed against older ages, with rates of 10% in young and middle
age, and 25% or more in the age group 70 and above.
We'll talk more about these deadly infections later.
Bacterial infections can wreak havoc with all layers of the skin.
For example, the top layer of the human skin, the epidermis, is covered by millions of bacterial
germs, the most common of which is staph epidermis.
We all have this germ, and unlike its cousin, Staph aureus, Staph epidermis usually just
minds its business happily living on the skin without causing disease.
But you might be surprised to know that 30% of us actually also carry Staph aureus on
our skin at any moment in time.
It's important to know that at any point in time, about 5% of us also carry Streptococcal
germs that could cause skin infections.
No matter how frequently we shower or bathe, there are always residual bacteria that stick
to the top layers of the skin.
Speaking of the skin does result in numerical reductions in surface bacteria, but within
hours the bacteria will replicate to reach their normal levels.
Each of us has our own natural equilibrium of skin bacteria.
In beginning our discussion on skin infections, it's useful to classify the infections by
the depth of invasion into the skin layers.
Infections of the sweat glands are called folliculitis.
One 21st century skin disease from recreational activities is known as Pseudomonas bacterial
folliculitis, which reminds me of a personal family story.
Friends of ours planned a weekend getaway with specific instructions to their teenagers
not to use the hot tub while they were gone.
Of course, one of my daughters went to visit the home during this time, and of course they
all got in the hot tub.
A few days later, my daughter sheepishly requested a consultation for an itchy, bumpy, red rash
that was located only in the swimsuit area.
I found out that the hot tub had not been chlorinated recently, which allowed Pseudomonas
germs to flourish.
My diagnosis was hot tub buns, which is an infection of the skin at the base of the hair
follicles which were in contact with the bacteria that likes to live in wet, warm places.
So the girls were literally caught red-bottomed.
Another infection of the epidermis, Acti, is a common occurrence.
It's virtually impossible to get teenagers to resist the temptation to squeeze a pimple
on their face, but since their face is a highly vascular area with many pathways to the deeper
parts of the brain, this is not advised.
Now infections that extend slightly deeper into the skin, into the dermis layer, are
known as skin abscesses, furuncles, or carbuncles.
Typically, these infections begin as a folliculitis in the epidermis layer, but the process then
extends into the next layer of the skin.
Most of these infections can be managed with hot compresses, which increase the circulation
to the area and enhance the body's normal inflammatory response.
If the abscess is larger, a minor surgical procedure known as an incision and drainage
may be required.
You will likely be surprised to know that most skin abscesses also do not require antibiotic
therapy, and I like to use the rule of thumb in making that determination.
Our thumb is about 5 centimeters in length, and if the diameter of the redness from one
side of the abscess to the other is less than 5 centimeters, antibiotics are usually
not required.
A topical antibiotic can be considered.
For all infections of the skin, it's important to know that bacteria cannot penetrate through
intact skin.
Hence, there has to be a portal of entry for bacteria to enter the surface or deeper layers
of the skin.
Many times it may just be a hair follicle or a minor scratch.
Another skin infection is known as cellulitis.
When this occurs, the infection is larger than 5 centimeters and extends above and below
the presumptive portal of entry.
It is usually hot, thick and painful and very red and can spread to the bloodstream and
the lymph nodes.
As you might expect by now, staph aureus and streptococcal germs are the most common culprits
in cellulitis.
Another example is erycypolis of the face, which is caused by streptococcal germs.
Anatomically, within the dermis layer of the skin are channels of the body that help return
extra fluids to the heart.
This is known as the lymphatic system.
And think of the lymphatic system as a giant spiderweb all over your body, which slowly
helps move any fluid that's outside the arteries and veins back to the heart.
This fluid is clear and yellow in color and resembles the fluid from the inside of a simple
blister in its character.
Well, aside from channeling the fluid, the lymph system also aids in our immune system
in transporting necessary cells to help fight infection.
The lymph system channels into lymph nodes, which is why lymph nodes are enlarged when
there's any type of infection.
When the lymphatic system is involved with infection, often with an abscess nearby, there's
a visible red streaking of the skin known as lymphangitis.
All cellulitis and lymphangitis will require either oral or intravenous antibiotics or
both depending upon the health care provider's assessment of the severity of the infection.
Now puncture wounds of the hands and feet, as well as animal bites, are also forms of
cellulitis and lymphangitis.
However, under these circumstances, it's the bacteria from the object that causes the
puncture, such as the bacteria in the dog or cat's mouth, that is the infection culprit
rather than your own skin bacteria.
The worst type of skin infection involves all layers of the skin, leading to destruction
and essentially death of the skin tissue and muscle.
This has many names, and the common layman's term is flesh eating bacteria, but the medical
name is necrotizing fasciitis.
Although this can be caused by staph aureus or strep, there are other bacteria that alone
or in combination can lead to this condition.
For example, in the typical World War I battlefield injury of an arm or leg, clastridium bacterial
spores that were in the soil can invade the wound, causing what was known as gas gangrene
resulting in dead tissues.
The management of necrotizing fasciitis is challenging.
Virtually all patients have a body wide sepsis response, which requires control of the infection
antibiotics and intensive care support.
Necrotizing fasciitis is considered a medical emergency and surgery is always required.
Multiple surgeries and even amputation may be necessary not only to control the infecting
bacteria but to remove tissue that is no longer alive.
Now methicillin resistant staph aureus, abbreviated MRSA, has been singled out by the Centers
for Disease Control, or CDC, as one of the most important resistant bacteria of the present
day.
The original strains of MRSA date back nearly 40 years to the hospital setting.
Staph bacteria acquired a large, extra chromosomal genetic element known as a plasmid, making
it resistant to all antibiotics, with the exception of the antibiotic vancomycin.
The current concerns that you hear about MRSA focus on a slightly different variety
of MRSA called community-based MRSA.
This organism appeared in the late 1990s and generally has continued to increase in prevalence
in the community.
It has a smaller resistance plasmid, so there are more antibiotics that can be used for
treatment when compared to the hospital strain of MRSA.
Now MRSA is present in about one percent of the general population, but it has a prevalence
of five percent or more in special population groups.
These groups tend to involve crowded living circumstances, such as inner city populations
or prison inmates, but can occur as outbreaks among athletic teams.
Everything promotes closer person-to-person skin contact.
MRSA is not necessarily any stronger or more virulent than Staph aureus, but since it is
resistant to many common antibiotics, it's more difficult to treat and may be more likely
to require intravenous therapy.
It may also be more prone to cause abscess formation.
One could acquire the germ since it's spread from skin-to-skin contact or contact with
infected surfaces.
The most common presentations of community-based MRSA are skin infection, typically boils.
But simply having the germ on your skin does not automatically mean you will have problems
with infections.
An infection may never occur and the germ may be replaced by normal bacteria of the
skin over time.
Other people may have a single episode of a skin infection.
As an infectious disease specialist, I tend to consult on the patients with recurrent
boil infections or those with severe staph infections of the skin, blood, or even the
heart.
Now, my oldest daughter had a throat culture performed once looking for strep and the lab
told us that she had MRSA instead.
The psychological trauma of being branded by the healthcare system as MRSA positive and
requiring special isolation precaution often does more harm than the actual bacteria itself.
A simple antiseptic mouthwash solution and the tincture of time allowing the throat to
repopulate itself with normal bacteria was all that was necessary in her case for the
germ to disappear.
Now have you ever come back from traveling only to find that you have a strange skin
rash or bump on your arms, legs, or torso?
Up to 8% of travelers return home with a skin disease and most of them are infectious.
Four of the top 10 are tropical diseases.
A family friend of ours recently returned from Belize with a painful lesion that looked
like boils.
It turned out that he was a victim of a Latin American bot fly attack.
The larvae of the fly infests the skin and lives in the subcutaneous layer, creating
a painful pustule.
Over time the larvae continues growing as does the pain.
The adult bot fly resembles a bumblebee, so if you're traveling to Central or South America
be on the lookout.
Another skin infection to watch out for is leishmaniasis.
If you're traveling in one of the 90 countries where the vector sandfly resides, beware of
a small fly that is about a third of the size of a mosquito.
Tourists in Costa Rica for example have presented with small bites that increase in size and
become ulcerous.
This infection is caused by the leishmania protozoa that is transmitted by the sandfly.
One more infection to watch out for while traveling is called cutaneous larval migraines.
This skin infection is due to a dog or cat intestinal hookworm and it can be contracted
by walking on contaminated lake and ocean beaches.
It is the most commonly acquired skin infection of the tropics and the subtropics.
The first sign might be intense itching of the skin at the site.
Next you would see a raised red rash with a snake like progression which is the worm's
burrowing path.
Travel requires being aware of your environment and any unusual eruptions of the skin.
Report symptoms and the location of where you are traveling when you get home to your
doctor.
We started this lecture with a couple of serious infectious disease cases involving streptococcal
and staphylococcal sepsis.
Sepsis is a syndrome, not a specific clinical entity.
It's actually part of a broader entity known as systemic inflammatory response syndrome
abbreviated CERS.
To meet the criteria for CERS, a patient needs to have a temperature greater than 101 or
less than 96 degrees Fahrenheit, a heart rate greater than 90 beats per minute, a respiratory
rate greater than 20 breaths per minute, and a white blood cell count that's either greater
than 12,000 or less than 4,000 where 10,000 is normal.
To have sepsis, the cause of CERS has to be infection.
When the systolic or top blood pressure number is measured below 90, the condition is further
defined as septic shock.
Even with antibiotics, patients still die of sepsis in spite of successful antibiotic
eradication of the inciting germ.
The reason that death may occur in spite of correct antibiotic treatment is that infections
are complicated by dysfunction of our body organs, including the brain, heart, lungs,
and kidneys.
Invading germs not only cause septic shock themselves, infection triggers physiological
changes that result in complex and dynamic interplay of chemical mediators.
It's a balance between good and evil or essentially pro-inflammatory and counter anti-inflammatory
events that determines the clinical outcome.
In general, pro-inflammatory responses are directed towards eliminating the germs responsible
for collateral tissue damage.
Anti-inflammatory responses attempt to limit tissue injury, but may reduce the ability
to fight off the germs.
As we've learned, both staphylococcus and streptococcus bacteria or toxin production
from either can initiate sepsis.
Septic bacteria may be more likely to cause sepsis than others.
For example, staph aureus in the blood is much more dangerous than staph epidermidis.
When gram-positive bacteria are involved, parts of the cell wall components such as
peptidoglycans are responsible for inducing the septic response.
Gram-negative bacteria have different cell wall components.
Endotoxin containing lipid A triggers this response.
Ironically, antibiotics used for gram-negative bacteria can paradoxically release more endotoxin
as more bacteria are being destroyed and higher levels of endotoxin are associated with worse
patient outcomes.
Even these microbial triggers are recognized by the immune system, activation of both inflammatory
and anti-inflammatory immune mediators known as cytokines occurs.
Two of the first cytokines to be implicated in sepsis were tumor necrosis factor or TNF
and interleukin-1 abbreviated IL-1, and there are many more.
Both are involved in local inflammation, white blood cell recruitment, and the generation
of fever.
Higher levels of these two circulating cytokines showed a correlation with worse outcomes.
Blocking the effects of IL-1 and TNF in animal models of sepsis led to improved outcomes.
Now, getting back to one of our deadliest bacteria, let's look at a sepsis example using
the anthrax germ.
Accilicinthrasis can exist as spores, and in 2001 when news media personnel opened envelopes
with anthrax spores, they were easily inhaled and transmitted to the lower portions of the
airways, the alveolar space where the inflammatory response for pneumonia occurs.
Next, the immune system lung macrophages recognize the spores as a foreign invader.
They stimulate the production of cytokines to attract many types of cells and antibodies
to the lung.
We know that inflammation also involves the influx of fluid, so the lungs become filled
with fluid.
The pro-inflammatory cytokines may unintentionally destroy the linings of the lung space.
This can lead to clogging of the small blood vessels of the lung leading to bleeding.
At this time, the victim would be short of breath and coughing up blood.
Anthrax produces three protein exotoxins into the tissues.
One is known as cell binding protein, the second is edema factor, and the last is lethal
factor.
These three exotoxins act together, causing physiological changes.
They collaborate to gain entry into the cytoplasm of cells.
Once inside a cell, the exotoxins disrupt protein synthesis, leading to cell death,
and the toxins may also have a direct effect on cells causing cellular death.
When antibiotics are given, the cell wall components of the bacteria break apart, further
stimulating an immune response, and this leads to more fluid and impairment of the exchange
of oxygen in the lungs.
The anthrax toxin would also lead to depression in the heart's ability to pump blood to the
major organs of the body, reducing blood pressure, and this can deprive the brain of
oxygen and cause confusion and coma.
Simultaneously, the ability of the kidneys to filter waste products of the body is diminished,
leading to an accumulation of impurities in the blood.
This results in changes to both the acid-base status of the blood and the amounts of sodium
potassium in the blood.
Now, the anti-inflammatory portion of the immune system is not just standing by, waiting
to concede defeat.
Several mechanisms are at work to try to counteract both the direct effect of the anthrax toxin
and the significant inflammatory response that has been initiated.
However, usually due to the virulence of the anthrax bacteria and lethal toxins, the pro-inflammatory
response will overcome the anti-inflammatory one.
This leads to progressive pneumonia, requiring a breathing tube for oxygenation and the need
for medications to strengthen the heart pumping.
Artificial kidney support or dialysis may be needed to remove body waste products and
keep the correct salt and potassium balance in the body.
Tragically, unless the diagnosis is suspected very early in the illness, the outcome is
likely to be death.
This is also the reason why thousands of postal workers received ciprofloxacin, an antibiotic
effective against anthrax, as a pro-flactic measure.
This is also why the CDC has a stockpile of ciprofloxacin for use against potential
bioterrorism attack.
I also wanted to mention one special case of a bloodstream infection known as endocarditis,
which is an infection of the inner layer of the heart.
The heart normally has four chambers, which are separated from one another by four heart
valves that control the flow of blood between the different chambers.
When germs invade the blood, they have the ability to latch on to any of the heart valves
and start an infection of the heart.
Some bacteria are much more adept at this task than others, and staphoreus is one of
those bacteria.
Once the germs have attached themselves to the heart valves, they start to grow exponentially
and left untreated may destroy the heart valves and damage heart tissue.
Eventually, individuals become ill and seek medical attention, and a diagnosis can be
made by culturing the blood for bacteria.
Now, it may take four to six weeks before the medical suspicion is high enough to even
get blood cultures performed to make a diagnosis.
I know this seems paradoxical since we just completed a discussion on septic shock and
its 15 plus percent mortality, so you would think that if the germ is in the blood that
you should be very ill.
But nature has a number of insidious bacteria that can lead to slow progression of the disease
process.
Most heart infections are called subacute bacterial endocarditis for this reason.
If you have a heart valve defect, the dentist may ask you if you've taken your antibiotics
before they work on your teeth.
This is because you can virtually guarantee that the process of teeth cleaning leads to
a transient jump of bacteria from the mouth into the bloodstream.
This creates a perfect opportunity for these germs to seed an abnormal heart valve and
cause endocarditis weeks later.
The same logic may apply to people with artificially implanted joints.
Taking antibiotics an hour before surgery or dental work will reduce this risk.
So, today we've learned about infectious diseases of the skin and bloodstream and the
powerful sepsis syndrome, which is responsible for 10% of deaths in the United States.
We'll be looking at more infections next time as we continue our exploration of organ
system.
We'll study infections that attack the urinary tract and pelvic organs and learn more about
the wide range of sexually transmitted diseases.
Until next time.
