9-11 changed America and Americans.
The knowledge that we were vulnerable to attacks by terrorists, even though we were protected
by vast oceans was a terrible realization.
Seven days later, a new type of terrorism, bioterrorism, confronted us in the form of
anthrax in five envelopes sent through the United States Postal System.
You may remember the first case which occurred in Florida and resulted in the first death
from anthrax in 25 years.
Letters were sent to American media, NBC, ABC, CBS, and a senator's office at the State
Department.
This attack resulted in 22 cases of anthrax with five deaths due to inhalation of bacterial
spores.
Besides the deaths, there was mass chaos in the Washington, D.C. area due to concern about
the Postal Service and the death of two workers.
19,000 tests were performed and 33,000 individuals were placed on prophlactic antibiotics.
Time-consuming and costly environmental surveys of post offices and mailrooms were performed.
And mail service was significantly disrupted.
Decontamination of one building alone cost $23 million.
This lecture is about something that experts say will happen.
It's not a maybe anymore.
I'm talking about bioterrorism, meaning the intentional release of viruses, bacteria,
or other germs.
These germs have the potential to devastate our food supply, infest our water, contaminate
the air, and ultimately sicken or kill people.
Although not well documented, there are a few stories of early bioterrorism.
As early as the 14th and 15th century, dead, diseased bodies of infected humans or animals
were flung at the enemy with catapults, some of the first trials of bioweapons.
One instance took place in Kaffa, a city on the Ukraine, which was under attack.
The Tartars turned their misfortune of a plague epidemic into a new form of an attack weapon.
There are also several accounts of attempting to spread smallpox to the enemy, the Attainted
Blankets, one of which took place during the conquest of the Incans in Peru and the other
against Native American Indians.
Believe it or not, in 1675, there was actually an early bioweapons treaty.
The Holy Roman Empire and the French agreed not to use poisonous bullets against one another.
Other agents over the years included the saliva of rabid dogs and even containers of poisonous
snakes.
Those of you who are Sherlock Holmes fans might be amused to know about a fictional
account of bioterrorism.
In the adventure of the dying detective, Holmes investigates a murder where he suspected a
bioweapon had been used.
All indications point to plague as being the murder weapon in question.
Today, we'll explore the modern threat of bioterrorism and the agents that might be
used in an attack.
There have been efforts in the 20th century to curtail the use of bioweapons.
For example, in 1925, the Geneva Protocol was established, prohibiting the use of chemicals
and biological agents, but not the research and development of them.
During the Cold War, both Russia and the United States developed weapons of bioterrorism.
During the 50s and 60s in the U.S., open-air tests were performed with what was thought
to be a harmless bacteria named serration marcessons.
The U.S. government wanted to know what would happen if a bioweapon was planted in a subway
or was dropped from a plane.
In an actual trial in San Francisco, it was disturbing to find that almost all of the
800,000 residents showed traces of serration.
In another test, a light bulb filled with harmless bacteria was dropped on the subway
tracks in New York City, and the organisms spread throughout the subway system within
20 minutes.
By the late 1960s, the U.S. had a large arsenal of different pathogens stored up in the form
of bacteria, fungi, and toxins.
However, in 1969, President Nixon terminated the Offensive Biological Warfare Program.
He ordered the destruction of stockpiled weapons.
Remember that the U.S. research focused on defensive rather than offensive measures.
In 1972, the U.S. and more than 100 nations signed the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention,
or BWC, the world's first treaty banning an entire class of weapons.
Now more specifically, the treaty banned the research, development, production, stockpiling,
or acquisition of biological weapons, as well as the means to deliver them.
But in 1979, a powdered form of anthrax was accidentally released from a Soviet bioweapons
facility in Russia, killing 70 people.
This facility was able to produce tons of the toxin.
Although the Russians blamed contaminated meat for the deaths to cover up for the accident,
in 1992, a U.S. team visited the site.
They found evidence in the lungs of victims that many died from inhalational anthrax, a
serious violation of the BWC treaty.
Through several defectors from the Soviet Union, the U.S. gained knowledge of the enormous
size of the Soviet bioweapons program.
This allegedly included a genetically altered superplague, antibiotic-resistant anthrax,
and long-range missiles to spread disease.
Evidently, the Soviet program had facilities with thousands of scientists.
In the 80s and 90s, many of these scientists became free agents with dangerous knowledge
for sale.
Today, we think there are bioweapons in at least 12 countries, spurring the need for
preparedness by medical and public health organizations.
Did you know that in 1984, the first bioterrorism attack in the United States occurred in the
state of Oregon?
A religious group was trying to gain votes in a local election.
They were trying to reduce the voting turnout of the general public to tilt the election
in their favor.
So they deliberately contaminated the salad bars of 10 local restaurants with salmonella
bacteria.
Over 700 people were sickened, 40 required hospitalization, but fortunately there were
no deaths.
Where else have there been attacks?
Well, in 1995, another bioterrorism attack was thwarted in Japan.
A religious cult group, now known as ALEF, attacked the Tokyo Subway with sarin nerve
gas.
As part of the police investigation, the cult's headquarters was found to have stocks of anthrax
Ebola virus and a Russian military helicopter parked nearby.
It was also believed that some bioweapons experts from the Soviet Union may have gone
to Iraq.
Although they had signed the BWC treaty, Iraq launched its own bioweapons program in 1985.
By 1991, they had weaponized anthrax, botulinum toxin, and several other lethal agents, even
while denying their existence.
However, a UN special commissions team confirmed their stockpile, including scud missiles
loaded to deliver the diseases.
It remains controversial as to whether Iraq had bioweapons during the time of Operation
Desert Storm.
What makes it advantageous to plan a bioweapons attack as compared to other attacks of mass
destruction?
Well, for one thing, biological agents are likely to be smaller and more difficult to
detect.
They could be portable and easy to carry on different modes of transportation, and terrorists
could disperse a bioweapons agent and leave the scene of a crime before anyone showed
symptoms of the illness.
The acquisition expense is also likely to be much cheaper, so beware.
The Centers for Disease Control, or CDC, categorizes bioterrorist agents into three categories.
These are based on the availability of the agent, its potential for infection or death,
and how easily it could be disseminated.
The most concerning agents are Category A. These agents have characteristics that make
them particularly worrisome.
They can be produced on a large scale.
They can be aerosolized, making them easily transmittable.
There is usually a lack of effective treatment or vaccines, and the attacks can result in
many casualties with a high mortality rate.
The big six in Category A include anthrax, smallpox, the plague, botulinum toxin, tularemia,
and hemorrhagic viral fevers, like Ebola.
Now, there are three scenarios that pose the greatest threats to us in a bioterrorism
attack, an attack by an airborne agent like anthrax, a smallpox attack, and a release
of botulinum toxin in the food supply, such as milk.
Let's explore anthrax in more detail.
Anthrax spores are easily found in nature or can be produced in a lab.
It can be released in several forms, in the form of powder, like the 2001 attacks sent
through the mail, or spore forms could be aerosolized and released into the air and spread by the
wind.
It can be put into the food and water, attacking people when they eat contaminated food or
drink.
Inhalational anthrax is the most serious form and would need immediate treatment for any
chance at survival.
It is odorless and invisible, and since the spores hitch a ride on the dust particles
in the air, they've been known to spread for up to 60 miles.
In Senator Daschle's envelope in 2001, there were about two grams of anthrax-laden powder.
Just this small amount contained nearly one trillion spores.
A 1993 estimate predicted that 100 kilograms of aerosolized anthrax over a city would cause
up to three million deaths as lethal as a hydrogen bomb.
Let's look at the characteristics of anthrax.
Anthrax is an oxygen-loving, gram-positive, and spore-forming bacterium that lives in
the soil and can contaminate wild animals.
The anthrax bacterium looks like a bamboo rod with joints.
Spores germinate when they find a welcoming host, like the tissue or blood of animals
or humans, and it also may take only one to three spores to cause an infection.
In Africa, cases of skin disease caused by anthrax have occurred from animal hides that
were made into bongo drums, but if inhaled into the lung, bacteria divide and produce
a lethal toxin that can enter the circulation.
This results in the sepsis syndrome.
Let's explore the initial medical investigation of the first victims of the anthrax attacks.
Blood samples are taken and cultured in an incubator to enhance the bacterial growth.
If germs are detected in the blood, a gram stain can be done to look at the morphology
of the bacteria.
If they look like bamboo rods, the situation is highly suspicious for anthrax.
Next, biochemical testing can be done to identify the specific bacteria, but this usually takes
another 12 to 24 hours.
Usually we initiate antibiotic therapy before the germ is completely identified, for example
after the gram stain is done in the blood, since the mortality consequences of waiting
for confirmation could be dire.
Anthrax is treatable with antibiotics.
Today we usually use ciprofloxacin, in part because it was rumored that Russia had developed
a penicillin resistant form of anthrax to use as a bioweapon.
Now let's return to the original 9-11 anthrax attacks.
You might be wondering if we ever figured out how and who was responsible.
A bioweapons expert who worked at the United States Biodefense Lab named Bruce Ivins was
suspected and he was formally investigated in April of 2005.
The molecular fingerprint pattern of the bacteria, known as the aim strain, was a type used in
the attack and was unique to this facility.
Ivins remained under surveillance for two years.
Tragically in 2008, he died of a drug overdose.
He was thought to be the culprit in spite of not having firm evidence against him.
However, after a scientific inquiry into the review of the methods used to investigate
his case, it was concluded that there was insufficient scientific evidence to definitively
link the attack to Ivins lab.
So this remains an unsolved mystery.
Let's move on to another of the deadliest agents, botulism.
There are some very good reasons we should worry about botulism toxin.
By weight, it's the most poisonous substance known to man.
One gram that is aerosolized has the potential to kill one million people.
Like anthrax, the bacteria also germinate from spores.
The clostridium bacterium is easily obtained from soil and could be cultivated to produce
toxin and could be put in our food supply.
Well, how does botulism cause illness and how can it be treated?
Bacteria produce the toxin, which can enter into the bloodstream from the mucous membranes,
the intestines, or cuts in the skin.
The toxin will then bind to nerve endings.
Normal nerve conduction to activate muscle contraction depends on acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter.
The botulism toxin blocks acetylcholine, which prevents muscles from contracting.
Paralysis ensues, usually starting from the head and progressing down towards the legs.
When the disease is clinically recognized, the antidote is botulism antitoxin, injected
into the body.
We'll explore how the antitoxin was developed in just a minute.
There are actually eight subtypes of botulism toxin, but the ones likely to be encountered
in a bioterrorist attacks are types A and B, food-borne botulism caused by eating foods
that are contaminated with the toxin.
Symptoms begin 12 to 72 hours after exposure, with fatigue and dizziness, blurred vision,
a dry mouth, confusion, and then arm and leg weakness.
Outside of a bioterrorist attack, an important health care tip for parents and grandparents
is be sure that children under one year of age don't eat honey because it can contain
spores which can cause infant botulism.
The spores are ingested and germinate in the child's intestine, producing the neurotoxin.
This leads to extreme muscle weakness and a medical condition we call floppy baby syndrome.
The toxin can also attack the diaphragm, the muscles between the lungs and the stomach,
and these control respiration and can lead to suffocation.
Infant botulism would be treated with an antitoxin, and there is a fascinating story
about how the antidote was produced.
In 1978, a retired thoroughbred horse that had been the ceremonial casein horse for funeral
and military processions at Arlington National Cemetery served as a source of developing antitoxins
against the neurotoxin of botulism.
The horse's name was First Light.
He was inoculated with an inactivated form of the neurotoxin causing an immune reaction
that created antibodies that would neutralize the toxins.
His blood was drawn and the serum was saved so it could be used to create an antitoxin.
In 1980, the horse was shipped to the University of Minnesota Medical School, and over the
following ten years, they collected 1,600 liters of First Flight's blood and stored
the concentrated immune globulin.
In 1991, First Flight's serum was shipped to Saudi Arabia as a preventative measure
in case Saddam Hussein decided to unleash biological weapons during the Gulf War.
First Flight died in 1999 at the age of 31, but he is still honored for service to his
country by visitors to the Smithsonian Institute, where his halter and a vial of his antitoxin
are displayed along with his story.
So, knowing that botulinum toxin is the most deadly substance known to mankind, why are
people having it injected into their faces?
Yes, Botox is one of four commercial products obtained of a toxin type A, which is mixed
with saline and injected into muscles.
In fact, it is being used not only for cosmetic purposes, but for 20 other medical conditions.
So why don't people die from injections of the toxin?
The answer is, the botulism poisoning is very dose dependent.
The lethal dose for a human is approximately 40 nanograms, with a nanogram being less than
a millionth of a gram.
Another typical Botox injection for cosmetic purposes is about 9 nanograms.
So how much of a threat is Botox as a bioterrorism agent?
There is increasingly frequent cases of illegal sales of cloned Botox known as Photox.
This means the toxin is getting purchased on the internet, and even from some manufacturers
that don't require a prescription.
It was even sold on eBay for a short time as a do-it-yourself kit.
Scientists speculate that with a master's degree in biology and $2,000 worth of equipment,
an individual could hypothetically make enough toxin to kill thousands of people.
So we should be concerned about this scenario, especially in civilian populations that are
unprepared.
The only comforting news is that it seems to be poorly suited for delivery via a bomb
or missile since it degrades quickly when exposed to heat.
Finally, let's consider smallpox as a bioterrorism agent.
It's ironic that just when we think we've conquered smallpox, we have to fear that it
still resides in labs around the world and could be used for bioterrorism.
You may be surprised to know that the United States government has obtained enough of the
newest vaccine to treat up to 2 million people in the event of a bioterrorism attack.
They even have a priority list of vaccine candidates, healthcare first responders for
example.
The vaccine can prevent disease even if it's administered three days after exposure.
Smallpox is feared for several reasons.
The lack of an antiviral treatment, the fact that most people are not immune to the virus,
and because it's highly contagious by aerosol particles or contact with the pox.
Let's take a look at an actual case outbreak in 1969 in LaShada, Germany.
There were 17 cases of smallpox during this outbreak.
The virus particles disseminated through the air at a single hospital.
The index or first case was a young man in 1969 who traveled from Pakistan to Dusseldorf
and then Mesheda.
Along the way, he received a dose of the live smallpox vaccine, which does not usually
cause smallpox.
He became ill 10 days later and was hospitalized with a fever.
Originally physicians thought he had typhoid fever and isolation was initiated for any
direct patient contact with healthcare workers.
But the medical personnel failed to take a history that included his recent vaccination.
Although he did have a cough, airborne isolation precautions were not initially implemented.
And a few days later, when he developed a rash, he was diagnosed with smallpox, confirmed
by electron microscopy and isolation of the virus.
Let's talk about why this case is so interesting.
This is the kind of mystery case that infectious disease physicians love.
How did 17 more people contract smallpox?
All three floors of the hospital had secondarily infected patients.
Why?
Well, linens and dishes had been meticulously separated and disinfected, and the index patient
never left the first floor.
Investigators looked carefully at where their nurses had gone, if there were patient visitors,
and even the priest who came to visit the patients.
No link was found to the spread of smallpox.
You're beginning to see how the theory of airborne transmission seemed more plausible.
Consequently, air currents within the building were studied by releasing smoke in the patient's
room and monitoring where it went.
It entered the hallway where visitors were talking with physicians, as well as rooms
next door.
The smoke then went up the stairway into the second floor, where it spread to various rooms.
Finally, it went out our index patient's window, right up the building wall, to other
open windows, into patient rooms on the third floor.
The mystery was solved.
So what about the future of smallpox?
The last few vials of smallpox are currently being held in high-security labs in the United
States and Russia.
In approximately every five years, the World Health Organization, or WHO, meets to make
it an important decision.
Should they eliminate the virus completely or save the remaining vials?
Although destroying the vials would prevent the virus from being used as a terror-related
weapon, leading virologists argue that the stock should be kept for research purposes,
just in case the virus reemerges in the future.
For the last 30 years, the WHO has not made the decision to fully destroy the remaining
vials.
In 2014, the almost unthinkable happened.
Two vials of smallpox were found in a storage freezer box at the National Institutes of
Health.
The box seemed to date to the 1950s, but had only been hiding in that location since 1972.
Obviously, not where it was supposed to be.
This of course resulted in protocols being reexamined and better security enacted.
Now, how would we know if we were under a bioterrorist attack?
It's difficult to identify the early stages of a bioterrorist attack for several reasons.
First, it's not until medical facilities begin to be overwhelmed with large numbers of victims
with similar symptoms that the epidemiologists begin to suspect either an epidemic or a bioterrorist
attack.
If the biological agent happens to be spread by human-to-human contact, it's likely that
10 or 12 other individuals would have already been infected.
That makes it difficult to trace the source of the attack and try to contain it.
What would be the first signs of a bioterrorist attack?
Well, there are some epidemiological clues that might help us.
You might see an unusual pattern of illness cropping up in the wrong season or a non-endemic
area.
For example, it would be strange to see large numbers of tularemia cases in a geographic
area without the appropriate animal vectors.
Or you might see an illness that is unusual for a particular population, like a number
of hemorrhagic virus cases in adults.
Or you might even see a large number of birds or animals dying, which might act as a sentinel
event.
Well, now you can see why individual vigilance and health department surveillance are essential.
You can also see why the One Health Initiative is so important, since clues could come from
both animals and humans.
How should you be preparing for a bioterrorist attack?
The CDC's website has information on how to put together an emergency kit, how to develop
a family disaster plan, and how to stay informed during an emergency of this type.
This should contain supplies that you would need similar to natural disasters, such as
tornadoes.
Think about also including important personal documents.
They should also include some specialized items, like enhanced N95 masks, which would
filter the air against TB, smallpox, and anthrax, but would not help during a chemical or gas
attack.
One helpful medical advance that has been developed is the microbial detection array,
which can detect more than 2,000 viruses and 900 types of bacteria within a short 24-hour
time window.
Its newer version will have double or triple this capacity.
The array uses over 380,000 probes, or nucleic acid sequences, which are microbial signatures.
The probe fits in a 1 by 3 inch glass slide.
DNA or RNA samples are applied to the slide, read by a scanner, and analyzed using special
algorithms.
So rapid diagnostic testing capabilities will continue to be powerful tools, not only in
bioterrorist attacks, but controlling disease outbreaks as well.
Keep this in mind for our next lecture as we explore deadly, emerging, and reemerging
infectious diseases, which will continuously challenge our detection and response capabilities.
See you then.
