Let's start today's lecture learning about viruses and germs in between with a clinical case.
Let's take an 18-year-old college student who decides to go to Florida on spring break.
She's been indoors and studying for midterm examinations.
When she arrives in Florida, she rushes to the beach where she spends the next two days in the sun
with minimal sun protection. Aside from the sunburn, she notices a painful sensation
on the upper part of her lip, but there's nothing visible there. However, 24 hours later,
a large blister appears at the site where the lip was having pain. What's your diagnosis?
If you said she has a cold sore, you're right. If you said she has herpes type 1 infection,
you're also right. And if you said it's a fever blister, you're also correct.
Herpes simplex virus type 1, abbreviated HSV1, infects about 50% of the US population by the age
of 20. These lesions are highly contagious until they are fully healed in about a week.
Now, how did she get it? This was a viral reactivation triggered by sunlight.
We'll come back to the family of herpes viruses later in the lecture once we learn a little bit
about viruses in general. Now, virus is derived from the Latin word poison. The first virus was
conceptually isolated in 1895 when laboratory filters that were too small to allow bacteria to pass
through were used. The smaller virus particles passed through the filter and were identified
as a tobacco mosaic virus, typically found on tobacco and tomato plants. Since viruses are at
least 100 times smaller than bacteria, they can't be seen through the light microscope.
They were first seen in 1931, but only when the electron microscope was invented.
Now, how are viruses different than bacteria? Viruses are life forms whose genetic material,
either DNA or RNA, replicates inside living cells,
using the cell's own synthetic machinery. This leads to the synthesis of components of the virus
that are subsequently reassembled and then transferred to other living host cells,
or sometimes to the environment. Viruses have no capacity for independent
protein synthesis or for generation of their own energy supplies. They have no cell wall
or no nucleus. They reproduce by assembly of various viral pieces and not by growth and division,
like bacteria do. They are totally dependent on the host cell for survival.
There are several steps in viral replication. These include attachment to the cell, entry into the
cell, early genetic expression, DNA or RNA replication, late genetic expression, assembly of
the new viruses, and release of the new viruses. These include the use of DNA, DNA, DNA, DNA,
RNA replication, late genetic expression, assembly of the new viruses, and release
of the daughter viruses from the cell. Now, first the virus attaches to the host cell.
An attachment involves two minimum components. There is a virus attachment complex,
and there are also cellular receptors for the virus. Some cellular receptors are proteins,
such as for HIV, whereas others are sugar receptors, such as sialic acid for influenza.
Next, the virus enters into the cells. How does the virus get across the cell membranes?
Either the virus melts and merges with the cell membrane, or the virus gets swallowed by the cell.
Next, viruses utilize one of three unique patterns of replication,
depending upon which genetic material they possess, DNA, RNA, or RNA retrovirus machinery.
For DNA viruses, its DNA must enter host cells nucleus to replicate. The DNA polymerase enzyme
of the host cell is essentially hijacked for the viral DNA replication.
Well, what about RNA replication? Now, RNA is a foreign genetic material to human chromosomes,
since humans don't have RNA. Therefore, the first step for virus replication in RNA viruses
is to trick the host cells to produce an RNA polymerase, which subsequently allows RNA
virus to be replicated. Finally, the third type of replication involves retroviruses.
Well, what exactly does this mean? Retroviruses, such as the human immunodeficiency virus,
or HIV, have a unique mechanism of replication. A retrovirus possesses one copy of a single-stranded
RNA, and it also carries with it a unique enzyme known as reverse transcriptase.
Shortly after cell entry, the single RNA strand is copied into a double-stranded DNA
spiral helix, the opposite of the normal replication process. Hence, reverse transcriptase
is an important antiviral drug target for HIV. Now retroviruses also like to bury some of their
genetic material into the host cell DNA, so they integrate their genetic material into this host cell
with a different retrovirus enzyme known as integrase. The host cell then treats the viral
DNA as part of its own genome, a bit like a Trojan horse trick. This new DNA will persist
indefinitely, and the integrase is another antiviral target for HIV infections.
As a general fact of viral biology, it's important to recognize that when viruses replicate,
they do so in a rapid exponential fashion, which generates millions of new virus particles.
This is more significant than for bacteria, since random genetic mutations are more frequent
and lead to, quote, survival of the fittest viruses. This is particularly important for
targeting antiviral therapy for HIV, meaning combinations of medicines need to be taken
to help prevent the emergence of viral resistance.
After the virus's DNA or RNA replicates in a host cell, it directs the cell to help the virus
package itself in the cytoplasm, and then the virus breaks three from the host cell
into a neighboring cell or sometimes into the bloodstream. Virus infections can either be
classified as localized, where the virus remains at the site of entry, or body-wide,
or otherwise known as disseminated. Examples of local infections would be respiratory viruses
like the common cold, or herpes viruses causing a cold sore, or wart viruses like a foot wart.
An example of a disseminated infection would be the varicella zoster, or chickenpox virus.
After local replication in the respiratory tract, the chickenpox virus spreads throughout the body,
and multiple organs can be infected, including obviously the skin, which causespox.
Now, you might be wondering what happens to the cell that the virus was inside.
Some viral infections, such as Ebola virus, result in a complete host cell shutdown,
leading to cell death. Other viruses may selectively inhibit a special host function,
allowing the cell to survive, but in a damaged form. If the cells do survive in a damaged condition,
there is a risk of subsequent bacterial superinfection, which can occur several days later.
This is a common mechanism of disease for respiratory viruses, which may lead to secondary
bacterial ear, or sinus infections, or even bacterial pneumonia. It's believed that over
half the deaths in the great influenza pandemic of 1918 were caused by secondary bacterial infections.
Let's talk for a minute about the basic classification of viruses.
Viruses are classified by their genetic material as either DNA or RNA, or retroviruses,
and secondly, by their outer component, either they're enveloped or non-enveloped.
Now, envelope viruses have different shapes, such as the rabies virus, which is bullet-shaped.
It's important to know, since viruses are structurally completely different than bacteria,
that no antibiotics will work in preventing virus replication. So getting antibiotics for a bad cold
is not going to help you recover any faster. Antiviral medications do exist, but not many
when compared with antibiotics. This is another reason that vaccination against viral diseases
is especially important. Now, how do viral germs spread?
Sneezing and coughing are an easy way for germs to spread, but larger droplets settle
quickly from the air and are not contagious. Viruses are more likely to spread via wet secretions
that contaminate surfaces in the environment, such as respiratory childhood viruses.
Many of these viruses can survive for up to four days on solid surfaces.
Now, did you ever wonder why virus transmission is more common in the wintertime?
Well, people congregate closer together, increasing the chances of spread,
and both low humidity and lower temperatures often enhance viral survival, both in humans
and on environmental surfaces. Now, let's return to our Florida student
and learn a little bit more about the herpes virus family.
What do we know about this virus and the family of herpes viruses?
It has over a hundred members, but there are only four main ones of clinical human significance,
and these include herpes simplex type 1 and 2, Epstein bar virus, which is responsible for
infectious mononucleosis, varicella zoster responsible for chickenpox and shingles,
and cytomegalovirus, or CMV, responsible for some newborn infections and even birth defects.
All of the herpes viruses not only cause an acute infection, but they are never eliminated
from our bodies and exist in a dormant state of hibernation throughout our lives.
Herpes simplex 1, while causing fever blisters,
can also cause clinical disease at a wide variety of other anatomical sites,
and herpes type 2 is usually known as genital herpes.
Now, during a person's first exposure to herpes viruses, otherwise known as a primary infection,
sometimes called inoculation, the herpes attacks the mucosal surface,
or moist mucous membrane sites, and this permits entry of the virus through the top layers of the
skin. Next, the virus invades the closest nerve endings. Local symptoms begin within a few days,
with the appearance of blister type lesions superimposed on a red base.
Sores in the mouth and severe sore throat with blisters are frequent manifestations of primary
herpes type 1 infection, whereas fever blisters are the more frequent sign of her current disease,
as with our student in Florida. A primary infection with herpes, either oral or genital,
is usually associated with body-wide fluid-like symptoms, fever, and malaise.
The blisters with primary infection are very painful and last for 10 days,
and the vesicles are usually grouped in a single anatomical site. However,
if someone touches the sores, they can be spread to other body locations.
Now, it will likely come as a surprise to you that even with all the severe symptoms that I just
described, most primary herpes infections are asymptomatic, no symptoms. Hence, our student may
not have even known or been surprised about the development of her fever blisters. Analysis of
blood from the general population demonstrates that only 20 to 25 percent of individuals
with herpes type 1 immunity and 10 to 20 percent of those with herpes type 2
ever remember having a history of blisters at the site of infection.
Hence, patients with known herpes 1 or 2 infection represent only the tip of the iceberg.
This has tremendous implications for disease transmission, since herpes virus can be shed
without clinical signs of disease and can lead to stealthy transmission via contact with secretions.
Once herpes primary infection has occurred, the virus survives in a dormant or hibernating state
inside nerve cell bodies and can reactivate at a later time. Unfortunately, this means that the
embarrassing and unattractive sores produced by the virus can keep reappearing. The frequency
and severity of reactivation is determined by many factors. Precipitating factors for herpes
recurrences include fever, menstruation, emotional stress, trauma to the area of primary infection,
and, in our case, exposure to sunlight.
In contrast to primary herpes, recurrences are usually not associated with body-wide symptoms.
Usually, those affected with herpes can tell in advance when an episode is forthcoming.
Prodromal symptoms, meaning early warning symptoms, are common before the reactivation event,
and these symptoms include tingling, itching, pain, and burning. The prodromal symptoms usually
start one to three days prior to the appearance of the first blisters. Now, although the specific
triggers for an outbreak can be predictable for an individual and vesicles tend to recur at the
same site for an individual, the pattern and recurrences vary from person to person.
Recurrent episodes are shorter than the primary episode and typically last five to seven days.
Twenty-five percent of individuals have recurrences as frequently as once a month,
but another quarter are as infrequent as only twice per year.
Another herpes condition, called herpetic whit-low, occurs when the virus infects the finger.
This occurs by inoculation of the virus through a break in the finger skin
by touching active vesicles of the mouth. Outbreak of herpes type 1 skin infections
have also occurred among wrestlers and rugby players because of the exposure of their skin
to the sweat and saliva of other players, and this type of skin infection is referred to as
herpes gladiatorium. In one large outbreak that was quantified, seventy-three percent
of high school wrestlers had lesions on their heads, transmitted by oral secretions,
and forty-two percent on their arms and legs. There are a variety of other neurological
syndromes that have been linked to infection with herpes infection, including viral meningitis,
which means inflammation around the brain and the spinal cord, and Bell's palsy is a
neurological condition where there is a temporary damage to the facial nerves, causing one side of
the face to droop, also caused by herpes. You might be wondering if there is any antiviral
treatment for the herpes family virus. Unlike most viral illnesses, there actually are antiviral drugs
that can be used for treatment and prevention. Since these are all DNA viruses, these medications
can target DNA polymerase, and acyclovir is the most well-known antiviral medication used for
herpes, chickenpox, and shingles. Well, now that we've looked at an overview of viral infection,
especially herpes, I'd like to introduce you to a couple of other microorganisms.
We're going to focus on additional two diseases, syphilis caused by a spirochete and typhus
caused by rickettsia. Both are less common infections today, but both have great historical
significance. Spirochetes actually have many of the same characteristics as bacteria, but are
different enough biologically that they don't stain with the routine gram stain. Two examples
include Borrelia burgdorferi, the Lyme germ, and troponema pallidum, the syphilis germ.
Usually, to view spirochetes, a microscope using special fluorescent staining is required.
Well, let's take a closer look at syphilis. Syphilis is a sexually transmitted disease,
and although less common than in the past, has an interesting disease process and historical
lessons for us. The infection is divided into three stages. The primary stage appears as one or
more painless, firm red ulcers called shankers of the skin at the site of inoculation. Ulcers most
commonly occur on the average of three weeks after exposure, but they actually heal spontaneously.
The secondary stage of syphilis is characterized by a rash and flu-like symptoms, and generalized
body lymph node enlargement that appears within a couple of months. This stage also surprisingly
resolves spontaneously without treatment, leaving the infected person completely asymptomatic.
Latent syphilis is defined as the period after infection when patients show evidence of fighting
the disease in their blood, but once again demonstrate no clinical manifestations of disease.
The third stage of syphilis, if untreated, occurs in amazing 15 to 30 years after the
initial infection, and can include unusual and bizarre manifestations of the body,
such as dementia of the brain or ruptured blood vessels leading to death.
The germ that causes syphilis, trepanemum pallidum, is a very thin spirochete that can survive only
briefly outside the human body. The germ has not been successfully cultured on artificial media.
It is a uniquely human disease. Like many diseases that were being identified in the early 1900s,
the syphilis spirochete was seen under the light microscope at the time as a corkscrew-shaped
bacteria. When its genetic code was examined in 1998, scientists found it to be relatively
primitive, with only a thousand genes. The germ produces sticky substances that allow attachments
to mucus membranes. It also has a few tricks that allow it to evade the immune system.
Why is this disease interesting and still important? Well, today there are still around 12
million cases of syphilis around the world, including 17% of pregnant women in parts of Africa,
which affects both the mothers and their babies. Its incidence is also directly related to HIV,
as there is a 2 to 5% chance of being infected with both HIV and syphilis,
since the primary means of transmission is bisexual intercourse. And syphilis has great
historical significance. A hot debate has been going on for years regarding the origin of syphilis.
For one thing, the disease seems to have originated in a non-sexually related form,
often seen in children. Then it adapted to a venereal form, which means it is primarily associated
with sexual intercourse, due to changes in behavior of people at different times in history,
and also likely as a means for enhancing its own survival.
Another historical debate is whether syphilis origin was in the old world or the new world,
specifically before Columbus sailed to America or after he returned to Europe. Researchers
speculated for years that Christopher Columbus's voyage brought not only news of the new world,
but brought syphilis as well from the Americas. A comprehensive study done by Emory University
in 2011 seems to confirm that it came aboard the Nenya, only ship to make it back to Spain.
You probably haven't heard of Girolamo Fracastoro, an Italian physician and poet,
who is credited for naming the disease syphilis around 1500. He wrote a poem about a fictitious
shepherd named Syphilis, who angered the god Apollo. Apollo in turn afflicted the shepherd with
this new disease. Besides naming the disease, Fracastoro was also the first person to believe
that it was due to a seed of contagion, which of course no one believed during his time.
Once syphilis arrived in Europe, it took only five years for it to become an epidemic. It quickly
spread throughout the old world, then through Asia, and to every continent except Antarctica.
It wasn't until four centuries later that the specific disease causing spirochegerm
was identified in 1905.
Regardless of its origin, we know that syphilis was a devastating disease that killed many
thousands of people here and abroad. Of course, certain behaviors, especially prevalent in the
15th century, allowed easy spread of syphilis, including public bathhouses, prostitution,
promiscuity in the royal courts, crowded urban conditions, and unhygienic hygiene.
It was thought that the advent of wearing wigs, or parruches, came about in the 1500s to cover
hair loss and mask unsavory smells from the disease. The wigs were made of goat, horse, or human hair,
with scents such as lavender and orange scented powder. The wearing of gloves may have also
arisen in that century in order to conceal the open sores. Interestingly, treatments for syphilis
were attempted, some botanical, like wild pansies, that were thought to have antimicrobial properties,
and another treatment was mercury that was injected, swallowed, or rubbed on the skin,
resulting in the saying, quote, a night in the arms of Venus leaves to a lifetime on mercury,
unquote. And mercury was used for a treatment up until 1910. Salversan and neosalversan,
which were arsenic-based compounds, were used on soldiers who contracted syphilis during World War
I. Arsenic, however, had many drawbacks. Treatment regimens required many injections over long
periods of time with toxic side effects. Many treated individuals actually died of chronic
arsenic poisoning instead of syphilis. Now, fortunately, syphilis today is more easily
treated with modern antibiotics, especially penicillin. It's worth mentioning that presently
in the United States, the syphilis incidence, which had been declining into the 21st century,
is actually beginning to rise and is now twice the rate of its US nadir in 2000.
This is predominantly due to a change in some sexual mores. Now, let's move forward to another
non-virus, non-bacterial germ, microorganism known as rickettsia.
Rickettsia are single-celled organisms that have gram-negative bacterial structural characteristics
but are intracellular, rod-shaped parasites, which, like viruses, must live inside cells to survive.
So, they're sort of a hybrid between bacteria and a virus.
Rickettsia are usually transmitted by blood-sucking parasites, like fleas, lysentics,
and they live in the parasite's intestine. But the parasite does not develop any disease.
Rather, rickettsia are transmitted by parasite excrement or parasite mouth parts.
This germ was named after Ricketts, an American pathologist, and ironically,
he died from one of the diseases he was studying, typhus, after identifying typhus as a rickettsial
disease. Now, just a cautionary note, typhus should not be confused with typhoid, which is a disease
caused by salmonella bacteria. Other rickettsial diseases include trench fever,
common in World War I, and transmitted by rat fleas, and rocky mountains by the fever,
transmitted by ticks. Typhus, in its normal epidemic form, is caused by rickettsia proazachii.
It's a deadly, lous-born disease with a distinctive rash that killed hundreds of thousands of soldiers.
When Napoleon retreated from Moscow in 1812, more French soldiers died from typhus than
were killed by the Russians. This trend of typhus helping to determine the outcomes of wars carried
over into the First and Second World Wars. And during World War II, there were devastating
outbreaks of typhus in concentration camps. One casualty of typhus tragically was none other than
Anne Frank. After the war, the pesticide DDT was used to get rid of the lous population,
and the number of infections was dramatically reduced. Epidemic typhus is now a rare disease.
However, thousands of cases occurred in Burundi in Southeast Africa in association with civil
wars during the 1990s. Body lous infestation preceded the outbreaks, and this was known as
jail fever, and epitomizes the problems with crowded and lack of good hygiene. Even the U.S.
is not immune. There were four cases of typhus in the mid-2000s among staff and visitors of a
wilderness camp in Pennsylvania. Testing of the flying squirrels in the area revealed that most
were infected with rickettsia proazachii. The squirrels actually harbored parasites that were
infected with typhus and transmitted the disease accidentally to humans. You might still be wondering
how do rickettsia actually cause disease in humans? The clinical manifestations are
due to the ability of rickettsia to multiply inside the endothelial or first layer of cells
lining small blood vessels. These infected cells detach from the blood vessels and block blood
circulation, eventually leading to deprivation of oxygen in tissues and cell destruction.
This is how citizens die of rocky matted spotted fever, which causes rapid cell death.
So to summarize, we've been talking a lot about viruses using herpes virus type 1 as a prototype,
a variant of normal bacteria known as a spirochete which causes Lyme disease and syphilis,
and rickettsia which is a hybrid between a bacterium and a virus causing an illness known as typhus.
In our next session, I'm excited to introduce another type of microorganism, fungi, as we
learn about diverse infections caused by innocent piles of rotting leaves or even from exploring
caves. See you next time.
