Welcome back, I'd like to start today's lecture with a fascinating story of a twist of fate
that occurred in 1951 that turned out to be one of the most important developments in
medical history. The story begins with an unfortunate woman's diagnosis of cervical
cancer around 1950. In that decade, at least 15,000 women were dying of cervical cancer every year.
Ten years earlier, George Papinikolau had invented what became known as the pap smear
to detect cervical cancer. However, some women chose not to have the test done,
and one of these women was 30-year-old Henrietta Lacks, and unfortunately, it cost her her life.
The treatment at that time for Henrietta Lacks' cervical cancer involved inserting a tube of
radium into the cervix, sewing it into place, and leaving it there for weeks of radiation therapy.
Yes, it killed cancer cells, but the radium had its own side effects, and also caused mutations
that could turn into other cancers. Henrietta Lacks died in October of 1951,
less than a year after her diagnosis. Just before she died, a surgeon took a sample of her tumor
cells and put them in a petri dish. Over the next 24 hours, to his surprise, they kept reproducing
over and over at a rapid pace, and they never stopped. Although this was unexpected, it also
explained why her cervical cancer had grown at such a rapid rate to over the size of a nickel
in three months. Years later, scientists would discover that her cervical cancer was caused by
an infection known as human papillomavirus, otherwise known as HPV. In the 1950s, research
scientists were looking to study human cells that could stay alive for many generations in cell
culture. Human cells died within hours when attempts were made to grow them in a petri dish.
They needed cells that could reliably replicate and could be frozen to examine various intermediate
stages. Her unlikely gift to all of us was the world's first immortal cells, meaning cells that
never die. These cells were taken from a tumor in her cervix and known as helicels, HE for
Henrietta and LA for lax. This discovery of immortal human cells was vital since scientists
needed cells to stay alive for transport and study. Today, helicels are in cell culture labs
all over the world. They're being used for many types of research. For example, studying genes that
turn on and off cancer cells and testing different drugs for their efficacy and treating everything
from leukemia to influenza. Thanks to helicels, we were also able to develop the polio vaccine.
In the 1950s, the polio epidemic was devastating and it was decided that a helicel factory would
be set up to develop trillions of cells each week that would be used for vaccine development.
Having this abundant cell stock was the only way the polio vaccine could be developed quickly
and mass produced. The lab was set up at the Tuskegee Institute, a prestigious Southern University.
The resulting cells were sent to 23 SOC vaccine testing centers around the country
and the vaccine passed the test. So even after her death, Henrietta lax indirectly saved millions
of American lives. Later, helicels were used in trials of mumps, measles, herpes, and HIV
and inspired the development of the medical science of virology. Her cells went on several
missions to outer space to see how cells behave under zero gravity conditions.
In fact, much of the research today in the area of sexually transmitted diseases uses helicels.
Let's talk about the complex mix of organs involved in sexually transmitted diseases,
abbreviated STDs, and other infections that involve the urinary tract,
prostate gland, and reproductive organs. Nearly every woman has had a bladder infection,
otherwise known as cystitis sometime in her life. The bacteria found near the female urethra
are similar to those near the rectal area, which has a readily abundant supply of germs
to cause an infection. Since the female urethra is short relative to males, it's easier for bacteria
to gain access to the female urethra. Our old friend E. coli is notorious for being a cause
of bladder infections. It has structures known as pilli that are adapted to holding on to any
skin cells that have minor disruptions in their surfaces. This is particularly common in the
vaginal area of estrogen deficient older women. Once bacteria attached to the urethral area,
they can advance into the bladder, the precursor of the infection known as bacterial cystitis.
In order to cause a true infection, the bacteria must invade the inner surface of the bladder wall,
and the body's immune response will be triggered to attract white blood cells.
The presence of bacteria in the urine, however, does not necessarily mean
there is a urinary tract infection. Sometimes bacteria can learn to exist harmoniously in
the bladder without actually causing an infection, a condition known as asymptomatic bacteria.
You might be surprised to know that the prevalence of this condition in women
at the age of 60 is 10%, at age 70, at 15%, and it's 20% or higher in older ages.
So if you're seeing your health care provider with no symptoms of a bladder infection,
but collection of a urine sample shows bacteria on a urine analysis, or even worse, the provider
cultures the urine just to see if there are bacteria present, you don't need antibiotics.
Asymptomatic bacteria exist in older men as well, but the prevalence of bacteria is lower at about
5%. Well, why should you take a stance in potentially refusing antibiotics? It's important to know
that there have been multiple long-term studies that show there is no decrease in kidney function
or increase in mortality associated with the bacteria, even if you have conditions like diabetes.
When there is a real bladder infection, more than 90% of cases of cystitis will have symptoms
that are all too familiar to women, urinary frequency, urgency, burning or pain with urination,
discomfort over the bladder, and often blood of the urine. According to my wife,
once you've had one, you'll never forget the symptoms. For bladder infections, your body
temperature may be slightly elevated, but fever is rarely greater than 100.5 degrees,
really a borderline fever. A more complicated situation exists in assisted living and nursing
homes. The medical personnel are almost uniformly taught that any change in an individual's cognitive
status is automatically due to a urinary tract infection. The staff will be on the phone with
a supervising physician to obtain an order to collect a urine sample, but by the time the
physician calls back an hour or two later, the individual's cognitive ability has often returned
to normal. It's true that any infection of the elderly can cause a change in cognition as a
manifestation of infection, but this change is nonspecific and should be persistent or worsening
before blaming a urinary tract infection, especially without bladder symptoms.
Now patients always ask physicians, but what would you do if it was your mother?
Well, when my mother was getting urine tests for no clear reasons when she was in a nursing home,
there were requests two or three times a week for urine samples, and I had to play tough cop
and insist that they go through me before actually prescribing antibiotics. In a report in the spring
of 2014 by the Centers for Disease Control, or CDC, on the excess use of antibiotics in healthcare,
the unnecessary use of antibiotics for presumptive urinary tract infections was the number one cause
of antibiotic overuse, and therefore increased the likelihood of antibiotic resistance.
They estimated that if prescribed judiciously, there would be a 37% reduction in overall antibiotic
use. Now, usually bladder infections in women are uncomplicated and can be treated for three
to seven days. Some women may suffer from recurrent symptomatic bladder infections. Now,
does the use of cranberry pills or cranberry juice reduce the chances of developing an infection?
Several studies have been done, although the products are safe and have no serious side effects,
I'm sorry to report that the evidence somewhat similar to the use of vitamin supplements
is not overwhelmingly positive. On some occasions, the bacteria causing a bladder infection
can ascend the urinary tract and lead to a kidney infection, a condition that we know as
pylonephritis. This is a more serious medical condition, and it prompts the need for stronger
antibiotics for a long duration of time, up to 14 days. This condition might require intravenous
antibiotics or even hospitalization. On rare occasion, the bacteria may actually jump into
the bloodstream causing bacteremia and sepsis. Well, how can you tell when you might be developing
a kidney infection? There are usually signs accompanied by a higher fever of 101 degrees
and associated pain in the flank or underneath the rib cage. Some elderly individuals may have
neither fever nor back pain and still have a kidney infection, though. Men have their own unique
infection of the prostate gland called prostatitis. If bacteria enter the male bladder, they don't have
to travel very far to invade the prostate gland. When this occurs rapidly, leading to sudden
difficulties in urination and associated pelvic pain, the condition is known as acute prostatitis.
An extended course of antibiotics specifically targeted at the unusual acidic environment of
the prostate is needed for cure. Some men are plagued by relapses of this condition
as not all the germs may be completely eradicated from the prostate. Some can remain
dormant for months or even years before causing recurrent symptoms, leading to a condition
known as chronic recurrent prostatitis. Let's start off our discussion of sexually transmitted
diseases with a little trivia. The first question, when do you think the first case of gonorrhea
occurred? Well, it's thought that the history of gonorrhea goes back to biblical times, but one
of the first citations about the disease was in the Acts of the English Parliament in 1161,
implying that it was a threat to public health even at that time. It's fascinating that besides
having earned the title of the oldest STD, that it is also the newest thanks to gonorrhea's ability
to change its genetic structure over time. A new superbug resistant to all antibiotics has been created.
Second question, which STD do you think has the highest incidence in the United States?
You may not have even heard of this STD called chlamydia. However, it has the highest incidence
of all STDs in the U.S. and worldwide. Now, incidence refers to the number of new cases
in a specific time interval. Third question, how many people do you think currently have an
STD worldwide? STDs affect or are prevalent in more than 60 million people. Now, prevalence
refers to the total number of cases over an extended period of time. Fourth question,
what is the most common age group for STDs? 50% of the new STDs each year are actually in the
age group from 15 to 24 years. So, if we're binogamous adults who have been married for years,
why should we worry about STDs? Well, besides the obvious public health impact
and associated health care costs, it could affect us in several ways. First, 75% of us
will be exposed to the human papillomavirus over the course of our lifetime, most likely by the age
of 50. Second, it's important to ensure that family members have all the information they need
to prevent STDs. Third, STDs are often asymptomatic. They can easily be passed along
through sexual encounters without either partner's knowledge. And lastly, if a woman is
pregnant with an STD, the infection can be passed along to the newborn. The prevalence
of a spectrum of STD disorders in the United States can be viewed as a pyramid with HIV
infection at the top and genital herpes, the most prevalent at the bottom. In today's lecture,
we'll focus on the three most prevalent diseases at the bottom of the pyramid,
chlamydia, HPV, and genital herpes virus. Although each has its own characteristics,
the main symptoms of STD are similar to bladder or prostate infections, burning on urination due
to infection of the urethra and or vaginal or cervical or urethral discharges. Also, in case
you're wondering, it's highly unlikely that you can get an STD from a public restroom toilet seat.
But the ways that you can contract an STD, though, are obviously through intercourse,
through oral sex and through skin-to-skin contact with infected sores. Now, chlamydia
trachomatis is not truly a bacterium nor a virus, but one of our in-between germs.
Although not the most prevalent, it has the highest incidence of new cases among STDs,
with more than one million cases diagnosed in the United States every year.
It most commonly affects younger adults who are sexually active, but does not show any specific
bias for age. Cervical infections in females are often asymptomatic, and the worst part about
this infection is that it can ascend into the female reproductive system and is the number
one cause of female infertility in the United States. This has become so problematic that the
U.S. Preventative Health Task Force recommends screening all adolescents during every routine
health care visit. Now, fortunately, the testing has become simpler and a urine sample
tested by molecular diagnostic tests is reliable for establishing a diagnosis,
rather than having an invasive pelvic exam or male urethral swabs. You may have grown up in
an era where chlamydia was unknown, and Nigeria-Gonorrhea was the STD that everyone feared. This was
also known as the CLAP. Gonorrhea is still a very important STD since it can also cause
pelvic inflammatory disease leading to infertility. And resistant gonorrhea is now an emerging
infectious disease problem cited by the CDC 2014 Resistance Report as a dangerous public health
matter. As with so many infectious diseases, these terms used to be sensitive to our old,
reliable penicillin. There are some characteristics of the disease process that can help differentiate
gonorrhea from chlamydia. But when there's a suspicion of one of the diseases, medical
professionals will test for both since it's possible to have both simultaneously.
And the potential infertility consequences of these STD in young women are so profound
that it is not unusual to receive treatment for both conditions, even if only one is proven.
As if resistant gonorrhea isn't enough, there are newer emerging non-bacterial causes of STDs
including germs known as urea plasma and mycoplasma genitalis. These latter conditions are difficult
to diagnose, but they are usually considered for testing when chlamydia and gonorrhea tests are
negative and symptoms still persist. Once again, you see that our knowledge of emerging infectious
issues continues to evolve over time, and the new microbes are being discovered at every turn.
Fortunately, at this time, chlamydia and other in-between germs are treatable with antibiotics
using tetracycline or erythromycin derivatives that target cellular protein synthesis.
Moving to the bottom of our STD pyramid, herpes simplex virus or HSV is the most prevalent
STD in the United States, affecting 22% of the population. Now this equates to between 45 and
60 million Americans with genital HSV infections. Genital HSV, similar to herpes labialis,
is not cleared and remains latent in the pelvic nerves, so it has the highest prevalence. Basically,
you have it for life. The main worry with this organism is that only 10% of individuals actually
know they've acquired the virus. Well, why did 90% of those infected not know they were infected?
Well, if herpes is always presented in a typical fashion with multiple painful
genital ulcers, everybody would recognize it. But because most HSV infections are more subtle,
most are unaware that they have been infected. And this creates a problem, since the virus
can be highly contagious. There are certain epidemiological factors that can help predict
which demographic population is most likely to be in the hidden 90%. For example, lower socioeconomic
status and having a higher number of lifetime sexual partners. If the initial genital herpes
infection is recognized, there are painful vesicles similar to fever blisters or cold sores.
That primary episodes tends to be the most severe as our immune system is unprepared for the first
event. Infected individuals do develop some degree of individual long-term immunity recognition.
However, the immune system is imperfect and recurrences are common. The recurrences are most
common within the first year and present as a painful crop of blisters. But fever and other
systemic symptoms are uncommon. Illness, even with antiviral medication, typically last from
five to seven days. Now, recurrences can continue to occur throughout an individual's lifetime,
but they're much more common in the first five years after acquisition of the virus.
There fortunately are several anti-herpes virus medications that can be used to
ameliorate the course of primary disease, treat recurrences, and sometimes even prevent recurrences.
I have been put in an awkward position in consultation with couples where I have to explain
the possible scenario that they could have contracted HSV many years ago,
lest one partner accuse the other of cheating and acquiring HSV. There are times when herpes
virus is actively shed in the vaginal or seminal secretions without the development of visible
vesicles on the skin, and this accounts for some of the silent HSV transmissions.
This also has important implications for pregnant women with the history of genital HSV.
Medical providers need to be extremely careful that no hidden active disease is
present at the time of birthing since the newborn could acquire an illness known as
disseminated herpes and or herpes encephalitis. We're now going to turn our attention to the
last STD in the pyramid, human papillomavirus or HPV. As you will recall, HPV was introduced in
our introductory Hila story. HPV is a ubiquitous virus with an estimated 20 million individuals
in the U.S. currently infected and 6 million newly infected annually. The HPV prevalence among girls
and women is 27% overall, but it has its highest prevalence of 45% from ages 14 to 26. Even 1%
of men have genital warts caused by the virus. The prevalence gradually declines with increasing
age since 90% of new HPV infections actually regress over 6 to 18 months.
Most HPV infections are not only asymptomatic, but they're too small to be clinically noticeable.
Externally, however, infections can be visible as warts. The most important concern about HPV,
however, is that it is implicated in more than 99% of cervical cancers. Persistent infection is a
prerequisite for progression to cervical cancer. There are a large variety of subtypes of HPV,
but there are only a limited number of them that are associated with cancer,
and these are the types that are targeted in vaccination. Cervical cancer is one of the top
10 causes of female cancer mortality. The HPV DNA can assert itself in the DNA of the host cell.
HPV has the potential to cause oncogenes, which leads to the host cell developing malignant
characteristics. You might be surprised to know that HPV is responsible for 5% of all cancers
in the world, not just cervical cancer, including throat and anal cancer in both men and women.
Let's talk about testing. The main reason women have to have a pap smear of the cervix performed
approximately every three years is to screen for cervical cancer. Now, there are more new and
sophisticated molecular diagnostic tests to look for the higher risk variants of HPV that are
associated with cancer's transformation, and these may eventually replace the pap smear.
There are over 100 types of HPV and 13 types that can cause cervical cancer.
About 70% of the cervical cancer cases are caused by genotypes 16 and 18,
while 90% of genital warts are caused by genotypes 6 and 11. The HPV 18 virus that
Henrietta Lax had was one of the 13 that caused cervical cancer, but it wasn't until 1984 that
this strain of HPV was actually discovered. In 2006, the FDA approved an HPV vaccine for use
in females ages 9 to 26. This vaccine offered protection for infection from HPV genotypes
6, 11, 16, and 18, which caused the most incidences of cervical cancer and genital warts.
A second HPV vaccine was also approved in 2009, but contains only the genotypes 16 and 18.
No matter which vaccine is chosen, the vaccines are immunogenic for the creation of antibodies
to protect against chronic HPV infection, and immediately is thought to last for about 10 years,
and at the present time, no booster vaccination is recommended.
Importantly, the vaccine needs to be administered before exposure to HPV infections,
since there is no protection from HPV disease for infections acquired before vaccination.
National organizations are targeting girls ages 11 to 12 years old, but also recommend
vaccination of women ages 13 to 26, since this age group is still at risk.
Naturally, this youthful age of vaccination has generated some ethical controversy.
Some parents are likely to object to giving the vaccine against an STD
before the child was sexually active, and conservative religious groups strongly opposed
the mandate arguing it would condone premarital sex and undermine parental rights.
In spite of these potential objections, the vaccine committees have also recommended that
boys and young men also receive the vaccine. This is based on the hypothesis that vaccination
would contribute to reduced HPV prevalence among men and therefore reduce transmission to their
sexual partners. So, today we've learned about infections below the waist, especially the many
nuances of urinary tract infections. We've also explored the sometimes complex and controversial
of sexually transmitted diseases. Next time, we'll take you behind the scenes at the hospital
to what is perceived as a pristine and sterile environment, but is really bustling with all
kinds of germs that have the potential to make you and your loved ones sick. See you next time.
