Let's start today's lecture with an unusual story of a viral disease transmitted from
animals to humans. Zoonoses is defined as any disease or infection that is naturally
transmittable from animals with a backbone to humans. In 2003, there was a multi-state
outbreak of an unusual and rare illness known as monkeypox in six Midwestern states with
71 cases reported. Monkeypox is a virus related to the smallpox virus, but normally is only
seen in Africa. An extensive epidemiological investigation eventually revealed that it was
brought to the United States in a shipment of 800 prairie dogs from Africa. During boat shipment,
the prairie dogs were contaminated with the monkeypox virus by being in contact with giant
Gambian rats from Ghana, which harbor the virus, but who were not ill. The prairie dogs had asymptomatic
viral infection, but in turn passed the monkeypox virus on to vulnerable humans. Does this sound
like a science fiction movie? Since the monkeypox skin lesions resemble smallpox, this created a
chaotic and scary scenario for the health departments. Importation of exotic animals and wild animals
harvested for commercial pet trade, many of them illegal, have been associated with a wide array
of outbreaks of infectious diseases in humans. The cover story of an issue of National Geographic
magazine was entitled Wild Pets, the debate over owning exotic animals. Well, no one died
from the monkeypox outbreak, but a ban was put in force immediately, which prohibits the importation
of African rodents. Human health around the world today includes more and more exotic disease names
like MERS and SARS, as well as flu viruses with names like bird and swine flu. Diseases are jumping
from animals to humans at a faster pace than before. Now, why are new diseases so prevalent,
and how are these exotic diseases being transmitted to us from animals? The phenomenon has been around
for centuries, and over 200 diseases have been identified as zoonotic. In fact, up to 70% of
all infectious diseases originate from wildlife. In this lecture, we're going to discuss
why transmissions of diseases is occurring more frequently, the methods of transmission,
the potential for human harm, and what is being done to prevent and contain these diseases.
Now, let's return to a more common zoonotic situation. It's important to know that infectious
diseases aren't always spread just by exotic animals, but at times by our pets at home
and other common animals. So, first, what about companion animals? When we talk about companion
animals, we think mostly of dogs and cats, but we should also include other caged animals in the home.
Dogs and cats can also become the vectors of disease if they have contact with wild animals,
potentially spreading germs to humans. For example, one day while playing with our two
samoyed dogs in the yard, we noticed one had disappeared from sight. We looked anxiously
around, and within a few minutes, a dog happily trotted back into the yard with a very large
woodchuck in its mouth. Fortunately, he obeyed the drop-it command, and the woodchuck scurried
back to the woods, leaving both of them unharmed. This happened again a few days later with our
other dog, who proudly carried over a baby opossum that was infringing on its territory.
Which diseases do these two scenarios have in common for transmitting illness from
wildlife to humans? Well, we might be at risk of contracting the rabies virus from the woodchuck
or the opossum, or another zoonotic bacterial infection known as tularemia from handling a woodchuck.
Let's take this opportunity to learn more about rabies. The rabies virus has a bullet-shaped
configuration. After a bite or even a scratch by an infected animal, the virus could enter the body
through the skin. If the wound goes unnoticed, which might occur with scratches, the virus next
establishes itself in the local nerves where the injury occurred. Over the course of the next
weeks or months, the virus is able to travel insidiously from the skin nerves to deeper
nerves in the body. Now, immediate disinfection of the wound and rabies immune globulin injected
into the wound confers passive immunity and their crucial measures for prevention.
There is also a six-week rabies vaccination program that must follow.
Once local neurological symptoms develop, such as burning pain at the site and tingling of the
nerves, the disease is almost uniformly fatal. As the virus spreads deeper into the body to the
central nervous system, fatal inflammation of the brain and spinal cord develops. There are no
reliable treatments available, but there is one success story. In 2004, a 15-year-old girl from
Wisconsin was bitten by a bat at a church service. She did not seek medical treatment. She exhibited
abnormal neurological behavior over the next four weeks with fluctuating consciousness, slurred
speech, and bizarre behavior. A diagnosis of rabies was established with a tissue biopsy.
She was placed in a drug-induced coma and physicians treated her with a cocktail of
four antiviral drugs. This protocol had never been tried before and was basically a
Hail Mary attempt at saving the girl. But she went on to make a miraculous, though not complete,
recovery. At the time, she was the only person known to have survived rabies without receiving
preventative vaccinations. The treatment was called the, quote, Milwaukee protocol and has
been used several other times since then, sometimes with success, but also with many failures.
Well, now back to my family dogs. An unvaccinated dog or cat bitten by a woodchuck or an opossum
could contract rabies and then could bite, scratch, or even lick a cut on my arm,
making me vulnerable to rabies as well. Fortunately, our strict adherence to rabies
vaccination in the United States has made transmission of rabies from domestic animals
extremely rare. Nevertheless, today in several third world countries that you might visit,
rabies may be transmitted from domestic animals since they are often unvaccinated.
In the U.S., more than 90% of rabies comes from wildlife, but especially bats. Other animals
that harbor rabies include raccoons, skunks, and foxes. Around 40,000 people in the U.S. every
year get rabies shots after exposure to wild animals and the estimated cost of receiving
these vaccinations is more than $300 million. So please try to avoid the temptation to feed
or handle wild animals. But if you are bitten or scratched by a susceptible animal, wash the
wound with soap and water and get health care attention quickly for post-exposure prevention.
Try to have the domestic or wild animal captured by appropriately trained personnel.
Then notify the County Health Department so the animal can either be sacrificed and tested
for rabies or observed for rabies symptoms. Animals that have rabies usually exhibit strange,
bizarre behavior patterns, especially a fear of water. If the animal is quarantined for 10 days
without symptoms, additional rabies vaccinations can be avoided. Rabies is a preventable disease
with the use of vaccines. Now, for wild animals, one of the means of vaccination is by using oral
rabies, baits, with a marshmallow flavor. The Wildlife Service Program targets raccoons, coyotes,
and foxes and is being used throughout the United States, Canada, and Europe.
There are other zoonotic diseases related to dogs and cats that are also important.
In the U.S., there are over 69 million dogs and 74 million cats, so it's important to consider
infectious disease risks. Let's take a further look at two cat-transmittable diseases.
Cat-scratch disease is a bacterial disease by a germ called bartonella hencelea. Most people
with cat scratch illness have been bitten or scratched by a cat. They usually develop a mild
infection near the injury site. Lymph nodes become swollen and fever and flu-like symptoms can occur
for several days. Surprisingly, up to 40% of cats asymptomatically carry this germ, especially kittens.
You would expect that once diagnosed, treatment with antibiotics would be successful.
However, antibiotics have a limited role in modifying this illness, although fortunately,
the outcomes are rarely serious. Toxoplasmosis is another zoonosis transmitted by cats.
Have you ever seen little children playing with barn cats? You probably never stop to think
about any associated dangers. Cats can become infected after eating infected tissue of rodents
or less commonly cattle. Infectious cyst forms are shed by cats and the humans become infected
through accidental contact with feline fecal material. Based on blood sample testing,
only 9% of the U.S. population has been exposed to toxoplasmosis, but in other areas of the world,
the rate is as high as 50%. Surprisingly, most human infections, like cats, are actually asymptomatic.
Other times, generalized whole-body lymph node enlargement with flu-like symptoms can occur.
In pregnancy, if a mother becomes acutely infected, the parasite can be transmitted across the mother's
placenta to the fetus. Newborns can be born with blindness or mental disability. The main takeaway
point from this scenario is that pregnant women should not be scooping litter boxes, should not
get a new kitten while pregnant, and should not really be playing with stray cats.
Well, what about other small pets? Did you know that reptiles and amphibians, like turtles,
lizards, frogs, can carry harmful salmonella bacteria that can cause intestinal illness?
In 2013, there was an eight-state outbreak of human salmonella linked to small turtles.
As you might expect, most victims were under age five and owned a benign-looking little pet turtle.
The infections can not only come from handling turtles, but also from the water or containers
where they are living. Using gloves for cleaning the environments of pets is essential,
as well as hand washing after handling them. These pets are probably not appropriate for
children under five who still put their hands frequently in their mouths. Around Easter,
there are various farms and pet stores showing off cute baby chicks. Alas, I'm here to warn you
of yet another opportunity for your family to become ill. Birds, baby chicks, and ducks are also
the source of infectious diseases, including salmonella. I'd like to tell you a true story about
my oldest daughter, who was very excited to live in a funky part of Denver on an urban farm.
There were several dogs, chickens, and roosters that ran freely amongst the dense garden.
This seemed like a nice natural enclave. However, chickens in this environment can
contract a parasite known as coxidia. Coxidia can be spread through chicken excrement,
especially around feeders. This can be transmitted to humans and cause diarrhea.
One of the growing problems with urban farms highlighted in a Wall Street Journal article
is that regular veterinarians are not usually experienced with chickens and don't know how to
properly diagnose or treat them. So one of my daughter's chickens became sick and unresponsive,
and that evening she made the mistake of watching the movie Contagion. If you haven't seen the movie,
it shows the worldwide spread of virus-borne illness that was a combination of a pig and
bat virus. This resulted in a very late night phone call from her. She asked about the chance of
contracting a weird bird flu or other exotic disease from her sick chicken, which she imagined
might have avian flu or even something worse. The Centers for Disease Control, or CDC,
has issued an alert that the surge in small urban farms is providing the perfect environment
for an outbreak of Salmonella. As people bring chickens into their home, they are letting them
walk on tables and countertops and contaminating the home environment. The scenario is not
necessarily mainstream America, but it's increasingly common. In 2012, the CDC monitored
eight outbreaks of Salmonella linked to backyard poultry flocks. The bottom line is,
choose your pets wisely. Resist the urge at Easter time to get a child under five a baby chick,
and make sure the classroom teacher with the iguana is also teaching good hand-washing techniques.
And consider the age, environment, and health of all the people who might be in contact with the
pets. The best thing that you can do is to educate yourselves and children about potential
health hazards of owning pets and implement strict hand-washing practices.
Other diseases may be transmitted from petting zoos, regular zoos, or farms. Many of us have
taken our children or grandchildren to places like this long before they were hand sanitizers
or even hand-washing facilities. I remember my kids petting and holding the barn cats
in a petting farm, complete with unpasteurized apple cider. What was I thinking? Petting zoo
animals, as you now might expect, can shed a variety of germs without the animals appearing ill.
Most concerning are young children that may touch an animal, then put their hands in their mouse
or on food. Often pacifiers, sippy cups, and ice cream cones are in the hands or mouths of the
children at the petting zoo. There have been numerous outbreaks of disease at petting zoos,
including bacterial and parasitic germs that usually cause an intestinal illness.
Another potential cause of alarm for acute and furry pets relates to pet stores and rodents.
Most of us are not going to be buying giant Gambian rodents like our opening story, but pet rodents
such as hamsters and guinea pigs can asymptomatically carry a virus called lymphocytic
coriomeningitis virus. This can cause inflammation around the brain and spinal cord,
but fortunately human infections from pet rodents are rare.
We're already talking about wildlife animals in our rabies example, but what else should we keep
in mind when in the great outdoors? Hantavirus is a rare but serious disease that humans can
contract through contact with infected urine, saliva, or droppings from rodents. Dried urine
in dust particles carries viruses and sweeping the dust or pitching a tent in the infected area
can cause an inhalation of the virus. This can lead to a life-threatening bleeding disorder
of the lungs with no available treatment. Since this virus was first identified in the U.S. in 1993,
there have been at least 60 cases in California residents and over 600 cases nationally.
Approximately 12 percent of deer mice in parts of the Southwest are thought to be asymptomatic
carriers of hantavirus. The deer mouse is the primary reservoir responsible for most human cases,
including those in Yosemite National Park in 2012. There were 10 confirmed cases of
hantavirus in Yosemite and three of them were fatal. As you can imagine, it's very difficult to seal
every crevice in a tent that a mouse can get through. A portion of the park was temporarily closed
down. Of course, whenever you enter a wilderness area, there are always some risks. You can protect
yourself, however, by being mindful of where you pitch your tent, not sleeping on the ground,
keeping food in containers, being alert for evidence of mice in the area.
Next, we briefly mentioned the bacterium tularemia in my earlier story about dogs interacting
with woodchucks and opossums. But what I didn't tell you is the most common cause of acquiring
tularemia is from direct contact with the blood or flesh of wild rabbits, for example,
skinning and eating wild rabbit meat. Tularemia skin disease in humans is similar to cat scratch
disease, but more severe. Another way to contract tularemia is by inhaling contaminated aerosolized
bacteria generated during the skinning of animals. Since the tularemia bacterium has a
high infectivity potential, it can cause a deadly pneumonia. Since it can be spread easily through
the air, there is a concern that it could become an effective bioterrorism agent.
Next, do you happen to be a venison lover or a deer hunter? Another emerging disease of wildlife
is chronic wasting disease or CWD. CWD is a contagious animal neurological disease
affecting deer, elk and moose. It is caused by transmission of a prion associated protein.
Now these proteins are not even alive, nor do they have nucleic acid building blocks of DNA
or RNA. They cause a spongy degeneration of the brain resulting in wasting, abnormal behavior
and death in animals. The disease is transmittable among animals through saliva and blood and also
from contaminated pastures. There is no treatment. But the big question that you are probably wondering
about is what happens if I eat a piece of venison that is infected with CWD? Well, scientists don't
know the answer to this yet. If you're a hunter, you can have your local wildlife lab test your
deer for CWD. A clinical diagnosis relies on special testing of the brain for prion proteins.
But another prion associated disease has caused a degenerative neurological disorder
in humans, bovine, spongiform and cephalopathy. This illness was first discovered in England
in the mid 1990s with several dozen citizens dying from eating contaminated beef.
Cooking meat does not destroy the prions nor reduce the risk of disease acquisition.
The risk of transmission of CWD to humans is generally thought to be low, which is good news.
Nevertheless, I confess to not being a venison eater.
Well, now let's talk about diseases of farm animals. We consume many farm animal products like
pasteurized milk and cheese. Recently goat cheese, which is frequently under pasteurized,
has appeared regularly in gourmet dishes or on tapas plates. The CDC deems drinking raw milk
as one of the riskiest behaviors for the acquisition of foodborne illness. This is because
of the range of germs in raw milk, which includes E. coli, salmonella, chigella,
camplemacter, and listeria to name a few. These are usually killed by pasteurization.
I must recommend that pregnant women avoid raw milk and other raw or soft cheeses. Listeria
bacteria acquired during pregnancy can lead to brain inflammation for the mom and spontaneous
abortions of the baby. Another bacterium, brucella, most commonly affects cattle, pigs, sheep, and
and goats by causing an unintended late-term animal abortion. Sometimes transmitted to humans
through milk and cheese from an infected animal, brucellosis causes fever and a body-wide illness
that can be life-threatening. The United States has maintained a federal program
for the eradication of brucella from domestic livestock for many years. I'm happy to report
that the U.S. is very near its goal of being brucellosis-free. Since 2001, for the first time,
we've reached a point of having no cattle herds quarantined. However, there have been rare cases
detected in buffalo herds since then. According to the U.S. Dairy Association,
cattle and bison in infected geographic areas are recommended for brucella vaccination.
The vaccine is a live, weakened bacterium. Note that imported milk and cheeses have
caused cases of brucellosis in the United States. Next, let's talk about Q or query fever,
named for the original disease with an unknown cause, first discovered in Queensland, Australia,
in 1935. It is a worldwide disease caused by an unusual germ known as coxiella burnetti.
This is neither a virus nor a bacterium. Cattle, sheep, and goats are the primary reservoirs.
Organisms are excreted in low numbers in milk, urine, and the excrement of infected animals.
But the transmission potential of this germ is especially high during animal birthing when the
germ can be aerosolized and humans get infected by inhaling contaminated barnyard dust. Very few
organisms are required to cause infection. Veterinarians, farmers, and slaughterhouse workers
are particularly at risk. In spite of its deadly potential, most human infection is actually
asymptomatic. 20% of farmers in the United States show serological or blood evidence
of exposure to this germ, but don't remember being ill. When humans do become sick,
they usually have pneumonia, but the germ has the potential to spread to all body systems
and cause life-threatening infections. So, how are we handling the burden of human and animal
transmission of infectious diseases? Since the 1800s, scientists have noted the similarity in
disease processes among animals and humans, but human and animal medicine were practiced separately
until the late 20th century, until links in the epidemiology and abnormal physiology of diseases
were recognized to be common. In the present time, there is an important collaborative worldwide
effort by environmental scientists, human physicians, and veterinarians to prevent,
control, and eradicate infectious diseases, and to improve the health of all species.
It's called the One Health Initiative. We are now able to appreciate the potential for repetitive
patterns of infections to occur among animals, their environments, and human-animal contexts.
This paradigm for global health also recognizes that most new human infectious diseases
will emerge from animal reservoirs. Deliberate human environmental changes,
whether due to road or dam construction, or cutting down rainforests around the world,
or human settlement, has led to increased contact between people, domestic animals, and wildlife.
This can affect the ecological balance of the species. In these situations, new habitats for
viruses, parasites, and their host vectors can provide opportunities for exchange and transmission
of disease. This has the potential to negatively impact the health of each species.
We have already witnessed this scenario with malaria, Ebola, and HIV. The One Health Initiative
will help provide essential information in anticipating and controlling future infectious
disease outbreaks, epidemics, and even the next worldwide pandemic. So for now, I hope you've
enjoyed learning about zoonoses. My goal is not to make you totally paranoid about handling a baby
chick or scooping a litter box, but instead to make you aware of the many opportunities to
contract infections and ways to protect yourself. My best parting advice when having contact with
animals is to improve your diligence of hand washing by rubbing your hands together with soap and
water for at least 20 seconds, and make sure your children do so as well. Next time, we'll move away
from animals as transmitters of disease to arachnids in the form of ticks as vectors of disease.
These small ectoparasites have emerged in force and have now created a new public health crisis.
Stay tuned.
