Before delving into today's lecture on the nuances of vaccinations, I want to tell you
a true personal story about the importance of vaccines.
It's about a vaccine that was used in 1992 in response to an outbreak of bacterial meningitis
on college campuses.
My wife and I had just moved to Champaign, Urbana, where the main campus of the University
of Illinois is located.
In the middle of influenza season in February of 1992, in a span of 72 hours, two university
students presented with severe flu-like symptoms.
However, one unusual feature of their illness in presentation was a strange rash on different
parts of their body.
This was not typical for routine influenza.
Alarm bells went off regarding the possibility of a devastating bacterial infection known
as meningococcemia.
Unfortunately, both students who had previously been completely healthy succumbed to their
illness within 48 hours in spite of maximal medical support.
And over the next 16 months, a total of 9 students in town would be stricken with meningococcal
bacterial disease.
Fortunately, after the first two deaths, there was increased community awareness of the signs
and symptoms of this condition.
In conjunction with the Centers for Disease Control, or CDC, an epidemiological study
was undertaken to look for the source of the deadly germ.
The discovery of a common link, a campus bar, had advanced medical knowledge about this
deadly bacterial disease.
The investigation results, which I co-authored, were published in the American Journal of
Epidemiology.
It concluded that all students who contracted diseases had the same strain of meningococcus,
serogroup C. All frequented the same bar, and they spent an average of 12 hours a week
in bars.
Yes, you heard me, 12 hours, compared with the control group of students who averaged
two hours a week.
Now, NYS is common since it is carried by 15% of the student population in their nose
or throat passages, without causing illness.
There is ample medical evidence suggesting that crowded dormitory and bar conditions
have made it easier to communicate the disease.
Patrons are exposed to coughing, sneezing, and other germ-spreading actions.
Another possibility is the consumption of alcohol or cigarettes may make it easier for
the germ to pass across the mucous membranes of the throat and then enter the bloodstream.
Well, why am I using this case as an introduction to our lecture on vaccinations and immunization?
Because this is an important example of vaccines and their ability to prevent devastating illnesses
and even death.
With germs, this dangerous disease can quickly spread within hours of their first symptoms
and can cause organ failure and bacterial meningitis.
In 1992, as a result of collaboration with the CDC, 18,000 students were vaccinated at
the university with the sugar or polysaccharide meningococcal vaccine.
Subsequently, the vaccination campaign continued over the next three years as well.
The effectiveness of the vaccination was demonstrated when no additional cases occurred after the
mass vaccination for over four years.
After this, and after several other outbreaks on college campuses, the CDC and immunization
committees started routinely recommending meningococcal vaccine for first-year college
students nationwide.
And this was eventually extended to teenagers as well.
Well, today we'll be talking about how vaccines are developed, vaccine types, and the substantial
impact that vaccines have on health in the United States and abroad.
Edward Jenner, at the turn of the 19th century, ingeniously created the smallpox vaccine that
used cowpox, a cousin of smallpox, to protect against the disease, but not cause serious
illness.
There was skepticism in early America about the efficacy of the vaccine.
So the Board of Health of Boston, founded in 1779 and chaired by no other than Paul Revere,
formulated a clinical trial of the vaccine to prove or disprove its effectiveness.
While they put 15 boys into a room, two of whom were unvaccinated, and the other 13 were
vaccinated, they were all exposed to the smallpox virus.
The two unvaccinated boys, not unexpectedly, became ill, but did not die, and the other
13 remained healthy.
This was the first controlled human trial that convinced the public that the vaccine
really worked and was safe, although this experiment might generate some ethical discussions
today.
The smallpox vaccine is no longer a cowpox derivative.
Instead, in the late 19th century, a new live vaccine derived from a similar virus,
the vaccinia virus, replaced cowpox.
It starts giving protection against smallpox a few days after it's given, and it provides
immunity for at least three to five years, and longer if booster shots are given.
The relatively quick immune response would be important for a rapid protection in response
to a smallpox bioterrorism event.
Therefore, the U.S. military still receives this vaccine, and the vaccine is also suggested
for, quote, first responders in case of a bioterrorism attack.
So, how are vaccines developed?
Vaccine development has been a long, complex process, and sometimes lasts a decade or more,
and involves a combination of public and private resources.
It's worthwhile to discuss this process a bit more, since vaccines are developed, tested
and regulated in a manner very similar to antibiotics.
This includes oversight by the Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, in collaboration with
the CDC's Immunization Safety Office.
Just to give you a quick overview, the exploratory stage usually lasts two to four years, and
consists of basic laboratory research.
Vaccines identify natural or synthetic antigen proteins as targets.
Preclinical activities involve the use of cultures and animals to assess the safety
and may be carried out in mice and monkeys.
Now, many vaccines never get beyond this point, and if they do, the sponsor submits an application
for an investigational new drug to the FDA.
If approved, it goes through three stages of rigorous testing, including clinical studies
with human subjects in small, then larger, then larger groups.
Of course, the safety is tested as well as the efficacy.
And if successful, it's usually approved.
In order to encourage vaccine development in the United States, our government removed
liability responsibility from pharmaceutical developers for approved vaccines.
The U.S. has a national vaccine injury compensation program for anyone injured by a vaccine.
Now, after hearing about this deliberate process, we can contrast this with the Ebola vaccine
prototypes that were rushed into production and tested after showing some protective effect
in monkeys.
When the death rate of a disease is 50 percent and there are no treatments, how quickly the
rules can be amended?
What is the process of vaccine development?
In order to mass produce vaccines, viruses and bacteria have to be grown in large quantities.
They also have to be meticulously produced to ensure consistent results.
Now, bacteria can be grown in liquid growth media and they multiply rapidly.
Viruses are more difficult to grow since they have to use living cells.
Viruses are grown in either immature embryonic eggs or embryonic tissues or primitive cell
cultures.
Another boost for the vaccine movement occurred in 1941 when rubella virus was found to cause
fetal abnormalities in pregnant women.
An Australian ophthalmologist noted that pregnant women who contracted rubella transmitted
cataract eye disease to their fetuses.
The risk of rubella in pregnancy then expanded.
Viruses with mothers infected with rubella had congenital heart conditions, deafness
and mental retardation.
This conveyed an urgent need to develop a rubella vaccine.
Four groups of scientists managed to attenuate or weaken the live rubella virus, three from
primary animal cells and one from human cells.
The rubella vaccine was the first vaccine created with the use of human cell lines by
virologist Stanley Plotkin.
Plotkin grew the virus through cell lines 25 times at lower than normal body temperatures
of 86 degrees in order to weaken the virus so it would no longer be infectious.
Rather, it was just strong enough to provoke an immune response.
Now interestingly, these three animal cell vaccines were approved in 1970 in the United
States and the human vaccine was only approved in Europe.
Evidently, there was a bias against the use of human cells for fear of contamination.
But eventually, the human vaccine not only replaced the animal cell line vaccines but
Plotkin's vaccine is still used today in the MMR vaccine given to children today.
Vaccines can be made in several different ways.
First, using live viruses, but weak enough not to cause disease, as we talked about with
rubella.
Secondly, using inactivated, killed bacteria or viruses, such as polio vaccines in the
United States, and most influenza vaccines.
Thirdly, using inactivated toxins known as toxoids of bacterial germs such as diphtheria
and tetanus.
And fourth, using a portion of the germ coating, for example, the sugar coating of pneumococcus.
You're probably wondering why we need to use four different types of vaccines.
Well, it's because different microorganisms have more ideal targets to maximize our body's
immune response.
For example, although we have been working for an HIV vaccine for more than a decade,
the ideal target for vaccination has yet to be identified.
How do we decide which type of vaccine to use for which disease?
The live, attenuated vaccine, as we described for the rubella virus, is too weak to cause
significant illness, but strong enough to provoke an immune response that protects against
future infection.
Inactivated or killed vaccines are made by inactivating a pathogen, typically using
heat or chemicals such as formaldehyde.
This destroys the pathogen's ability to replicate, but keeps it intact so it can still be recognized.
But don't worry, we're not injecting anyone with formaldehyde.
This type of vaccine is most likely to require a booster because it does not duplicate the
normal infectious process in humans.
Immunizations are different because the diseases they cause are not from a bacteria themselves,
but from a toxin produced by the bacteria.
Immunizations can be made by inactivating the toxin using chemicals or heat.
Both subunit and conjugate vaccines contain only pieces of the pathogens they protect
against.
Inactivated vaccines, however, are made using pieces from the outer coating of bacteria
that are chemically linked to a carrier protein, and then the combination is used as a vaccine.
The carrier protein is often chosen to maximize the human immune response to the entire complex,
not just the bacterial coating.
Essentially, we are tricking our own immune system into a maximum response.
You might be wondering why influenza has both a killed and a live vaccine.
The first vaccines available were killed, but there has been progress with both live
vaccines and, quote, high dose killed vaccines.
The high dose influenza vaccine is now the vaccine of choice for adults over the age
of 65.
Now which one is better?
In general, live vaccines mimic the actual infectious process better than inactivated
vaccines and thereby result in a stronger and longer immune response.
Hence, it's been recommended that children ages 2 through 8 get the live influenza vaccines.
They may even transfer the live vaccine to others, enhancing a concept known as herd immunity.
Now herd immunity describes the number of people in a community that must be vaccinated
in order for the entire community to be protected.
Typically, this is between 80 to 95 percent, depending upon the particular disease.
This is called the herd immunity threshold, but this also means that 5 to 20 percent of
the population, if not vaccinated, are essentially freeloaders on the rest of society.
If the high threshold is maintained, the non-vaccinated may not get ill.
But if the threshold falls too low, these non-vaccinates may contract the illness and
spread it to others.
You can be reassured that if there is a major disease outbreak, such as whooping cough
and you and your children have been vaccinated, you will not be the victims.
It's the unvaccinated who are at risk of contracting the disease.
Let's look at a couple of examples where the thresholds were lowered by choice.
In Stockholm in the 1860s, smallpox outbreaks had been contained, so the population became
lackadaisical about being vaccinated.
In 1872, a majority of the population refused vaccination for smallpox, and the vaccination
rates fell to below 40 percent, which was below the herd threshold.
A major smallpox epidemic occurred just two years later.
A more recent example occurred in the 1990s when more than 150,000 Russians fell ill from
diphtheria, resulting in more than 6,000 deaths.
In order for you to make an informed decision for yourself and your family about vaccines,
I want to give you some examples of the public health implications for declining or skipping
vaccinations.
I keep coming back to measles, mumps, and whooping cough because at the time of this
course development, there are almost daily reports of small geographic outbreaks in the
United States and elsewhere in the world, and they will likely continue to occur.
These are childhood diseases that were eradicated or nearly eradicated.
For example, in early 2014, there were measles outbreaks in five states.
In California alone, there were 49 confirmed cases.
In one instance, an unvaccinated boy who was traveling in Europe with his family contracted
measles on vacation.
Upon his return, he unknowingly exposed over 800 people with 11 unvaccinated children getting
the disease, and three of them were babies.
This of course is not an isolated incident since global travel presents risks for catching
infectious diseases that have not been contained elsewhere.
In 2011, California had more than 2,000 whooping cough cases and 10 infant deaths.
Only one of the 10 infants had received a first dose of the vaccine.
As a result of waning adult immunity to whooping cough, the U.S. Advisory Immunization Task
Force subsequently changed their recommendation to include one extra dose of vaccine in adults
over the age of 65, as some of these infant deaths were tragically linked to infected
grandparents.
This is now being facilitated with a combination tetanus booster known as T-D-A-P.
Well, what about the anti-vaccination movement?
Even back in the mid-1800s, vaccines were deemed compulsory in Britain.
There were severe punishments for not being vaccinated, including fines and imprisonment
since they recognized that everyone's health was interconnected.
While some people had strong feelings about this and said this was a violation of their
civil liberties, 50 years later, the law was amended to allow for conscientious objections.
There has been much chatter in the press about the recent anti-vaccination movement.
Let's address some of the concerns of the anti-vaccinationists.
Some people say, I had chickenpox, measles, and mumps as a kid, and I came through it
just fine.
Well, we do know that natural infections can have a negative influence on childhood development
and can cause complications or even death.
For example, about one in four young children with whooping cough develop complications like
pneumonia or even stop breathing.
Children with chickenpox can develop an infection of the brain called encephalitis, and others
have developed deadly toxic shock syndrome from their hundreds of pox wounds and bacterial
superinfections compared to none from the vaccine.
Some people say, I'm afraid vaccines will cause autism or other disorders because they
contain mercury.
Coincidentally, autism emerged around the timing of the current vaccination schedule
for the one-year-old, so the occurrence can be misleading.
Numerous vaccines have been given to babies over the first year when developmental changes
occur.
If something happens around this time, often the vaccine is blamed.
Certain vaccines contain ingredients like formaldehyde, phenol, or mercury, but only
in minute concentrations and always below a health threshold.
Formaldehyde's purpose is to kill the vaccine's virus, ensuring its safety.
Opium hydroxide enhances the immune response, and phenol acts as a preservative, which is
especially important when vaccines are being sent overseas and need to maintain their stability
for a long period of time.
Well, what about thimerosal?
This is a mercury-containing ingredient that was used in many vaccines to prevent the
growth of bacteria.
It's no longer used in the United States in any routine child vaccines.
In fact, though, no scientific studies have found a connection between autism and thimerosal
in vaccines.
Believe it or not, the largest case-control study of the link between autism and vaccination
showed no direct cause-and-effect relationship.
This controversy was compounded over the last decade by a researcher named Andrew Wakefield,
who fraudulently published results in 1998 in Britain's prestigious medical journal
The Lancet, stating that there was an association between the two.
His original publication included findings with blatant conflict of interest.
Once the author was being paid by a law firm to publish his paper, allegedly the law firm
was planning to sue vaccine manufacturers and create a vaccine scare.
Dr. Wakefield admitted to the fraud, but the quote, damage from the years of his work being
considered gospel truth is significant.
For example, the panic resulted in the drop of vaccinations for MMR to 80% in Britain,
leading to a sharp rise in measles since then.
In the United States in 2014, measles rose to the highest level since 1997, concurrently
with lowered numbers of vaccinations.
Another concern for some individuals is, for vaccines made with live viruses, there is
a chance you can acquire the diseases that the viral vaccination was meant to protect.
It's true that certain vaccines can cause mild symptoms of the disease itself, an example
being varicella or chickenpox, which contains an attenuated form of the live virus.
So mildpox rashes may occur in about 5% of the vaccinees.
Another example is the live oral polio vaccine used before 1998, which contained a live virus
resulting in some cases of actual polio.
This vaccine has now been replaced by the killed virus in the United States, although
some issues remain with live vaccine campaigns worldwide.
Next, some parents feel there are too many vaccines in the first 6 months.
They are worried that they cause overloads in the baby's immune systems.
The current recommended vaccine schedule could include up to 23 shots by the time children
are 2 years old, and as many as 6 shots at a single doctor's visit.
So it's not surprising that people are concerned.
But doctors believe that children have an enormous capacity to respond safely to challenges
to their immune system.
For measles, 95% of children have to be immunized in order to prevent disease from spreading,
which is a relatively high herd immunity goal.
The consequences of contracting mumps or measles can include impaired fertility due to testicular
infection in young men who contract mumps, and about 1 in 20 children who contract measles
develop a serious viral pneumonia.
And measles can also cause encephalitis, which can lead to permanent brain damage.
Let's address another concern.
People say that some vaccines are not 100% effective and also don't give lifelong protection,
so the risk of vaccination outweighs the benefits.
Some vaccinations like chickenpox and hepatitis A are thought to grant lifetime immunity.
It's true that with other vaccinations, protection may only last 5 to 10 years, and the flu shot
only covers you for one year since the influenza virus strains are different every year and
a new vaccine must be developed.
Does this mean you shouldn't get the flu vaccine?
Well, part of the decision whether or not to get vaccinated depends upon your individual
response to illness, for example, how strong your immune system is.
For example, when I get a respiratory illness, I get over it quickly, usually in a few days.
But if I manage to pass it on to my wife, she is usually sick for 10 days in spite of
the fact that both of us would be considered as having normal immune systems.
Nevertheless, we both decide every year that we'll get the flu shot.
I can't afford to miss work, and I can't afford to pass a virus on to my patients.
People who are elderly or chronically ill are particularly at risk for the debilitating
symptoms or even death from the flu.
In the U.S., influenza can kill as many as 50,000 people per year.
The influenza vaccination, however, is sometimes less than 100% effective, depending on your
age and your health, and the strain of the virus that's circulating.
Its efficacy is believed to be between 50 and 90%.
The vaccine is usually less effective at older ages and those with compromised immune systems.
But the high-strength flu vaccine has already shown promise for improved protection.
Also, flu vaccines now contain four strains of the virus, not three.
Well, vaccination requirements are likely to continue to get tougher in the future.
Influenza vaccination is already uniformly recommended for all children ages six months
and older.
Working parents who don't have their children vaccinated may now be faced with another hurdle.
Influenza vaccination is now being required for preschool and daycare in most states.
Legislation has just been passed in the first stages of Congress that will require a physician's
note for families declining vaccinations.
It would need to state that the physician had counseled the parents regarding the consequences
of non-vaccination.
And the time has come, at least at most local levels, when many health care institutions
have made influenza vaccinations a mandatory condition for providing health care to the
general public.
What should you do regarding concerns about vaccinations as an adult?
As I mentioned, vaccination recommendations are usually in a state of flux.
Make sure you review your vaccine history with your health care provider at any medical
visit, not just your routine physical, especially these items.
A tetanus and diphtheria booster every 10 years.
Under age 50, at least one booster should contain the whooping cough component.
You don't have to wait to age 65 for this vaccination.
If you haven't gotten the full vaccination series as a child, you should review that
with your doctor, especially if you're regularly around babies or the elderly.
If you're 60 or older, get information on the shingles vaccine.
When over 65, there are two choices of pneumonia vaccines now.
And if you're traveling, make sure you check with your travel medicine clinic.
In closing, a fundamental principle for vaccination is, where there is sufficient vaccination,
there is minimal risk of vaccine-preventable disease.
Or stated slightly differently, there is a definitive cause-and-effect relationship
between vaccination and its effect on the emergence of disease in individuals and populations.
We'll learn more next time about how our bodies respond to vaccines as well as infectious
germs as we explore how our immune system responds to these challenges.
See you then.
