To begin today's lecture, I'm going to ask you to pause for a moment and think about
where we would be without inventors and innovators that brought to life inventions and discoveries
that are the foundations of modern medicine.
We're going to start in the present by taking a peak at rapid molecular diagnostic testing
for infectious diseases and how this has been revolutionizing medicine.
In the 1800s, infectious disease germs were grown either in a liquid or a solid culture
media that supported their growth.
Diseases were stained with a gram stain to assist their identification and classification.
Some disease conditions were highly suspicious of being caused by an infectious agent, but
the hypothesis could not be proven.
Laboratory studies were performed that were supportive but not completely diagnostic.
One such condition is known as Whipple's disease.
This is a rare chronic disease that involves multiple organ systems.
Afflicted patients have fever and generalized lymph node enlargement, but especially disturbances
of the intestinal system causing diarrhea and extensive weight loss.
The causative bacterium is now known as trophherma Whipplei.
In 1943, this unidentified germ was suspected to be a bacterium when pathology stains identified
what appeared to be a bacillus or rod form.
In 1961, using the electron microscope, rod-shaped structures resembling bacteria were also seen
in patients' tissue specimens, providing additional support this illness might be infectious.
In 1992, scientists used newly developed molecular diagnostic technique known as the polymerase
chain reaction, abbreviated PCR to multiply the ribonucleic acid or RNA from the ribosomes
of 10 Whipple's disease patients.
The PCR tests showed identical positive result for all 10 patients, but not for the patients
with other diseases.
In 2000, scientists finally were able to isolate and grow trophherma Whipplei from affected
patient tissues using special primitive tissue cells known as fibroblasts.
PCR technology was the first important infectious disease molecular diagnostic technique.
The PCR process begins with a few fragments of DNA or RNA and repeatedly multiplies the
DNA or RNA until there are millions of copies of a specific genetic sequence.
This leads to a unique identification of a specific germ, either bacterial, viral, fungal
or other.
In 1983, scientists Kerry Mullis invented this technique in collaboration with another
scientist Michael Smith.
This led to them sharing the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1993.
Today, PCR and other rapid diagnostic infectious disease tests are rapidly expanding.
Another is called Maldi, which stands for Matrix Assisted Laser Disorption and Ionization,
where biomolecules are vaporized and then the unique vapor profile of the germ is identified.
These two tests continue to advance the diagnosis and treatment of infectious diseases to new
almost unlimited boundaries.
For example, our standard diagnostic tests for influenza and whooping cough are now performed
by PCR technology.
Well, I started in the present, but now let's turn back the hands of time in order to appreciate
some of the most important individuals and their contributions to infectious diseases
and how their scientific breakthroughs may have changed the course of history.
Let's start with Hippocrates, the father of modern medicine.
What do we know about him?
Well, we know he was a Greek physician born on the island of Kos.
He founded the Hippocratic School of Medicine, a college that at the time revolutionized
the understanding of medicine in ancient Greece.
He taught medical students at the school, especially the skills necessary to make detailed
clinical observations, diagnoses and prognoses.
In Greek medicine, doctors believe that a person's makeup predisposed them to certain
diseases.
The human constitution could be broken down into four humors or vital fluids.
The humors were known as the four universal elements, earth, air, fire and water.
In this ancient scheme, earth is linked to black bile, a sediment of blood which is important
to metabolism, bone formation and clotting.
Fire is linked to phlegm, representing clear fluids like plasma, saliva, mucus, which lubricates
and nourishes the body.
Fire is linked to yellow bile, which is produced by the liver and stored in the gallbladder.
And yellow bile affects the intestinal system and digestive processing of fats and cholesterol.
And finally, air, which was linked to red blood cells and is thought to be the purest
humor since it's essential for vitality and growth.
If one of these humors was out of balance, it was believed that it led to illness and
disease.
In addition, each humor was associated with a particular season and psychological temperament.
For example, air in blood was linked to spring, which was associated with optimism and well-being.
Hippocrates believed that physical health and individual personalities were part of
your whole health, not bad observation for 2,000 years ago.
The negative characteristics of the humors were thought to come out only when there was
an excess or aggravated by imbalances.
An excess in one humor led to the practice of bloodletting that was supposed to expel
harmful surpluses of one of the humors.
This theory also led to the practice of using medicinal leeches.
And believe it or not, bloodletting was actually practiced until the late 1800s.
One of Hippocrates' most important contributions to infectious diseases was his recognition
that specific diseases come from unique causes.
Greek society at the time believed that disease was a result of miasma or bad air, or was
due to superstitions or works of the gods as punishments.
Since the government forbade dissection of bodies, it was difficult to accurately study
disease.
Hippocrates' beliefs went against those of the government, and he was actually imprisoned
for 20 years.
Fortunately, during his imprisonment, he was able to write an important medical book such
as the Complicated Body, which set the course for the future of modern medicine.
Well, let's jump ahead now a couple of millennia.
What else was happening in the world that affected infectious disease?
Knowledge after Hippocrates.
Let's look more closely at some of the important scientists and their discoveries.
As early as the 13th century, special lenses that were magnified images formed a very primitive
microscope.
One of the most important events during the 1600s was the development of the modern light
microscope to identify specific germs.
Combining lenses to attempt to increase magnification have been attempted in the 1600s, but they
were difficult to build and can only enhance objects by 20 to 30 fold.
It was Anton von Leuenhoek who was considered to be the father of microbiology.
Ironically, he started as an apprentice in a dry goods store where magnifying glasses
were used to count threads and cloth to determine quality.
He taught himself to grind and polish the lenses.
He continued to construct microscopes, and later he used them to discover bacteria in
1674.
He was the first to identify single celled organisms as well as muscle fibers and blood
flow through capillaries.
Another scientist, Robert Hook, is designated as the English father of microscopy and is
famous for his book Micrographia that contains fantastic copper plate engravings of his findings,
including details of a fly's eye.
He was the first to use the term cell to describe what he saw, looking at slices of cork through
his microscope that were divided into individual spaces.
He confirmed Leuenhoek's discoveries and improved upon the microscope's design.
These two men contributed much to the emerging field of microbiology.
Now, let's move into the 18th century, a time when cures for and prevention of
diseases were desperately needed.
Let's take a look back in time to a historically important disease, the virus known as smallpox,
whose death rate rivaled the plague.
One of modern medicine's true triumphs has been smallpox eradication.
Now, the cause of smallpox is variolevirus, which is thought to have evolved from animals
in the central African rainforests thousands of years ago.
The virus became established in humans in the Nile River Valley approximately 10,000 years ago.
Evidence of smallpox was even found in mummified bodies of the Egyptian pharaohs that dates back
10,000 BC.
Later, the disease became widespread in Europe and Asia, killing nearly half a million Europeans
yearly at the turn of the 19th century, with over 80% of them being children.
Now, smallpox enters the body through infectious particles contacting the mucus membranes,
or via the respiratory system via inhalation of droplets.
From its initial site of invasion, it spreads locally to lymph nodes,
then jumps into the bloodstream, where it can invade other major organs.
The pox on the skin are the visual clue of the internal disease.
Now, later, colonization of the, quote, new world carried smallpox to the Americas.
Ironically, it played a major role in the conquest of Mexico and Peru,
as well as the European settlement of North America.
Many of the indigenous Native American populations whose immune systems had never
been exposed to the virus couldn't fight off the disease, and they died.
As late as the 20th century, there were millions of worldwide deaths from smallpox.
The WHO, or World Health Organization, estimated that as recently as 1967,
15 million people contracted smallpox, and 2 million died of it that year.
In order to reduce the risk of smallpox, an ingenious preventive inoculation called
variolation was devised as early as the 10th century in Asia.
Individuals were deliberately injected with smallpox by blowing dried smallpox scabs
into the nose of the individual. These individuals usually contracted a mild form of smallpox,
leaving them immune. Only 1-2% of these patients died, compared to 30% mortality
for others dying from smallpox without the variolation prevention.
In 1700, this procedure was being widely used in India, Africa, and the Ottoman Empire,
but smallpox was still a serious threat with no treatment. Therefore, developing a more
scientific vaccination for prevention was a world healthcare priority.
A more traditional type of smallpox immunization was developed in 1796 by English physician Edward
Jenner. Even though he was unaware that smallpox was caused by a virus, he discovered that immunity
to smallpox could be conveyed by inoculating a person with material from a cowpox lesion,
a pox virus from the same family. He called the material, quote, vaccine, from the root word,
quote, vacca, which is Latin for cow, and hence the origin of the term vaccination.
Now, the vaccine is no longer a cowpox derivative like Jenner's. Instead, it's a live vaccine
derived from a similar pox virus, the vaccinia virus. The last case of smallpox in the U.S.
was in 1949, but in 1967, the disease was still endemic in 31 countries. Since the, quote, incubation
period for smallpox is relatively long, seven to 17 days, and quarantine can be effective in
halting transmission, smallpox was a prime candidate for worldwide eradication.
The WHO worked hard over the next 10 years to eradicate the disease, and the last naturally
occurring smallpox case in the world was in Somalia in 1977. In 1980, the world was declared
free of smallpox. Now, these eradication programs demonstrate how international collaboration
and cooperation can have a significant worldly benefit, except for laboratory stockpiles smallpox
has been eliminated. However, there is heightened concern since 9-11 that the virus might be used
as an agent of bioterrorism and contingency plans are in place by governments around the world.
Another major infectious disease that has reared its ugly head in Europe beginning in the 1800s
was cholera, a bacterial disease. It was presumed to have originated from the Ganges River Delta in
India in the 1500s, but it followed world trade routes in the 1800s, killing thousands of people
in its wake. The symptoms of violent vomiting and diarrhea caused severe dehydration.
And cholera victims often died within hours. Fluid losses led to low blood pressures and
alterations in sodium and potassium content to the blood, leading to cases of sudden cardiac death.
During six worldwide pandemics caused by cholera, millions died across all continents.
The seventh wave of a pandemic began in South Asia in 1961, spread to Africa in 1971,
then to Central and South America in 1991. Now, cholera is now present at low levels in many
countries and still kills thousands yearly. An effective vaccine may have finally been developed
and is undergoing continued evaluation. Fortunately today, death from cholera can usually
be prevented by early recognition, taking rehydration salts and massive fluid replacement,
assuming these resources are available. An interesting twist of fate was that a
cholera outbreak occurred in Haiti in 2012 after unsanitary conditions from Hurricane Sandy.
It did not have its origin in Haiti, however. The origin was traced using bacterial molecular
fingerprinting techniques to relief workers volunteering from Southeast Asia, but that's
a story for another time. In the 1800s, since the miasma theory of infection was still prevalent,
many believed that cholera was not contagious since it didn't seem to easily spread from person to
person in those with close contact. So, how do we finally find out that cholera was contagious?
Well, there was a major outbreak of cholera in London in 1832, which lasted for 22 years,
and it was referred to as the period of, quote, the great stink.
As in many urban cities at the time, London was overcrowded and lacking in good sanitation.
A perfect breeding ground for diseases. In August of 1854, a major outbreak of cholera
struck the Soho District of London. An English physician, Dr. John Snow, who did not believe
in miasma theory, hypothesized the disease was actually being spread through contaminated drinking
water. Without an efficient sewage system, all waste was being dumped into the Thames River,
the source of London's drinking water. Snow showed that two water companies were taking water
from sewage polluted sections of the Thames and delivering the water to homes that had higher
incidences of cholera. Snow went door to door asking questions, and he finally hypothesized
that the source of the disease might be the public water pump on Broad Street in Soho.
As a budding epidemiologist, Snow had discerned that the death rates were proportional to the
proximity to this particular pump. When he managed, in the face of much skepticism,
to convince the city council to remove the pump handle, the rate of cholera dramatically improved.
One epidemiological fact that didn't fit with Snow's theory was the observation that monks
living in the monastery in Soho were not stricken with cholera. Why? Well, it turns out
they were surprisingly beer drinkers. The preparation of beer involved the fermentation
process with high temperatures that rendered the beer disinfected from the cholera bacteria.
So, Snow's use of statistical methods and his case study can be regarded as the founding event
in the world of epidemiology. Epidemiology is the branch of medicine that deals with the incidence,
distribution, and possible control of diseases and other health factors related.
The history of epidemiology is closely linked to the history of infectious diseases.
Robert Koch, a bacteriologist in London, finally identified the specific cholera germ,
cholerobacillus in 1883. Koch was one of the most influential bacteriologists in history.
He also proved that microorganisms caused anthrax and tuberculosis.
His work was important in proving that germ theory of disease and that diseases were contagious.
And Koch also revolutionized medical epidemiology by his four postulates,
which have set the standard for the proof of infectivity up until the present day.
The postulates dictate that a microbe must be found in an animal or person with a disease,
isolated and grown in culture, injected into a healthy experimental animal,
producing the disease in question, and then recovered from the experimentally diseased animal
and shown to be the same pathogen as the original.
All of the work of these scientists in the years through the 1800s was essential for what would
happen next, the development of germ theory. These men brought medicine out of the dark ages
of infectious diseases. It was no longer my asthma that caused diseases like smallpox and cholera.
Thanks to Koch, Jenner, and eventually Louis Pasteur, germ theory began to be refined in the
mid-1800s. It stated that specific microorganisms are the cause for specific diseases. This theory
radically changed the practice of medicine. Scientific proof of this theory was provided
by the laboratory research of Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch.
Together, their work spurred research that helped identify dangerous germs and develop
life-saving treatments. Louis Pasteur tragically lost three children to typhoid fever,
also likely spurring his interest in germ theory. You're probably unaware, though,
that some of Pasteur's first work was actually with wine growers in France trying to ascertain the
cause for grape blight. Now, Emperor Napoleon III had requested Pasteur's assistance because
something was destroying the grapes in the vineyards and causing economic losses.
Pasteur demonstrated that wine diseases are caused by microorganisms that can be killed by
heating the wine to 55 degrees centigrade for several minutes. Thus, the process was named
pasteurization. He also discovered that beer and milk spoiled because of the rapid multiplication
of microbes in these liquids, and this could be prevented through pasteurization. For his work,
he was subsequently granted a U.S. patent, quote, for improvement in brewing beer and ale
pasteurization, unquote. In 1885, Pasteur went on to discover vaccines for chicken cholera and
thracs and even the first rabies virus vaccine. Since rabies is one of the most uniformly fatal
infectious diseases, the rabies vaccine has significant implication. Rabies was actually
too small to be seen under any microscope at the time, leading to the concept of smaller organisms,
which we know as viruses. Perhaps the best thing Pasteur did to revolutionize scientific methodology
was to pass on his knowledge to his disciples by creating the Pasteur Institute, encouraging
freedom of creative imagination and rigorous scientific experimentation. He told others
they should be interested in laboratories because he predicted that humanity would experiment there,
and our knowledge base would vastly increase. Pasteur worked together with another scientist
Charles Chamberlain to invent a device that would enhance the discovery of viruses. In 1884,
the Chamberlain Pasteur filter was developed, which completely removed all bacteria from a liquid
suspension. By doing this, scientists were able to prove that an unknown infectious substance
still remained in the liquid passed through the smallest caliper filters. They hence
speculated the existence of viruses even before they were seen. Sounds similar to our Whipple's
disease case. In 1898, the first virus was discovered by a Dutch scientist, and it was a tobacco
mosaic virus. By squeezing liquid from an infected tobacco plant and injecting that liquid into a
healthy plant, the disease could be transmitted, even though it was put through a special
Chamberlain Pasteur filter. Pasteur also implemented methods to improve sanitation,
such as cleaning physicians' hands and instruments, and he was a national hero and given a state funeral.
This brings us to the 20th century and the need for new, more powerful types of microscope,
the electron microscope. The invention of this microscope in the 1930s enabled scientists to
finally see viruses, which are about 100 times smaller than bacteria. Now, how did the microscope
work? Well, electrons, which are subatomic particles, are accelerated in a vacuum space
at short wavelengths. These electrons are directed to a target to form an image on an
electron-sensitive photographic plate. Magnification can occur up to one million times the original
object. Now, unfortunately, no living specimen can survive the high vacuum pressure and bombardment
of electrons, so the microscope cannot show the organism's dynamic life process.
Our understanding of infectious diseases was really starting to improve.
Many of the worst diseases were found to be caused by specific bacterial or viral pathogens,
and vaccines were produced against some of the organisms, and by the 1950s,
antibiotics would begin to cure others. But in the 1960s and 1970s, scientists were
potentially becoming overly optimistic about the future conquest of infectious diseases.
In 1951, Nobel Laureate in Physiology and Medicine, Frank McFarlane Burnett stated,
quote, the most likely forecast about the future of infectious disease
is that it will be very dull. The effective control of every important infectious disease
with the one outstanding exception of poliomyelitis is possible, end quote. Although the source of the
following quotation has never been definitively confirmed, in 1969, William H. Stewart, who was
the Surgeon General of the United States, allegedly said, quote, it's time to close the book on
infectious diseases, unquote. No one could foresee the dynamic nature of infectious diseases,
or the serial outbreaks of emerging new infections such as Legionnaires' disease,
Ebola hemorrhagic fever, flesh-eating streptococcal infections, and of course, HIV or the AIDS
epidemic. Now, we've talked here about major microscopic historical events, so I would like
to end this lecture with a glimpse of what we could have in the future getting microscopes in the hands
of those that need it most. Manu Prakash worked at Stanford University, where he and his students
developed a microscope out of simple materials, including a flat sheet of paper, a watch battery,
a light-emitting diode, and optical units that when folded together, much like origami, becomes a
tiny microscope. They created a cheap functional instrument with a magnification capacity of
up to 2,000 times, and this magnification is sufficient to identify parasites like malaria,
giardia, and mycobacterium tuberculosis. Imagine if clinics in developing countries
could have this tool to diagnose diseases. The invention is called the foldoscope,
and it costs less than one dollar to make. The microscopes were tested by 10,000 people
to gather information regarding best practices in use, and the foldoscopes have been deployed.
How far have we come since the days of the invention of the first microscopes?
In our next lecture, we will explore the miracle that began in the 1940s with the discovery and
the development of antibiotics. Ironically, we may be headed backwards towards the pre-antibiotic era,
so join me to hear this disturbing story of the rise and fall of antibiotics.
