It's time to discuss our guts, a miraculous system of food and nutrient processing, as
well as waste disposal that would stretch out over 30 feet.
Anatomically, it includes the esophagus, the stomach, the duodenum, all the way through
the small and large intestines.
When this system is running smoothly, it's like a well-oiled machine.
However, when viruses, bacteria, or parasites enter the intestines, it's a whole different
story.
You may be surprised to know that every year, one in six Americans gets sick from food poisoning,
which also means, in all likelihood, once every five to six years, you will be struck
down by a foodborne illness.
Several years ago, I gave an educational lecture at the equivalent of a five-star restaurant.
I always wondered if the attendees came because of the food, or they really wanted to hear
me speak.
Either way, the evening lecture was completed and all seemed to have gone well.
I remember having beef and mashed potatoes for dinner.
Approximately eight hours later, I awoke in the middle of the night with nausea, frequent
watery diarrhea, and developed a fever of 101 degrees.
I felt miserable.
Through the lecture coordinator, I later found out that there were five others who attended
the lecture who became ill within 12 hours.
A quick epidemiological survey of my colleagues revealed that each of them had consumed the
mashed potatoes.
What type of illness did I contract?
Well, I was most likely the victim of food poisoning.
Here are a handful of bacterial conditions that can cause the rapid onset of intestinal
illness less than 12 hours after food ingestion.
It's most likely that I had staphylococcal food poisoning.
And this was not an invasion of staphylococcal germs, but rather the ingestion of a preformed
toxin that is not destroyed by heat or rewarming of the food.
In preparing the food, one of the food workers likely had staphylococcal germs on their skin,
which accidentally dropped into the mashed potatoes.
There, the staphylococcal germs found a nice, warm environment with all the necessary nutrients
to replicate.
Other foods implicated in staphylococcal food poisoning include cream-filled pastries and
custards.
Now, no antibiotics are indicated for treatment, as the illness usually resolves within 24
hours.
So, even doctors can't escape food-borne illness.
Welcome to the world of gastrointestinal illness, or GI illness for short.
In this lecture, we'll explore food-borne illness, teresta, which is traveler's diarrhea,
the parasites, giardia and cryptosporidia, sushi, abdominal infections, and finally,
a horrible condition called clostridium difficile.
Now, food-borne illness has three major causes, bacteria, preformed toxins, and viruses.
But in 80% of the cases of food-borne illness, we don't know which of the three is the cause.
Simply because illness is so common, we can't investigate all the possibilities.
The foremost prominent symptoms for GI illness are various combinations of nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and abdominal pain.
To give you an idea of the national scope of the problem, according to the Centers for
Disease Control, or CDC, 48 million episodes, or 15% of all diarrhea in the United States
annually, is thought to be caused by food-borne illness.
This accounts for an estimated 128,000 hospitalizations and 3,000 deaths.
Also, before we get too deep into this lecture, let's remember the definition of the term
fecal oral route of transmission.
This means transmission by poor hand-washing and bathroom habits, or contaminated water sources.
Let's continue our discussion of food-borne illness.
If you have some combination of our four symptom complexes, you may have a food-borne illness.
All of these symptoms can also be seen in non-food-borne illness, for example, and appendicitis.
There are some key questions that will point in the correct diagnostic direction if food-borne
illness is suspected, such as, what have you eaten in the last 48 hours?
How soon after you ate did you feel ill?
People often ask me, how do you know if you're sick from something that you ate?
The general timeline of illness ranges from a few hours to a few days, so there is no
definitive answer.
But epidemiological clues need to be factored into the timeline.
When one of our four symptoms presents as the major symptom, it also helps us sort out
which might be causing the intestinal distress.
First, let's tackle vomiting.
As we saw with my illness, the sudden onset of vomiting in nausea is likely due to the
ingestion of a preformed toxin or chemical made by bacteria.
Since the toxin is preformed, there's no risk a person-to-person spread.
Nausea and vomiting interrupt the normal motility of the GI system.
There's actually a vomiting center called the Areopostrema located in the lower portion
of our brain.
Input from the GI nervous system, from noxious stimuli, is transmitted to this brain location.
Nausea is likely caused by an increased conscious awareness of activity in the vomit center.
Another bacterium, bacillus sirius, also produces a preformed toxin causing nausea and vomiting.
Bacillus is typically found in starchy foods such as rice.
And a typical scenario for bacillus food poisoning would be consuming leftover white
rice from a Chinese restaurant, either rice at the restaurant that was left over from
the previous day, or leftover rice that you placed in your refrigerator, then partially
warmed.
Neither refrigeration nor warming affects the toxin.
Both staph and bacillus food poisoning, the diagnosis is usually made on clinical grounds,
and it is without a lab or blood test, using these criteria, the right opportunity, the
right food, and the typical illness.
Nausea and vomiting are also the predominant symptoms of our friend the norovirus infection,
which is the most common infectious cause of gastrointestinal illness in the United States.
Next, let's examine diarrhea as the major symptom.
Diarrhea is defined as an increase in the frequency or volume of bowel movements that
are unformed.
All diarrhea has one abnormal physiological event in common, a mishandling of the absorption
of water, especially in the colon.
Other than norovirus, viral gastroenteritis accounts for another 30 to 40 percent of infectious
diarrhea in the United States.
One of the biggest culprits, again through the oral fecal route, is rotavirus.
rotavirus, which is unfamiliar to most of you, is the single most common cause of dehydrating
diarrhea, necessitating hospitalization in children under the age of two.
About three million cases of rotavirus infection occur annually in the United States, mostly
from food contamination.
The good news is that a childhood rotavirus vaccine has been shown to be effective in
the United States, reducing the burden of this illness by more than 50 percent.
But worldwide, it's astonishing to hear the statistics of children dying from diarrhea.
The toll is nearly 800,000 yearly for children under the age of five, which makes diarrhea
the second biggest killer of children in the world.
While diarrhea doesn't sound like something that should be life-threatening for children
who become dehydrated, it could be the difference between life and death, especially in impoverished
areas of the world.
The body needs a certain minimum volume of fluid in the arteries and the veins to keep
the circulatory system pumping, and an adequate blood pressure to support the function of
major organs, such as the heart, brain, and kidneys.
Also, diarrhea can cause a major loss of key blood ingredients called electrolytes, especially
sodium and potassium.
If the sodium and or potassium levels of the blood become too low, muscles don't function
well, and there's a potential for abnormal heart rhythms and even sudden death.
Rotavirus vaccination in underdeveloped countries is a key goal of the World Health Organization.
Well, let's switch from viruses to take a look at parasites.
Parasites are nasty organisms that use your body for food and shelter.
Giardia lamblia is the most common parasitic infection of humans.
It's also the most frequently isolated intestinal parasite in the United States, with about 20,000
cases annually.
However, there are millions of cases of Giardiasis worldwide annually.
Giardia symptoms appear a week or two after ingestion of contaminated water.
One additional notable symptom that may point to Giardia as a cause is flatulence.
The western and northeastern mountain regions of the United States are areas where there's
a high risk for acquiring Giardia.
Environmental factors such as the closeness of the water supply to the habitat of certain
animal species, especially beavers, predispose the area to infestation with Giardia.
In both infected humans and animals, both Giardia cysts and trophozoites are excreted
and the cyst forms are infectious.
Custs are even resistant to chlorination and can persist for months in soil or water.
So if you're camping and you're counting on iodine tablets to clear the drinking water
you got from a nearby stream, be aware that iodine is not totally protective.
Water for drinking while camping should be boiled for a minute or filtered with an approved
water filtration device.
Since Giardia is common in childhood daycare centers, infection control precautions are
needed there to prevent transmission.
We're going to continue our discussion of parasites as a cause for diarrhea, but first
here's an unusual story.
In the spring of 1993 there was a widespread outbreak of acute watery diarrhea among the
residents of Milwaukee.
For two weeks no one could figure out what was causing it.
Checks for viruses and bacteria came up with nothing.
Doctors suggested that patients drink more water and stay hydrated.
Well, the pharmacies actually ran out of medications for diarrhea control.
Then at a fancy Sunday brunch people noticed that the ice sculptures were actually cloudy
and the investigation revealed there was increased turbidity of the water in one of the city's
treatment plants and the plant was shut down.
Evidence of a different parasite, Cryptosporidium was identified in the Milwaukee water system
during these weeks.
It was estimated that 400,000 people had watery diarrhea attributable to this outbreak.
There were 100 deaths in the elderly and other immune compromised individuals.
The 1993 Milwaukee Cryptosporidiosis outbreak was the largest waterborne disease outbreak
in history.
The CDC showed that this outbreak was caused by Cryptosporidium that passed through the
water filtration system of one of the city's water treatment plants.
Two miles upstream from the plant, water had been taken in from Lake Michigan that likely
contained farming runoff water from cattle who have this parasite.
The exact source of the epidemic was never officially identified.
Another camping heads up, Cryptosporidium is also common in all surface water and is not
killed by iodine.
What happens when the diarrhea involves invasion of the intestines?
The presence of white blood cells under the microscope and or blood in valve movements
defines an inflammatory diarrhea since the germ is invading the intestinal lining.
This shows up in valve movements as the passage of diarrhea with blood or mucus, the presence
of moderate or severe abdominal pain, and fever.
There is a wide array of harmful bacteria that cause these symptoms.
We are all at risk for invasive foodborne poisoning from the four most common bacteria
– Salmonella, Campylobacter, Shigella, and a special type of E. coli.
Symptoms of all these bacterial diseases may begin as early as 12 hours, but more typically
48 to 72 hours after ingestion of contaminated food.
The bacteria need time to multiply and produce their toxins.
Up to 2 million cases of Salmonella infection occur in the United States every year, with
98% of the contamination caused by bacteria linked to animal sources of food.
In spite of the warnings to my children during every holiday season when they bake cookies,
they are simply unable to stop themselves from eating raw cookie dough.
Eggs at the grocery store appear to have intact shells, but approximately one in a thousand
have cracks and contain Salmonella.
When these eggs are used raw, such as in dressing for season of salad or eggs sunny side up
with runny yolks, Salmonella can contaminate the food.
Virtually every other month, there is a CDC epidemiology report involving a Salmonella
outbreak.
For example, in 1994, a quarter of a million Americans developed intestinal illness after
eating ice cream from a national brand where Salmonella contaminated the ice cream processing
trucks.
Campylobacter has recently become the most common bacterial cause of intestinal illness
in the United States, around 3 million annual cases in the United States, with 1% of the
population affected.
70-80% of retail poultry is contaminated by Campylobacter, thus making cross-contamination
very hazardous in food preparation.
Using good handling techniques for poultry, such as not preparing your salad on the same
cutting board as your chicken, will help reduce these risks.
Well, what about another invasive food-borne bacteria, E. coli 015787.
Now, most E. coli in our intestines will not make us sick.
Why is this special E. coli important for us to know about?
Well, over the past 20 years, there have been several multi-state outbreaks of this special
E. coli.
E. coli 015787 serotype was first identified as a cause of illness in 1982, during an outbreak
of severe bloody diarrhea traced to contaminated hamburgers.
This germ has since emerged as an important cause of both bloody diarrhea and an illness
known as hemolytic uremic syndrome, or HUS.
HUS is the most common cause of acute kidney failure in children, and can occasionally
result in childhood deaths.
In this outbreak, undercooking of hamburger patties likely played an important role.
Based on this outbreak, the FDA made recommendations to increase the internal temperature for
cooking hamburgers to 155 to 160 degrees Fahrenheit, and these recommendations remain
in place at the present time.
I'm sure you're familiar with warnings that are now required on restaurant menus that
say, but consumption of undercooked beef may increase your risk and chance of food-borne
illness.
Nevertheless, certain traditions in the United States go on, with nary a thought to the medical
implications involving ingesting raw meat.
Have you been to a Milwaukee wedding lately?
Cannibal sandwiches is an appetizer featuring raw lean ground beef served on cocktail bread.
This is a wedding and holiday tradition in some ethnic groups who refuse to let fear
dictate their appetizers.
Cannibal sandwiches have been a festive dish in the German, Polish, and other ethnic communities
in the Milwaukee area since the 19th century, and they were also tied to food-borne outbreaks
in Wisconsin in 1972, 1978, and 1994.
You are more likely familiar with a similar version, steak tartare, as the offending food.
This has lean ground beef seasoned with salt and pepper on a rye cocktail bread with sliced
raw onions on top.
Consume at your own risk.
Personally, I don't eat raw anything.
What other concerns about food are important to discuss?
Well, where our food is coming from these days is becoming more and more important.
I'm talking about globalization of our food supply.
Roughly 15% of all food consumed in the United States is imported.
Some consumers want different kinds of food and expect it to be available year-round.
This includes more than 80% of seafood and more than 50% of fresh produce.
Foods imported to the U.S. come from more than 200,000 foreign facilities in more than
200 different countries.
Many of these foreign food producing countries may lack food safety standards as strict as
those in place in the United States.
The rapid globalization of food production increases consumers' vulnerability as well
as by making any food outbreak much harder to trace.
For example, in 2008, there was an outbreak caused by contaminated hot peppers imported
from Mexico.
More than 1,000 people had documented illness and many others likely went under-reported.
In 2003, a massive outbreak of viral hepatitis A was linked to imported green onions from
Mexico.
And while we're speaking about Mexico and diarrhea, what better time to talk about
tarista?
Travel as diarrhea or tarista is the most common illness in persons traveling from developed
to developing regions of the world.
The concern is well-founded.
About 50% of travelers develop diarrhea.
Most episodes occur between 4 and 14 days after arrival.
Travel as diarrhea is nearly always benign and self-limited.
However, the dehydration can occur and may be more severe and pose more of a challenge
than the illness itself.
The reasons are similar to our discussion of rotavirus.
The most common germ is yet another species of E. coli, known as enterotoxogenic E. coli.
Travelers should also be aware that food items on airplanes are usually obtained at the city
of departure, so beware.
The treatment of travel as diarrhea includes three different approaches.
First, fluid replacement, meaning keep yourselves well-hydrated with bottle drinks, especially
if you can use rehydration salts that contain sodium and potassium.
Secondly, anti-motility agents, like ammonium or peptidismol, these agents can slow down
the volume of fluid loss by acting on the nerve receptors of the intestine, and sometimes
antibiotics if necessary, but not very commonly.
A few more comments about antibiotics.
They're usually prescribed under the guidance of a traveler's clinic.
They may be warranted for treatment in travelers who develop moderate to severe diarrhea.
However, it's important to know that medical help may be needed if you develop a high fever,
worsening abdominal pain, or bloody diarrhea while traveling.
Let's continue our discussion of GI illnesses by examining a popular food that may be risky.
Sushi has entered America's gourmet restaurant scene, and it's becoming more popular.
It started in the 1960s as the, quote, California roll, which contained crab and avocado, and
has branched out to numerous other delicacies.
Did you know that the word sushi actually refers to the sweetened, vinegarized rice
that the sushi is served on and not the raw fish itself?
In the U.S., the good news is that sushi eaters don't typically need to be concerned about
getting sick, since sushi restaurants take special steps in handling and preparing their
fish.
A required step involves freezing fish at temperatures of minus four degrees Fahrenheit
for seven days, or frozen at minus 31 degrees Fahrenheit for 15 hours, which will kill any
parasites.
But be aware that in other countries, these strict safety criteria may not be met, and
you may place yourself at risk of acquisition of parasites in raw fish.
Before we conclude today's lecture, there are a few common infectious diseases of the
intestal tract that I would like to briefly examine with you, appendicitis, diverticulitis,
and clostridium difficile.
Let's talk first about the world's most famous appendicitis.
A Life of Mountain Gorillas was recorded in detail by Diane Fosse.
As a young woman, she met Louis Leakey, the famous African anthropologist.
He invited her to study gorillas with him, and he also suggested jokingly that she have
her appendix removed as a precaution, since she would be working so far from medical help.
Allegedly, Leakey later sent a letter to her that he wasn't serious about her appendix,
but it was too late.
Fosse already had her appendix removed.
So what really is an appendicitis?
The appendix is a non-essential organ located in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen.
Blockage or obstruction of the opening of the appendix leads to bacteria being trapped
inside.
This leads to inflammation and infection, and right-sided lower abdominal pain.
Appendicitis in older individuals is usually more serious, because 60-90% are found to
be ruptured at the time of surgery.
Now what is diverticulitis?
In the distal colon, outpouchings known as diverticuli are common.
These diverticuli occur in approximately 30% of the population over the age of 45 and 60%
of those over the age of 70.
It's estimated that 10-20% of people with diverticuli will develop an infection when
bacteria get trapped similar to an appendicitis.
Ruptures can also occur.
Advertising symptoms are like an appendicitis, but on the left side.
However, unlike an appendicitis, diverticulitis can usually be managed conservatively with
antibiotics and without surgery.
However, if a perforation leads to a large abscess or the disease recurs frequently,
surgery may be necessary.
Both of these conditions occur because our own normally good bacteria end up in the wrong
place at the wrong time.
What happens, though, when our guts get overrun with bad bacteria?
Well, you could end up with clostridium difficile, often abbreviated C. diff.
C. diff is an anaerobic, gram-positive, spore-forming, toxin-producing germ.
Now listed by the CDC as one of the top emerging infectious disease threats, C. diff can be
the cause of antibiotic-associated colitis and can be life-threatening.
Now, antibiotic use is the most widely recognized and modifiable risk factor for this disease.
This is one reason that we don't want to overuse antibiotics unnecessarily.
Exposure to healthcare environments likely increases the risk for acquiring this germ.
What happens next to cause this disease?
Alteration of normal intestinal bacteria due to antibiotic therapy allows this germ to
overgrow, with patients having diarrhea of increasing intensity and severity.
C. diff is capable of elaborating toxins that bind to the surface of intestinal cells,
and this leads to inflammation, the formation of pus, and watery diarrhea.
Outside the colon, the germs can survive as spores which are resistant to destruction,
and once the spores are in the colon, they can convert to bacterial forms that produce
toxin.
Stramatic increases, at least a doubling in the incidence and severity of healthcare-associated
C. diff infections, have occurred since 2000, particularly in patients over the age of 65.
Even if the condition is successfully treated with special antibiotics, up to 25% of patients
may have recurrent symptoms weeks later, with 10% of these relapses having yet another
occurrence.
A new treatment for this condition is known as fecal microbiota transplantation.
It takes a healthy person's intestinal microbiota and transplants it into the afflicted patient,
hoping to repopulate the intestines with the appropriate bacteria to restore a healthy
state.
In some cases, it has turned patients around with multiple recurrences in a matter of hours,
after being extremely ill for weeks.
This procedure has an approximately 90% success rate.
Well, you can see that the infectious disease world of the gastrointestinal tract is a very
busy one, from foodborne disease, to viral and bacterial diarrhea, to inflammation of
major body organs, and finally to the emerging infectious disease, clostridium difficile.
In our next lecture, we'll talk about some severe respiratory and central nervous system
illnesses that may have deadly consequences.
See you then.
