And antibiotics have been around since the 1940s and are so commonplace these days.
So why have we taken a heightened interest now?
Well, unfortunately, we're running out of antibiotics to treat certain illnesses since antibiotic resistant germs are becoming much more common.
In a national report, it was estimated that bacteria resistant to all antibiotics resulted in 23,000 deaths and 2 million illnesses a year in the United States alone.
Let's begin our lecture by tracing the history of antibiotic development.
Next, we'll sketch out the mechanisms of action of the different classes of antibiotics.
I'll introduce you to the increasingly important concern about antibiotic resistance proclaimed by the World Health Organization, or WHO, and the U.S. government.
And lastly, you'll learn how you can contribute to more prudent use of antibiotics.
Let's start with a historical perspective on antibiotics.
Perhaps you've heard of the urban legend of the discovery of penicillin by Dr. Alexander Fleming, but you might be surprised to know that several efforts towards the development of antibiotics preceded Fleming's discovery by at least a couple of decades.
Once such effort occurred in 1888 when German scientists observed that the bacterium pseudomonas originosa produced a substance in the test tube known as pyocyanase.
Laboratory studies showed that pyocyanase killed dangerous bacteria like staphylococcus.
However, when it was tried in patients, it was unsuccessful and even toxic, but pyocyanase was used, however, for nearly 30 more years as a topical skin antibiotic.
In 1910, Paul Erlich, a German chemist, took a different approach.
He used a chemical compound called salversan, which is an arsenic derivative to treat syphilis.
The drug was toxic, but it represented the first partial success in syphilis treatment.
Now, scientists at the time were striving for a, quote, magic bullet, unquote, that could rid the body of an infecting organism without harming the patient, a concept we still strive for today.
Dr. Fleming was working in London in the 1920s on a natural chemical from human tears that had antibacterial properties called lysozyme, which caused bacteria to fall apart.
This, too, never really succeeded as an antibiotic, but it did show that humans could produce a natural antibacterial substance.
In 1928, a strange twist of fate occurred.
After returning from vacation, Fleming noticed a petri dish with staphylococcal bacteria, whose growth had been inhibited by a mold growing in the adjacent area.
He eventually demonstrated that the mold was a penicillium fungus.
So, an unknown substance produced by the mold must have traveled across the agar plate to kill bacteria.
And this substance was henceforth named penicillin.
Now, the original dried plate still remains today in the archives of St. Mary's Hospital in London.
But it would still be another 10 to 15 years before full advantage could be taken of this discovery with penicillin's first human use in 1941.
Next, let me list for you the eight different classes of antibiotics that we're going to cover today.
Beta lactams, sulfonamides, aminoglycosides, chloramphenicol, tetracycline and arithromycin, trimethyprim, sulfamethoxisol, and the quinolones.
Next, let's learn about each of these individual categories.
You might be wondering, how does penicillin really work?
Penicillin is the antibiotic group known as the beta lactams named after their structure.
Beta lactams bind to proteins on the bacterial cell wall surface and then interfere with a bacterial enzyme that is involved in the cross-linkages among the outer layer of the bacterial cell wall.
By analogy, they interfere with placing the large cables on suspension bridges, thereby leading to a weakened structure that can easily collapse.
Now, sulfonamides are another class of antibiotics.
And in the 1930s, Gerhard Domach, a German professor, was in examining an assortment of chemical dyes for their possible antibiotic effect.
One man-may-die, called Protoncel, was active against mice infected with a streptococcal bacteria.
Now, sulfonamides work by disrupting the pathway that leads to the synthesis of DNA.
Folic acid is a building block needed for DNA synthesis, and it structurally resembles sulfonamides.
The two compounds compete to acquire an enzyme known as para-amino-benzoic acid, which is necessary for folate production and subsequently for DNA synthesis.
Derivatives of the sulfonamide drugs over the next few decades formed one of the key foundations for antimicrobial therapy and continue to be used today.
Sulfa even saved the life of Winston Churchill in 1943, when he developed pneumonia while traveling in North Africa.
Churchill said, quote, there is no doubt that pneumonia is a very different illness from what it was before this marvelous drug was discovered, unquote.
These sulfonamide drugs were the one class of antibiotics that were reliably available before the start of World War II, not even penicillin was.
As early as the 1940s, scientists hypothesized that millions of years of evolution favored the survival of bacteria that might produce substances which destroyed other harmful bacteria.
So this began several decades of what we know as soil microbiology.
Scientists literally went panning for bacteria that possessed antibacterial properties.
And in 1939, scientists working at the Rockefeller Institute discovered a bacterium in the soil, basillus brevis, which produced a compound that inhibited gram-positive bacteria.
This substance contained gramacide, which has antibacterial properties, but unfortunately, gramacide was also too toxic when given by mouth.
But similar to Fleming's pyocyanase, gramacide was used as a topical skin antibiotic.
And Elsie, the famous cow of the Borden Company, was one of the first patients to be successfully treated with gramacide.
While attending the 1939 World's Fair, Elsie developed mastitis, an infection of her udder tissues.
In the 1940s, fueled by the new excitement that was generated from sulfonamide and gramacide, there was a renewed interest in pursuing the development of penicillin.
Englishman Howard Flory and German-born Ernst Chain learned how to extract penicillin and produce it in sufficient amounts to test in animals.
Penicillin was subsequently released for human testing for those who were considered near-death, often with dramatically favorable results.
And Flory also managed to convince the United States government to support large-scale production.
His efforts were largely successful due to the needs of soldiers in World War II.
So, penicillin was made available in both intravenous and oral forms, and ironically, until the mid-1950s, it did not even require a prescription.
Now, Dr. Fleming actually warned in 1945 that the misuse of penicillin would lead to mutant-resistant bacteria.
By 1946, a study from London showed that 14% of staph aureus were already resistant to penicillin, and today, it's greater than 95%.
Now, I personally treated a World War II veteran who had a chronic staph infection of his shin bone from a shrapnel injury.
The infection would flare once every 10 years, and I went to see the veteran when his great-grandchild accidentally kicked him in the shin, reactivating the infection.
His strain was sensitive to penicillin, and I think it was an ancient staphococcal species from before the penicillin era.
You might also be surprised to hear that penicillin-resistant genes were found in bacteria before the discovery of penicillin.
Scientists have analyzed ancient DNA from 30,000-year-old permafrost sediments and identified genetic elements that encoded for resistance to beta-lactams and other antibiotics.
The results conclusively showed that antibiotic resistance is a natural phenomena that predates the modern selective pressure of antibiotic use.
The story of antibiotics would not be complete unless it included the discovery, in 1943, of streptomycin, the first drug used for tuberculosis, or TB treatment.
The bacterium that produced the streptomycin was found in a farmer's field.
Not only was streptomycin able to treat TB, but it was useful to cure gram-negative bacterial infections, which penicillin could not.
However, when streptomycin was used alone for TB, not unexpectedly resistance emerged.
And, damage by streptomycin to the kidneys prompted further development of an improved antibiotic, neomycin.
Both of these drugs belong to the class of antibiotics known as aminoglycosides.
They exert their mechanism of action by inhibiting protein synthesis.
They bind to the ribosomes of bacteria, and this causes an inaccurate reading of messenger RNA, so that proteins are synthesized erroneously.
More advanced aminoglycoside derivatives are still in use today.
Well, so far, the antibiotics discovered attacked either gram-positive or gram-negative bacteria, but not both.
In 1947, a Yale researcher discovered an antibiotic from the soil sample collected in a field in Caracas, Venezuela, and he named it chloramphenicol.
This was the first, quote, broad spectrum, unquote, antibiotic to exhibit activity against germs with different cell walls and different gram-stating characteristics.
Chloramphenicol was found to interrupt protein synthesis by interfering with the binding of messenger RNA at ribosomes, similar to aminoglycosides.
Now, if you were a child in the 1950s, it is likely that you were treated with this antibiotic.
However, you might be wondering why we don't hear about chloramphenicol in the present day.
It was a first-line drug for typhus and typhoid fever in the mid-1900s.
Unfortunately, a rare idiosyncratic side effect of total blood cell production shutdown occurred in a tiny percentage of treated patients, but this was enough to taint the use of chloramphenicol.
In 1948, another broad spectrum antibiotic named aureomycin was being studied.
This was a prototype drug for the class of drugs we know as tetracycline.
As the name implied, it has four circular rings.
Its mechanism of antibacterial action is blocking the attachment of transfer RNA again at the ribosomal site of protein synthesis.
With their broad spectrum of activity and rare side effects, tetracycline emerged as a major class of antibiotic that we still use today, second only to beta-lactam penicillins.
And I remember being treated with tetracycline as a teenager for acne prevention, still a common practice in the present day dermatology,
but under close re-examination due to concerns about antibiotic resistance.
Erythromycin is another antibiotic class used for nearly 50 years with a very similar mechanism of action to the tetracycline.
In 1964, another beta-lactam drug known as cephalosporins made their debut.
They are structurally similar to penicillin and disrupt the bacterial cell wall in a very similar manner.
They were discovered from extracts of a mold found in a sewer off the coast of Sardinia by an Italian microbiologist.
It took nearly two decades, however, to purify these antibiotics for clinical use.
Cephalexin, an oral antibiotic, made its debut in 1967 and is still one of the major first-line antibiotics in use today.
The intravenous form of Cephozolin is given to virtually every patient receiving antibiotic prophylaxis for surgical procedures today.
Through synthetic modification of a side chain of a six-member cephalosporin ring, additional broad-spectrum activity was achieved,
and these new cephalosporins are in widespread use today.
Importantly, cephalosporins resist the penicillinase enzyme, which originally made penicillin ineffective for the treatment of staph aureus infections.
Another synthetic protein known as methicillin was introduced in the early 1960s to overcome this same resistance enzyme.
Bacteria, however, not to be denied, would subsequently learn how to alter their affinity for penicillin and cephalosporin binding proteins on the surface of the cell membrane.
This was the harbinger for the emergence of methicillin-resistant staph aureus, or MRSA.
In the 1970s, trimethyprin was introduced as a synthetic antimicrobial.
A novel idea occurred to chemists that if they combined two antibiotics at different steps in the same crucial folate metabolic pathway,
the combined drugs would be more effective at interrupting DNA synthesis.
This resulted in trimethyprin himself a methoxisol, which is still one of the first-line antibiotics chosen for the treatment of bladder infections, and is also effective for MRSA.
The final class of antibiotics for discussion are also synthetic drugs derived from a compound known as nallidicic acid.
This prototype was used for the development of broad-spectrum class of drugs known as the quinolone antibiotics introduced in the 1980s.
The mechanism of action of the quinolone drugs is unique, as they bind to a crucial enzyme called DNA gyrase.
This enzyme is responsible for the unzipping of DNA during reproduction of bacteria.
Now, due to widespread use as a broad-spectrum, quote, kill everything antibiotic,
not surprisingly, resistance has emerged to the quinolone class.
Unfortunately, quinolones are also exploited for food and growth promotion in livestock animals,
also leading to resistance that has sometimes been transferred to humans.
With this background on antibiotic mechanisms, you might be wondering how bacteria develop antibiotic resistance.
We'll start by exploring the various mechanisms of resistance, then we'll discuss some ethical issues in prescribing antibiotics, and finally, we'll look towards the future.
So, let's say you're in the hospital with a severe leg infection.
You're allergic to penicillin, so you can't use that to fight the infection.
A culture has shown MRSA, so cephalosporins are out as well.
MRSA from the hospital is usually resistant to tetracyclins, sulfonamides, and quinolones.
What's left?
Well, fortunately for you, there are a few antibiotics left, but you're beginning to see the treatment dilemma.
For every mechanism of action of an antibiotic, we can virtually be assured that there's a mechanism of resistance.
When bacteria divide, they duplicate their DNA, proteins, and cell walls.
They also replicate at a rapid rate, and each time there's a division of cells, there's a chance for genetic mutations for any of these three cell products will occur.
The genetic mutation can occur at the level of genes or within the chromosomes, or in extra chromosomal genes that exist in the cytoplasm, known as plasmids.
There are ample opportunities for bacteria to share genetic material, including many genes that can encode for resistance.
Now, the mechanisms of bacterial resistance can be divided into four general categories.
Enzyme inactivation, altered bacterial membrane target sites, altered other target sites such as a ribosome,
and antibiotic efflux pumps.
Let's first take a look at the basic mechanism of resistance to Alexander Fleming's penicillin as an example of enzyme inactivation.
Resistant bacteria produce an enzyme that results in the disruption of the penicillin ring, hence rendering penicillin unable to structurally block cell wall synthesis.
For the second mechanism, let's go back to your hospitalization for the leg infection.
Due to alterations of the structure of the cell membrane penicillin binding protein target sites, the staphylococcus is now resistant to methicillin and cephalosporins, and hence it's called MRSA.
Altered penicillin binding proteins is also the main mechanism of resistance for streptococcus pneumoniae, the most common cause of bacterial pneumonia.
As an illustration of our third mechanism, streptococcus pneumoniae can also become resistant to antibiotics that act on the ribosomal protein synthesis target site.
If a methylchemistry group is added to the ribosome, antibiotics working at this site, such as erythromycin, may be unable to bind to the ribosome.
Sometimes there can be an alteration of the entire outer membrane structure that does not even allow the antibiotic to enter into the cell.
Now, Niseria gonorrhea, which causes a sexually transmitted disease, can show this resistance property.
Cell membranes also have holes called porins that will not allow cephalosporins to enter into the cell, and cephalosporin-resistant gonorrhea has been placed on the CDC list of urgent emerging bacterial resistance.
Fourth and finally, increasing the bacteria's capacity to actively pump antibiotics out of the cell before they're able to exert their antibiotic effect is seen with a wide assortment of bacteria.
To make matters worse, some bacteria possess multiple mechanisms of resistance simultaneously, resulting in resistance to several different classes of antibiotics, such as with our leg infection with MRSA.
This leads to bacteria known as multiply drug-resistant or extensively drug-resistant.
So, you can imagine having a urinary tract infection with E. coli bacteria that once was easily treatable with Trimethaprimsulpha and is now completely untreatable.
This is true for the, quote, New Delhi strain of E. coli that is slowly spreading around the world.
And in 2013, the Centers for Disease Control, or CDC, issued a summary report on the emerging crisis of antimicrobial resistance, including the names of bacteria on the watch list.
The top three bacteria on the resistance hot list included Clostridium difficile, which causes Sirius diarrhea, Ni-Syria gonorrhea, and drug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria, which produces a special enzyme called CRE against our newest antibiotics.
Other serious threats include resistance strains of MRSA, pneumococcus, salmonella, and tuberculosis.
And to further complicate our dilemma, the development of new antibiotics has stalled over the past two decades.
This includes the inability to discover new molecular targets in bacteria and the failure to find target drugs that exhibit antimicrobial properties.
Another disturbing problem is that there are disincentives to the pharmaceutical industry to develop drugs that are only taken for limited periods of time, which have limited financial incentive when compared with drugs for chronic illnesses such as hypertension or diabetes.
And since 1983, there has been a stunning decline in the number of antibiotics discovered.
But can we improve the use of current antibiotics with your help?
In particular, this means not requesting antibiotics from your doctor when they determine that they are unnecessary and ineffective, especially in cases of viral illness.
This is likely the most important action to slow the rate of drug-resistant microbes.
Let's take an example of the prescribing antibiotics for respiratory tract infections that include sinusitis, ear infections, sore throats, and chest colds.
Respiratory illness accounts for an overwhelming majority of outpatient antibiotic use.
Now, before I move forward, I would like you to make an educated guess as to what percent of the time antibiotics are prescribed by primary healthcare providers for these conditions.
Well, the answer is about 50% of the time.
We know that antibiotics don't work for viral illnesses, and there's increasing evidence-based medicine that ear and sinus conditions get better within 10 days with or without antibiotics.
Also, only 5% of adult sore throats are caused by streptococcus that requires antibiotics.
So, what percent of the time do you think antibiotics are really needed to be prescribed for respiratory condition?
It's somewhere between only 5% or 10%.
So, why is there such a discrepancy between prescribing habits and the actual need?
Well, there are factors in motion that can easily lead to antibiotic overprescribing.
From a patient's standpoint, they might have been treated with antibiotics in the past for the same condition and had the impression, correctly or not, that they're improved due to the antibiotic.
From a healthcare provider perspective, it takes time to explain to a patient why they might not need an antibiotic.
They also want to satisfy their patient's expectations out of concern that the same patient may go down the street to another provider that prescribes antibiotics.
The situation is only magnified by the acuity of the illness, meaning visits to urgent care centers and emergency departments are likely to have even more implicit pressure to yield an antibiotic prescription.
Now, our CDC has been aware of this patient and provider paradox for at least the past decade and initiated a campaign known as Get Smart to educate patients and families about the need, risk benefits, and side effects associated with antibiotic prescriptions.
It also provides educational tools for healthcare providers to make it easier for patients to understand why antibiotics might not be appropriate.
Use of antibiotics kills not only the intended bacteria, but also has collateral damage on good bacteria.
And this has made clostridium difficile the top urgent healthcare threat in the United States, since this illness is caused by an overgrowth of these bad bacteria in the colon.
From our society's perspective, we all have a vested interest in ensuring the antibiotics are only prescribed when necessary.
Now, let's shift our focus into the hospital setting. Again, what percentage of antibiotics prescribed in the hospital do you think are either unnecessary or incorrectly used?
Remarkably, the answer is no different than the outpatient setting, 50%.
Patients in the hospital, however, have little or no choice in the decision making process of whether they receive antibiotics or not.
So, who's going to protect the patients?
Well, a concept has evolved over the past decade known as antimicrobial stewardship.
It's intended to use antibiotics wisely and safely.
An antibiotic stewardship team is composed of pharmacists, infectious disease physicians and microbiologists who review antibiotic prescribing habits in the hospital for each individual patient, as well as overall antibiotic prescribing trends.
I've had the honor of directing the antimicrobial stewardship program for the University of Wisconsin for at least the last decade.
Another dimension in antibiotic resistance is the widespread use of antibiotics in food-producing animals, which amazingly accounts for nearly 80% of antibiotic use overall.
And more than 75% of this use is just for fattening the animals.
This use, especially with subtherapeutic antibiotic concentrations, contributes to the emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria in food-producing animals that can be transmitted to humans.
Fortunately, there are legislative efforts moving forward in the United States that bring the pharmaceutical manufacturers, the American Dairy Association, and health departments together to agree to limit the use of antibiotics in food-producing animals to medicinal purposes only.
To stimulate new antibiotic development, the Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, is also trying to motivate pharmaceutical companies to devote time and money to the research and development of new antibiotics, including passing the Generating Antibiotic Incentives Now Act.
The FDA can also designate a potentially new antibiotic as a fast-track antibiotic and grant it priority review.
In 2014, President Obama issued both an executive order and a U.S. national strategy to combat antibiotic-resistant bacteria, and this included establishing a task force for combating antibiotic-resistant bacteria,
requiring all federal health care programs to have antimicrobial stewardship, strengthening national surveillance and international collaboration efforts against resistant bacteria, and promoting the development of the next generation of antibiotics.
We've talked today about many antibiotic topics, including their discovery, their mechanisms of action in bacteria, how bacteria fight back with resistance, and how we individually can assume some responsibility for our own fate.
According to Nobel Laureate Joshua Letterberg, who discovered bacterial exchange of DNA among bacteria, quote, it's a race between their genes and our wits.
So by now you've been introduced to the grand scheme of infectious diseases, then bacteria and viruses and fungal diseases.
We've also reviewed infectious diseases from a historical perspective before exploring antibiotics.
Next time we'll be starting a new section which will take a look at some of the most pressing infectious disease issues of daily life at home, in school, at work, and are in our communities as a whole. See you then.
