We take a break if enough people want to stay
Yeah, I'll continue of course deputy to continue. Otherwise, we call the day at midnight, okay?
There's a really it's not it's not I mean, it's not a it's not a death march to the end of the subject, okay?
We can we can
And please do interrupt with lots of questions, okay, this is
Okay, let's start. All right, let's start
Okie-dokie, so let's now talk about
Glow on amplitudes and n equals 4 super angles
And we're gonna do a couple of things so now we're gonna talk about the kinematic space again
So we always begin by thinking about kinematic space
And
Now most naively the kinematic space is I have the momenta that are lambda lambda tildes
So a runs from one to n
If we're doing n equals 4 super angles
The amplitudes are a function of the lambda the lambda tilde as well as these grassman variables
Did Jake talk about these grassman variables?
Okay, so there are these grassman variables that sort of
unify the all the holicities into a
Grassman coherent state, okay, so
All right
Okay
Now already there's kind of an
There's a very early story here that I think Jake probably talked about which is that we can think about
So there's a story of the positive grassmanian
But here's a motivation for where the positive at least where the grassmanian comes from
Which is just thinking about the data, so let's say you give me the the data
For the lambda one through lambda n
Okay, so each one of these is a two vector so that would literally be like a one b one a two b two up to a n bn
And that's the most obvious way we think about the external data as n two vectors
right
But we can also think about this data as
Two n vectors we can think about it as two row vectors rather than n column vectors
And if we do that, so let's say here is one giant
vector a
another giant vector b in
This n-dimensional space
Okay
So that's another way of specifying that the data of lambda
Just these two giant vectors
Now let's say you go to a different Lorentz frame
Lorentz transformations act like SL2 right on lambda lambda tilde
So in a different Lorentz frame, I'll have some different vector a prime and b prime
But
There's something which is common what is invariant what's invariant is the two plane that's spanned by a and b
Right because in the new frame the a prime and b prime are just some linear combination of a and b
So while the vectors change the two plane that's spanned by them does not change
And so that's the Lorentz invariant information about the lambdas is just specifying this two plane and n dimensions
So that's already pretty cool
That's why Grusmanians have anything to do with anything. Okay, the external data of
Lambdas is given by a two plane and n dimensions
Where is this business about planes coming from why do we talk about these vector spaces planes?
Grusmanians all these things of linear algebra vector space. Where's all this coming from?
It's because of this slightly magical fact that the space-time symmetries in four dimensions are linear transformations
Okay, that the Lorentz symmetry is SL2 cross SL2
And that in fact if we generalize so the conformal symmetry is SL4
There are all these SLs right there all these linear transformations are the sort of clue that there are some underlying vector space linear
Algebra type structure going on
Okay
Anyway, I think Jake probably talked about this. So so that's the picture for the lambdas and there's a similar picture for the lambda tildes
So here's lambda here's lambda tilda
So here's lambda as a two plane lambda tilda as a two plane
And
I've drawn them this way because in fact they have to be orthogonal to each other and
Why do they have to be orthogonal? That's momentum conservation
Momentum conservation is saving the sum over a lambda a lambda tilda a alpha alpha dot is equal to zero
That means if I take any vector in this space, it's orthogonal to any vector in that space
Is that clear okay
So that's already kind of cool that yes
This is actually important this actually important here, I'm not modding out by anything yet. Okay, I'm just saying that
In other words, we don't ordinary mod out by Lorentz transformations
Okay, I'm just making a statement that that the Lorentz invariant data of the problem is this to play
I have a two plane and another
To play
Okay
So
All right now so and part of the early motivation for the Grasmanian
Was this looks like a slightly complicated?
quadratic constraint
but
Let me draw it like this now. I've just collapsed the picture. So this is a two plane
This is another two plane and this should be orthogonal
But instead of directly saying that lambda should be orthogonal to lambda tilda
You introduce another actor in the game and the other actor is a K plane. You say there's a K plane C
There's a K plane C K and
Then you ask that C K should contain
Lambda and that C K should be orthogonal to lambda tilda. Did Jake talk about this? Okay, excellent. Good. Good
All right
And that of course enforces
That enforces momentum conservation
And what you're then supposed to do is say, okay, so I'm I plunked down some delta function
I'm being a little impressionistic here because I'm sure
Jake talked about it
You impose a delta function that says C contains lambda some delta function that says C is orthogonal to lambda tilda
Super symmetrically, there are some delta function that says C is also orthogonal to a to tilda
There's various motivations to say where that comes from
Okay, but then you have to integrate over the space of these planes
So you have to integrate over the space of K planes in
End dimensions I
Think of a K plane in end dimension as a K by N matrix modulo GLK and
The final thing left to do is to talk about the measure and
Then there is this
Beautiful form that involves all the cyclic miners of the
K by N matrix downstairs did Jake talk about this formula. Okay, excellent
But all we need to know we don't need to know the great details now
All we need to know from here is that there's there's an integral over the space of K planes and end dimensions
With this so there's this action happening inside the grass manian and
The external data is a sort of window in just from this
Requirement that C contains lambda and is orthogonal to lambda tilda. All right
Okay, good
All right, so and and that's one beginning and we can go on from there to talk about many other things
But I want to take a little detour
Maybe now I'll try this. They want to leave this up. Whoops
Are you sure this is a better idea? Yeah
God I'm so bored already
Nobody's complain. All right, let me register my complaint
When you told me I thought I was some really shoo shoo, it'll be so no you sit there
You wait for ages you forget what you wanted to say you wonder if your pizza is still warm
You wonder whether you can make make you know make any new mob connections importing communist coke into the US
Is there a check mob or you'd love to say
You didn't say anything there is a check mob
Yarra father
All right, very good. Um, what was I saying? All right. Yeah, um, so so
Separately from here for the moment. There's a picture of momentum
Twisters, how many of you know what momentum twisters are put up your hand?
Okay, about half of you. So I'll
It's a it's very simple. So we'll we'll do it in a self-contained way. Okay
Okay, so um
so
the the
Motivation here is to make our kinematic space as simple as we possibly can all right
Maybe I should have said this to a begin with see the ordinary way of thinking about kinematic spaces and
No, momentum that add up to zero, right? That's so that's already very very
Constrained because each momentum has got a satisfied p squared equals zero. So it's that's constrained and they have to add up to zero
That is constrained when we say p equals lambda lambda tilde. We at least trivialize
the p squared equals zero constraint and
The the remaining on the the the residual redundancy is just the little group. So it's good, right?
But we're still left with imposing the sum of lambda lambda tilde equals zero, which is this ugly quadratic constraint
And I don't know if any of you guys just as a practical matter
You know if you play with amplitudes, do you have somewhere in your laptops like data scattering data?
Someone at some point in your life
You must have made you know seven momentum that add up to zero that are null and it's a pain in the ass
Because there's some final formula with a square root in it somewhere. That's really horrible, right?
It's so and you always have to do that. Oh, you make the last one and you solve for them and there's a square root
It's just it's just disgusting that that can't be you know, that can't be the what?
Anything grand is written in terms of so um so
So
This is a step in the right direction upstairs, right?
Because we're also kind of trivializing momentum conservation, but in this auxiliary way adding these extra k planes and so on, right? That's the
Now there's something else that we can do
Much more direct and
In a moment, we'll see how these things are connected to each other
In fact, if we never knew about momentum twisters and all the things that I'm about to tell you
We would discover them starting from this picture upstairs
Just on the nose just you know doing the obvious thing proceeding from the picture upstairs
We would discover them, but I want to tell you the the sort of most direct way of discovering them
Which is to come back and draw our famous picture of the sort of null polygon
Okay, now these are really four vectors
We're in four dimensions
So we have a bunch of momentum that add up to zero
Okay, but each p is null each p squared equals zero and so each p is lambda lambda tilde
But we still have this we saw this
Constraint, okay
So
So but when we draw this picture instead, sorry
So so we have this when we draw this picture instead. We're saying that each p is the difference
Between the coordinates of the two vertices, right? So we label the vertices
x1 x2 x3 and so on so this is the sort of dual x space x here has coordinates of momentum
Okay, so these x is not the ordinary spacetime the axis units of momentum. So this is the dual
Coordinate space or the
Momentum coordinate space, I don't know what you want to call it. I forget what we call it the dual space
Okay
But the problem now is we have to enforce that the x's are not separated from each other
All right, and so now comes the first sort of foray into twister geometry
And there's a huge amount to say about twisters, but we need a tiny amount for
for this and
For essentially anything that you work with with momentum twisters and all this stuff
You need nothing more than the next 10 minutes. I'm about to tell you okay
So this is not a scary thing
You don't have to like start knowing about you know O plus minus
Co-homology check blah dobo blah nothing none of it is this as super irrelevant as possible
Okay, to this subject. I'm not saying it's entirely super irrelevant
It's relevant for other things, but not to this. This is super basic kinematics
To begin with we're gonna ask a really simple question. What does a null ray in spacetime look like?
And now we're gonna imagine by null ray, I really mean this everything here is complex. Okay, everything is totally
Complex so what I really mean is a linear equation
right
such that I
Want to look at the set of all x's
That satisfy a linear equation all x's on some on some kind of plane
Such that x1 minus x2 squared is
equal to zero
And x1 and x2 there's a linear space
Such that any pair of x's on this on this plane are not separated from each other
Now this means that x1 minus x2 if I think of it as a 2 by 2 matrix alpha alpha dot
Well, it has a vanishing eigenvector, right? So there are some lambda
For which this is true
Or the alpha dot, but let's say I'm doing with lambda and
This in turn means that all of the x's on this line is a linear equation. So all the x's on this line satisfy
on this ray
satisfy
That
x lambda x alpha alpha dot lambda alpha equals mu alpha dot for some mu
Okay, and that's the Penrose incidence condition
So this is a linear equation in x space
Right and this linear equation in x space all the x's that satisfy this equation are not separated from each other is that clear
Now if you want to think about this as a real equation
We want to think about lambda and lambda tilde and mu as real everything is real
then
You've probably discussed that when the lambda lambda tilde real is when we're in 2 comma 2 signature
Not in 3 1 signature and 3 1 signature the lambda tilde should be the complex conjugate of lambda
Star well, I'm told should be lambda star plus or minus lambda star into two signature lambda and lambda tilde are random
independent real variables
So what is this?
This is two equations
Right on a four-dimensional space of x's
That there's two components right for the alpha equals one and alpha equals two components
So this is a two plane in four dimensions
Is that clear and that's what a that's what a null ray looks like in 2-2 signature
Okay, a null ray is a two plane in four dimensions
There's another kind of two plane in four dimensions with the alpha dot rather than the alpha
Okay, so there's two kinds of two plane in four dimensions where the things are not separated from each other. Is that is that clear?
All right, but anyway, if you're doing everything in the complex you never have to worry about these things
So much now a cool thing here
So I'm going to draw the null ray like a line, but remember in Minkowski space, it's a it's a
And it's a it's a it's a plane
It's a two plane in four dimensions in the complex or a complex two plane in four dimensions
but here I'm going to draw it as a null ray and
Space time so this is a picture of
Space time these are all the x's
These are all the x's and they're just span this they span this this ray
so it looks like the x's are
Are characterized by a lambda and a mu
So if you give me I'm going to just group the lambda and the mu in a variable z
since I'm Canadian it's z
okay and
and
So it looks like if you give me a z which is a four vector that specifies a null ray
Okay, but not quite
Because clearly if I take this equation and I multiply everything by a factor of two or by any factor of t
I'm not going to change the x's that satisfy this equation
Okay
So so the z's are
Equivalent to t times z
In other words if I multiply everything by t the null ray that they correspond to is exactly the same
Is that clear so this is our most basic correspondence between
Null ray and space time on the one hand and there's this now point z
Equals lambda mu up to rescaling
and
This is twister space TS and it's a three-dimensional projective space
Right four vectors up to rescaling so it's a three-dimensional projective space
Okay, so far so good
All right
So that's the first part of the correspondence the second part of the correspondence is
What happens if we have two of these
Null rays and space sign let's say I have two of these null rays x one and x two
So I have x one
Well, let's call them x a and x b x a lambda
equals
X a sorry, I've x lambda a equals mu a and
I
Can ask is there a point in common between x a
Between the null ray for a and the null ray for b
Now just by counting there should be one point in common
right because there are two equations that
From a for x and another two equations from b for x so that's four equations for the four
components of x
That's why you should expect that there is one point in common between two two planes
You might find this maybe so hard to visualize but two two planes in four dimensions should intersect at a point
generically
Okay, and it's for this reason right that that the equations for one plane is two equations the equations for the other plane is two
Equations so the total number of equations is equal to the number of unknowns
Okay, so that's what we can ask is there a point in common
Is there a point in common between these two?
Null ray, so let's let's look for it. It should it should be a point x
That's both on this line as well as on this line
Okay, and
We can very easily solve for this and it's x alpha alpha dot is
Mu a
alpha dot lambda b
I might have the overall sign wrong minus mu b out lambda dot alpha lambda a
divided by
Lambda b lambda a
Okay, I
Think it should be sort of more or less clear right if you just multiply the top equation by
Mu tilde b by mu b and the bottom equation by mu a new
Subtract them, then this is what you get
Okay
So indeed if there there is a there is a point where two null rays intersect
Right
We found the point
So we have a we have a second part of the correspondence now
Let me draw this a little more neatly
So
Down here we have space time and we started we have a null ray in space time and here
We have crystal space which is a p3 and here we had a point
But now if you give me two points in crystal space a and b
This seems to give me a
Point in space time x labeled by a and b
Right
Except just like except it's still not just a and b separately
Why not because if I take these two equations, I can take any linear combination of these two equations that I want
And that'll still give me exactly the same solution x
So that means that I can
Replace that a and that b by any linear combination of that a and that b that I like
And that will give me exactly the same
point
So what do all linear combinations of that a and that b look like
Over here like here is one times that a plus zero times that b
This is one times that b plus zero times that a
What's something in between is something there a
Third two-thirds right every linear combination
Will give me points on the line that connects a and b
That's what defines the line all possible linear combinations of a and b
So we learned something a little more interesting that
It's kind of interesting that a line or a null ray in space time is a point in
Twister space
But a line in Twister space
Is a point in space time and
We can label if I want just to remember I can label this by giving an a and a b on the line
But I always have to remember that the line only occurs in the combination a b, right?
I mean I can do it take any linear combination of a and b that like a b is just like a marker for just some way of
labeling two points on the line
Okay
Now the most beautiful thing about twisters
is that they make the action of conformal symmetry obvious and
You know the the
the exciting part of conformal invariance is
not scale invariance scale invariance any idiot could think of okay, but
The exciting part of conformal symmetry are the inversions the inversions of the thing which are kind of
Little mind-blowing right that and in fact, you know
If since most of your proper probably physics enthusiasts from a young age
You know everyone knows they can solve the problem of
What does the electric field look like outside?
conductor
Right, and you know how to solve this problem that we have this picture with the electric field lines going like this
But how do we solve it? We solve it by putting an image charge on the other side, right?
So this is very easy
And you can solve it
But then you see at some point a teacher kind of
Amazes you that you can do the same thing if you have a charge outside a grounded sphere a spherical conductor and
The amazing thing is that if you're out a distance r here with some charge q
There are some intelligently chosen q prime that you could put here at if this radius is little r at r
squared over capital R
Which also makes us an equal potential surface
Right, so it's possible to solve this spherical problem with the method of images, too
But it's because of a little miracle that you look and you put with the right value of the charge that you can make it an
Equal potential surface, okay, and that miracle is exactly the the symmetry of
massless
Laplace equation not even all electrodynamics under inversions. That's the conformal symmetry
Okay, and that's the hallmark that it takes something very far away and it replaced it by something very close by
Inversions is the exciting part of the conformal symmetry
now as you also probably know if we think the infinitesimal version of inversions is the special conformal transformations and
It's not really infinitesimal version of inversions, but the infinitesimal part of the conformal group
The the exciting part of the special conformal transformations and what are they it's what you get when you start somewhere you invert
big change you make a small
Translation and then you invert back
Okay, and that process now makes a small change compared to where you started and that's where the special conformal transformations are all right
But if we look in total at all the symmetries of the conformal group
There's things that look like translations ddx there are things that look like Lorentz and rotations x ddx
And then there's conformal that looks like xx ddx. I'm not being careful with the all the indices
Okay, but it's already slightly unsatisfying that the spacetime symmetries treat
I mean all these guys get unified into a nice group together and the big group they're not on a different footing
But we're putting on quite a different footing when we represent the asymmetries in this way
so this shows that the choice of kind of working with spacetime coordinates is
obscuring the action of the is kind of obscuring the unity of the
conformal group make some
Make some generators look different than others
Alright, well
That's the beauty of twister variables
the beauty of
Twisted variables
if I say this another way if I take two random points
I
Don't know x and y in spacetime
Then if I look at the distance between them x minus y squared
Under inversions x minus y squared goes to x minus y squared over x squared my over x squared y squared
in other words if I send x to x mu to x mu over x squared and
Y mu to y mu over y squared
Then then under inversions of course the distance isn't invariant
Duh, right?
So clearly the distance being non-zero is not a conformally invariant notion not even a scale invariant notion
Definitely not a conformally invariant notion
But what's cool is that if x minus y if x and y are not separated
Then all separation is a conformally invariant notion
If they're not separated before inversions, they're not separated after inversions
And that's why it's a good idea to look at sort of null rays in spacetime
Apart from their intrinsic interests. They're also conformally invariant things
One null ray in spacetime under conformal transformations transforms to another null ray in spacetime
and
We can actually see the action of the full conformal group very nicely on
On this formula x lambda equals mu
Okay
What happens if I if I do the SL2 cross SL2 of Lorentz is obvious
There's the SL2 that acts on the alpha dot on the alpha index
But under translations under translations if x goes to x
plus D
Well, this equation just goes into itself where I shift mu goes to mu minus D lambda
Okay, so in other words
Translations just act like a linear transformation on lambda and mu. So if we look here on lambda and mu
I forget maybe you upstairs. I forget who we put upstairs anyway
There is a
two by two linear transformations up there and two by two linear transformations down there and
We also have a transformation where lambda is translated by mu
Right, so that's down here like D
Right well, so there's something a little left up there
Those are the special conformal transformations
But it's actually super easy to see that just directly at the level of the inversions
because if I take this equation
X lambda equals mu
Then
Lambda is equal to x inverse mu
Right
Now under inversions in terms of the alpha alpha dot variables x is literally going to the inverse matrix x inverse
And so under inversions we just interchange lambda and mu
The world's simplest linear transformation just interchanging lambda and mu
So we see that all of the conformal group is just
four by four linear transformations on
Z, right? That's the glory of Twisted variables
Is that they manifest as simply as possible the action of space-time symmetries
But the beautiful thing is that the space-time symmetries do not act mostly on space-time points
But they act most simply on rays through space-time. That's really remarkable
Okay, so
Okay, so we have so so so the conformal group
Is Z goes to L Z
Where L is just any
four by four matrix
Okay, and if there's an overall factor g l four that's just part of the little group
Okay, so we can just take this and think of it as part of the
The rest of it is part of the conformal group
All right
Okay, so now um this also means that since this is the since this is the
Since this is the
Symmetry the only invariant tensor that we have is epsilon i j k l is the only invariant tensor
So
There's no metric there's no distance nothing like that okay all we have in
We have points in p3. These are these twisters or maybe have lines in p3 that correspond to points in space-time
But there's nothing we can do. There's no dot product. Nothing we can do
The only thing we can do is take four of these zeds and put them together
With an epsilon symbol and whenever I do that. I'll just write it as a bracket everywhere. There's a bracket
Something like this
It means that they're contracted together with an epsilon symbol
all of geometry in is projective geometry and if we had
Five more hours. We would do a projective geometry boot camp, but we're not going to do that
But but but you don't really need to practice to know a whole heck of a lot
Other than this very important thing. These are the only invariants
So let's do like one example like let's say I have a
point in space-time
That's
Associated with this line a b
Okay, so this is in this is a picture in p3 now. This is a picture in twister space
And I have this line a b
So that's one point in space-time
I'll call this the point x a b to remind myself it came from a b then I have another line here cd and
This is some other point here x cd
Remember this only depends on the line not on the individual points only depends on cd not the individual points
What can these two lines look like now if you want to visualize things in projective space
It's really simple. Just visualize them in ordinary three space. There's nothing special about the projectiveness all the projectiveness does is
Make it so that you don't have to worry about whether things are parallel or not
You can always imagine that lines and everything are in generic position and that lines intersect at points in two dimensions
And so on there's nothing special with parallelism
And infinity is treated on an equal footing as everything else
But precisely because of that it means that if you're just thinking about generic configurations for your visual imagination
Just visualize them in three space directly. Nothing will go wrong. Okay, so that's what you should do
Okay, so what happens if I have two generic lines in three space? Is there anything special about the relation that I can say?
Let's say they're like that
Anything no, what if they're like that?
Well, they're so close
nah
So close means nothing. Okay
You can do an SL4 transformation to put them anywhere. So okay, so so the only thing that's meaningful
What about that? No, no, the only this meaningful is do they intersect or not? That's it. I love it. It's like super, you know
Super hardcore. There's no
Forgiveness at all, right that right so
So if the lines intersect that's meaningful, right that means that that's that's something special
That's a conformally invariant statement
So what does it mean that the lines intersect?
It means that this bracket a b c d is equal to zero
Because for example that means that if they intersect it means that a b c and d are actually in a plane with each other
on a two-dimensional plane and
That means that I can write a is a linear combination of b c and d and
That means that this bracket will vanish, right?
Okay, yes
Probably if I knew what it was I would probably agree with you sounds right. Yeah
I
There are definitely the correct names that that should go go go together that but it might be a more fancy
What you're saying might be more more fancy. Yeah
Okay
All right, so now and and what does this mean back in space time it means that the points are not separated
Now in fact, there's a very cool formula if I if I go back to the formula for x minus y squared
You can actually remember I gave you a formula for x is mu a
lambda b minus mu b lambda a etc, right?
Over lambda a lambda b and
Similarly, there's a similar this would be x for a b and x for cd
There'd be the similar formula for it and here's an exercise for you
I want you to just work out. What is x minus y squared if you work out x minus y squared you find the following beautiful thing
It's actually a b cd
Divided by lambda a lambda b lambda c lambda d
Okay, so that's the formula for the distance squared between two points and you see the numerator only has a four bracket in it
So that's in variant under sl4
The denominator is not it involves something that just contracts the upper two components of z
So you can introduce something that's sometimes called an infinity twister
Which is this sort of two by two matrix that has an anti symmetric block here and zeros everywhere else
So that lambda a lambda b you can just I mean this is just to write this as z a
z b I
contracting these
indices together
Okay, so that makes it clear that
It is possible to have a good notion of distance and so on ordinary
Poincare notions
But x minus y squared
involves now a b cd
But there's this thing that's not invariant under conformal transformation this infinity twister
And
notice that this I is
Exactly something I can think of it
You see I also should have said like how can I think if I if I give you z a I and z b j
Right, so the I runs from one to four
Well if I take the anti-symmetric combination of these guys that a j z b I
This is a what is this this is some anti-symmetric four by four matrix, right?
But it has rank one
Because it's just made out of this one linear combination, so it's determinant vanishes
Well, that's exactly what this guy is that's exactly what this infinity twister is it's an anti-symmetric four by four matrix of rank one
So you can actually think of this I as another
line
Just some fixed line in p3
Right, so imagine there's a b and cd and there's a sort of fixed line sitting there dumbly all along I
Okay
Now this is just like the symmetry breaking the Higgs mechanism all that
Very loose analogy
But the most trivial aspect of the Higgs mechanism, but I have this big SL4 symmetry
If I declare there's this fixed line
Well, there's only a some subgroup of the SL4 that will preserve that line and that subgroup is exactly punk array
Okay, and here's a what here's a way of thinking about it. What is this fixed line in p3 back in space time?
Just some fixed point
Right and this is what we conventionally call the pointed infinity
That's why it's called the infinity twister, okay
So if there's a special pointed infinity well clearly you don't have inversions
Right, the whole point of inversions is that close and far are not distinct from each other
If you say there's a marked pointed infinity, that's definitely going to break inversions and it'll break you down to punk array
Okay
So so this is a sort of full relationship, and this is why these twisters are really useful even when you have
Only punk array symmetry because it's a very easy way of keeping track of infinity
Okay, it's a very easy way of keeping track of
And you know when you're when you do loop integrals loop integrans and so on
It's a very nice way of sort of seeing instead of worrying about how L is going to infinity and so on
It's a very clean way of
characterizing
What is going on at?
Infinity all right, so this is sort of pure kinematics
So far so the most general punk array invariant theory you can think of as points in spacetime are lines in p3
If there's a special line at infinity then we're down to punk array. If not, we have full conformal
Okay, yes
Oh
No, no good excellent yet
So I was just about to say that this conformal invariance that we're talking about has nothing on the face of it to do with the conformal invariance of the
Space-time space-time ordinary space-time. This is some conformal invariance in this dual space-time
All we know at the moment is that the simply the kinematics of massless particles has conformal invariance in it
Okay, simply because having n particles that are null
Well, we know that nullness is a conformal invariant concept
But we have no idea whatsoever of dynamics does or doesn't have any kind of conformal symmetry
If it doesn't then we'd see it that this infinity twister would show up everywhere
Okay, but absolutely this is not that this is the dual conformal invariance the conform the conformal variance in this in this
in this dual space
Absolutely if you have
Momentum twisters are a very useful way of thinking about any massless theory when there's a natural ordering
The ordering is important because we have to draw this polygon to begin with I haven't gotten to the momentum twisters yet, but
But they'll be but yeah, let's let's do that
Let's do that right now. All right, so that's everything on the kinematics
But now let's go back and now this is the payoff
Let's go back to this picture of the null polygon
And let's draw the picture in space time first
So you see I have this point here and
This point and now the only thing that I need that I'm building the fact that the momentum are going to add up to zero
Automatically the only thing that I need to somehow put in is that this point is not separated from this point is not separated from this point
And so on okay, that's the thing which is not hardwired in yet
We'd like to sort of understand how to make that manifest
But this is a picture in space time now. Let's draw the corresponding picture in twister space
So at this point is let's say x1 x2 x3 and so on
Who is x1 in twister space? So let's draw a picture in twister space here
X1 is some some line in twister space right here at some line in twister space
So this is a line that corresponds to x1. So I'll just label this line one
Who is x2 is some other line in twister space?
But what's the crucial thing?
The crucial thing is that these two x1 and x2 are now separated which means that these two lines
must intersect
Okay, so here's the next line
So this is a line for two
It's a four-dimensional picture three-dimensional picture, right? It's a p3. This is a picture in p3
So three-dimensional picture
But I'll of course I can only draw it two-dimensionally and here's the next line and the next line the next line the next line the next line
Okay
So instead of a picture of a null polygon
We just have a picture of a bunch of lines one intersecting the next
Okay
But here's the spectacular thing
You can completely reconstruct this picture
Simply by specifying these intersection points
So I don't know let's call this one z1 z2 z3 and so on
In other words if you just give me n zeds in p3 n points in p3
Just give me n points so let's do it backwards give me n points in p3 to begin with one two
three four five
six
Okay
If there was no ordering there's no natural way to build points in space time out of these guys I just have n points
But since there's an ordering
Then there's a natural set of lines to draw
I'll draw the line one two and then two three and then three four and the four five and five six and six one and
These will correspond to points in space time that are a
Null six gone
Is that clear
And this is really beautiful because now the Zeds are completely unconstrained
There's no more constraints. We've managed finally to parametrize
The scattering data in terms of completely unconstrained variables
Okay, and if you give me
these Z a I
Which are lambda a and mu a I keep forgetting who's upstairs and downstairs
Then this is an exercise that I'll leave for you to do
You can from these Zeds you can work out what are the X's that correspond to Z 1 Z 2 Z 2 Z 3 and so on
Then you can look at the difference between two consecutive X's
That's guaranteed to be null so you should be able to write it as lambda lambda tilde
And so you should be able to have a formula for what are the lambdas on the lambda tilde's that you get in terms of these
lambdas and mu's
and
Of course the momenta are going to be
lambda lambda tilde
Where the lambdas are the same as those lambdas?
But the lambda tilde's are the following cool formula the lambda tilde a is lambda a minus 1 lambda a
mu a plus 1 plus cyclic
All
Divided by lambda a minus 1 lambda a
And
The final exercise is that you can show that if no matter how the lambdas and lambda
for totally unconstrained lambdas and mu's
The lambda and lambda tilde you define in this way will satisfy momentum conservation
And that will be a consequence of the shouten identity
As everything is involves manipulations with these little two vectors. All right. There was a question. Yes
Not as usefully no, yeah, this is a this is certainly it's not a general dimensional phenomenon
Twisters are so useful in six dimensions to some extent
So there's something special in three four six and ten dimensions
But it's it's yeah, it's not remotely as the usual as this
Right
Okay, so so the most practical thing that we've discovered then is that the scattering data the scattering data is a
Can be completely given by N
Four vectors
It's ironic. We do all this song and dance. We start with N four vectors
except these N four vector satisfy p squared equals zero and
The moment to add up to zero now. We've replaced them with N totally unconstrained four vectors
Except each four vector has a rescaling invariance. That's a little group
Okay, and I'll leave it for you to puzzle out a little what happened. I mean what?
What happened to the sort of four extra degrees of freedom, right?
We sort of lost momentum conservation like what you know
We thought we had like four n variables and then maybe n on shell constraints
So that's three n variables, but with those four constraints from momentum conservation. There's three three n minus four
Well, what happened here? We seem to have like just three n
where do the sort of minus four go and
The minus four is there in that well, okay, I'll leave it for you to puzzle that out. It's not it's not it's not
It's not
Okay
So
So the kinematic data when we have an ordering is is most conveniently written in terms of these momentum twisted variables
All right
Any questions about that
Now let me come back to this picture upstairs since I used this brilliant board to put it up there this whole time
There's a completely different path that you could take that would also arrive you at momentum twisters
So let's go back to this upper picture where we had this
We're integrating over these kpl. I'm just gonna be I'm just gonna be very sketchy
But but I just want to give you a picture of what is going on so
Up in this picture, we're saying that we want to integrate over all
K-plane C that contain lambda and orthogonal to lambda tilde
Right, so C is a k-plane in n dimensions. So C is a k-by-n matrix
Jake explained this to you
There we go
Want to speak to my eye
There we go, so C is a k-by-n matrix
And we're supposed to integrate over all C's that contain lambda and orthogonal to lambda tilde, right?
But if you think about it for a sec that seems like a little bit dumb
Because C is forced to contain lambda
right
Since C is forced to contain lambda that means it's possible to take some linear combination of the rows of the C matrix
Let's say so that the top two components are literally lambda. It's like saying this plane contains lambda
So there's a lambda part and there's the rest of it
so it should be possible to
It should be possible to kind of write C as C is equal to and put sort of lambda upstairs
manifestly and
Then have some kind of C hat matrix downstairs
Which would be k-2 by n dimensional so this would be 2 n and this would be k-2
And then you see so that takes care of the first delta function that C contains lambda
Then the delta function that C is for particular lambda tilde would just be momentum conservation
And the a to tilde part would just be the super momentum conservation. Okay, so why don't we do this?
Okay, no problem
You could do this
But the problem is that if you do this then naively
Those minors downstairs 1 2 k 2 3 2 k plus 1 and so on
They would now depend on lambda right because this is a k by k minor
And now the upper two components have lambdas in them. So when I take determinants, so they'll involve little determinants of lambdas
Okay
So there's a natural question that you can ask and actually if you if you think more carefully about what it means to put lambda
On the top two rows. This is all forced on you anyway
Okay, but you what you really want to do is further do a linear transformation a
GL and linear transformation that rotates the columns that takes that lambda dependence out of those minors
okay
So and it turns out there is exactly a linear transformation that you can do now
Rotating the columns together
Such that after you do that linear transformation the things downstairs are now some other matrix D
Okay, but that the k by k minors upstairs
Become k minus 2 by k minus 2 minors downstairs
multiplied by
So, you know, I have some I have some let's say lambda 1 lambda 2 up to lambda k and then
something in between here with
too smaller
Okay, so some matrix D such that this
Ciclic consecutive minor of the C matrix
This minor this determinant becomes lambda 1 lambda k
times the determinant of this little D matrix
So determinant of this C
Becomes just lambda 1 lambda k times the determinant of this D matrix
But this is after a this interesting linear transformation and that interesting linear transformation
Turns out to be exactly that interesting linear transformation that we just saw that took us between the muse and the lambda Tilda's
Okay, remember we've had this interesting linear transformation to the muse and the lambda Tilda's
Such that when the dust settled so I'm not I'm not explaining this in any detail
This is really the sort of beginning of the story and it's it's like a short argument
But it's it's a little bit of an argument
But it begins just by trying to put the lambdas upstairs to trivialize momentum conservation. Okay
What you find is that this integral
DK and C mod GLK over the cyclic minors of C
Delta Delta Delta is actually the integral
Dn
Times k minus 2
And actually let me call this original k k hat because I want to save k for what it is afterwards
So this is going to be k hat
This is turns out to be a DK and D over now the k by k minors
Cyclic k by k minors
Where k is just equal to k hat minus 2 and
Here we get instead instead of all these delta functions, we just get
Delta 4k
D dot z d alpha a z a
So this is the product over all the alphas so this is a k by n matrix z ai and
Z ai is equal to lambda a
Mu a
Up to a factor and sorry. Remember the whole point of this was that it pulled off a delta function of momentum conservation
And a delta function the super delta function
And there's finally
Jacobian factor of all this it also takes care of all the little group weights. That's just the part Taylor factor
Now you might say what the heck is this mu? Where did this mu come from?
But the point is that this part of the equation is only on the support of these delta functions and
On the support of these delta functions that that's the whole claim is that this thing is only a function of lambda and lambda tilde
Why is it only function lambda lambda tilde because?
notice by
Construction manifestly this expression is invariant under SL4 transformations, but SL4 transformations on the Zeds
And so this is manifesting this dual conformal invariance in the Zed space
Right
So we learned something very interesting this structure on the grass manian to begin with is giving us n to the k hat
MHV amplitudes so k hat equals 2 would be MHV
Okay
That would be k equals 0
Now I don't know how much Jake explained about the Yangian symmetry
Or even ordinary conformal invariance
But part of the point of these grass manian formulas is that they make the action of conformal symmetry totally obvious
Here it was written in terms of lambdas and lambda tildes
You can actually go to Penrose's twister space
In order to write a formula. It looks identical to this except the Zs are not these dual
Twisters, but are the
Twisters that are related by a Fourier transformation to lambdas and lambda to lambda tildes. Let's say for a transforming the
Lambda tildes. Anyway, if you don't know what I'm talking about, it doesn't matter
The point is that there's a there's a trivial way of seeing this formula is manifestly conformally invariant
But we discover that after we pull off this factor
That's just a delta function for momentum conservation a super momentum conservation and the part Taylor factor that takes care of weights
The thing that's left over is manifestly a function
That's invariant under SL4 transformations. We discover the dual
conformal transformations
So we discover both the momentum twisters
I didn't explain exactly the steps, but I can refer to the
Papers which did a very short argument
but simply by following your geometric nose and trying to make it manifest that lambda fits in the top two rays of C
you go from this formula to this one and
This formula makes conformal symmetry obvious this formula makes dual conformal symmetry obvious
right and
That's a remarkable thing about the Gresminian is the only structure
We know that makes the conformal and the dual conformal symmetries manifest at the same time that makes them both obvious
That's the sort of famous Yangian symmetry is sort of made obvious by these arguments
Okay, and
That's another path to discover the momentum twisters even if you didn't
Know about them ahead of time
All right
Now with all of that being said let's now look at the very very simplest
Objects that we can get here the very simplest objects that we could get if k hat is equal to two
Oh, sorry, and and of course this is part of this general
Amplitude Wilson loop duality is that if we have an amplitude
which depends on
lambda
Lambda tilde and a to tilde the claim is that it's equal to delta four of momentum
Delta eight of Susie over part Taylor
Times some other so this is n and k hat
This is r of n and k that only depends on Zed's and
And the super and these adas are
Like are like the eight of Tilda's are related to the adas the same way the lambit told us are related to the muse
Okay, so
Right, so this is conformally invariant
This is dual conformal invariant
And super for both
And it's this thing which is interpreted as a expectation value of a supersymmetric Wilson loop
So that's that's the other part of the
Of the basic connection. All right, but what I want to do now is look at the very simplest objects that we get
In this way
So you probably learn from Jake
That that that BCFW is
Related to on-shell diagrams
And
This is related to cells of
The Grasmanian or the positive Grasmanian of G k hat n the thing. I'm calling k hat now
And
So I want to look at the very simplest so so k hat equals to that's just mh v and
This integral is nothing this r of n and k equals zero is just one
Sorry, the r isn't one but the things that we get from the Grasmanian are just one
So there's not there's nothing to say or the tri-amplitude are just one or
Yeah, Lisa tree level these are and k equals zero tree
It's just one. So the first interesting case is k hat equals three
mh v and
already back in G
Back in the original on-shell diagrams. These are already some kind of juicy looking on-shell diagrams
You have three by n matrices g3 and lots of fun, right?
But this case is simple enough that we can really do it by hand if we take it now down to the
To this downstairs smaller Grasmanian so that's k equals one
Okay
So for k equals one
Our D matrix is just one by n so I can think of it as like little d1 up to little dn
And and so what I'm left with is this integral I apologize for the many D's
Maybe I should call it something else
Little D matrixes
Maybe call it Delta one through Delta n
Okay, so this is
D Delta one to D Delta n the product over the cyclic miners is just Delta one through Delta n
I'm supposed to mod out by GL k equals one
and
Then what I'm left with is just a Delta four of
Delta one
Z one plus Delta two Z two plus Delta n Z n
Times the Delta four of the of the
Eight apart so Delta one eight one. This is the Susie part plus Delta two eight or two
Plus Delta n eight
All right now, how are we supposed to interpret this expression?
Well
Notice that
The Zeds are all four vectors
so I can express
any four vector as a linear combination of
Four four vectors
Okay, so if to begin with I look at what this what does this look like for n equals five
That's the sort of smallest interesting case for n equals five
Remember this would be five point and mhv
Which is the same as by parody the five point mhv so we expect this should be a really simple case
Okay
But let's see what this formula looks like in this little respond in here
It's like D Delta one over Delta one up to D Delta five over Delta five
I'm gonna have a Delta four of Delta one Z one plus Delta Delta five Z five and
Then there's the eight apart Delta four of eight of one
Delta one eight of one plus Delta five eight of five
So far so good
Mod GL one
Now let's think about what this mod GL one means mod GL one means that that I mean if I didn't mod by GL one
This expression is in very intent to rescaling all the deltas. So that has a spurious infinity just by that dumb fact, right?
So modding by GL one means that that really I only care about the ratios of these deltas relative to each other
Or I can use it to let's say set Delta five equal to one any one of them. I want equal to one
Okay, and then I just do the integral of the remaining four
So far so good. So modding by GL one
Turns us into
So
This really is D Delta one over Delta one up to D Delta four Delta four and then I have a Delta four of
Delta one Z one plus Delta four is that four plus that five and then a Delta four of the eight apart
This part is just going to come along for the ride
This is the interesting part because I have four integration variables
But I have four Delta functions here
So I should be able to use it to solve for all of the deltas and
How do I solve it? Well?
See this is exactly what the song is Z five is equal to negative Delta one Z one negative Delta Z two
So on this is just the expansion of Z five in terms of Z one through Z four
Okay, so let's solve. How do I solve for?
How
Do I solve for Z five minus that five is equal to Delta one Z one plus Delta two is that two
Delta three is that three
Delta four is that four? Well, let's say you want to isolate Delta one
I just take this thing and I take the the the four bracket with two three four
Okay
Then here I'll get Delta one one two three four and the rest Spanish
Right
so Delta one is
equal to
Z two Z three Z four Z five
I got rid of the minus sign by pushing it all the way to the right over
one two three four and
So on okay, so you get Delta two is
equal to Z one Z three Z four Z five
over
One two three four all of them over one one two three four and so okay, so I solve for all the deltas in this way
And so that's it so I've solved for all the deltas so all those deltas occur downstairs here
okay
And I get them in this
Susie Delta upstairs
So the final expression for this object
This is a famous object. It's called an R invariant
And it's labeled by five twisters one two three four five
Sometimes written as a bracket like this is equal to Delta four of a to one two three four five
plus cyclic
Divided by one two three four two three four five
three four five one
Two five one two three
Okay
So that's the very simplest object that we can get from the k equals one
K equals one n equals five momentum twister
Grasmanian
All right
And the claim is that if you took the beat if you took anything upstairs and the k hat equals three and you stripped off the
The the the delta functions of the parkeler factor you'd get this guy, right?
Now what about higher n?
Now what happens for higher n is that we're always looking we have this integral
But we have to interpret the integral as a residue so that we finally get it down to a point with a number of integrations
is equal to the number of delta functions and
What that means for higher n is very simple all I had is Delta this Delta four of Delta one Z one plus Delta two Z two plus
dot dot dot dot
We know that if there's a total of five things that occur in that Delta function, that's enough to lock everyone
Just like we saw in this example, right?
So all I have to do since my little integrals over d Delta ones were just little are just integrals
I can imagine that I just set them as little contour integrals set the Delta is equal to zero
so I set all but five of the Delta's to zero and
The rest is something right the rest is one of the residues of this
Grasmanian integral
so that's the most general object that we can get at
For K equals one okay, so for cake was one the most general object
We can get is actually labeled by any five guys i j k l m
Was exactly the same formula
They don't have to be consecutive okay, just any any five
Okay, any questions about that
So we've now encountered what the very simplest nmh v objects look like
All right, and so now we can finally get to some physics after all of this
kinematic setup
Let me oh, I forgot I have to do this
Let me
Oops, oh
No, that's wrong. Oh
I see like that
Which one?
This one is down. Oh
But I can't do them simultaneously. Oh
That's really bad. Oh
Sorry, I
See
All right. Well, okay here
What am I doing wrong?
Why is this one not going up?
That's
Huh
Top button. Oh, there we go
But it's only going down. It's not going up. Oh now it's going up very good
It wasn't maybe I was I wasn't pushing it enough. Oh, it's slow. It's slow to respond. That's the problem. Ah
I'm the master. That's great
Okay
Yara's too far gone for the reach of justice here. It should be all right. So, um, all right. Yes
Yes
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, absolutely. Yeah, the the
First of all if you like
This is maybe a little first at the most basic level the overall K has got to be one
It was three and it's got to be one. We only got rid of two by
By by taking out the Delta 8 Q, right?
But if you like this is the the Delta 8 Q was the
was the
Was the Delta function for ordinary supersymmetry
This is the Delta function for the dual supersymmetry. So the dual super translations
So it's not yeah
So it was not taken care of by the first one and somehow you have to strip off the first
Delta functions to even define the second one. That's one of the funny interesting things, right?
The amplitudes are in principle defined for any lambda or anything and they just we happen to say they have a delta function
But on the support of that delta function this other symmetry comes to life
And so yeah, so it's it's it's imposing the dual supersymmetry
Which is not the same as the original supersymmetry
Just like the the full could the full dual conformal symmetry is not the original super is not the original conformal symmetry
The only overlap on the Lorentz part
But everything else is different
Okay
So um if we so I'm not just gonna tell you what
and what does
K hat equals three means
K equals one tree amplitudes
What do these look like
Alla BCFW
And the answer is that the endpoint amplitude for K equals one
After we strip out now that we're in these dual variables after we strip off the delta functions and the part Taylor fact and all that stuff
Is actually beautifully written in terms of these are invariants
Well, it had to be because it's written in terms of on-shelf diagrams and all the on-shelf diagrams are
Turn turn into this from what I was telling you before right
But it turns out there's many ways of doing BCFW, but in one of the simplest ways of doing them it looks like the sum
Over I less than J different than J of
One I I plus one J J plus one
It's funny interesting structure
So that's funny one and then I plus one you see the object should be cyclically invariant
The amplitude is cyclically invariant, but we seem to be breaking cyclical symmetry. There's a one is special there
Okay, and of course, you know, that's true of BCFW and BCFW you choose the special people to do the recursion
Okay, and here essentially you just keep choosing the same last guy to be special in doing the recursion
So that's what gives you this very uniform looking looking formula
Okay, so let's for example, let's just look the first interesting example for n equals 6
The
Amplitude is just by these rules is one two three four five
Plus one two three five six
Plus one three four five six, so it's a sum of three terms
And let's just for a second look at the pole structure that these terms have so I'm just writing down the poles
Right the poles that this has are well, it's just the I just the it's just the five
The consecutive four brackets right so the poles this has are one two three four
two three four five
three four five one
Four five one two
Five one two three
This one two three five two three five six
Three five six one
Five six one two
Six one two three
One three four five three four five six
Four five six one five six one two
Six one three four. Oh, sorry, what am I doing five six one three?
Six one three four
All right, so those are each each term has those five sets of poles
Now let's back up for a second. What are the poles that the amplitude should be allowed to have?
What are the physical poles that the amplitude should have?
The physical poles that it should have if we go back to our Wilson our polygon picture
Because of the ordering again as with our earlier
Asocohedron story
Phi cubed story the poles of the amplitude can have the only poles can be when when a sum of consecutive momenta
Go on shell in this case go to zero
Which means when x i minus x j squared goes to zero
right and
This means when the four bracket z i z i plus one
z j z j plus one
goes to zero
Okay
So this i i plus one j j plus one structure. This is a big key
Okay, that
You see it's kind of interesting the amplitude in the end well for example in these formulas in this cross-mining formula
What we see are just zeds directly
Zeds are the natural variables on the other hand the points in space time and this dual space time
Sorry are not zeds. There are these lines like i i plus one and they have this i i plus one structure in it
okay
so the most zero-thorner
aspect of
What kind of theory you're looking for a second let's back up again
Now in in this context our kinematic space is just the space of n zeds. That's it
right
This is
The most satisfying kinematic space you could imagine right as we said it's just the cleanest way of specifying the scattering
Data for the external problem
It has some structure in it, which is the ordering and that's there in the problem
Okay, the problem has it and it's incredible that that one notion of ordering is all it takes for the everything else unravel
Okay, that we just start with n zeds
Just with that space we can do nothing
But the word ordering is the only thing it takes to begin a whole cascade of events
That has the word positivity and grusmanians and blah blah blah and then then we're off to the races
Okay, but it's really just begins with this word ordering
But now we have an interesting question
We're looking for some theory some structure of something in momentum twister space
So our space our kinematic space is space of n zeds
I know i'm beating a dead horse, but I just just want you to get it like
That's it like so what we're saying is that this is it's not like some boundary of some space and some metric and some
Some time and locality are spaces the space of n zeds
It's a four by n matrix and somehow we have to find a question the space of four by n matrices that
Gives us all the miracles of n equals four super young mills and locality and uniterity and all the rest of it, okay
But one big clue is whatever the heck this question is has to say that even though it's fundamentally about zeds
Somehow it has to care about this i i plus one jj plus one business
This i plus one jj plus one has got to be special the only poles to involve i i plus one jj plus one
Okay, that's in particular the only singularity is the only poles should be of the form i i plus one jj plus one
And so let's see here. What do we have? This is i i plus one jj plus one good
Okay, this is i i plus one jj plus one are still good
Okay, this is i i plus one not not good
Because this is at n equals six. So it's five six one. There's a six in between. That's no good
That's the spurious pole, right?
This is i i plus one jj plus one. That's good. This is not good
And here too not good good
Not good good good
Not good good
Good
Not good good
right
So we see that every term in bcf w every term has three good poles and two unphysical ones
Two spurious poles
Now probably jake emphasized this already, but we are just saying again in this language
We see the building blocks here. They don't care about spacetime locality
They have poles in them that just do not correspond to anything that we can think of as a local spacetime process
By the way, if you go back to the original on-shell diagrams, this makes a lot of sense
Because what are on-shell diagrams doing?
They're gluing together three particle amplitudes on-shell amplitudes and gluing together three particle on-shell amplitudes means that you're
Not thinking about points meeting at a point in spacetime
But you're averaging over everywhere that they can be on a null ray relative to each other
Okay, so that's why it's totally unobvious that they should look local. In fact, they don't look local
They're not local things on-shell diagrams are not local spacetime processes
They involve averaging things over entire light cones where the points can get arbitrarily far separated from each other in light cones
whereas when we talk about
ordinary
spacetime process and finding diagrams precisely because we have off-shell intermediate points precisely so we can talk about
points, right
Rather than everything being localized on-shell, which only gives you things that are
localized on full light cones
okay, so
But of course we see that there is there's there's hope
Because this spurious Paul 3451 shows up here
And it also shows up there
As 1 345 same as 3451 and that's what happens in bcf w is that the spurious falls
Kind of canceling pairs in this example and the full answer does not depend on them
all right
But this is our first kind of invitation
to uh
Think I mean that we're looking for some kind of structure some kind of object something
that
you know
We'll make formulas like this come out in some reasonable way, but it'll be obvious ahead of time why it doesn't depend on 1
Why we only see i plus 1 jj plus 1?
Okay, so this is the kind of thing that we're uh, we're after
All right
so
And that's what the story of the ampoultahedron is all about
So one way of saying what's going on is that you can think of for example bcf w
As giving you a whole collection of terms each term comes from some cell of the grass manian
Either of the original grass manian or under this map of the momentum twister grass manian
Okay, but in the end you get a whole collection of objects each one is coming from somewhere in the grass manian, okay
But we don't know why we have to add them up in this particular way to get the answer
Right only our desire to make the answer
Compatible with locality and unitarity tells us that we have to add them up in that particular way
But we don't otherwise know why we're adding them up in that particular way
So that was the sort of uh frustration
uh, was that you can come all this way with all these uh
Remarkable things about the on-shelf diagrams and the grass mania and all these things that that seemed like very close to a
Very different way of thinking about things
But you're still tethered by a longer and longer rope, but still tethered to ordinary
Quantum field theory by locality and unitarity, right?
So what what's needed is to sort of cut the rope
And to just find some ab initio question
That who is answered by itself gives you something and then sort of read back out that it can be interpreted in in this way
All right, so I want to give you uh
I want to tell you
Something about what that answer looks like already in this example, but maybe we could pause to see if there are any questions
I think we're 10 minutes from our when we turn into a pumpkin at midnight, right? So
um
So maybe this is a good time to ask for questions and and see if I can leave you hanging so that uh, yes
Sorry, I missed why um
Did for example like one three four five not work, but uh three four five
It's all the things that look like i i plus one j j plus one
Okay, okay, um all the things that look like consecutive pairs because it's those consecutive pairs that correspond to
Xi minus xj squared that correspond to physical poles. Gotcha. Okay. Thank you. And and you see this is one of the hallmarks of bcf w at five points
Three four five one is a perfectly local thing, right?
That's that is a form i plus one jj plus one. It's a hallmark of bcf w that after bcf w shifts the things that were physical poles
Before becomes spurious falls afterwards. Okay
So something that was perfectly physical for five points all of a sudden becomes spurious at six
Uh, yeah nema. Yes, uh, so it's uh, not clear to me
Why I mean what is bcf w in this in the sense that the way I understand bcf w is some legs are shifted
Sorry some legs some external legs. That's right. Yeah, so so I didn't tell you how we got to this point
I'm just telling you this is what the answer ends up looking like. Okay. We could take uh, uh, you just have to take this on face
A uh a little bit, but it's not crazy that it should have something uh picked special because you do
Make two legs special when you do bcf w
There's actually a way of describing what bcf w is purely in momentum twisters
But that that would take me a little long to explain
So so take this much on faith
Okay, that that if you just translate ordinary bcf w and you just translate it into what's going on in momentum twisters
You get this nice formula in terms of our invariance. Also, uh, sometimes in bcf w
We have pole at infinity and sometimes we don't right these are all
Situations where there's no poles at infinity. Okay
And uh, and actually one of the nice things did jake talk about super bcf w
Well, I mean that that's one of the really nice things about the supersymmetric version of bcf w is that you don't have to worry about who you shift
Okay, there's only one supersymmetric way of doing the shift and there's never any poles at infinity
In fact, the dual conformal symmetry gives you a very nice understanding for why there couldn't have been any poles at infinity
Uh, that's a symmetry explanation for why there's no poles at infinity because infinite momentum is not anywhere special
You see in this picture if you have if you have uh in the dual space
Uh, the point at infinity is just any other point
So you can't have a singularity at a random point in infinity if you did it would break the dual conformal symmetry
So that's uh, it's not clear what the chicken and what the egg is here
But uh, but the absence of poles and infinity and bcf w is intimately related to the dual conformal invariance. Okay, thank you
Any other questions
Yeah, um, so when you drew this the geometry the dual geometry in twister space
Yes, you drew it in such a way that made it look like not like it's not a positive geometry in twister space
Oh, no, it's not at all. I mean in in uh, the picture of the lines
Is not at all because it's not even
I mean, there's no notion of any interior and we'll come to that stuff later
But just drawing these lines. I just have a line another line another line another line
I just have a collection of lines
and so could you could you
Set up your problems such that you got both a positive geometry in
In your kinematics space time and in twister space. Yes very much. So that's what that's that's what the that's what the kinematic picture of the
Association will end up of the ampoule will end up being
Okay
Oh, this is a super amplitude. So again, this is a very important point. So if if uh, we could talk
I assumed that jaked explained about uh, super amplitude, but if not, these are all super amplitude. And so the helicity is
Taking care of okay. Everything is in the super part. Everything is in the uh, uh, is in the dependence on these ades
That's why we didn't have to put any plus minuses anywhere and uh, and yeah, the super bcf w is a really cool thing that uh
That you don't have to worry about who you shift and and so on
So when you did the first integral with the c matrix, um, I guess I I didn't fully understand in that part
Why is it relevant? Like, why do we need to have susie to make it work?
Ah, ah, that's a great question. And it's as a very beautiful answer that um, uh
As a very beautiful answer, but let me give you a 30 second. Let me tell you what the answer is about. Okay, so, um, uh
And I won't do details, but but you can actually work out the uh, the details pretty easily
Remember we said that I want a delta function that enforces that c contains lambda an adult function that says c is orthogonal to lambda tilde
So far, we don't need susie for anything. Okay
And I want to say and I want to integrate over some measure on the grass
So this is I want a k plane. So I want the integrated some measure on the grass manian
Of uh, something right of these delta functions
And it almost looks perfect
Except those delta functions are not exactly a property of the k plane
Because those delta functions are not actually invariant under c
unto the gl one part of the gl k transformations
Okay, if you do the you know s l k transformations those delta functions are preserved
But if you do the gl one just the rescaling of the entire matrix
You see those product of delta functions just pick up a chicobian factor
So even though you thought geometrically you were doing something that was about a k plane
You're not quite
Because those delta functions pick up some weight under the rescaling
And that's what the susie part exactly is there to cancel that's its only purpose in life
And that's why you need grassman variables because you need something that under the chicobian just goes upstairs
And then downstairs and kills it and that's the entire purpose
In fact, you could totally motivate the introduction of susie just from that
You want to make this picture that appears to be about k planes
Really about k planes and that means making it really invariant into the gl one and that forces the introduction of the aides
Okay, thank you
Yes
Yeah, I just want to follow up on your question with
Jake was stressing that the the susie delta function can be replaced by any
Three dependent
Numerator type yes type thing
So these all you need is all you need is some object that has the correct weights to make up for the that's what I want to know
So they're just constrained to have to have this very all all it needs is something that has weight minus 4k
Is there any other constraints or or no? I see. Yeah. He wrote it to okay
Yeah, and in fact if you take a particular component to the amplitudes, that's exactly what it's doing
Right if you take a particular component out of those deltas you just get some power of a minor of the
C matrix that exactly makes up for the weight
Okay, and what's nice about susie is that it does it in a way that's
That's totally you know permutation invariant between all the particles just the same way as the
Another way of saying you can think of as a susie is that's a generating function for all the possible things that you could do
Right, uh, simply made out of the minors of the matrix
So a short break yeah about a short break and I I won't yeah again if you want to go go
Although I would left you at a kind of exciting point. So okay, so uh, so a short break
There's still some junk food. Okay. Great. There's drunk food. All right. Excellent. Uh, I do need to go to the bathroom now
Yes, although I should not take this with me to the bathroom. Yes
All right
