comes from, the asocihedron in kinematic space.
And once again, remember, our kinematic space is the space of xij's, right?
So there are these nn-3 over 2 variables.
And we're going to now try to ask a question in xij space.
We're going to look for some structure, ask a question in xij space, whose answer will
be the asocihedron.
And not only whose answer will be the asocihedron, but we'll understand why we're going to ask
a question that manifestly is going to give us a polytope, which also manifestly factorizes
into polytopes of the same type when we go on its facets.
So again, that's the nature of the kind of thing that we're trying to do.
This is our kinematic space.
We're going to try to find a structure in this kinematic space.
Now this is a story that I'm going to give you the artisanal version of the story.
As it sounds, you know, by art.
So this is something we sort of stumbled across with Song Hei and Yang Tao Bai and Zhong An
Wang.
We stumbled across this realization of the asocihedron back in 2017.
And in 2019, we found this sort of more conceptual way of understanding where it comes from,
but it still had some kind of element of guessing and art in it.
I think now we understand it as a completely canonical, conceptual thing with no guessing
and no art at all, and again, that's something that in one way or another, I'll be talking
about on Monday.
But that'll be a little too abstract to just get.
So I want to tell you this sort of more, somewhat more intuitive way of thinking about things,
which already is going to give you an idea for how this kind of thing can come about.
And now all of this are things that we see for the asocihedron that actually we saw in
many ways even more strikingly with the amputahedron, which I will still hope to get to.
But in the story of the amputahedron, ultimately, you begin by just looking at the kinematic
space, just thinking about the kinematic space, imagining labeling the kinematic space.
And then at some important moment, you say the word positivity, and then everything goes.
So we're going to try to do the same thing here.
Okay.
Now, so to begin with, let's just represent our variables in an intelligent way.
Like I could represent them just by giving a big list, x13, x14, let's say n equals
5, x24, x25, x35.
These are my five variables.
But I want to just graphically denote the variables.
And notice that I have an n gone here.
So there's a natural sort of cyclic symmetry to the problem.
Again, there's one, two, three, the indices are ordered going around.
So what I'm going to do is just write these x's just to denote them just by points on
a grid in the obvious way.
So you'd have 1, 2, 1, 3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 2, 3, just the obvious 90-degree grid, except
I'm going to, for reasons that'll become clear in a second, I'm just going to orient everything
by 45 degrees.
So I would start with, let's say, x12 here.
And then when I go in this direction, I'm going to increase the rightmost index by 1.
So this will go up to x13, that'll go up to x14, that'll go up to x15.
And in this direction, I increase the other index.
So this would be x23, and then x24, which that makes sense there, and x25.
And here n equals 5, right?
And okay, so I could keep on going in this direction.
So who would this be?
This would be x53, right?
This would be x54.
This would be, oh, sorry, that's it there.
You'll see.
Why did I, yeah, okay, so here I'd have x34.
And now, so why am I stopping here?
And this also explains why I drew it by rotating 45 degrees, just for convenience.
Because you see, x12 is actually not a variable, right?
x12 is one of the edges of the polygon, and that's the thing which is on-shell.
So x12 is 0, x23 is 0, x34 is 0.
Similarly here, x15 is 0, x54 is 0, and so on, right?
And I have this grid that goes off to infinity in both directions, okay?
Just sickly repeating, okay?
So first of good, right?
Nothing exciting is happening yet.
There is a little peculiarity in this picture.
So let me, let me maybe draw, oops, I shouldn't have used that.
I'm gonna draw, so imagine in your mind that I can populate this with any number of these
I'm gonna make a grid like this anyway, right?
Okay, so I'm gonna just label this direction, just a name, for this direction I'm gonna
call t, and this direction x.
So something that looks like time and space, all right?
Just names, just names for the moment, you'll see why.
But so I'm just gonna draw a continuum picture for the minute, just in your mind imagine
filling it with as many, with lines, 45 degree lines, however you like.
I just wanna say some basic things.
So one thing is that there is a periodicity by two in this setup.
So there's something a little interesting here.
You see here we have five three, right?
And actually I didn't draw it up here.
And here is three five, it's up there.
So five three is down here, but three five is up there.
So but of course x five three is the same as x three five.
So this guy here is identified with this guy there.
And so in general, in this picture, if I have a point here, which is at x and t, and I imagine,
this has sort of length one, then it's identified here with a point that's one minus x and one
plus t.
In other words, this is ij and this is ji, all right?
So that's just a little thing to notice.
Okay, so it has a it has a Mobius property, it has this Mobius identification.
Okay, well if you don't, or it's just this trivial thing which I said.
Okay, so now let's say I want to just then choose some kind of non-redundant way of labeling
the variable.
I want to choose some chunk out of this grid, I want to choose some chunk out of this grid,
such that every variable occurs once, either as ij or as ji, all right?
But I don't want to have three five and five three together, okay?
And there are many ways of doing it, but any such way of doing it is kind of going to break
the symmetry of this problem a little bit.
I mean I have this infinite strip and I just have to choose some region, I have to choose
some region of the strip that has the property that every variable is contained once and
only once.
And you can choose any way of doing it that you like, but I'm going to choose one of them
and what I'm going to tell you will work for every such way of doing it, but I'm just going
to for simplicity choose one of them which is the easiest to work with.
And so let me draw what it looks like, let's say for n equals seven.
Okay, so once again we have these boundary guys with special here, that's one, two, three,
four.
Okay, so can you see plainly that every variable is there once and only once?
So for instance two five is here, but five two would have been up there somewhere, okay?
This is kind of amusing because this is what of course the kind of Penrose diagram of Minkowski
space for a scattering amplitude looks like, but anyway, that's, that's, all right.
So this is our kinematic space now, okay, we've now represented our kinematic space,
right?
We've just drawn all the variables in an obvious way, instead of just sprinkling them randomly
I'm organizing them by whether the indices are close to each other, just according to
the cyclic rotation around the polygon.
All right, but there's a really cool thing here, even going back before making this choice,
but I just want to make clear this is our kinematic space, this is our kinematic space.
But let's go back to this general picture, there's actually a good reason why I called
this t in this x, okay?
Because there's a very particular sense in which we should think about this as a space
time picture, completely different space time, has nothing to do with the space time, the
scattering process, but there's a good reason why this t, this direction is sort of usually
thought of as time like.
Let's go back and remember, what's the kind of most important thing about these chords?
The most important things is the chords cross or don't cross, right?
So we know that all the drama is going to be about whether these chords cross or uncross,
and when we think about the chords as just a chord on the end gone, of course we can
see whether they cross or not cross, but what we've now done by going to this kinematic
space is a point in this kinematic space is one of the chords before.
So now we should ask, what does it mean for the two chords to cross?
What property do the two points have on the left hand side that the chords cross or don't
cross on the right hand side?
And the answer is the following, it's very easy to see.
You see, let's say here is i, j, and here is k, l, somewhere else, okay?
i, j, and k, l will cross each other if and only if i, j, and k, l are the past and future
corners of a causal diamond that fits inside this space time.
What I mean is if I draw 45 degree lines back, and I now think of these as light rays, okay?
So this is the past of k, l, this is the future of i, j, and i, j, and k, l as chords intersect
each other if and only if this picture fits inside the strip.
Okay?
So we can see this very easily in this example, right?
So let's say I take 2, 5, and 3, 7.
So here is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
So I have 2, 5, and 3, 7 cross.
Okay.
Well, here is 2, 5, and 3, 7.
And indeed, 2, 5, and 3, 7 are the past and future corners of a causal diamond.
But what about 2, 5, and 1, 6?
Right?
Well, there is 2, 5, and there is 1, 6, and you see 2, 5, and 1, 6 are a space-like separation.
Okay?
And you can also have situations, I don't know, let's take 2, 4, and 4, 6, okay?
So here is 2, 4, and 4, 6.
Also don't cross each other, okay?
And what happens here is that 4, 6 is there, and there is its past like cone, and here
is 2, 4's future like cone, but you see they can't meet, there's not enough room for them
to meet.
Okay?
So 2, 4 going forward, so the causal diamond doesn't fit inside this strip, all right?
And so that's very easy, that's very easy just to a check, but this is slightly striking,
that this just, we've organized our variables in such a way that the question of whether
or not things are compatible is associated with whether or not the points are past and
future corners of a like cone.
Okay.
Now we have our kinematic space, and now we have to ask a question in kinematic space.
We have to do something in kinematic space, all right?
Now let me tell you what we're going to do.
Now if someone were to just tell you, just you're a physicist, and you have some space,
some two-dimensional space with one time and one space coordinate, and you want to write
down some equation in this space for some variable, oh, and what is our, you know, so
we have this x that depends on ij, right?
I was writing as xij, right?
So it's like I have an x that depends on two variables.
What kind of equation would you think of writing down in two dimensions?
Yeah?
What's the harmonic oscillator equation in two dimensions?
In one dimension it's x double dot plus omega squared x equals zero.
What is it in two dimensions?
Well, you have two kinds of dot, right?
You have r double dot and r double prime.
And what is that equation called?
It's the wave equation, all right?
All right, so just keep that in mind.
In fact, what we're going to do is write down the following equations.
For every diamond that you see in the picture, actually, let me, for all these tiny diamonds
that we see in the picture, for every diamond that we see, right?
Whatever the diamond is, it has a past and a future and a left and a right.
We're going to write down the equation x future plus x past minus x left minus x right is
equal to a constant.
And that constant will depend on what the diamond is, which diamond we're talking about.
Okay, now, what does this equation remind you of?
Let's say you make this diamond very, very small.
What is this combination, past plus future minus left minus right, to double derivative,
right?
It's d by du.
So if this direction is u, if this direction is v, it's d by du, d by dv.
So this is something that, in the limit where the diamond gets very small, is literally
the wave equation.
What is this equation itself?
Just imagine this was in a continuum.
There's no discrete anything.
This is Gauss's law for the wave equation.
You've maybe never thought of Gauss's law for the wave equation.
You think about Gauss's law for the Laplacian, but there's also Gauss's law for the wave
equation, and this is it.
If you have a plus one-dimensional wave equation, then if you have the equation du, dv, x equals
some current c, then Gauss's law is exactly that if you take any diamond past future left
right, x past plus x future minus x left minus x right is just the integral of the current
inside the diamond.
You can prove that the same fact.
You really prove it by showing that in the limit as the diamonds get small, you get the
wave equation back.
Notice a cool thing.
If I tell you this equation for this little diamond and for that little diamond, if I tell
you Gauss's law for this diamond and then for that diamond, then if I just add those
two Gauss's law, what do I get?
I get the equation for that diamond, because I get this plus this minus that minus that,
plus this plus this minus that minus that, but that guy cancels in the middle, so I'm
just left with the boundary pieces, just like the way Stokes theorem works, except very
visually in 2-D like this.
In fact, giving you just the primitive Gauss's laws for these little diamonds guarantees
that you have the Gauss's law that's satisfied for all the diamonds, where the right-hand
side is just the sum of all the meshes.
If you put meshes together in any way to make a bigger mesh, then the big Gauss's law will
be just the sum of all the meshes that are contained in it.
So far so good?
Now, here is maybe admittedly a jump.
Why did we pull this wave equation out of nowhere, et cetera?
But I'm going to do it without apology.
This is the artisanal part, and we will proceed.
But let's see what this looks like in various cases.
So for instance, what does it look like when n equals 4?
Well, here it's really simple, because here I just have 1, 2, 1, 3, 1, 4.
Okay.
Here I only have one mesh, which is this one.
Okay?
And so the only equation I'm going to write down is x13 plus x24 equals a constant.
From now on, I will label the mesh by its past anchor.
Okay?
So in this case, I'll label it by c13.
That unambiguously says who it is.
It's just a mesh that's sort of above that.
Okay?
All right.
So this is our kinematic space, and this is our question in kinematic space.
We're looking at this sort of discrete wave equation in kinematic space.
And now we're going to say the word positivity.
We're going to ask that all of the xij's are positive, and all of these meshes are positive
as well.
All these mesh constants for the Gauss's law are positive as well.
Okay?
All right, so let's see what happens in this case, right?
So I'm trying to solve the equation x13 plus x24 equals c.
C is positive, and I also want x13 and x24 to be positive.
Now, by the way, since we know this is just a discrete version of the wave equation, we
also know that if you give me the initial data on this, like, past surface, then I can
unambiguously solve for every one of the future, right?
So that's why it's natural to think of this as the initial surface, the initial Cauchy
surface, and I'm going to solve for every one of the future.
Is that clear?
I can solve for everyone just because, for example, I solve for that guy using this mesh
relation, right?
Then I use solve for that guy using this one, that one, then I just keep on going, right?
So obviously I can solve for everyone if you just give me the initial data.
Okay?
Yes?
Why is there no x to x, right?
Sorry?
Ah, thank you.
Sorry, because remember x23 is equal to m squared is equal to zero, and x14 is equal
to zero.
Sorry about that.
Thank you very much.
Okay?
So remember, all of these guys at the boundaries, the boundaries are special.
These boundary things are zero.
Okay?
Yes?
Yes?
Yes?
Yes.
Yes?
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Basically, yeah.
I mean, that's right.
Yes, it does.
Yes.
No, no, no, no.
You need, I mean, yeah, right.
No, it fixes it to this form.
It has to look like a derivative, a discrete derivative in both directions, and it fixes
it to this form.
So if you wanted to start from that as a primitive thing, then that might give you a motivation
for it.
Okay.
So, but now what I'm going to, now what I want to do is just look at what is, what's
the, so let me say again what we're doing.
So if we ask for all of the x's to be positive when the c's are positive, that's going to
put some constraints on this initial set of x's.
Right?
If they're random, first of all, they all have to be positive to begin with, but they
presumably have to satisfy some constraints in order for everyone inside to stay positive.
Right?
So we're going to come back to that.
Right?
So we're going to carve out in the initial, in the space of the initial x's, there's
going to be some region which is carved out by this demand, that on the support of this
wave equation, of this discrete wave equation, that all the x's remain positive.
Let's see what that region looks like.
Now in this, in this example, it's really, it's really simple.
So in x13 space, okay, here's x13 space, so first of all, x13 itself has got to be
positive.
Okay?
So here's the origin in x13 space.
So x13 has got to be over here, but also x24 has got to be positive, and x24 has got
to be positive, is c13 minus x13.
So that means that x13 has got to be less than something.
It's got to be less than c13.
Okay?
So in x13 space, if I imagine these c's are fixed, these c's are some fixed things,
in x13 space, I have to live inside this interval.
Okay?
Not very exciting so far.
Perhaps.
All right, let's do the next example.
I'll erase this picture.
I know I should be moving the boards up and down, but.
So now I have 1, 3, and 1, 4.
This is 2, 4, 2, 5, 3, 5.
Okay?
And so now my free variables are x13 and x14, right?
So now let's write down, but let's write down our mesh equation.
So I have x13 plus x24 minus x14 is equal to c13.
I have this equation, x25 plus x14 minus x24.
Equals c24.
And I have this equation, which is x24 plus x35 minus x25 equals c.
Sorry, I did this wrong.
That's 1, 4.
That's 2, 4.
And once again, there's terms that are missing here that are just equal to 0.
So I just didn't write them down.
Okay?
Yes?
Well, that's the whole interesting thing, is that we're going to see that just by asking,
that's one way of motivating these, because you see exactly the guys that appear here
are the ones that are the past and future corners of the tiniest causal diamonds that
we could have, right?
So well, we'll come to that in exactly a second, because that's exactly what's going
to enforce, the beginning to enforce the structure that we want.
So just hang on to your question for a second.
Okay, but I just want to say the first, the most mechanical thing that you could do,
the most mechanical thing you could do is now you can just solve for 2, 4, 2, 5 and 3, 5
in terms of 1, 3 and 1, 4 from these equations.
Okay?
So let's do that.
In fact, we could take linear combinations of these equations or, which is the same thing,
we could just look at the picture and draw the mesh that's more convenient for us.
So for instance, if I want to solve for x24, well, x24 is already fine.
So x24 is equal to c13 plus x14 minus x13.
x25, now I could take linear combinations of equations, but I could go back to the picture.
See, there's a Gauss's law, which is 1, 3 plus 2, 5 minus 0 minus 0 is equal to c13
plus c14.
Okay?
So I can use that to solve for x25, and x25 is c13 plus c14 minus x13 plus c14 minus
c13, and x35 is, so who is this guy's convenient Gauss's law?
It's with 1, 4.
So x14 plus x35 minus 0 minus 0 is c14 plus c24.
Okay?
And so now I want to have that all the x's are positive.
So now, if I work in my initial conditions plane, x13 and x14, then clearly they both
have to be positive, so I have to live in this upper quadrant.
But also I have to have that x14 minus x13 is greater than minus c13, right?
So that's a line that starts at minus c13 here and then hits c13 there, so I have to
be above here.
And also you see that x25 being bigger than 0 means that x13 has got to be smaller than
something.
Now, notice here how crucial it is that my assumption that the c's are positive.
I assume the c's are positive, so the x25 being positive means that x13 is less than
c13 plus c14, but that's bigger than c13.
So that means that I get to go up this way for a while and then I have a cut here.
I have to be on this side.
And similarly, the fact that there's a c14 plus sitting there means that x35 bigger than
0 chops this off down here somewhere.
So you see that I have to live inside this pentagon.
Okay, so what we've seen in our two examples is that if I just ask for this solution of
the wave equation, a positive solution of the wave equation with positive source that
that carves out of the initial condition space, it carves out a shape.
And the shape with the interval for n equals 4 and the inside of a pentagon for n equals
5, these are the associahedra so far, yes.
I just realized it's not that clear to me why, for example, x4 must...
Why did you do it for this?
I'm not explaining it at all.
I'll give some intuition for it in a second.
We'll have some intuition for it in a moment, okay?
But I'm just beginning by giving you the answer, okay?
And then we'll sort of interpret where this comes from.
Well, I'll say it now that we want some kind of space where the boundaries correspond to
the poles, right?
So we know that I can set any one of these x's to 0 that I want, and that's supposed to be a pole.
So we want to have some kind of boundary when any x goes to 0, any x I j goes to 0.
So that's why, to begin with, I just impose that they're all positive, okay?
So that's why we should expect some kind of positivity because we want the sort of boundary,
the poles that correspond to hitting those are boundaries.
But we need much more to tell that there's some pattern in which how they come together, right?
Not just that they're individually positive, but there's some pattern in which how they come together.
And the interesting thing is that the pattern in which and how they come together is captured by this sort of picture of some kind of local process,
some local evolution dynamics, all in quotation marks in this kinematics space, okay?
And now we'll understand why.
We'll understand why this does everything it should do.
Here we've just observed we get the correct shapes, but I'm now going to explain why we get the correct shapes.
Yes.
Was there a question up there?
The positive is a pure convention.
In fact, you could have any number you wanted for each boundary separately,
and that would correspond to a theory with every propagator is even allowed to have its own mass, okay?
But you could definitely let them all be the same common number, even so zero here is pure, pure convenience,
so I don't have to drag around extra constants.
You could in your mind put any constant there that you want for each one of them, okay?
Yes.
Yes, it's always a pentagon, yes.
And it's obvious why you get a pentagon, because if you solve in terms of other variables,
the other variables will just be a linear transformation of these ones.
So if you take a linear transformation on this picture, you'll just get another picture of the sides, you know,
moved around a little bit, but you'll get a similar picture.
The fact that it's a pentagon is an invariant statement that's independent of the sort of coordinates of how I presented it.
Okay?
All right.
So now why does this work in general?
So it's clear that this picture is defining a polytope.
Totally clear that it's defining a general N.
So why does this work in general?
Clearly for general N, we're always getting a polytope.
We get a polytope.
Basically by construction, right?
I have a bunch of linear equations.
I'm asking everyone to be positive on these linear equations.
One way of thinking about what we're doing is that we have this very big space of all of the X's, right?
And the wave equation is slicing this space with a hyperplane, right?
There's this big hyperplane that's defined by all these equations associated with every mesh.
So the big kinematic space is N minus 3 over 2 dimensional, but there is a hyperplane in that space.
And in this NN minus 3 over 2 dimensional space, I just have the positive orthent.
This one is positive. Very boring.
But I take that space and I intersect it with an interesting hyperplane that's given by these mesh relations.
So for example, in the simplest case of N equals 4, I would have X13 and X14, both positive.
But I'm intersecting it with this line X13 plus X24 equals C13.
Okay, and if I intersect it, I get that on the intersection plane, which in this case is a line,
I get the interval.
Or in the N equals 5 case, I have a 5-dimensional space, a 5-dimensional positive orthent,
and I'm intersecting it, I'm just slicing it with a 3-dimensional, with a 2-dimensional plane.
It's three equations that get me down to a 2-dimensional plane.
And on that 2-dimensional plane, there is this pentagon living there on the 2-dimensional plane.
Who is this 2-dimensional plane? It's a solution of the wave equation, right?
That's what the, I have the kinematic space on the support of the solution of the discrete wave equation.
With these, that when I intersect the positive orthent, gives me the, gives me this, gives me the associator.
Yes.
The meaning is to tell, there are two ways to talk about two points of guarantee.
One, a facadefinition.
Yes.
This seems very much like a facadefinition.
This is very much a facadefinition.
Yes.
Is there, from a good way, if you look at the picture and see if it's a vertical, is this the facadefinition?
Yes.
And in fact, in a sense, totally understanding a geometry is really that you understand both its vertices and its facets.
But that would take me longer than the 15 extra minutes that I want to spend on this before I start talking about the amplitude.
But the short answer is yes.
This is really just a broad point.
You know, there's a lot of things you can say about polytopes, the, or general positive geometries or polytopes, they have canonical forms, blah, blah, blah.
But what it means to understand when something interesting is happening is precisely when you understand the object well enough that you can see it from both points of view.
And understanding a class of polytopes means that you understand it from the vertex definition and from the facadefinition.
And typically, in physics, we're handed it in one way or the other.
And if you're handed it, let's say, as a vertex definition, then it's not that easy.
I mean, there's an algorithmic way of doing it, but it's exponentially complicated.
So the kind of hammer for doing it for a random polytope, you can apply to the ones that we get in physics, but it somehow is not especially insightful.
What's really interesting is that the objects we see in physics, we can understand from both points of view.
So you really can really understand it, which means you understand the facadefinition, you understand the vertex definition, you really get it.
And very often, the kind of all the juice, all the sort of magic that is happening is exactly that while for a random polytope, you wouldn't know what to do.
For the things we get in physics, we happen to be able to understand it from every point of view, and then you have an analytic control of what it looks like on the other end.
So that's a very good question, but I don't have time to answer it here, but it has a very nice answer.
Alright, now why does it work in general?
Well, what I want to do is it's clear we're getting a polytope.
What I now want to do is show you that we're getting a polytope that's guaranteed to have the property that if you go to a facet, what you get on the facet is a direct product of two lower polytopes of the same type.
So the fact that it's polytopal is going to be, is obvious, is built in, but it's factorization will also be obvious.
We're going to see that factorization is obvious.
And anyway, and that's what, so you could just plot this on the computer with Mathematica for n equals six, and you'd get a very, very nice three-dimensional shape that if you look at six pentagonal faces,
three square faces and has exactly the combinatorics of the associatron, although it won't look like the one I drew.
It has very funny parallel sides, you know, it has a very special specific version.
Now the shape that I drew is just a sort of combinatorics of how they come together.
It's a very specific version that you get, but you can just do it in real time as I'm blabbering just to get a feeling for what they look like.
Yes.
Sorry, was it a statement that we're getting a polytope that has an n-facet that is a product of n minus one facet?
No, it has a codimension one facet, and every codimension one facet will be the product of two lower associatron with two different values, n one and n two, so long as n one plus n two add up to n plus two.
Okay.
All right, but let me just give you a, let me give you at least a sketch for why it's true.
It's a really simple argument, so with the sketch you should be able to fill it in pretty easily.
So just so I don't keep drawing lines all the time, again imagine this is sort of a continuum picture, but you can fill in any number of lines, 45 degree lines in here that you like.
Now here's the point.
So let's say as I'm moving around here, I'm changing the x's here, the c's are fixed somewhere in here, right?
The c's are all fixed, but as I move around somewhere I'm hitting a boundary.
That means that somewhere in here there's some x which has gone to zero, right?
So let's say there's an x in here which has gone to zero.
Now here's the critical point.
If an x has gone to zero, and this is related to a question that was asked a moment ago, let's say there's an x here which is equal to zero.
Now let's look at any causal diamond, either to the path to the future of this guy, it doesn't matter.
But let's look at any guy which is a complementary.
If this x goes to zero, then those guys cannot go to zero.
Now why?
Let's look at the Gauss's law.
The Gauss's law says that x plus x prime minus x left minus x right is equal to c, right?
Say for this guy.
Well let's say I put x equal to zero.
Then I can't put x prime to zero because if I do the sum of two negative things would equal something positive.
Okay?
So in this way we see the first vivid fact about these polytopes.
Remember, maybe I didn't emphasize it when we first drew them, but one of the things these polytopes do is there's this face that corresponds to some x.
There's this one that corresponds to a different one.
The most zeroth order thing is that if two cords cross, if two channels are incompatible, well the faces shouldn't meet each other, right?
So the zeroth order job of this polytope is to keep apart the facets that are incompatible with each other.
Okay, well we just did it.
We see that facets that are incompatible cannot possibly meet.
Alright?
So that's progress, but we need to see more.
We need to see what you can call the totalitarian principle.
Gell-Mann called the totalitarian principle, which is that everything that's not forbidden is compulsory.
Okay?
So we see that, so the incompatible guys can't meet, but we have to see that everything that is compatible will meet, right?
And in fact we're going to see more.
We're now going to see that the resulting object is actually the direct product of two lower sociohedra.
But to begin with, let's go to this picture and let's first draw the obvious 45 degree lines coming out of it.
Just the light rays that would bounce off coming off this point.
Oops, I don't know why I can draw them straight, but anyway.
Let me draw them a little more straight.
So in here is where we're zero.
So you see, nowhere in there, none of those X's can go to zero.
Right?
Because every X in here is either the past or the future of some diamond that is associated with this guy.
So that's already kind of interesting.
Furthermore, you can really easily convince yourself that everyone in this red region, everyone here, you can actually solve for them if you're just given the data of the rest of the boundary regions.
Just by using Gauss's law, if you know, if you give me the sort of data on every there that's not in the red regions, I can reconstruct what the X's in the red region are from the knowledge of the other ones.
So I really don't need the red regions for anything.
What I mean is that nothing in the red regions can ever go to zero, so they're never going to participate in any other boundary.
And furthermore, if you just give me the data of the X's on the non-red regions, I can completely reconstruct what the X's are in the red regions from them.
So I'm going to do something here.
I'm just going to make a new picture where I'm just going to scrunch away the red regions.
I'm going to scrunch away the red regions by taking this little triangle and just sliding it, just to scrunch that away, and taking this and scrunching it away there.
I'll say what I mean by the scrunching in a second, but let's just see what happens if I do.
See, I get this triangle here, and then I get this triangle here.
And let me denote these sort of red lines that I did some scrunching.
So inside that red region is actually the scrunch of everyone that was scrunched away.
So it's just a reminder that that's where I scrunched.
Now we're done.
All we have to do is make one final comment is when I scrunch these guys away, as far as the rest of the problem goes, now let's say I have a Gauss's law here on two points that are sort of separated by the scrunched line.
Well, they just satisfy that x plus x minus x minus x is the sum of whatever meshes they had before plus the sum of all the red meshes that I scrunched away there.
So that just redefines what I mean by the meshes for the new problem.
And it's still positive because everything was positive and I added positive things to positive things.
Now why is that the case? Well, again, it's clear here because, again, if I take any diamond in here, then whatever I have for this plus this, it's the sum of the meshes plus whatever the red stuff was.
Meanwhile, if I give you the x's here and here and here, now I have a new problem.
I have a new problem in terms of all of these x's and all of these x's and these new mesh constants that have been slightly modified by the scrunching.
Okay, but now what do I have? Well, I have one associated and I have another associated.
The space of x's that I have is literally the direct product of the space of x's on this side and the space of x's on that side.
So factorization is this utter triviality about scrunching.
A, that you can get rid of everyone on the inside because you can't set them to zero and then you can reconstruct all of them from the boundary values of the other ones.
And when you scrunched away, you just manifestly get the direct product of two smaller problems.
Okay, so that is an example of the kind of thing that we're talking about.
As I said, you can still complain about a lot of things. Why do you do this wave equation? Why do you do all this stuff?
But I think you'd have to sort of be pretty hard-hearted not to think something sort of interesting has happened.
We go to kinematic space, we ask these very simple questions, and then something comes out that has these features of there's a pole.
And when you go on the pole, you factorize into the product of two other objects of exactly the same sort.
And we did not ask anywhere about Feynman diagrams, propagators, nothing like that.
Okay, now I'll just say it in words because I want to move on to the next topic.
What is the amplitude? The amplitude is a canonical form with logarithmic singularities on the boundary of the amplitude.
But in fact, it's a little bit more interesting than that. It's a form that's defined on the entire kinematic space.
So let me at least give one example of this.
Because in the end, the kinematic space picture of the amputahedron is exactly the same structure as what we're going to see here except somewhat more abstract.
So already it's useful talking about it here.
So maybe the sort of final topic I'll just talk about, I'll really sketch in five minutes, is scattering forms and scattering amplitudes, functions and forms.
So let's go back, forget about all this fancy stuff.
For the n equals 4, the amplitude is like 1 over s plus 1 over t, or in this language it would be 1 over x13 plus 1 over x24.
That's the actual amplitude.
But what we're going to do is instead we're going to look at a scattering form, a one form.
I mean we have these poles, 1 over x13, 1 over x24.
We're going to look at a one form, obviously, that lives on x13, x14 space.
Sorry, this is x14.
Sorry, x24, sorry.
So omega is going to be dx13 over x13.
And then plus or minus, let's come back to that in a second, dx24 over x24.
Now clearly this is kind of closely related to that except for this interesting question about the sign.
And in fact what we're going to want here is the minus sign again.
But what this form is, is there's a unique form on x13 and x24 space.
So it's defined on this full two dimensional space, x13 and x24.
But let's say you take this form and you pull it back.
It's a one form that's defined on a two dimensional space.
So that means it's natural to take this form and just pull it back, look at what it looks like on a one dimensional subspace.
So I'm going to take this form, I'm going to pull it back onto the subspace where x13 plus x24 equals c.
So what is this?
Well this is, for example, is dx13 and it's 1 over x13.
And because of this minus sign, but also x24 is equal to c minus x13, this is actually plus 1 over c minus x13.
You see which is dx13 times 1 over x13 plus 1 over x24, where x24 is evaluated on this subspace.
So see something slightly interesting happened.
There is this form that lives on the whole space, but its form is completely determined, with the minus sign even,
it's completely determined by the requirement that when you pull it back on this subspace, exactly the subspace that we talked about,
you get the canonical form for the interval.
And furthermore, the form on that subspace is the amplitude, gives you the amplitude.
You strip off the trivial dx part and the form gives you the amplitude.
So that's pretty cool.
You start with a form that lives in the entire kinematic space.
You pull it back to the subspace defined by the solution of the wave equation.
So what is the picture?
So the picture, finally for what's determining the amplitude, is in kinematic space we have, oh we have a nice piece of chalk here that I didn't see the whole time.
Okay, so here's kinematic space.
Here it's a space of all xij's, it's an n minus 3 over 2 dimensional.
In this space is like a positive region.
So I'm going to call this positive region P.
I mean it's not curvy.
In this case it's literally an orthent, but I'm just going to draw it just a little impressionistically.
There's a positive region P.
This is in this case just the region where all the x's are positive.
But there's also this sort of hyperplane that lives in this space.
And this hyperplane is defined by the wave equation, x plus x minus x minus x equals c.
The definition of the hyperplane also has some positivity in it.
The c's have got to be positive.
And the intersection between these two things gives us the associated hydrant.
So that's the kind of picture that we've been seeing.
And there's a big form that lives in the whole space.
There's a big scattering form that lives on the whole space.
Such that when you pull it back to this subspace h,
you get dn minus 3x, some trivial form, multiplied by the amplitude.
So this in the end is the story.
This is what determines the amplitudes directly in kinematic space.
So it looks a little bit funny.
Why do we choose that type of plane?
Why do we make various choices?
But this is an example of the kind of question.
There's going to be a literal analog of this for the amplitude hydrant.
But maybe we can stop now and see if there's any questions about this
and ask Yara about advice about what we're doing.
Okay, thank you for the second part.
So I have a maybe two part question.
I'm hearing you, man.
It's obvious to me that you get these linear equations or inequalities
that cuts out something in a positive authentic.
But why is it compact and why is it not an unbounded object?
That's because it's clear there's always minus lines.
Let me...
Did you swallow it?
I'm sufficiently surprised that I might erase the blackboard of the pizza.
If I scratch it, that's completely rambling.
You removed the microphone.
Well, I went from being Madonna to, I don't know, Beyonce.
Okay, you see, there's always...
So I have one, three, one, four, one, five, let's say.
But there's always, for one, three, there's always is partner on the deep future boundary.
Okay?
And so there's always a Gauss law that involves just two terms.
This plus this, minus zero, minus zero is positive.
And so that means that that guy's positivity forces each one of these guys to be bounded.
Okay.
And continuing on this structure here, you proved the factorization,
but why is it an associahedra and not just a generalized permutahedra?
Oh, because we got exactly the same right triangle picture back.
So I'm saying that you get something which looks like these little right triangles,
and when you go to a boundary, on that boundary,
you get the direct product of two other little right triangles of exactly the same type.
And you can have some fun doing it for the case where you make a choice from the initial strip
instead of making the sort of simplest choice, just make a random choice.
You can make any old choice that you want for keeping one copy of all the variables.
And it's exactly the same picture is true.
And you can do the same scrunching argument.
It's just slightly more fun to see how the scrunching works,
but it's always the case that you get objects of the same type.
Okay.
Yeah. Hi.
I'm here.
Oh, there you are.
Yeah.
Hi.
So how much of this, I mean, what would ruin it?
Like, suppose I take scalar interactions, which are, which have derivatives in it,
or which are mixed, which are higher order.
Yeah.
So, so everything so far here is about denominators.
Everything is about denominators and the structure of poles.
And, but the fact that I get amplitudes as a residue of the form,
there wouldn't the numerator also come in the very much.
No, so what I'm saying everything.
So this entire structure is really about the denominators.
And if you want to talk about a totally general theory,
you want to somehow start thinking about numerators in some way.
I would say that I think what one of the biggest challenge,
and you know, it's been happening in various ways and there's lots of nice work.
But, but one of the things that, that needs to be done more systematically in this vein is to,
is to remove the sort of vice grip of the delog form from our imaginations.
That, that it could be there's a sort of a more general way of endowing forms
and functions with these geometries.
What seems definitely correct is that the, I mean, the reason it's a good start
is that the singularity structure of the denominators is universal for any theory
or any color theory anyway.
So, yeah.
Another very big challenge in this neighborhood though is thinking about
is there a kind of a geometry for gravity?
And if there's a kind of, and again, it doesn't have so much to do with gravity,
it has to do with whether it's things that are uncolored.
And you're the zero-thorner thing to start with the dumbest theory of an uncolored phi-cubed
where the four-point amplitude would be one over s plus one over t plus one over u.
There's no ordering.
And there is your challenge because whatever the heck it is,
if there's some kind of geometry, it would have to be one-dimensional
because we only have one propagator.
And yet it has three poles.
There is no geometry that lives in one dimension that has three boundaries.
So there's this very super basic problem.
And this problem is reflected in many, many places.
It's reflected in string theory.
It's reflected, I mean, it's not a problem.
It's a fact that somehow the sort of boundary structure of the modularized space for closed strings
does not have boundaries in co-dimension one.
It has boundaries in co-dimension two.
It's the open strings that you have these nice sort of drop one in dimension phenomenon.
So there is something new that's needed to tie uncolored theories in this.
Maybe there's nothing like it for uncolored theories.
We don't know.
But I think if you ask Yara, he knows more about what gravity amplitudes look like, you know,
in his bones somewhere, then certainly than I do, probably more than most people do.
And he's pretty convinced that some structure like this exists.
So I trust him.
Okay.
More questions?
There's one more.
Hi.
Do you know that picture you drew for the factorization?
I understood that the red regions, everything's non-zero.
But why did you get rid of them?
Why did you scrunch it down?
Oh, the only reason I scrunched them visually just so we could.
I didn't need to scrunch it.
But then the really important point is that everything inside, not only can they never go to zero,
but they're completely determined by the things outside.
Just from Gauss's law.
So I really, they're fully determined.
They're fully, totally determined from the ones outside.
Thanks.
Okay.
More questions?
If not, thanks Nima for this part of the lecture again.
And now we decided to do following.
So we officially end the school now.
So thanks everybody for coming and thanks for all the speakers.
Probably we can ask to stand up, people helping us and thank them.
So it's Michal, it's Petr, it's Taro, it's Christof.
Who did I forgot?
Of course there are people helping us and they are not here.
And yeah, but like people from Seiko and people from our department, but they are not here.
Okay, good.
So, but this means that we take a break now.
There are some snacks in the back and people who need sleep or are on a regular schedule.
Then they can slowly leave.
And everybody else who wants to learn something about the amplitude he drawn.
So we reconvene back in, let's say 20 minutes and Nima will continue.
Okay.
What's up?
Yeah, so we have one.
She had to like manually search for them because they were searching for them.
Well, but I was, I was, she said it was like half of one.
It was half of one in the morning.
So I guess she probably was trying to sleep.
So we should check on the, on the.
Sorry for this.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And this is actually the kind of first thing.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So, in order to show that the action is positive, we want to show that for any, for any, for
any, for any signature, but as long as they're not real, this is typical of the s dot, dot.
And so this is the cool thing about Laurentian signature is that if you have a vector in
Laurentian signature such that v dot v equals to zero, then v dot v star is always positive.
And so this is just, if you run it a plus i v, so a dot dot a plus i v, this tells you
that a squared minus b squared equals to zero and that a dot v is equal to zero.
If this is, but let's say that a is, oh, meanwhile, sorry, meanwhile v dot star is equal to a squared
a dot a. And you see, these equations tell you that a has to be spacelike.
Because if a dot v is zero, like let's say a looks like one somewhere, one a, then b,
so that's the equation, you have to be zero or something.
Sorry, let's say a is one zero, then b would have to be zero or something, and then you can
have a squared equal to zero. So a has to be spacelike.
But because a squared equals b squared, we know that a squared has a fixed sign, so
v dot b star is equal to a squared of a fixed sign. And this is only true in Laurentian signature.
So, yeah, because in any other typical, there's not going to be an extra component up there,
and now it's not true.
So that was actually special about the, and so that's why on any solution of the federal equation,
not only is the action positive, but it's, the Laurentian density, the world's density is positive.
So they were sort of more positive than at least in cities.
And now, yeah.
It is, yeah, and it's damped up for it, because it's possible for all actions to be positive
but the Laurentian density actually goes negative from there.
So Laurentian signature is just hammering the, the integral or something everywhere up on it.
But, but, but, but I was wondering what, this is a, this is an amusing fact about the Laurentian signature that I didn't know.
That's about that.
Oh, sure, sure. Yeah, well, yeah.
Yeah.
Definitely, yes, yes. Thanks for staying.
I appreciate it.
I didn't say most.
Okay.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
