Welcome back.
The first 19 lectures of this course have, for the most part, told an uplifting story
of ancient technologies improving the human condition, aqueducts, supplying water, mills
producing flour, temples inspiring worshipers. Today we must examine the darker side of ancient
technology, its use in warfare. War in any age is a human tragedy, and wars in antiquity were
particularly brutal, often ending with a mass slaughter, deportation, or enslavement of entire
populations. Studying technologies that have caused so much suffering is likely to make us
a bit uncomfortable, yet we can't allow our discomfort to deter us from exploring this subject
for three reasons. First, many historical events that have profoundly altered the course of human
affairs were significantly influenced by military technology. For example, as we've seen in lecture
one in 480 BC, Athenian triremes were instrumental in winning the naval battle of Salamis, which paved
the way for the extraordinary cultural achievements of Greece's gold and age. In 70 AD, Roman siege
machinery brought about the destruction of Jerusalem, which initiated the Jewish diaspora,
and a subsequent chain of events that still dominate our headlines today.
Second, the urgency of war tends to concentrate funding, creativity, and expertise on technological
development with an intensity rarely seen in peacetime. As a result, military technologies often
lead and influence non-military technological development. We've already encountered this
phenomenon in the construction of Trajan's column, which used a lifting device that was
probably adapted from a military siege tower. Simply put, the technology of war is worth studying
because it's an essential part of the broader story of technological development. In today's lecture,
we'll focus on the ancient world's most technologically intensive form of warfare,
the siege, which provided a powerful stimulus for the development of large-scale machines
that were as ingenious as they were deadly. Siege warfare probably originated in Mesopotamia
during the 2nd millennium BC in response to the development of increasingly effective fortifications.
The typical city of this era was surrounded by a thick mudbrick wall with a stone foundation.
An elevated wall walk made it possible for defending troops to move very quickly around the
perimeter protected by parapets. Towers provided enhanced fields of view and gateways were heavily
reinforced with mutually supporting bastions. To overcome these formidable defensive systems,
attacking forces might use any of five different siege methods. They could first cross over the
defensive wall using scaling ladders, mobile siege towers, or earth embankments. Second,
they could break through the wall with battering rams or by undermining the foundations. Third,
tunnel under the city wall. Fourth, blockade the city and starve it into submission, or fifth,
use deception or treachery, perhaps feigning retreat and then returning by night to conduct a
surprise assault, perhaps bribing someone within the walls to betray the city.
None of these methods guaranteed success. Thus, the ancient world's greatest masters of siege
craft, the Assyrians, the Persians, the Macedonians, and the Romans, learned to employ multiple methods
and technologies in flexible and complementary ways to enhance their prospects for success.
Let's begin with the Assyrians, who conquered much of the Near East during the 8th century BC
through the systematic employment of siege warfare. Assyrian siege craft is exemplified by
King Sennacherib's conquest of the Judean city of Lakish in 701 BC.
Amazingly, this little known event from distant antiquity is attested in three different sources.
The Old Testament Book of Kings, archaeological remains of an Assyrian siege ramp at Lakish,
and an extraordinary series of stone reliefs, which originally decorated Sennacherib's palace
at Nineveh. These carvings vividly depict the Assyrian troops scaling the city walls on ladders
and ramps, wheel-battering ramps breaching mudbrick walls with chisel-shaped iron blades,
and mobile siege towers serving as firing platforms for archers.
This complex form of warfare could only be prosecuted by a powerful ruler who commanded
vast resources and engineering talent. Recall from Lecture 12 that Sennacherib is also credited
with building the world's first aqueduct, an enterprise requiring a similar exercise
of centralized political power. Assyrian power waned in a series of civil wars following the
death of King Ashurbanipal in 627 BC, and this great empire was eventually eclipsed by the Persians
under Cyrus the Great in 560 BC. Unfortunately, the Persians left us no similar depictions of
sieges, yet the historical records suggest that they learned well from their Assyrian forebears.
Herodotus tells us, and archaeology confirms, that Cyrus employed the full panoply of siege
methods in his conquest of Lydia and the Greek cities of Ionia in the 6th century BC.
Through these campaigns, the Greeks probably received their first taste of siege warfare.
Despite this traumatic introduction, classical-era Greeks seldom practice siege craft themselves.
Unlike the great kingdoms of Assyria and Persia, the typical polis simply couldn't afford to develop
siege machinery. Rather, Greek city-states fielded armies of citizen-soldiers called hoplites,
infantrymen, who bought their own armor and who fought in tightly-packed linear formations
called the phalanx. Greek hoplites were renowned for their effectiveness on the field of battle,
but they were of little use in a siege. As we saw in our lecture on urban planning,
Greek fortifications typically consisted of heavy stone walls and closing an entire urban area.
These great circuits were essentially impregnable to enemy armies not equipped with siege machinery.
And so when Greek armies fought each other, as they often did,
they usually met on the battlefield by mutual consent. And when they fought the Persians,
they often sought to preempt a siege by abandoning their fortifications and attacking with the phalanx,
as at the Battle of Marathon, or by fighting at sea, as at Salamis.
After their great victory at Salamis, the Athenians formed the Delian League. A group of city-states
allied for mutual defense against the Persians. But as the League gradually transformed into a
de facto Athenian Empire, some of its members rebelled against their new overlord, and Athens
found herself having to conduct sieges against her erstwhile allies. Pericles, the great Athenian
statesman, was reported to have been the first Greek to use a battering ram at a siege of Samos
in 440 BC. But this use of siege machinery, if it happened at all, was a rare exception to the
usual rule. Even rich Athens, at the height of her imperial power, relied almost exclusively on the
blockade to coerce recalcitrant subjects back into the League. This technique, called peritikismos
in Greek, was executed by encircling an enemy city with a substantial wall of stone or wood,
augmented by a naval blockade if necessary. The limitations of peritikismos are vividly
illustrated by Athens' ill-fated Sicilian expedition from 415 to 413 BC during the Peloponnesian War.
In their campaign against the city of Syracuse, the Athenians first established a fort on the
plateau overlooking the city, then successfully drove a pair of siege walls south to the great
harbor to secure their access to the sea. At this point, had they aggressively completed their planned
wall to the north, they would have completely isolated Syracuse and probably would have won the
campaign. But they dallied, and the Syracuse unceased the initiative by driving a perpendicular wall
across the proposed line of the Athenian encirclement. This very simple countermeasure
scuttled the entire Athenian plan, turned the tide of the campaign against them,
and ultimately led to the destruction of the entire expeditionary force. Had the Athenians
been able to deploy more sophisticated siege technology, the outcome would certainly have
been different. As it was, their limited capacity for siege warfare ultimately cost them not only
the battle, but the war. Large-scale mechanized siege warfare was finally brought to the western
world in the 5th century BC by Carthage. This North African city had been founded four centuries
earlier as a colony of Phoenicia, the great seafaring civilization centered on the Mediterranean
coastline of modern Lebanon. After the Persians conquered this region in 539 BC, large numbers of
Phoenicians immigrated to Carthage. Thus, it's likely that Carthaginian enthusiasm for siege craft
was really just a continuation of the Persian tradition. As its great mercantile empire expanded,
Carthage increasingly came into conflict with the Greek cities of Sicily. Starting in 410 BC,
the Carthaginian war machine crushed the cities of Selenus, Acragus, and Gala on the west coast of
Sicily. Alarmed by the Carthaginian onslaught, Dionysius, the tyrant of Syracuse, responded
with an extraordinary initiative. He recruited scientists and engineers from all over the
Mediterranean world, paid them handsomely, and then put them to work designing the world's most
advanced siege machines. In effect, he created the first government-sponsored research and
development laboratory. By 399 BC, this think tank had produced battering rams, siege towers,
and early prototypes of a weapon that would revolutionize warfare, the subject of our next
lecture, the catapult. Armed with these new machines, Dionysius experienced considerable
success against the Carthaginians, including a difficult siege against the offshore city of
Motea, the main Carthaginian supply base on Sicily. Yet despite these prominent successes,
mechanized siege warfare still failed to take hold in mainland Greece for another five decades
afterwards. It seems that the Homeric ideal of the warrior hero was just too deeply embedded in
Greek culture to be easily replaced by technology. According to Plutarch, when a fourth century Spartan
king was shown a catapult that had just been brought from Sicily, he exclaimed,
By Heracles, man's valor is no more. When change finally arrived, it came not from the Greek
heartland, but from the kingdom of Macedon, where Philip II and his son Alexander were
reinventing warfare in the pursuit of world conquest. Today, both Philip and Alexander are
known for their development of a revolutionary new battlefield formation that integrated cavalry
with a new type of phallics. But both men were equally adept at siegecraft. Alexander in particular
demonstrated great vigor and flexibility in his operations against walled cities.
Alexander's most spectacular siege was conducted in 332 BC against Tyre, a Persian-controlled island
city located just off the Phoenician coast. He approached the island by employing tens of thousands
of men to build a half-mile-long earthen causeway called a mole, over which he advanced two immense
siege towers against the walls of Tyre. Then, recognizing that this approach would allow the
defenders to focus their defensive efforts on one single narrow front, Alexander also equipped some
of his ships with battering rams and used them to conduct a coordinated assault around the city's
perimeter wall. Ultimately, his troops entered Tyre simultaneously through breaches in the
seaward wall and over the battlements from the towers on the causeway.
Let's take a closer look at a typical siege tower of this era. It's called the Halepolis
of Poseidonius. The Halepolis, or citytaker, was built for Alexander around 330 BC by an
otherwise unknown engineer named Poseidonius. It's described somewhat vaguely in a treatise by the
Greek author Bytan. This machine was enormous, 60 feet long, 50 feet wide, and over 100 feet tall.
It rolled on solid nine-foot diameter wooden wheels. Inside were protected staircases for
the assault troops and near the top a drawbridge that could span from the tower to enemy battlements.
Unfortunately, Bytan doesn't describe this drawbridge, but it was probably hinged at its base
and lowered into position from above like this. On top of the tower was a platform from which
archers and catapults could engage enemy defenders as the tower moved forward and deployed its
drawbridge. The timber exterior walls were covered with plaster and animal hides for
fireproofing and to cushion the shock of enemy missile impacts. We're not sure how these ancient
siege towers were propelled. Some sources suggest that they were pulled by oxen, but this could only
have worked outside the range of the enemy's catapults. Men could certainly have pushed from
the sheltered space within and behind the tower, but this space couldn't have accommodated enough
men to move such massive machines by themselves. Bytan provides an intriguing hint that the
Heluptus of Poseidonius used an internally mounted capstan to assist with forward movement.
We don't know how this apparatus worked, but it is possible that the capstan pulled a rope
that was wrapped around a drum on one of the machine's axles as shown here. Many scholars
have dismissed this passage of Bytan as entirely fanciful, but this mechanism actually is functionally
identical to the double-shafted Vitruvian construction crane we studied in Lecture 17,
and it would have produced comparable mechanical advantage. Granted, it would have been necessary
to reset the system periodically by manually unwinding the rope from the capstan and then
rewinding it around the axle. But in most circumstances, this wouldn't have caused a
significant delay because the Heluptus couldn't be moved forward any faster than the surface ahead
of it could be smoothed and compacted, a difficult and very time-consuming process,
particularly under fire. Recognizing that the Heluptus could only move on a flat, hard surface,
cities soon began supplementing their fortifications with ditches and other obstacles
along potential avenues of approach. Alexander's engineers then responded with this machine,
called the ditch-filling tortoise, a four-wheeled armored shelter for work crews,
preparing the way for the Heluptus. The outer shell of this vehicle was padded and
fire-proofed, and its walls were sloped to deflect enemy projectiles thrown from above.
This ingenious chassis configuration allowed the wheels to pivot 90 degrees so the machine
could be rolled sideways as well as forward and back. By the way, the Greek word for this
machine is cheloni, which does indeed mean tortoise, a wonderfully descriptive name for
a slow-moving vehicle with a hard exterior shell. In the Hellenistic era that followed Alexander's
death, siege craft became more important than ever as the successor kings fought for control of
the greater Greek world. During this period, Hellenistic armies built ever larger and ever
more impressive siege towers and rams. Indeed, impressiveness appears to have been their primary
design goal. Many of these machines were so large and unwieldy that they must have been intended
more to overaw their enemies than to be militarily effective. A representative example of these
Hellenistic monstrosities is something called the ram tortoise of Hegator, which looked something
like this. Now, Hegator of Byzantium was an engineer who probably worked for Demetrius
Poliarchetes. Demetrius the besieger, a third century BC Macedonian king who was infamous for
his licentious behavior, his ambitious military campaigns, and his grandiose siege machines.
According to ancient sources, Hegator's tortoise had an armored pyramidal shell measuring 60 by 40
feet and running on eight six-foot diameter wheels. Above its timber chassis was an intermediate
floor that mounted several arrow shooting catapults and above that was a 12-foot tall turret.
The iron-headed ramming beam was over 100 feet long and wrapped in raw hide for fire protection.
It was suspended from the turret. There are sources don't explain quite how this suspension
system was configured or how the ram was actually operated. Presumably troops stationed behind the
tortoise pulled the ramming beam back with a rope and then released it. Now as impressive as
this machine must have been, the ram tortoise of Hegator could only have been marginally effective
in battle. When a ramming beam is suspended from above, like this, the amount of energy available
to batter an enemy fortification is a function of just three factors. One, the weight of the
ramming beam. Two, the force applied to pull it back for each blow. And three, the length of the
suspension ropes on which the ramming beam swings. Greater destructive power can be achieved with
a heavier beam, greater pulling force and longer suspension ropes. The ram tortoise of Hegator
did indeed have a massive ramming beam and Demetrius Poliarchetes could have employed any number of men
to operate it. Yet the configuration of its turret dictated the use of extremely short
suspension ropes, so the ram would have had far less destructive power than its immense size would
suggest. This trend toward ever larger siege machines ended with the demise of its proponents,
as one by one, the Hellenistic kingdoms yielded to the ancient world's newest masters of siegecraft,
the Roman legions. Like the Greeks, the Romans were slow to adopt mechanized siege methods.
Initially, they favored the storming assault, supported by scaling ladders and little else.
But starting around 200 BC, the legions adopted the ramped embankment, or agar,
as a characteristic feature of Roman siegecraft. The agar was constructed of soil and rubble
reinforced with timber. To protect its builders, the Romans developed portable shelters,
high-covered wooden frames called vinea. These modules could be linked together to create a
protected corridor through which workmen could carry baskets of rubble forward in comparative
safety. Initially, the agar was intended simply as an improvement over the scaling ladder,
a means of facilitating massed infantry assaults on enemy battlements. But during the 2nd century BC,
Roman military engineers also began using it as a ramp for battering rams and siege towers.
Machines operating from an elevated position atop the agar could be much smaller than their
Hellenistic predecessors, which operated from ground level. This idea led to the development
of smaller, more mobile Roman machines, which were standardized and incorporated into a methodical,
flexible system of siege warfare. This is a model of the standard Roman ram tortoise,
as described in a treatise by Apollodorus of Damascus, that versatile engineer who built
Trajan's market, Trajan's column, and probably the pantheon. Notice the striking differences
between Apollodorus' ram tortoise and the Hellenistic machine built by Hegator. Apollodorus'
tortoise is small, quite small. It was only about 24 feet long and 12 feet wide. It could actually
have been moved easily by about 20 men. The structure is quite simple yet very robust. It centers
around heavy timber A-frames, which are then tied to a chassis below that protects the wheels and
axles inside of the tortoise's hard shell. This is interesting because a lot of modern
reconstructions of this device often show the wheels positioned outside of the tortoise.
An incredibly bad design, as the wheels and axles would have been highly vulnerable
to damage from enemy projectiles thrown from above. Apollodorus knew better, and his treatise
very clearly defines a chassis configuration that would have enclosed the wheels within the
protective cover. That protective cover, which you can see here, consisted of three-inch thick
planking, fire-proofed with clay mixed with hair, and then often covered over with animal hides
to further cushion the blows of falling projectiles that might have been launched from the
battlements above the ram. But without question, the best defensive feature of this system was the
extremely steeply sloped sides, which were quite effective at deflecting projectiles thrown from
above like this. The ram tortoise tortoise also had this distinctive protective beak on its front
end. And to demonstrate its use, I'm going to flip it around once more. The beak was designed
such that when the ram tortoise was wheeled up to the enemy battlements, it protected the
ramming beam from above. In ancient warfare, it was quite common to attempt to defeat battering
rams by lowering padding made of chaff to cushion the blows of the ram as it was attempting to
batter down the wall, or even to lower a noose consisting of heavy ropes or chains to try to
snag the ram and disable its use. This beak would come into physical contact with the wall as the
ram moved forward and would physically prevent anything from being lowered down to interrupt
the operation of the ram. Apollodorus also tells us that the ramming beam was a heavy piece of timber
capped with an iron head up front and also counterbalanced with a lump of iron on its back end.
This was intended to balance the ramming beam to ensure that the tension in the two suspension
chains was approximately equal. It would also significantly improve the ram's destructive
power by increasing its weight while also reducing its tendency to oscillate from side to side during
operation like this. And that sort of oscillation could severely compromise the operation of the
device and might even cause it to self-destruct. But most importantly of all, the A-frame design
of Apollodorus's ram tortoise allows for very long suspension chains, as you can see here,
thereby significantly increasing its destructive power. Now my model is actually quite light.
The ram head is made of aluminum rather than iron. It doesn't have a counterweight on the back of the
ramming beam as Apollodorus has specified. And so you would think that relative to the
considerable weight of these bricks, it probably wouldn't be particularly effective in battering
this replica of an ancient city wall. Well, let's see whether that's the case or not.
I'm going to place the ram into operation pretty much as the Romans might have done by
simply pulling it back and releasing it. And I'll do it again. Indeed, many of the ancient
accounts of siege warfare describe the ram's pounding away for hour after hour, day and night,
gradually pummeling enemy fortifications into submission. And you can see that this ram is
indeed gradually having that sort of effect on our ancient city wall. Bit by bit, one small
displacement at a time, the wall is gradually coming apart and at some point will be completely
breached and capable of allowing Roman infantry to pour through the gather and take the city.
Now the ram tortoise of Apollodorus exemplifies the Roman approach to siege craft, emphasizing
efficiency and functionality in lieu of Hellenistic era emphasis on grandiose scale and imposing
appearance. Not surprisingly, the Roman approach proved far more effective.
This approach is vividly illustrated by the Jewish-Roman war of the first century.
In 66 AD, Judea rose up in rebellion against Roman rule. The Jews had no field army, so it was
inevitable that sieges would dominate the ensuing campaign. Over the next seven years,
four Roman legions crushed the revolt with a series of hard-won sieges against rebel-held
towns and cities, from Galilee to Jerusalem, and the seemingly impregnable hilltop fortress of
Masada. This campaign pitted Roman engineering skill and relentlessness against the Jews'
extraordinary courage and resourcefulness. The Roman siege of Jotapata in 67 AD exemplifies this
campaign. Led by the future emperor Vespasian, the operation began with a series of Roman infantry
assaults, which were vigorously repulsed by Jewish defenders under the command of Joseph Ben
Matityahu. Vespasian then directed the construction of an agar, which his infantry could use to
directly assault Jotapata's battlements in standard Roman fashion. Roman troops systematically
denuded the local countryside of stone and timber, and then they built the agar under covering fire
from 160 catapults. Yet the defenders thwarted this effort by raising the height of their wall
at the terminus of the ramp. Exasperated, Vespasian changed his tactics, deciding instead to block
Jotapata and starve its defenders into submission. This approach might have worked as the city was
desperately short of water, but Joseph thwarted Vespasian once again by resorting to psychological
warfare. He had his men soak their outer garments in water and hang them from the battlements
to allow the Romans to believe that they had plenty of water, and the deception worked,
convinced that the Jews must have an abundant supply of water. Vespasian gave up the blockade
and ordered a renewed assault. This time the Romans deployed a ram toward us up the agar,
again supported by catapult fire. The defenders responded by attempting to lower sacks of chaff
in front of the ram to cushion its blows, and by conducting nighttime raids aimed at destroying
the machine. Ultimately though, the ram did succeed in battering down the upper wall,
and Vespasian's men charged into the breach, locking their shields in the famous testudo or
tortoise formation. Undaunted, the Jews doused the attackers in boiling oil and repulsed them yet
again. Vespasian then brought up three 50-foot siege towers, their outer walls reinforced with
iron plates. From these towers, catapults provided accurate covering fire, while engineers raised
the agar even higher. Finally, on the 47th day of the siege, the embankment topped Jodopod's upper
wall, and that night, Vespasian's own son Titus led a small force over the battlements. They surprised
the Jewish sentries and threw open the gates for the entire Roman force, which easily captured the
city. The siege ended as most ancient sieges did, with most of Jodopod's intrepid defenders killed,
and its women and children sold into slavery. Amazingly though, one of the few male survivors
of the city was the Jewish commander, Joseph Ben Matityahu, who gave himself up to the Romans and
was spared when he prophesied that Vespasian would become the Emperor of Rome. When this
prophecy proved correct in 69 AD, Vespasian freed Joseph, who then became a Roman citizen,
took the Romanized name Josephus, and served as a military advisor to Vespasian son Titus.
Now today, Josephus is often maligned, with some justification, as an opportunist and a
traitor to his people, yet his defection to the Romans left us with an important legacy,
one of the few positive outcomes of the tragic Jewish-Roman war.
After the revolt ended, Josephus wrote two books, A History of the War and A History of the Jewish
People. Today, these works provide us with rich and valuable perspectives, not only on first century
Judaism and early Christianity, but also on Roman siegecraft. Josephus' personal account is
our principal source for the dramatic story of the Siege of Jodipata,
and we'll meet him again next lecture, as we examine the most important technological system
used in this and many other ancient battles, the catapult. Until then, thank you.
