Welcome back.
In the late first century B.C., a Greek historian named Dionysius of Halicarnassus wrote,
The extraordinary greatness of the Roman Empire manifests itself above all in three things,
the aqueducts, the paved roads, and the construction of drains.
This is an extraordinary assertion, particularly if we consider aspects of Roman civilization
that didn't make Dionysius's list, the military conquests of the legions,
the republican form of government, Roman law, Roman religion, Latin literature,
evidently infrastructure mattered in the ancient world,
and Roman engineers were seen as particularly adept at designing and building it.
Over the next four lectures, we'll look at all three types of infrastructure systems cited by
Dionysius, roads, water supply, and drainage system. We'll survey these systems historical
development, we'll examine how they were built and how they worked, and we'll assess the extent
to which they contributed to and reflected the greatness of Rome, as Dionysius suggested.
Today, we'll begin with roads.
In surveying the historic development of roads, we should begin by noting that,
particularly in antiquity, an intercity road was a political as well as a technological entity.
Connecting two cities with a durable transportation link invariably required
political control over the region in which those cities were situated.
Indeed, the principal purpose of many ancient roads was to strengthen political control over
region. Constructing a road also required a substantial commitment of state resources,
and thus required considerable political authority.
So it's hardly surprising then that prior to the Roman era, the most significant technological
developments in land transport occurred under the patronage of powerful kings.
In the fourth millennium BC, in Mesopotamia, some of the world's first wheeled vehicles
were developed under the auspices of Sumerian kings. Later, Babylonian kings built special roads for
religious processions, like the processional way passing through the Ishtar Gate, shown here.
And the Assyrians cut numerous long-distance routes through mountainous terrain to facilitate
military operations. Though particularly impressive construction achievements,
these Assyrian roads were typically just temporary tracks that were never developed into more
comprehensive systems. Then around 500 BC, King Darius of Persia developed an extensive permanent
road system, an instrument for exercising control over his vast empire. This system included the
famous Royal Road, stretching 1600 miles from Susa in western Iran to Sardis near the Aegean
coast of Turkey. As described by the Greek historian Herodotus, the Royal Road was the basis for a
very sophisticated courier system that served the great king. All along its length, at intervals of
roughly 15 miles, the Persians built ways stations to provide food and shelter for travelers.
By changing horses and riders at these stations, Persian couriers could cover the entire length
of the road in nine days. Herodotus was quite impressed with the system, writing that, and I
quote, neither snow nor rain nor heat nor darkness of night prevents these couriers from completing
their designated stages with utmost speed. Sound familiar? Yet despite this superb organization,
the Royal Road reflected relatively primitive technology. It was unpaved, and many streams
and rivers along the route could only be crossed at fords or with ferry boats.
In late Bronze Age Greece, the Mycenaean kings also built an extensive network of military roads,
connecting their great citadels. But these roads fell into disrepair after Bronze Age civilization
collapsed, and they were largely non-functional by the classical era. The classical Greek city
states, or poleas, achieved prosperity and influence largely through maritime commerce
and naval power. Greece's rough terrain and the location of many poleas on islands made
land transport inherently difficult. More importantly, the politically independent city
states of the Hellenic era were at least as likely to be at war with each other as to be
collaborating on infrastructure projects, so they had very little incentive to build intercity
roads. For these reasons, Greek roads were usually little more than dirt paths, suitable for pack
animals and pedestrians, but not for vehicles. The only major exceptions were the sacred roads
that connected major religious sanctuaries with their host cities. For example, the Sacred Way,
a well-built road from Athens to the sanctuary at Ellusis.
In sharp contrast, the Roman Republic established a strong tradition of road building, primarily to
support military operations, first in Italy and then throughout the Mediterranean world.
The first major Roman road was the Via Appia, or Appian Way, built by the censor Appius Claudius
in 312 BC. By the way, the censor was a Roman magistrate who had responsibility for both
administering the Roman census and initiating major public works projects, and one of the
fringe benefits of being censor, apparently, was that the public works he initiated might
be named for him, as was the case with Appius Claudius. The Via Appia was built first and foremost
to provide an all-weather route for the rapid movement of troops from Rome to Campania,
where the Second Samnite War was raging at the time. Consistent with this purpose,
it ran as directly as possible from Rome to its terminus at Capua, establishing a precedent that
would become a characteristic feature of nearly all Roman intercity roads. The Via Appia ran
absolutely straight for long stretches, entirely independent of the topography over which it was
constructed. For example, the first segment followed a straight-line path 55 miles from
Rome to Tericina, despite the fact that it crossed the Albin Hills and the vast Pontine
Marshes along the way, where previous roads typically zigzag from town to town, passing
directly through each urban center, the Via Appia bypassed most of the towns along its route,
connecting to them only with branch roads. And in this aspect of its design, the Via Appia was
actually quite similar in concept to a modern interstate highway. In one sense, the Roman's
use of these relentlessly straight roads reflects the fact that the shortest distance between two
points is a straight line. But it also confirms that these roads were intended primarily to
facilitate the rapid movement of infantry. Building a straight road across hilly country would
inevitably produce some steep gradients, as you can see here. Infantry wouldn't be appreciably
impeded by these gradients, but horse or ox-drawn vehicles certainly would. Thus, if these roads
had been built primarily to support vehicular transport, we'd expect them to follow the contours
of the terrain, like this, to minimize gradient at the expense of distance. But as a matter of
principle, Roman roads would not bend to the terrain, any more than Roman legions would bend
to their barbarian foes. Thus, the relentlessly straight road also became a statement of Roman
dominion over geographic regions and even over nature itself. This statement even had its own
unique punctuation marks, carved milestones placed at regular intervals along the route,
and triumphal arches marking the beginning and end of each road, the entrances to major cities,
and even some bridges, like this one, the beautiful Flavian Bridge in southern France,
with a triumphal arch at each end. Designing and building one of these roads was a multifaceted
engineering challenge. Selecting the route required a careful topographic and geologic
analysis of the land over which the road would pass. Once the route was chosen, surveying and
marking the route presented an even greater challenge, because those long, straight stretches of
road rarely provided a direct line of sight between their start and end points. So, for example,
surveying the straight 55-mile Rome to Terracina leg of the Via Appia would have required sightings
from at least two intermediate points of high ground along the route. The process of locating
these two points precisely on the straight line connecting Rome and Terracina, without the aid
of a magnetic compass as we would use today, would have required considerable technical skill in
surveying. The chosen route would then dictate the need for a host of associated engineering
works, many of which needed to be initiated before the construction of the roadway proper
could begin. These included bridges and viaducts to cross waterways and low-lying areas, drainage
structures to divert small streams, land reclamation projects to eliminate swamps and marshes,
rock cut terraces, and retaining walls along valleys and mountain sides,
and tunnels through mountains and ridgelines that couldn't be surmounted or bypassed.
For example, construction of the Via Appia was accompanied by an ambitious land reclamation
project aimed at turning portions of the pontine marshes into productive farmland.
The thoughtful integration of these two projects can be seen in a 20-mile segment of the Via Appia,
where the road itself serves as one of the two embankments forming a man-made canal that was
built to drain the marshes. Now, only when these supplemental structures were fully worked out
could construction of the roadway begin in earnest. Let's see how it was done. Let's go
ahead and build ourselves a model of a Roman road using the same procedures that Roman engineers
would have used. So here's a piece of terrain, and let's say that it's a piece of ground somewhere
between Rome and Teresina, and some Romans are interested in traveling that route with a wagon.
I'm going to take my wagon, I'm going to subject it to a typical cargo loading,
and then attempt to negotiate this terrain. And as you can see as I pull my wagon forward,
it's sinking into the ground and having a very difficult time moving through this soft soil.
Imagine how much worse it would be when we get a heavy rainfall and all of this turns to mud.
Clearly, we need a road here. Well, let's build a road in, again, in the way that Roman engineers
would have constructed it. I'm going to begin by digging two narrow trenches which are going to be
used as the foundations for the curbs for the traveled way of the road. I'm going to dig those
trenches by digging into the soil and turning the soil outward to the shoulders. I'll take a second
trench here. Now with those trenches in place, we'll begin setting the curb stones. The curb
stones were pieces of cut stone which were set erect in the ground, standing upright,
the soil compacted around them to hold them in place.
At regular intervals along the length of the road, taller curb stones were put in place
that would project above the level of the normal curbs. These taller curb stones could
be used ultimately in the finished road by pedestrians in order to load up their pack
animals, for example, or to mount horses. Give them a little bit of an elevated platform to do that.
So there's one line of curbs. Now let's do a second on the opposite side of the traveled way.
Again, setting each curb stone vertically and then backfilling soil in order to hold it erect.
Again, I'll place one of those taller curb stones for the purpose of
loading pack animals and mounting horses. And now we have our curbs firmly in position.
With the curbs in place, our workers will now come in and excavate out the ground between
the two curbs further in order to provide space for the structural foundation of the roadway.
So we're going to dig out most of the soil that lies between the curbs.
And the curbs now prevent the soil from falling into the excavation,
as it would have been the case if we hadn't put them in place first.
Now we have successfully excavated out between the two rows of curb stones,
and we're going to begin laying in the foundation of the road.
We'll begin with a layer of very large stones to fill the space,
spread out on the base of the traveled way of the road.
These stones are compacted in position as necessary,
and they serve as a source of structural strength for the road,
while also enhancing drainage since water can flow freely through the stone and out and away
from the road surface. Above those large stones, we'll have a layer of smaller stone gravel,
in many cases mixed with clay to enhance the waterproofing of the road's structure,
so excessive amounts of water can't penetrate through this soil layer into the subbase.
So we put this second layer of gravel in place, spread it out,
and at this point the road would begin to attain its camber.
Camber refers to a lateral curvature of the road surface that's designed to enhance drainage.
That camber would be put into place by sculpting this upper layer of gravel to ensure
that it's a little higher in the center than out here on the ends,
so again in the fine finished road structure the water would be able to flow off of the surface
and away from the roadway in order to maintain its traffic ability.
Now we still have another layer to go, the layer that we would typically refer to as the
wearing surface in modern highway design, and early Roman roads were typically capped with
a wearing surface of compacted pebbles, but over time most of the important roads in the
Roman Empire were eventually resurfaced with a heavy pavement made of polygonal basalt blocks
cut into size and then wedged into place to provide a very rigid and very strong wearing
surface for both pedestrians and vehicles. I'm going to very quickly add those paving stones to
my model of the Roman road at this time.
Now our Roman road has a complete wearing surface on the traveling way,
but we also need to add shoulders, and the vast majority of Roman roads had well developed 10
foot wide shoulders to augment the 14 foot wide principal road surface. So at this time once again
I'll very quickly add the smaller stone blocks that are used to delineate the exterior edges
of the 10 foot wide shoulders.
And now all that remains to complete construction of the road is to cover the shoulders with
a layer of compacted fine gravel, which will provide an appropriate wearing surface for
the shoulders of the road. I'll add those now.
With a little bit of compaction,
our Roman road is now complete and indeed my wagon fully loaded is able to negotiate it
with little trouble at all.
Now this diagram shows a cross section of the Roman road structure we just built,
the curb stones, the foundation layers, the pavement, the shoulders, and while the structure
was typical, there really was no such thing as a standard Roman road. Configurations vary
tremendously from road to road and even from location to location along the same road. These
variations reflect deliberate adaptations to different soil types, moisture conditions,
and availability of construction materials. In a region of weak, silty soil, for example,
the foundation trench might be dug deeper than usual to facilitate the construction of
stronger, thicker foundations. In a region where basalt wasn't available, limestone might be used
for the paving stones. Later roads used lime or pozzolana-based concrete to strengthen the
foundation layers. When a road crossed a low-lying area, it was often elevated on a structure like
this one, two massive stone retaining walls filled with compacted gravel or concrete.
If a road crossed a swampy area that wouldn't support an embankment, a causeway like this one
was built. The wooden substructure was anchored with stakes and then covered with stone slabs,
bonded together with clay, and then capped with gravel. In my view, there's no better
evidence of the Roman engineer's skill and versatility than these well-conceived adaptations
of the typical road configuration to suit the unique circumstances of each project.
Even after it was built, no Roman road was a static, unchanging structure. In 268 B.C.,
44 years after its initial construction, the Via Appia was extended from its original terminus at
Capua to the newly founded colony of Beneventum, following Rome's successful war against the
Greek general Pyrrhus. By 240 B.C., Roman armies had conquered the heel of Italy and extended the
Via Appia to the port of Brindisium, which now became the jumping-off point for their overseas
conquests. Called Regina Viarum, the Queen of Roads, the Via Appia had now attained its final
length of 385 Roman miles. Yet even then, its development didn't stop. Well into the Imperial
Era, the Via Appia was continually being upgraded with improved pavements, bridges, viaducts,
terraces, retaining walls, and pullover areas on steep slopes. Of the many enhancements made during
Trajan's reign, none was more spectacular than a rock-cut terrace at a place called Pisco Montano,
near Terracina. This excavation through 120 feet of solid limestone eliminated a treacherous assent
through a mountain pass, allowing the Via Appia to skirt the mountain just above sea level.
Not only has this incredible rock-cut survived to the present day,
but Roman numerals proclaiming the depth of the excavation are still visible at regular
10-foot intervals down the face of the rock. Just as the Via Appia served southern Italy,
so the Via Flaminia and Via Emilia were built in 220 and 189 B.C. to support a series of newly
established colonies north of Rome. As the empire expanded, wherever the legions marched,
the roads soon followed. Indeed, many of these roads were actually built by the legions,
in conjunction with the process of centuriation of adjacent lands as we learned in Lecture 10.
At its greatest extent, the Roman road system included 75,000 miles of public roads.
Augustus capitalized on the strategic value of these roads by creating an official courier system,
the Corsus Publicus, supported by a network of roadside facilities for the couriers and their
horses. No doubt this system was inspired by the Persian Royal Road, but it was significantly
greater in extent and remained in use for far longer. Portions of the Corsus Publicus were
still serving Byzantine emperors in the 6th century AD. All the factors contributing to the
efficiency and majesty of the Roman road system, none was more important than Roman engineer's
mastery of bridge design and construction. Previous civilizations had failed to develop
this competency, and thus, as we saw with the Persian Royal Road, for example,
the effectiveness of their land transport was fundamentally compromised by the need to cross
rivers by Ferry or Ford. The Romans succeeded where others had failed by exploiting a technology
we already know well, the arch. As you'll recall from Lecture 6, an arch carries load
entirely in compression, and so it provided Roman engineers with a means of spanning long
distances using readily available materials, stone brick and concrete that are strong in compression
but weak in tension. As we've seen, the arch sparked a revolution in Roman architecture.
Now in the hands of bridge engineers, the arch would allow those arrow-straight Roman roads to
defy the terrain over which they ran. The first great Roman bridges were built in the 2nd century
BC, when the arch was just coming into widespread use in Roman construction. An excellent early
example is the Milvian Bridge, built around 110 BC to carry the Via Flamenia over the Tiber River,
just north of Rome. Recall that we examined this bridge as an example of an arcade back in Lecture 6.
The Ponta Milvio has four main arches, each spanning about 60 feet, and just as we've seen in
the buildings of this era, the arches are constructed entirely of cut stone, durable
travertine on the outer faces, and softer tufa within. These arches are supported on massive
prow-shaped piers, which channel the waters of the Tiber around the foundations to prevent
scouring of soil beneath them. Above the piers are smaller arched openings, which relieve pressure
on the sides of the bridge during flooding by providing an additional outlet for the flood
waters. The greatest challenge in building a bridge like the Ponta Milvio was constructing
those stone piers in the riverbed. Fortunately, Vitruvius provides us with a very clear description
of how this was done. First, a structure called a cofferdam was fabricated from sharpened oak posts,
lashed together, and then driven into the riverbed at the pier location. A slightly smaller
cofferdam was then installed inside of the first, and the space between the two walls was then packed
full of clay to create a waterproof barrier. The river water was now pumped out of the interior
cofferdam using devices we'll be discussing in lecture 18. With the riverbed exposed,
workers could then descend inside the cofferdam and excavate down to a firm layer of rock or soil.
If necessary, piles made of rock-resistant wood were driven into the soil to provide additional
support, and then the pier was built to usually have cut stone with rubble and mortar infill.
Once the top course of stone exceeded the water level, the cofferdam could be disassembled,
removed, and the remainder of the structure completed. Amazingly, today, this same basic
process, with only minor modifications, is still used to build underwater bridge piers.
A hundred years after the construction of the Pontemilvio, bridge design began to reflect the
grand ambitions of the new imperial era. One of the most impressive engineering achievements of
Augustus's reign was the extraordinary bridge carrying the Via Flamenia over a deep gorge
at Narni in Italy. Sadly, only one of this bridge's four original arches remains,
but from the surviving piers, we know that the span of the center arch was well over 100 feet,
and therefore was probably the longest span ever built in antiquity.
Like the Pontemilvio, the bridge at Narni was fabricated of beautifully fitted stone,
but here, concrete has been substituted for stone in the core of the arches. In this way,
early imperial era developments in bridge engineering continued to parallel the trends
we've already seen in building design. The use of cut stone arches with concrete fill in the
Narni bridge was quite consistent with the Colosseum's use of cut stone arcades in combination
with cast concrete vaulting. By the first half of the second century AD, the Roman construction
revolution had taken hold, a bold new paradigm in building design had emerged, and bridge design
was evolving in precisely the same direction, toward the total replacement of stone structural
elements with opus testachium and concrete. Here's a typical example, a viaduct carrying
the Via Appia across a broad valley near the Campanian town of Cessa Arunca. This structure
is over 500 feet long, and it consists of 21 arches made entirely of brick and concrete.
Just as Trajan's market set a new standard for functionality and construction efficiency
in building design, so the viaduct at Cessa Arunca reflects the application of this new state of the
art to bridges. Although most of the bridges associated with the Roman road system were
permanent structures made of stone or brick, we can't leave the subject of Roman bridges without
also mentioning a temporary timber structure of great historical importance. Julius Caesar's
bridge over the Rhine River built in 53 BC during his celebrated Gallic campaign.
This bridge was built to support a punitive expedition aimed at intimidating Germanic
tribes that lived east of the Rhine and had been raiding across the river into Roman-controlled Gaul.
Caesar could have ferry his army across the Rhine by boat to conduct this raid,
but he recognized that he would make a significantly more powerful impression on the Germans by
building a bridge. We actually know a lot about this structure because Caesar himself provides
an amazingly clear description of his personal account in his personal account of the Gallic war.
Indeed, this is regarded as one of the richest descriptions of Roman construction methods
outside of Vitruvius. As this illustration shows, the structure was supported on a series of frames
called trestles created by using this barge-mounted pile driver to hammer sharpened timbers into the
riverbed. Let's take a closer look at this unique structural system as a way to get a better appreciation
of the amazing abilities of Caesar's engineers. Those trestles were created by taking piles and
connecting them together in pairs by lashing them to cross members as you can see here.
The piles were then driven in at an angle in order to better resist the pressure of the
of the river current flowing by the bridge. Two pairs of these were driven in on either side
and then a massive two-foot wide timber beam was extended from one pair of piles to the other
in this manner. An amazing aspect of this construction, as you can see from my model,
is that it was very carefully configured with these cross members on the outside below the beam
and on the inside above the beam arranged in a manner such that the more heavily loaded the
structure is the more tightly these joints clamp the members together and therefore
the greater the structural integrity. The more I load the structure the stronger it becomes in
essence. An amazingly clever system, particularly given the austere conditions under which the
structure had to be built, it really was an ingenious way to put a timber trestle together.
In addition then to this general configuration an additional pile was driven in at a sharp
angle on the downstream side in order to further increase the resistance of the structure to the
force caused by water pressure pressing on the sides of the bridge as the river flowed by.
In addition upstream of each trestle a cluster of piles was driven into the riverbed looking
something like this and the purpose of this structure was to deflect logs or boats that
the barbarians might launch upstream of the bridge with the intention of floating it down
the river and destroying the bridge through the force of impact. Now 20 or 30 of these trestle
assemblies would have been required to span the full width of the Rhine River which might have
been over 1,000 feet wide at the bridge location. Obviously I'm not going to build that many
trestles here today but I would like to add one more just so we can see the overall configuration
of the structural system and how it fits together. So here's a second parallel trestle and once it's
driven into the riverbed we now take a series of heavy wooden timbers and they span from trestle
to trestle leaving a gap between so that another set of heavy timbers can bridge in between those
gaps to the next set of trestles farther across the river. This series of timbers then provides the
supporting structure for what will become the deck of the bridge and the deck was created by
binding up bundles of wooden sticks and laying them across the surface of the bridge transversely
supported on top of these heavy timbers. Those wooden sticks probably were just the branches of
the trees that were cut down in order to create these heavy piles which were used to build the
trestles. Incredibly it took Caesar's army only 10 days to build this bridge then leaving a garrison
behind to defend the crossing. He marched his legions over the Rhine and into German territory
burning the towns of hostile tribes that fled and negotiating alliances with those that didn't.
After 18 days he decided that the barbarians had been sufficiently intimidated he crossed back
into Gaul and in one of history's greatest displays of hubris ordered his men to destroy the bridge
they had just worked so hard to create only three weeks earlier. Caesar's bridge over the Rhine was
indisputably an engineering marvel yet one could certainly make the case that this temporary
structure built to support a single military operation really doesn't belong in a lecture on
civil infrastructure. Recall however that to the Romans roads and bridges were more than just
civil infrastructure. The Via Flamenia was more than just a road the Great Bridge at Narni was
more than just a means of carrying that road across the river. These structures were statements of
Roman power, proclamations of dominion over a territory and its people. In that sense Caesar's
bridge is just another chapter of the same story albeit a particularly dramatic one.
At its height the Roman Empire had 75,000 miles of public roads organized into a system
that incorporated way stations, milestones, triumphal arches and upwards of 1,000 bridges
any of which still survive today. Over a period of eight centuries hundreds of millions of travelers
used this system. During this era the Mediterranean region enjoyed better land mobility than at any
time until the 1800s and while this incredible system was intended primarily to project military
power it also yielded important second-order benefits economic development enhanced public
order and dissemination of Roman culture and Roman law that proved to be at least as important.
When Dionysius of Halecarnassus suggested that the extraordinary greatness of Rome was manifested
in its roads he sure knew what he was talking about. Next lecture we'll begin our examination of the
other two manifestations of Roman greatness cited by Dionysius, aqueducts and drains,
principal components of the ancient world's most sophisticated water supply systems. Until then thank you.
