Welcome back.
In Lecture 6 we encountered this fascinating building, the Porticus Emilia, one of the
earliest manifestations of the Roman construction revolution.
Created in 193 BC, this sprawling warehouse on the Tiber represented a distinct break
with tradition and glimpse into the future of Roman architecture.
With its sophisticated arrangement of concrete arcades and stepped vaults providing vast
interior space and ample natural lighting, the Porticus Emilia was a triumph of functional
design and structural efficiency.
Given this building's size and prominent location right there in the heart of Rome,
we might expect that its construction would have had an immediate impact on Roman builders.
That the evident advantages in its design would have prompted widespread adoption of
vaulted concrete construction in other structures soon afterward.
Surprisingly, that didn't happen.
In the two and a half centuries after the Porticus Emilia was built, the Roman construction
revolution played out slowly and sporadically.
Indeed, as we've seen, as late as 72 AD, the builders of the Colosseum were still using
traditional cut stone for structural columns and arcades, and concrete only for secondary
elements of the structural system.
But then, quite abruptly, in the second half of the first century AD, there was an explosion
of vaulted concrete construction, much of it exhibiting bold new approaches to enclosing
interior space.
This was the advent of a fundamentally new architectural style, one that was eventually
adopted for many of the imperial era's greatest buildings, and ultimately came to characterize
the era itself.
In today's lecture, we'll examine the causes and effects of this seismic shift in Roman
architecture.
We'll focus primarily on two milestone structures, Nero's Golden House, the Domus Aurea, and
Trajan's Market, both of which vividly illustrate the genesis of this new, characteristically
imperial architectural style during the first and early second centuries.
In examining these great buildings, we'll see how a Roman architectural revolution was
spawned by an amazing confluence of new technologies, human genius, and cataclysm.
After the Porticus Emilia was built, there were few, if any, new developments in vaulted
concrete construction until the first two decades of the first century BC, the era of
the dictator Sulla.
This was a period of great architectural creativity, and it produced several innovative buildings
that seemed to reflect a new aesthetic paradigm.
One of these, the Sanctuary of Fortuna Primagania at Palestrina, was particularly impressive,
and it remains so today, built of opus incertum, that system of stone-facing surrounding a
concrete core.
This elaborate arrangement of ramps, terraces, colonnades, and arcades included several important
architectural developments, raking vaults over the ramps, and these elegantly curved
angular vaults over the colonnades lining semicircular plazas that are called hemicycles.
These developments showed great promise, but further progress was then stymied by the civil
wars of the succeeding decades.
Order wasn't restored until Augustus assumed power in 27 BC, but the stability of the Augustan
era would also bring extreme architectural conservatism, consistent with his self-proclaimed
role as prinkeps, or first citizen of the Roman Republic.
Augustus sponsored traditional architectural works, which invoked older, republican era
forms.
Architectural experimentation simply wasn't in the spirit of the times.
After Augustus died in 14 AD, later members of the Julio-Claudian dynasty established
more openly autocratic rule.
Heligula and Claudius, in particular, were also great builders of roads, ports, aqueducts,
and vast imperial palaces.
And just as these emperors rejected Augustus' attempt to rule within the framework of traditional
republican conventions, so they also rejected traditional architectural forms for their palaces.
Archaeological evidence suggests that all of these structures used vaulted concrete construction
to some degree.
Nonetheless, a coherent, fully developed vaulted architecture didn't emerge until 54 AD when
the emperor Nero came to power.
Nero, a non-conformist and aspiring artist, immediately initiated a period of intense
architectural experimentation.
His early efforts included a huge new palace called the Domus transitoria, which served
as a proving ground for many new ideas in vaulted construction.
And so, at this pivotal moment in history, three preconditions for the full flowering
of a bold new Roman architecture were finally in place.
First, Roman architects and engineers had acquired proficiency and confidence in the
use of opus testacium and concrete vaulting.
250 years after the Porticus Emilia, the technology of the Roman construction revolution was finally
ripe for exploitation.
Second, the large-scale civil works projects already sponsored by the emperors had stimulated
tremendous growth in construction capacity.
Brick-making factories, quarries, experienced construction contractors and craftsmen were
now available to do the work.
Most important, absolute power was now in the hands of an artistically inclined emperor
who consciously sought to break with tradition and who was inclined toward grandiose gestures.
With these conditions in place, a period of architectural innovation was probably inevitable,
though it might still have taken a while to develop fully.
But as it turns out, a cataclysmic event would cause the revolution to happen far more dramatically
than even the dramatic Nero might have imagined.
The night of July 18, 64 AD, fire broke out in the area between Rome's Palatine and Calian
Hills and was driven across the city by strong winds.
The fire burned for nine days, leaving most of Rome a smoldering ruin.
Nero would later be accused of starting displays, but even his detractors acknowledged that
his conduct in the aftermath of the disaster was exemplary.
He opened up his private gardens to provide temporary shelter for refugees.
He saw to the prompt removal of debris, then he ordered the city rebuilt.
Not as it was before, but according to a new, rational plan, organized around broad, straight
avenues interspersed with open plazas.
Nero decreed that all reconstructed buildings would be limited in height and built of fire-resistant
materials, and at his own expense he added porticoes to the fronts of the city's apartment
buildings to provide elevated platforms that could be used by firefighters in future blazes.
The great fire and Nero's response to it transformed Rome.
Almost immediately the entire city became one vast construction site, a blank canvas
for creative architects and engineers looking for opportunities to experiment with new ideas.
And to meet the need for architectural flexibility, rapid construction and fire resistance, there
could be no better raw materials than opus testacium and concrete, which could be assembled
by gangs of unskilled laborers using standardized mass-produced components.
From 64 AD onward, a structural fabric of Rome and much of the wider empire would be brick
and concrete.
The fire had another far-reaching consequence.
It destroyed Nero's Domus transitoria and sparked his interest in building an even grander
palace.
Thus was born the Domus Aurea, or Golden House, one of the most extravagant private residences
ever built.
According to the Roman historian Pasitas, the Domus Aurea was an immense complex extending
between the Palatine and Esquiline hills.
It included hundreds of rooms, a mile-long portico, lavish interior decor, an artificial
lake, vineyards, pastures and woods.
The palace was designed by Severus and Kaler, an architect and an engineer who, in Pasitas'
words, had the ingenuity and courage to try the force of art even against the veto of
nature.
Evidently, Severus and Kaler were recognized even in their own time for having made a bold
new architectural statement that stretched the limits of contemporary engineering knowledge.
The Domus Aurea probably wasn't finished when Nero died in 68 AD.
Later, Vespasian attempted to enhance his own reputation at Nero's expense by turning
most of the complex over to the people of Rome and by building the Colosseum on the
site of Nero's artificial lake, as we've already seen.
The Domus Aurea was badly damaged in several subsequent fires and then most of it was demolished
when Trajan's baths were built on the site in 104 AD.
Fortunately for us, a portion of one wing on the Esquiline Hill wasn't demolished but
buried to create an elevated terrace for the baths.
This Esquiline wing is the only major portion of the Domus Aurea that has actually survived
to the present day, and its ruins are sufficiently intact to convince us that Severus and Kaler,
the architect and the engineer, succeeded in creating a sophisticated system of vaulted
spaces unlike anything that had preceded it.
This floor plan shows the surviving portion of the Esquiline wing of the Domus Aurea.
It's quite extensive, but for our purposes, we only need to focus on one small segment,
this eight-sided atrium and its adjoining chambers.
Even though this is just a small fragment of the Domus Aurea, it's arguably the most
unique and innovative structure in all of ancient Rome.
The central feature of the atrium is this octagonal room, 44 feet across and aligned
with the building's southern exterior wall.
Note that all eight walls have square door openings, and here's something we haven't
seen previously, flat lintels made entirely of brick.
Well, even what we know about beams, that they experience tension on their bottom surface,
even what we know about brick masonry, that it has essentially zero tensile strength,
how can these lintels possibly work?
Why don't the bricks just pull apart along the bottom surface of the beam?
The answer is that these lintels aren't beams at all, they're actually arches, they don't
look like arches of course because they're not curved, and that's why we actually refer
to them as flat arches.
To see how a flat arch works, let's build a model.
We're going to build a model of a flat arch, and we're going to use what the Romans would
have used, which are these flat bricks.
And these are the same bipedales that you've seen previously in my demonstration of the
construction of opus testachium, and while the bricks are flat, when we put them into
the construction of the flat arch, we're going to be separating the individual bricks
with mortar, and that mortar is going to take on a slight wedge shape.
And so as you can see in this particular brick, the combination of brick and mortar creates
a brick and mortar unit that will be able to work essentially like a vusoire, just like
the wedge shaped vusoires that we saw in a conventional arch back in Lecture 6.
Here's where we're going to build the arch, and out here on the ends are structural elements
called impost blocks.
In the domus aria, these blocks are made of travertine, a very hard and strong limestone.
Their angled ends will be serving as the supports for the flat arch, and they are absolutely
critical to the functioning of this structural element.
Down below the impost blocks, you see our temporary centering made out of wood.
Of course, it performs exactly the same function as the temporary centering that we saw in
the traditional arch, except that this being a flat arch, this temporary centering is flat.
I would add that in this configuration, it's particularly difficult to pull out the temporary
centering after the arch has been constructed without disturbing the integrity of the arch
itself.
And so we use a special configuration of props to hold it up.
You can see these angled props below that are actually held in position with wedges
that are inserted at their bases.
Once the arch has been built, I'll simply be able to pull out the wedges and then drop
the centering without disturbing the arch itself.
All right, we're ready to build our arch.
Let's give it a try.
I'm going to start by building the structure exactly as we built the conventional arch back
in lecture six.
That is by placing pairs of bricks out at the supports at the impost blocks and working
progressively inward.
In this case, we can save a little bit of time by adding a handful of bricks at a time.
So we'll work inward with stacks of bipedales, two-foot square bricks, formed into that
slight wedge shape by virtue of having mortar separating the individual bricks.
And now have just about finished the job.
And this last series of three bricks, I'll insert into the center in much the same way
as we inserted a keystone in the traditional arch.
We have now completely built our flat arch structure, and it's time to remove the centering.
Once again, as I said earlier, I'll remove the centering by pulling out these wedges
first.
That drops the centering straight down and then allows us to simply collapse it and pull
it out, and the result is a flat arch.
Once again, not only capable of carrying its own weight, but also additional load superimposed
on top of it.
So it works, but how does it work exactly?
Well, in practice, this arch actually carries load in precisely the same way that a conventional
curved arch does.
Indeed, the path of the internal compression force through the flat arch actually follows
a curved path from center to support, just like this, in precisely the way that the compressive
force in a conventional arch works.
Now note that the curve always remains perpendicular to the joints between the bricks, and that's
how that compressive force is transmitted from brick to brick.
Also you should note that this curve is much flatter than a conventional semicircular arch.
And as a result, this particular type of arch generates significantly more lateral thrust
than a conventional arch would do.
But the designers, Severus and Taylor, clearly recognize this because in the actual domus
aurea, those flat arches use impulse blocks that are made of high-strength travertine
to carry the thrust, even though the remainder of the structure is somewhat weaker brick.
Now these flat arches of the domus aurea serve as a wonderful example of how a few simple
engineering concepts can help us understand an interesting architectural feature that
might otherwise seem inexplicable.
Returning to our computer model, note that the octagonal walls transition seamlessly
to a cast-concrete dome, which is pierced by a circular opening called the oculus on
top.
The oculus is formed by a ring of radially-oriented bricks.
Well, this is our first encounter with a dome, so let's pause to explore how this structural
element works.
Let's build an octagonal dome similar to the one in the domus aurea.
A concrete dome carries load very much as a concrete arch does.
Indeed, we can think of the atrium's octagonal dome as four arches simply arranged radially
around a vertical axis.
And that's the way I'll actually construct this model of the octagonal dome of the domus
aurea.
I'll begin by erecting a single arch consisting of two of these wedges by placing each wedge
into my octagonal base, standing them toward the center, and then using a small replica
of the oculus to hold the two of them in place.
So here's that single arch with the oculus serving as a three-dimensional keystone that
just happens to have a hole in its center.
You should note, however, that if we just built this structure, the oculus would tend
to collapse inward because it would have compressive force pressing in here and nothing tending
to stabilize the oculus in any other direction.
I hope you can also see that as we build the remainder of the dome, however, the oculus
effectively gets stronger because it'll have compressive forces pressing inward in all
directions so that tendency to squash will be eliminated.
So now let me complete the construction of the dome by adding the remaining segments.
This can be just a little touchy, so I'm going to do it quite carefully.
One of the very interesting aspects of this dome in general, and my dome model specifically,
is that it tends to get significantly more stable as it gets closer to completion.
So you see it looking kind of wobbly right now, but as I get each successive segment
in place, we're going to see it start taining a higher level of structural stability.
And now we'll get this last pair of wedges in place.
One of the other fascinating aspects of the dome is that once the dome is complete, the
keystone is no longer required.
In effect, this becomes the oculus.
The individual segments of the dome are capable of supporting themselves without the addition
of the keystone in the center of the dome.
Now before we go on, I need to emphasize that the actual dome of the Domus Aurea was actually
one single monolithic concrete casting.
A huge wooden centering would have been built underneath, and then one pore of concrete
would have been laid on top of it in order to create a single concrete shell to create
the dome.
We've only constructed my model of eight individual segments as a way to illustrate
structural behavior.
So let's talk about structural behavior.
Like an arch, each of these segments carries load primarily in compression.
The weight of the dome presses downward, and that load is transmitted in internal compression
force all the way out through the segment and down to the base of the dome.
Just like an arch, as a result, the dome tries to flatten out, and as a consequence,
this base tends to try to spread out laterally.
Now my model is perfectly stable because the thrust is being restrained by this octagonal
base that I have currently surrounding it.
However, if I remove that base by lifting it off, I can now apply just the slightest
load to the dome, and we'll find that just like an arch that's unsupported laterally,
it collapses quite easily.
This situation actually gets worse when the dome is placed on top of the atrium's octagonal
walls.
Now, the thrust of the dome causes the walls to tip outward, resulting in even greater instability.
Severus and Kaler met this challenge in two ways.
First, they added heavy piers called buttresses at the corners of the octagon to prevent the
walls from tipping outward.
Second, the designers further stabilized the dome by providing these vaulted chambers,
extending outward from five sides of the octagon.
Because the chambers are oriented perpendicular to the atrium walls, they're very effective
in preventing those walls from tipping outward.
For this reason, they're often called buttress vaults, because they serve that structural
function.
Now we can complete our model by adding concrete fill to form the domus aureus flat roof.
And here's another fascinating aspect of the architectural design.
The octagonal space around the outside of the dome is left open to create a skylight,
which opens into the vaulted chambers through short arches shown here.
Because they're arranged around the octagon, these light wells provide excellent natural
illumination, regardless of the sun's position in the sky.
The atrium of Nero's domus aurea is an extraordinary architectural statement.
Severus, the architect, abandoned all convention to create a unique octagonal space that integrates
a dome and vaulting to achieve a striking visual effect, ingeniously illuminated from
above.
Dr. Kaler, the engineer, made it work, devising a masterful structural scheme and then implementing
it in brick and concrete.
In describing this milestone structure, J.B. Ward Perkins, a noted architectural historian,
wrote, it is hardly an exaggeration to say that the whole subsequent history of European
architectural thought hangs upon this historic event.
If Nero's domus aurea represents the seed of a new architectural paradigm, then the
full flowering of that paradigm can be seen in one of Rome's most underappreciated buildings,
Trajan's Market.
The emperor Trajan, who ruled from 98 to 117 AD, was a prolific builder.
He was aided by a gifted architect engineer named Apollodorus of Damascus, a Greek from
Rome in Syria, who's known to have designed several important buildings in Rome, as well
as Trajan's column, which we'll encounter in Lecture 17.
One of Trajan's and Apollodorus' most ambitious projects was a new forum in Basilica in the
heart of Rome.
And because these works, Trajan's Forum and the Basilica Opia, displaced many small shops
that had previously been located in that area, Trajan also initiated the construction of
a large market complex adjacent to the Forum, at the base of the Quirinal Hill.
Trajan's Market was built around 106 to 112 AD, and much of it has survived, probably
because it was repurposed as a religious establishment during the Middle Ages.
Today, the ruins of Trajan's Market include some 170 rooms distributed among six levels
arrayed up the slope of the Quirinal Hill to a height of 115 feet, actually exceeding
the height of Trajan's column, which stands nearby.
The extent of the original structure was even greater, but much of the periphery apparently
has been lost to modern construction.
Trajan's Market is a magnificent architectural design, brilliantly adapted to a challenging
site.
A well-integrated arrangement of shops, multi-story halls, corridors, streets, ramps, stairwells,
and terraces, the Market provided shoppers with easy access, effective illumination,
protection from the elements, and splendid views.
Sound familiar?
Based on these characteristics, you won't be surprised to learn that Trajan's Market
is often regarded as the world's oldest shopping mall.
This design fully reflects the new imperial architecture, enabled by the stuff of the
Roman construction revolution, opus testacium, and concrete, with only minimal stone and,
believe it or not, not a single structural column.
Let's use a computer model to examine the six levels of Trajan's Market, starting at
the base of the Quirinal, adjacent to Trajan's Forum, and then building upward.
The northeastern side of Trajan's Forum was delineated by a stone hemicycle, one of those
semicircular plazas, which Apollodorus echoed in his design for the first level of the market.
This market hemicycle incorporates 13 wedge-shaped rooms covered with concrete barrel vaults.
Eleven of these are shops, called Taberni, and the other two are stairwells.
The hemicycle is flanked by three large semicircular halls, two on the north side, one on the south.
On the second level, these three halls are covered with concrete half-domes, also called
semi-domes, each creating a majestic space that, unlike a full dome, can be illuminated
by these second-story windows piercing the front wall.
The second level of the hemicycle features a vaulted annular corridor illuminated by
these 24 windows in the outer wall.
On the opposite side are 10 more Taberni shops extending into the hillside.
Rows of shops also extend to the north and south of the hemicycle, as you can see here.
One level up, the hemicycle is ringed by a promenade overlooking the Forum, and a third
level of Taberni opening in the opposite direction, onto the Via Bibaratica, a street
that was designed as an integral component of the market.
Taberni also lined the east side of the Via Bibaratica, as you can see here.
Extending farther up the Quirinol are three more levels of construction, with the lowest
standing across the Via Bibaratica at the south end, to create this elevated terrace
with fine views of the Forum.
The northeast corner of this upper structure is the most unique and innovative component
of Trajan's Market, a cavernous two-story hall called the Aula, which is Latin for
courtyard.
Each side of the Aula is defined by blocks of Taberni, stacked on two levels, with the
upper level entrances set back to create a corridor here.
Overhead, resting on stout piers, we see an exceptionally fine example of early Roman
groin vaulting.
Hey, that reminds me.
Didn't we cast a groin vault back in Lecture 6?
This would certainly be an appropriate time to see how it turned out.
And so let's do that now.
So here's the casting we did in Lecture 6.
I've cleaned up the mold a little bit, but otherwise this is exactly as we left it back
in Lecture 6.
What we're going to do now is exactly what the Roman builders would have done after the
concrete had cured, and note that it has cured quite nicely.
The first thing I need to do is remove the temporary props that are currently holding
up the centering.
I'll do that by simply pulling them forward and out.
And now we should be able to simply drop the centering directly downward.
I'll do that here.
And upon releasing the centering down below and removing it from the structure, we now
have the completed groin vault intact and serving a number of critically important purposes.
First, the upper surface of the groin vault produced a beautiful flat, hard, structurally
sound surface which can either serve as the roof of the building or perhaps the floor
of stories that would be built up on top.
But more importantly, inside the structure we now have a beautiful monolithic concrete
groin vault.
It's very difficult for me to show you inside this structure, so instead I'm going to show
you an identical copy of the same vault.
This is an exact duplicate of the groin vault that we currently have in the building right
now.
I cast this as a trial prior to Lecture 6 just to make sure the system would work.
And you can see the result.
You can see the configuration of the groin vaulting consisting of two intersecting barrel
vaults.
And more importantly, you can see and I hope appreciate the development of a complex curved
shape with great aesthetic beauty, great complexity, a great visual effect inside the completed
structure and we created that quite easily simply by pouring wet concrete into a wooden
form, a wonderful example of concrete's versatility of form.
So in addition to the aesthetic appeal of the groin vaulting in and of itself is another
great functional advantage of this system.
The use of groin vaulting allows for window openings to be placed on all four sides of
this structural bay.
Had we used a barrel vault, that is a vault that simply followed this curve and extended
all the way through the building, then these side windows would have been impossible to
include in the architectural design because they would have been completely closed off
by concrete and interior illumination would have suffered considerably.
Now Apollodorus didn't invent groin vaults.
They'd been used sparingly and conservatively for at least 200 years before his time.
What Apollodorus did was to use them in a new and daring way, supported not on solid walls
but on piers to create a dramatic covered space brilliantly illuminated by natural light.
In the aula of Trajan's market we see an architectural concept that 1,000 years later
would be manifested in the grand cathedrals of the Middle Ages.
Compare Apollodorus's 2nd century aula with the 11th century cathedral in Spire, Germany
and I think you'll see the family resemblance.
Beyond its striking visual effect, Apollodorus's groin vaulting is also an amazing technological
achievement.
Like any arched structural element, groin vaults generate significant lateral thrust
and whether supported on tall piers, this thrust causes a strong tendency to tip the
piers outward.
Apollodorus responded to this challenge with two innovations that demonstrate his absolute
mastery of structural engineering.
First, he supported the vaults on these stone projections called corbels.
Because they project inward, the corbels significantly reduced the vault's tendency to tip the piers
outward.
Second, Apollodorus arranged the taberni along the sides of the main hall such that they would
function as buttress vaults to prevent the piers from tipping outward.
This wasn't a new idea of course, Severus and Kaler had used buttress vaults in the
Domus Aurea, but the Alla proved to be a significantly greater structural challenge.
On the upper story, the taberni are set back to create these longitudinal corridors, but
because of the setback, the upper taberni couldn't function as buttress vaults as long
as they were physically separated from the piers.
Apollodorus addressed this issue by adding these ingenious brick arches which provide
a load path for transmission of lateral thrust outward from the groin vaulting across the
corridor and into the upper story buttress vaults.
These arches represent an astonishing structural innovation for which Apollodorus of Damascus
is seldom given credit.
And if you're a lover of Gothic architecture as I am, you probably recognize them as flying
buttresses.
Yes, the flying buttress is generally regarded as a medieval invention, but in terms of structural
function, there is fundamentally no difference between these flying buttresses supporting
the Alla of Trajan's Market and these supporting the nave of Chartres Cathedral.
In studying Trajan's Market, I hope you've come to see this rather utilitarian brick
and concrete building as something quite special, a significant architectural and technological
achievement in its own right, but also a critically important link in a chain of innovations
that will lead to the grand imperial bath complexes like the Baths of Caracalla which
will examine in Lecture 15, to later imperial halls like the Basilica of Maxentius shown
here, to the magnificent cathedrals of the medieval era, and to many modern buildings
that have drawn inspiration from them.
In both Nero's Domus Aurea and Trajan's Market, we see the advent of a fundamentally
new imperial Roman architecture.
In this new paradigm, traditional, traviated construction is abandoned for complex vaulted
structural systems with few if any columns.
Symmetrical, rectilinear plans are replaced by circular, polygonal, and irregular geometric
forms.
Exterior appearances de-emphasized in favor of interior spaces that are visually striking,
cleverly illuminated, and highly functional.
And while these new architectural forms were enabled by technology, opus testacium, putzolana-based
concrete, and ever-improving construction processes, they were ultimately products of
human aspirations and human ingenuity.
This new Roman architecture is appropriately characterized as imperial because it was invariably
sponsored by the emperors, but we really owe it to the genius of men like Severus, Kaler,
and Apollodorus who had the vision to imagine a fundamentally new paradigm and the skill
to make this vision a reality.
We're fortunate indeed to be able to enjoy their legacy, the great structures they built,
and the even greater structures they inspired.
Next lecture, we'll immerse ourselves in their greatest legacy of all, ancient Rome's
most notable structural achievement, the pantheon.
