Welcome back.
In lecture four, we learned that
tabulated construction constituted the basic structural system of all classical Greek temples,
and that stone provided these structures with the beauty and permanence that has made them
enduring icons of Greek culture.
But beauty and permanence came at a cost.
The inherently low tensile strength of stone fundamentally limited the span length of architrave
beams which constrained the overall size of these buildings, while limiting opportunities
for structural experimentation.
In lecture five, we learned how the Roman tie beam truss overcame this span length limitation
and thus enabled the development of a daring new architectural form, the basilica, with
its vast unimpeded interior hall.
But the truss's long spans also came at a cost.
To be effective, a truss must be made of a material that's reasonably strong in both
tension and compression.
In antiquity, the only such material available for use in large structures was wood, but
wood lacks permanence.
It's highly vulnerable to fire and to long term deterioration by rot and insect damage.
As Roman engineers gained experience and expertise and confidence, they sought to overcome the
limitations of both trabeated stone construction and the timber truss with a fundamentally
new structural form, one that allowed for both long spans and permanence, one that would
become intimately associated with Roman civilization itself, the arch.
The arch was not a Roman invention.
Archaeologists have found many examples that predated the Romans, like the Ashkelon Gate,
dating from 1850 BC, discovered in modern-day Israel.
Though it's only partially intact, there's no doubt that this structure was a true arch.
We also know of several arches from 6th century BC Egypt and this underground passageway
at the 4th century BC Greek stadium at Olympia.
But the arch didn't come of age as a structural technology until it was embraced by the Romans
about 100 years later.
As with the truss, Roman engineers saw immense potential in the arch where other civilizations
hadn't, and they exploited that potential in varied and innovative ways.
By the imperial era, the arch had become ubiquitous.
We see it in bridges, city gates, aqueducts, triumphal arches, sewer systems, and great
public buildings like baths, basilicas, and arenas.
What made the arch so effective and so versatile in comparison with other structural technologies?
To answer that question, let's build a simple, semi-circular arch of the sort that the Romans
might have used for a bridge or city gate.
An interesting aspect of the arch is that it's only capable of supporting itself after
it's been completely built, so it has to be held up with some sort of temporary structure
before it can actually be assembled.
The Romans used something called centering, which is a heavy timber structure formed into
the shape of an arch, but only for temporary use.
I'm going to take the centering and put it in place, and now we'll construct our arch.
We'll build the arch of these wedge-shaped stones called vooswares, and I'm going to add
the vooswares to the arch in pairs so we can keep it in balance as it's constructed, starting
at the base and working our way upward as we get closer to the top.
The arch gets closer to completion, and now there's a slot for one remaining vooswares.
We'll put that last one in place.
This last vooswares often called the keystone, though in practice it's actually no different
as a structural element than any of the other stones in the arch.
Now with the arch complete, the structural element can be self-supporting, and it's now
possible for me to remove the centering and allow the arch to stand on its own, and indeed
it does.
Indeed, not only does it carry its own weight quite effectively, it actually can carry substantial
load in addition to its own weight.
Now as a structural element, the arch has two key characteristics.
First, it carries load entirely in compression.
We can see that this is the case because, as you'll recall, when I put the arch together
I didn't use any sort of glue or adhesive to hold the stones together.
Well, if those stones are being held together, something's holding them together, something's
keeping them from falling apart.
The three stones I have in my hand, I'm holding the outer two, and the one in the center is
only remaining in place because I'm pushing inward from the outside.
I am compressing the stones.
If I apply tension to this collection of three stones, well, clearly it's incapable of carrying
load.
And so that's clear evidence that our arch must certainly be carrying load entirely
in compression.
Because of this characteristic, the arch effectively overcomes the principal limitation of traviated
stone construction.
Short beam spans resulting from the low tensile strength of stone.
Because the arch is in compression, low tensile strength is in a problem.
As a result, the arch can be made of many small stones rather than a single large one,
and dramatically longer spans are possible.
In the hands of pragmatic, technologically adept people like the Romans, the arch opened
the door to unprecedented structural and architectural innovation.
By now, you've probably noticed that the advantages of any structural technology always
seem to come at a cost, and the arch is certainly no exception.
The second characteristic of an arch is that it can only carry load successfully if it
is supported laterally.
The weight of the arch, and any additional structure or superimposed loading that's located
above it, causes the arch to tend to flatten as the load pushes down.
As the arch tries to flatten, its ends attempt to move outward.
This tendency is called lateral thrust.
And in order for the arch to carry load successfully, this outward thrust must be fully resisted
by some sort of very rigid inward lateral support.
On my model, that job is being done quite effectively by these two wooden blocks.
And to demonstrate that those blocks are in fact keeping the arch intact, I'm going to
remove one of them.
Now, that block has been removed and the arch hasn't fallen down, but I think you'll
see that it can carry substantially less load than it was able to carry when the two lateral
supports were in place.
Clearly, lateral support is critical for the structural integrity of the arch.
And so, the arch's unique advantage, its ability to carry load entirely in compression, facilitated
its use in Rome's greatest and most innovative structures.
Yet as we'll see, its unique disadvantage, the need for lateral support, profoundly
influenced both the form and function of these structures.
The earliest Roman arches were typically used in settings where lateral thrust was easily
restrained.
This is the Nolan Gate at Pompeii, built around 200 BC.
You see how the arches are laterally supported?
Clearly, this restraint is provided by the surrounding wall, which prevents the ends
of the arch from spreading out sideways.
How about an underground structure like Rome's great sewer, the cloaca maxima?
Here, the arch is laterally restrained by the compacted soil that surrounds it.
Similarly, in single-span bridges, like this one near Salaris, Spain, foundations built
into steep river banks support the beautiful arch's lateral thrust quite effectively.
The situation gets a bit more complicated and more interesting when several arches are
placed side by side, as we see in long-span bridges, like the Milvian Bridge shown here.
Now, although this structure became famous in 312 AD as the site of the Great Battle
where Constantine defeated his rival Maxentius to become the Emperor of Rome, the structure
was actually built 400 years earlier.
It was one of Rome's earliest masonry arch bridges.
Let's take a look at a simplified model of the Milvian Bridge.
This is an arrangement of multiple adjacent arches, and it's called an arcade.
And if you look closely at the arcade, you'll see that the exterior ends of its outermost
arches are supported just like the single-span arch that we tested just a few moments ago.
But what about the interior ends?
Well, notice that when I place a load on the center span, that load is transmitted in compression
down through the arch, the bases of the central arch tend to want to spread out laterally.
Well, what holds them in?
What prevents them from moving?
Well, I think you might be able to see that what prevents it from moving is actually the
adjacent arches, because those arches are carrying similar amounts of load, and therefore, load
is being transmitted in compression out through each of those arches.
In that case, the lateral thrust is pressing inward, and so the lateral thrust from two
adjacent arches tends to counterbalance each other and keeps the system in equilibrium.
As long as all of these spans are loaded more or less equally, the opposing thrusts counterbalance
each other, and the system remains intact, and its structural integrity is preserved.
But were the multiple arches of an actual arcade more or less equally loaded?
Wouldn't a structure like the Milvian Bridge experience localized loads, like, say, a cohort
of soldiers or a supply wagon crossing the bridge and applying their weight to a single
arch in a very concentrated way?
Wouldn't that localized loading exert more force on that one arch, causing its lateral
thrust to exceed the thrust of the adjacent unloaded arches?
And wouldn't that imbalance cause the structure to topple, like a house of cards?
Well, the best way to find out is to give it a try.
Let's do an experiment.
What I'll do is take all of the loads that we have applied to our individual spans, and
let's apply them all to the single center span, perhaps even add a little bit more.
And what I do, we find that the bridge is incapable of carrying that concentrated load
in the center.
So if a localized load can cause an arcade to collapse, then why are so many of these
multi-span Roman bridges still standing?
Well, to answer that question, we'll need to reassemble my model.
So in practice, a stone or arch bridge is extremely heavy.
And once again, I'll represent the weight of the structure itself using these individual
weights spread out over each arch, but the weight of pedestrians and Roman-era vehicles
would actually have been very, very small in comparison with those weights.
So the real situation that this bridge is subjected to in real life is actually much
closer to this.
There's an extremely small concentrated load applied over one of the arches.
But because the bridge's weight itself is uniform and unchanging, this very small increment
of load in the center isn't really enough to cause sufficient imbalance in the lateral
thrust to cause the structure to collapse, the bottoms of the arches won't slide as
they did in the experiment, and the bridge, of course, remains stable.
Now these early applications of the arch, like gateways and bridges, were quite effective
in spanning horizontal distances, but the most revolutionary applications were yet to
come.
In the second century BC, Roman engineers began experimenting with the arch as a means
of enclosing space.
An architectural purpose that required a new structural configuration, the vault.
The simplest type of vault, called the barrel vault, is created by simply extruding an arch
into the third dimension like this to create a curved roof or ceiling.
But while the vault provided a versatile new tool for enclosing space, its potential couldn't
be fully realized as long as it had to be meticulously assembled from these geometrically
complex wedges of stone.
In addition to this structural form, the Roman construction revolution needed a new, more
versatile material that could substitute for stone.
That material was concrete.
But before we can discuss concrete construction, we need to talk briefly about the earlier
Roman building methods that concrete eventually replaced.
Early Romans probably learned stone masonry construction from their Etruscan neighbors,
and because Etruscan architecture had been strongly influenced by the Greeks, it's hardly
surprising that Rome's early monumental structures used essentially the same Greek-style
ashlar masonry construction that we saw back in Lecture 3.
Precisely cut stone blocks, assembled in horizontal courses without mortar, interconnected with
iron clamps.
The Romans called this configuration opus quadratum, Latin for squared work.
Now, initially, the only significant difference between Roman opus quadratum and Greek ashlar
masonry was the stone itself.
During the Republican era, Roman builders had little access to marble, so they built
primarily with tufa, a locally available limestone.
The tufa is relatively soft, it's porous, and it's quite unattractive.
So as you can see in this building at Pompeii, it was often faced with a layer of stucco
and decorated to resemble marble, an imitation of Greek masonry.
It's interesting then that in these early years, the Romans hadn't yet found their
own architectural voice, seemed mostly content to mimic the Greek tradition.
But over time, the Romans did develop some significant improvements on Greek-style masonry.
Most importantly, they began using a thin layer of lime-based mortar in the joints between
stones.
We can see these mortar joints in the surviving tufa walls of the tabularium, Rome's public
archives building constructed in the 1st century BC.
But wait, here's a material we haven't discussed previously.
What is lime-based mortar?
Well first, mortar in general terms is a substance used to fill the gaps between stones or bricks
in masonry construction.
Mortar is not glue.
It has very little tensile strength, so it can't adhere stones together the way glue
would.
Its two main purposes are first, to seal the joints between stones or bricks, and second,
to provide a uniform bedding surface between successive courses or layers of masonry to
allow the weight of the structure to be transmitted downward through the wall in compression without
any concentrations of stress at the points of contact between the stone blocks.
Now in Greek masonry, which used no mortar, the only way to achieve this end was by meticulously
smoothing the horizontal faces of each stone to a perfect flat surface.
Very labor-intensive process.
The Roman's use of mortar allowed for minor imperfections in stone carving, so it reduced
construction cost and improved construction speed considerably.
Previous civilizations had used clay, gypsum, and bitumen as mortar, but by the classical
era, far superior lime mortar had come into widespread use.
It was manufactured in a two-step process, each involving a characteristic chemical reaction.
First, limestone, which is calcium carbonate, was baked in a kiln at nearly 2000 degrees
Fahrenheit.
This process drove off carbon dioxide gas and transformed the limestone into a substance
called quicklime, or calcium oxide.
Second, chunks of quicklime were soaked in water for upwards of three months, a process
called slaking, to create lime putty, which is calcium hydroxide, which was then mixed
with sand for added strength.
The resulting material, lime-based mortar, requires direct contact with the air to harden.
When this occurs, the calcium hydroxide reacts with carbon dioxide in the air to create calcium
carbonate, which, as you'll recall, is essentially limestone, the same material we started with.
But now it's been transformed into the desired shape for a construction application.
Now, lime-based mortar works quite effectively when used in thin layers to create joints
between stones, but it couldn't have been used effectively as a substitute for stone,
as concrete eventually was.
If lime-based mortar is cast in a thick mass, like concrete, its outside surface hardens
through direct exposure to the air, but this crust then prevents air from penetrating inside
the mass so the inner core never fully hardens.
This very significant limitation was overcome when the Romans discovered a naturally occurring
volcanic ash called Pazzolana, named for Pazzoli, a town near Naples where the stuff was originally
found.
The unique chemical properties of Pazzolana made Roman concrete possible.
When combined with lime and water, Pazzolana undergoes a chemical reaction.
The calcium hydroxide in lime combines with silica in the Pazzolana to produce calcium
silicate hydrate, a substance that's five times stronger than lime-based mortar.
More importantly, this chemical reaction doesn't require air, so Pazzolana-based mortar can
be cast into large masses without hindering the curing process.
Indeed, it'll even harden underwater.
Pazzolana-based mortar was first discovered around 3rd century BC, but for a long time
Roman builders used it quite cautiously as a substitute for traditional lime-based mortar
in stone masonry.
Metruvius, writing in the 1st century BC, still indicates some mistrust of this new-fangled
material, but eventually builders began experimenting with true concrete created by mixing liquid
Pazzolana mortar with solid material or aggregate for added strength.
In modern concrete, the aggregate is a carefully proportioned mix of sand and gravel.
In Roman concrete, it was usually random rubble, fist-sized stones, broken bricks, pieces of
terracotta tiles and such.
In either case, when the liquid mortar and the aggregate are mixed together, the aggregate
forms an interlocking matrix of solid material, as you can see in this concrete floor at Herculaneum.
With smaller pieces filling the spaces between the larger ones, the mortar paste then fills
the smallest voids between the little particles, and it hardens, creating a dense, rock-like
mass with a compressive strength quite comparable to stone.
Roman concrete first came into widespread use in a series of progressively more sophisticated
systems for wall construction.
The first was called opus incertum, shown here.
In this system, the outer wall facings were built of random fitted stones, and the space
between the facings was filled with concrete.
Here we see the distinctive appearance of opus incertum in the wall of a Roman temple
at Terracina.
Note the use of rectangular cutstone reinforcements at the corners.
The architectural term for this detail is a coin.
Note also that you can see some of the concrete core, right here, where a reinforcing arch
has fallen away.
By the end of the second century BC, builders had refined this system to create opus reticulatum,
which retained the solid concrete core of opus incertum, but replaced the random stone
facings with pyramid-shaped cutstone blocks arranged in a diamond pattern.
The word reticulatum refers to the net-like appearance of these wall faces.
Notice that in the lower portion of this wall, much of the stone facing has actually been
lost.
It's just fallen away.
The wall still stands, a clear indicator that the source of structural strength in these
composite wall systems was not the facing, but rather the concrete core.
Here's another fine example in the ruins of an aqueduct in southern France, where, again,
loss of the facing at the base of these piers hasn't compromised the integrity of the structure
in the least.
Opus reticulatum represented a significant improvement over opus incertum, because those
pyramid-shaped blocks could be mass produced in standard sizes by unskilled workers.
This trend toward mass production and standardization accelerated further with the development
of an even more effective system called opus testacium during the imperial era.
Here's a model of a partially completed Roman wall of opus testacium.
Note that the outer facings of this wall system are built of these triangular bricks, which
are then turned inward and laid in overlapping courses to form the outer facings.
And that once again, the inner core of the wall system is solid concrete.
You can see some of that solid concrete here in the partially completed wall.
To build this system, the masons first had to lay those outer facings.
So I'm going to complete the construction of the outer facings by taking some of this
concrete mortar.
This is actually modern Portland cement-based concrete, but it's functionally the same and
very nearly chemically the same as Roman pazzolana.
I'm going to take a layer of it and spread it out on the previously laid course of brick
and we'll then set another of these triangular bricks in place, tap it into position.
Once again, I'll use my trowel to set another bed of mortar for the next course or layer
of brick.
I'm going to go on top to complete this layer of wall construction.
Again we'll take a second brick, point facing inward, notice that I've offset the brick
from the previous one to increase the strength and structural integrity of the system.
Now with those bricks in place, we're ready to fill the inner core with concrete just
as the Romans would have done.
Now in modern concrete construction, concrete is created by mixing Portland cement, water
and aggregate together all at the same time in a concrete mixer.
But the Romans didn't have this capability, so they combined the materials manually inside
the wall like this.
They would begin with a layer of mortar, simply dumped into the space between the two outer
wall faces.
And once a good thick layer of mortar was in place, they would add some of that aggregate.
Remember stones, broken brick and rubble acquired from around the construction site.
And with the two materials in place, they would use wooden rods to ram the aggregate
down into the mortar in order to create a better mix so that the aggregate is appropriately
dispersed through the mortar.
Once that first layer is in position, they would go back and repeat the process again.
Layer of mortar and a load of aggregate.
Once again, we consolidate the aggregate within the mortar by ramming it into place to get
a good strong mix.
And we know those Roman concrete mixes were strong because so many of those structures
are still surviving today.
Now we'll cap it all off with one last layer of mortar.
This mortar not only caps off the aggregate mix, but also provides the base for these
large square bricks, which we'll use to cap off the wall to create this final layer.
The mason would carefully position the bricks so that they're perfectly level.
This brick cap protects the newly placed concrete from the elements while it's curing.
It also strengthens the wall by tying the two outer faces together structurally.
And perhaps most importantly, it establishes a level surface for the next level of construction,
which might be more wall, it might be a vault, it might be some other aspect of a taller
structural system.
The final result is an attractive brick wall to all the world once it's completely closed
in.
We don't see the concrete core anymore, and it is extremely strong.
More importantly, it's constructed without the need for any of the temporary formwork
that's used in modern concrete construction to hold the wet concrete in place while it's
curing.
Now, because of its many advantages, Opus Testachium quickly became the dominant construction
method throughout the Roman Empire, except in the Hellenized East, where traditional
stone masonry retained its popularity.
The widespread use of Opus Testachium was directly tied to Rome's growing role as an
imperial superpower.
Rome's imperial ambitions demanded a vast increase in all forms of construction, city
walls, bridges, aqueducts, basilicas, baths, palaces, apartment complexes.
At the same time, wars of conquest produced large numbers of low-skilled slave laborers.
Traditional masonry construction relied heavily on highly skilled masons for cutting and fitting
all those perfectly fitted stones.
Slave laborers would have been ill-suited for this sort of work.
But because Opus Testachium used only standardized, mass-produced materials assembled in an
unvarying pattern, the system could be implemented with gangs of unskilled workers supervised
by just a few skilled masons.
Thanks to Opus Testachium, construction became more a matter of assembly than of craft.
And yet, this humble construction method lies at the heart of innumerable grand imperial
projects of mind-boggling scale and complexity.
You'll visit many of these, the Colosseum, Nero's Domus Aurea, Trajan's Market, the
Pantheon, and the Bads of Caracalla in future lectures.
As we'll see often in this course, technological development begets technological development.
And so the widespread adoption of Opus Testachium stimulated a tremendous expansion of the Roman
brick-making industry around the 1st century AD.
Brick factories around the empire mass-produced millions of terracotta bricks in standard
sizes, ranging from the small 8-inch square basales to the two-foot square bipedales.
And you don't have to be a Latin scholar to recognize that bipedales means two feet.
The triangular bricks used in Opus Testachium were then cut from these square bricks on
the job site like this.
Before firing, many of these terracotta bricks were impressed with stamps, identifying the
manufacturer and the emperor who commissioned the associated project, or for military construction,
the Roman legion doing the work.
Today these brick stamps have proved to be invaluable resources for archaeologists attempting
to date Roman structures accurately.
Yep, Roman organization skill continues to benefit us, even today.
And because technological development begets technological development, Roman brick-makers
soon expanded their product lines to include a variety of other standardized terracotta
elements, hexagonal floor tiles, circular and wedge-shaped bricks for building columns,
water pipes, and rectangular ducts called tubuli, which were used in heating systems,
will revisit several of these technologies in future lectures.
The arch and the concrete.
These two revolutionary technologies converged most powerfully in the concrete vault, perhaps
the most distinguishing feature of imperial Roman architecture.
As we've seen, the simple barrel vault could be constructed of cut stone, albeit with considerable
difficulty.
But with concrete, vaults of much greater complexity could be built quite easily.
Let's see how.
Here's a portion of a Roman building.
It would have been constructed of opus testacium.
And we're going to enclose the building with this groin vault.
And in order to form the groin vault, we'll use temporary centering, which is currently
mounted inside the structure.
As you can see, a groin vault is formed by intersecting two barrel vaults perpendicularly.
Here's one of the barrel vaults running acrosswise, and one of the barrel vaults running perpendicular
to that one.
It's quite a complex shape, but concrete will be able to deal with it quite effectively.
Remember, this is a temporary centering.
It'll be removed after the concrete cures.
So at present, it's held in position with these temporary wooden props.
I've already mixed up some concrete in this container here.
And so all we need to do in order to create our barrel vault is to take that concrete
and pour it into the formwork.
It's quite fluid, and so it takes the shape of the forms that have been created for it.
And it looks like it's just about enough.
Now we just need to consolidate that concrete a little bit to make sure it flows down.
And I've put plexiglass on the front of my mold so you can see it flowing into the formwork
and taking the shape of the forms.
Once we've consolidated that concrete into position, I'll take my trowel and level off
the top surface.
Ultimately, when the concrete cures, this will become either the roof of the building
or perhaps the floor of the story immediately above this one.
And it's just that simple.
We'll return to this model two lectures from now when our casting should be hardened
enough to create a beautiful, self-supporting vault.
Now in this demonstration, we saw the most important characteristic of concrete, its
versatility of form.
Any shape that can be modeled as wooden formwork can be transformed into a strong, waterproof,
monolithic, architectural element simply by filling that formwork with concrete.
Using this technique, complex vaulted forms and even domes could be created with relative
ease.
When the Romans figured out how to combine concrete, arches and vaults in integrated
structural systems, the door was open to the grand public works of the imperial era.
These technologies came together at a surprisingly early date.
In 193 BC, an immense warehouse called the Porticus Emilia was built along the east bank
of the Tiber River in Rome.
Starting 1600 by 200 feet, this was Rome's largest commercial building.
One of the earliest known uses of the opus in kertum technique, the Porticus Emilia
exploited this technology to create a functional, fireproof, trans-shipment facility for goods
arriving at the port of Rome.
The design was an ingenious arrangement of 50 parallel barrel vaults arranged in steps
descending toward the river, each step forming a skylight for natural illumination.
These barrel vaults were supported on arcades, which opened up the interior laterally to
create one vast, continuous covered space.
This amazing structure is without precedent in the ancient world.
If the Greek temple represents our point of departure for classical era building technology,
then we have come a very long way indeed.
Gone are the cut stone blocks, iron clamps, segmented columns, massive architraves and
timber roof beams.
In their place is a new integrated construction system, one that exploits standardized mass-produced
building components assembled in bold new ways to meet functional and aesthetic demands,
free from the constraints of trabeated stone construction.
The Porticus Emilia is a wonderful reflection of the Roman construction revolution in its
early years, yet this great structure is even more important as an indicator of things to
come.
For in those beautifully integrated concrete arches and vaults, we can see a seed that
will blossom two centuries later in Rome's grandest building, the Colosseum.
Thank you.
