Welcome to the first of eight lectures on machines in the ancient world.
This series of lectures will be looking at the use of mechanical devices, transportation,
construction, water lifting, power production, and warfare.
The focus of today's lecture is on land transport.
From an engineering perspective, these lectures will be fundamentally different from anything we studied so far.
To put it simply, structures and infrastructure systems stand still, but machines move,
and this simple distinction makes a huge difference, not only in the nature of the technologies involved,
but also in the underlying scientific principles that govern their behavior.
And so before we can delve into the wonderful world of ancient machines,
we need to review just a bit of the science that will help us understand this world more fully.
A machine is defined as an assembly of fixed or moving parts that are used to perform work.
Now in this context, the term work has a precise scientific definition.
Work is the quantity of energy expended when a force moves through a distance.
So for example, if I lift this five pound weight through a distance of two feet,
I'm doing five pounds times two feet equals 10 foot pounds of work.
Now notice that work is expressed in units of force times distance,
that's foot pounds in the U.S. system and Newton meters in the international system.
We often evaluate machines in terms of power, defined as the rate at which work is done.
So now if it takes me four seconds to lift my five pound weight two feet,
one, two, three, four, then the required power is 10 foot pounds of work per four seconds,
or two and a half foot pounds per second.
In the U.S. system of units, power is most commonly expressed in horsepower.
Horsepower equals 550 foot pounds per second.
And yes, that number was originally defined back in the 18th century by the engineer James Watt
as a means of comparing the power of a horse with that of the newly invented steam engine.
Quite appropriately in the international system, the standard unit of power is the watt,
defined as one Newton meter per second.
And just in case you were wondering, one horsepower equals 746 watts.
In classical antiquity, there were four principal sources of power, humans, animals, water, and wind.
Let's start with human power.
Whether pushing, pulling, or lifting, a healthy adult can produce about 1.2 horsepower for a short period of time
and can sustain one-tenth horsepower more or less indefinitely.
An athlete in very good physical condition might be able to produce about 0.3 horsepower for several hours.
If you'd like to test these numbers, you could do it quite easily by climbing stairs.
On a step in a typical staircase, you're going to climb about eight inches every time you ascend one step.
That's two-thirds of a foot.
So when I climb one step, I'm lifting my body weight, that's 190 pounds, through that vertical distance.
Eight inches or two-thirds of a foot.
So the work I do is 190 pounds times two-thirds of a foot equals 127 foot-pounds.
Now, if I climb a flight of stairs at a steady rate of one step per second,
the required power output is 127 foot-pounds per second, which equates to about one-quarter horsepower,
which I can sustain for several flights of stairs, but not indefinitely.
Remember, the horsepower that a human can sustain indefinitely is about 0.1 horsepower.
So how does human power compare with animal power?
Well, a mule can deliver about five times more power than a man, a horse about seven times more,
an ox about ten times more.
But we humans do have a few unique advantages as power sources.
We can be trained to work independently.
We can use our hands to do complex tasks that animals can't do.
And we can use our brains to regulate our work output in response to observed conditions.
For these reasons, in the ancient world, human power was used primarily for highly specialized tasks
that animals couldn't do, like rowing ships, operating cranes, carving stone, and digging.
In contrast, animal power can only be used to pull or push horizontally.
As such, in antiquity, animals were used primarily for pulling wagons and plows.
For carrying heavy burdens on their backs, and occasionally for powering specially configured pumps and mills.
Water power was used to a lesser extent than human or animal power, primarily for milling grain and pumping water.
But this technology did undergo substantial development during the classical era.
We'll be discussing it much further in lecture 19.
And finally, wind power was used almost exclusively for sailing ships, which we'll be examining in lecture 22.
This very limited set of power sources, human, animal, wind, and water, had been in use since the Neolithic Age
and really wasn't effectively augmented until the invention of the steam engine in the 18th century.
In today's world of electricity on demand and in an internal combustion engine in every garage,
it's hard for us to appreciate how meager these ancient power resources were.
Yet as we'll see in the next eight lectures, ancient engineers responded to this constraint
with extraordinary ingenuity, developing machines that achieved impressive levels of performance
using power inputs that by modern standards were miniscule.
Consider, for example, the Roman construction crane that we'll be examining next lecture.
This device could lift about eight tons, yet it was propelled entirely by a crew of four or five men
who in total could deliver about the same level of sustained power output as an average modern leaf blower.
Constraint really can be a powerful stimulus for innovation.
To understand complex machines like this crane, it's often helpful to analyze a system
as an assembly of simple machines, each performing a specific function.
Now we owe this concept of the simple machine to the great 3rd century BC mathematician Archimedes
who identified and articulated three simple machines.
The first was the lever, which magnifies an applied force.
So for example, if I want to lift a heavy block of stone, I can apply a relatively small force
out here at the left-hand end of the lever, and by the action of the lever,
I can deliver a much larger force to lift the stone here on the opposite end
as the lever rotates about its point of support, which is called the fulcrum.
The second of the initial three simple machines is the pulley.
The purpose of a pulley is to change the direction of a force.
So, as I use this pulley, I'm applying a tension force to the string,
and the direction of that tension force is down and to your right.
However, the pulley is converting that tension force into a vertical force directed upward,
which is being used to lift this load.
Next is the screw, the purpose of which is to convert rotational energy or torque.
A concept we'll be discussing in some detail in the next lecture into a linear force.
So here I'm able to apply torque to the screw, and because of the threads of the screw
and the spiral nature of those threads, that rotational force is converted
into a longitudinal force directed along the axis of the screw
and driving it down into the piece of wood.
Later, Greek thinkers added three more to the list of canonical simple machines.
The first is the wedge.
The purpose of the wedge is to convert a single force into a pair of opposing forces,
which are directed perpendicular to the surfaces of the wedge.
So when I insert the wedge into my log, I apply a single downward force,
and the wedge converts that single force into a pair of forces,
which are directed outward and downward, perpendicular to the surfaces of the wedge,
and oriented such that they tend to split the log into two pieces.
Next, the inclined plane, which allows us to lift an object with an applied force
that's less than the object's weight.
So for example, I'd like to lift this heavy block of stone.
My motto weighs about two pounds, and by using the inclined plane,
I'm able to apply a force significantly less than two pounds to lift the two-pound block.
Finally, the sixth of the canonical simple machines is the wheel and axle,
which facilitates horizontal movement with an absolute minimum application of horizontal force.
Now, although the six simple machines were first identified as such during the classical era,
all but the screw were actually well known before that time.
One of these simple machines, the wheel and axle,
is particularly important for our understanding of land transport technology,
and we'll be devoting the remainder of today's lecture to this subject.
In the ancient Mediterranean world, long-distance transportation of heavy cargo
was done almost exclusively by ship.
Land transport was limited by its inherent expense,
and before the Romans came along, by very poor quality roads.
While the great Roman road network must have improved this situation somewhat,
these roads were built primarily to facilitate the movement of infantry, not vehicular traffic.
For these reasons, many modern scholars have dismissed classical era land transport
as a marginal and relatively unsophisticated technological endeavor
that contributed very little to ancient economic development.
However, thanks to recent archaeological discoveries, this view is changing quite dramatically, as we'll see shortly.
Throughout antiquity, there were three principal modes of land transport.
First, human porters could carry loads of 50 to 60 pounds for relatively short distances.
This is significantly less than an animal could carry, yet the porter had unique advantages.
He was self-loading. He could climb stairs, negotiate obstacles,
and place his burden in the desired location with great precision.
Thus, on a construction project, for example, like the Basin Carcala,
the required construction materials would have been delivered to the site by ox-drawn wagons,
but the bricks, stone, pazzolana, and timber would all have been moved within the site by human muscle power.
Second, if a moderately heavy load had to be transported beyond a few hundred yards,
it would probably be carried on the back of a pack animal,
typically a donkey or mule with a pair of penniers slung over its back, like this.
A donkey might carry as much as 200 pounds, depending on its size, and a mule 300 pounds,
provided the load could be split into two equal halves and balanced across the animal's back.
In the Greek and Roman worlds, pack animals were often provided by transport contractors
who maintained large fleets of animals and hired them out for specific jobs.
Finally, to move people in heavy loads for long distances overland,
the preferred mode of transport would have been a wheeled vehicle pulled by a draft animal.
A wide variety of these vehicles were used throughout the classical era,
but most fell into two basic categories, two-wheeled carts and four-wheeled wagons.
Some common types of two-wheeled vehicles included the Greek war chariot,
often mentioned in Homer's Iliad and depicted on Greek pottery.
The hamaxa, a small Greek all-purpose carriage that could carry four people or a modest load of cargo,
and was quite well suited for negotiating the narrow, winding streets of cities like Athens.
The famous Roman racing chariot, and a Roman two-seat taxi cab called the cesium,
depicted here in a mosaic, decorating the floor of the baths of the cesiaree,
the baths of the coachman in the port city of Ostia.
All of these vehicles were light, fast, and maneuverable,
but they had relatively low load carrying capacity.
Four-wheeled vehicles were less maneuverable, but they could carry significantly more cargo.
Their configurations ranged from this crude, solid-wheeled ox cart used extensively for hauling timber and stone
to specialized cargo carriers like this wine wagon
to this extraordinarily sophisticated Roman traveling coach, which we'll examine in greater detail shortly.
And regardless of configuration, all ancient vehicles incorporated three principal technologies,
the wheel, the axle, and the traction system.
First, the wheel.
One of the great hallmarks of human civilization, the wheel was probably invented around the 4th millennium BC.
By the 2nd millennium BC, the state of the art had advanced considerably,
as evidenced by the use of sophisticated lightweight-spoked wheels on military chariots in the Near East.
This early progress notwithstanding, though,
the full range of wheel types from very crude to highly advanced
was still in widespread use during the classical era.
This variety reflects the ancient wheelwright's ability to tailor the weight, strength, and cost of each wheel to its intended purpose.
Solid wooden wheels like these were used on vehicles ranging from ox carts to massive siege engines,
where simplicity and strength were the governing design criteria.
The Greek homaxa used these unique crossbar wheels,
which were very light and somewhat simpler to fabricate than these spoke wheels,
which exhibited a wide range of configurations from this lightweight four spoke model often depicted on Greek chariots
to the more substantial 10 spoke wheels of this Roman farm wagon unearthed at Pompeii.
During the Roman imperial era, the spoke wheel reached a high level of technological sophistication,
probably as a result of ideas borrowed from the Celts of Northern Europe.
The fully developed Roman wheel had as many as 12 elegantly crafted spokes,
fitted into a wooden hub that was reinforced with iron bands to prevent the wood from splitting under heavy loads.
Its rim, called the Fellow, was fabricated from a single piece of ash wood
bent into a circle, spliced together, and then enclosed within an iron tire,
which strengthened the wheel while also preventing wear.
The iron tires found in archaeological digs have no nail holes,
which tells us that they were shrink fitted into position.
The iron hoop was fabricated just a bit smaller than the outside diameter of the Fellow,
and then it was heated until the iron expanded enough to get it onto the rim.
As the hoop cooled, it shrank back into its original diameter,
clamping the Fellow tightly to the wheel.
The result was a structure of exceptional strength and durability.
After the fall of Rome, this technology wouldn't be equaled again until the high middle ages.
Of course, a wheel is of little use without an axle,
which is probably why the Greeks defined the wheel and axle together as a single simple machine.
As we've already seen, ancient vehicles had two basic configurations,
the two-wheeled cart with one axle, and the four-wheeled wagon with two.
But all axles are not created equal.
Let's take a look at a couple of representative examples of vehicles
to see how the different axle configurations work.
Now, on a simple two-wheeled cart like this one,
there are two possible axle configurations.
First, illustrated by this model, the axle is fixed to the body of the cart,
and then the wheels rotate on the axle independently of each other while the axle remains fixed.
The advantage of this configuration is excellent maneuverability.
Whatever direction the animal pulls on the draft pole,
the cart will happily follow without difficulty.
In fact, the vehicle in this configuration can actually be pivoted around entirely within its own length
without any trouble at all.
Notice, as it pivots, the two wheels are actually rotating in opposite directions.
They can do that because they're rotating independently of each other.
The disadvantage of this configuration, however,
is that the wheel and axles constitute a wood-on-wood connection.
That is, a wooden hub turning on a wooden axle.
And that connection tends to wear out quite quickly.
Over time, as that connection wears out, the wheels begin to wobble from side to side,
as you can see somewhat in my model and far more clearly in this graphic.
Eventually, the wheel, the axle, either breaks or simply becomes so worn that it becomes unserviceable
and no longer can be used.
The alternative configuration is this one here.
In which the wheels are rigidly fixed to the axle,
and then that entire unit, consisting of two wheels and a single axle,
rotate as a single body.
Now, the advantage of this system is that it largely eliminates that problem of excessive wear.
The wheels now are constrained to always remain perfectly vertical
because they're rigidly attached to the axle,
and the axle will always remain horizontal.
And no matter how much those axle bearings underneath experience wear,
it's not going to affect the tracking of the wheels in their vertical planes.
The problem with this simplified configuration is that it is much less maneuverable
because both wheels are constrained to rotate at the same speed.
When the vehicle is pulled in a curve, the wheels tend to skid.
And so if you look closely, you can see in this case that the inner wheel is skidding
as I'm moving around the turn.
As I attempt to do what I could do quite easily with the earlier configuration,
that is pivot the wagon around its own length,
you can see that the wheels do nothing but skid.
And that skidding action makes both turning and maneuvering the wagon much more difficult.
Now, that's why this rotating axle configuration tended to be used only for simple farm carts and such.
While the fixed axle was used for chariots and other vehicles requiring high speed and maneuverability,
to address the problem of excess wear on fixed axles,
the Romans developed an iron wheel bearing system with one cylindrical sleeve fitted over the axle
and a slightly larger one reinforcing the inside of the wheel hub.
By replacing wood on wood with iron on iron,
this simple system greatly improved the wheels load bearing capacity while reducing both wear and friction.
But as simple as they are, these bearings would have required an extremely high level of precision in fabrication.
Their widespread use stands as a testimonial to Roman ironworking skill.
Now let's look at a two axle wagon and compare its performance with that of the single axle wagon.
The great advantage of a two axle system is that it has greater load carrying capacity.
So let's simulate that by adding some heavy load to this double axle wagon.
But that capacity is achieved at the cost of maneuverability.
Like our one axle cart, a two axle wagon can use either fixed or rotating axles.
But even the more advantageous configuration, the fixed axle configuration,
that has all four wheels rotating independently on two fixed axles as represented by my model,
even that configuration, as favorable as it might be, doesn't prevent skidding from occurring as the wagon is pulled around the turn.
Note the extensive skidding, you can even hear it as I pull it around the corner.
The only way to address this problem is with a pivoting front axle.
So let's reconfigure our wagon to introduce this new configuration.
We move the fixed axle and replace it with an alternative configuration.
And now in this case, the front axle is able to rotate freely on a heavy iron vertical pin which is located at its center.
And note that the draft pole is now rigidly attached to the axle itself.
Now, when our heavily loaded wagon is pulled by the draft animal, the axle turns with the draw pole and the vehicle is able to follow along quite happily without any skidding whatsoever.
If you've ever watched an American western movie, then you've certainly seen the pivoting front axle in action on a Conestoga wagon or stagecoach like this one.
The typical telltale sign of a pivoting axle is that the front wheels are invariably smaller than the rear ones and so they can pass underneath the coach body in a tight turn like this.
In contrast, most surviving pictorial representations of ancient four-wheeled vehicles appear to show all wheels of equal size, with the front wheels projecting above the lower edge of the wagon body.
If this particular vehicle had a pivoting front axle, then presumably the wheel would apparently strike the wagon body in a tight turn.
On this basis, most 20th century scholars concluded that classical Arab vehicles did not use pivoting front axles and therefore were sorely lacking in technological sophistication.
But some very recent archaeological finds have called this conventional wisdom into question.
The most important of these finds were actually in Bulgaria, Roman era Thrace, where some of the ancient local religious rites apparently included the burial of wagons.
Here, several complete wagons have been unearthed and many included clear evidence of pivoting front axles.
One such find served as a basis for this beautiful reconstruction of a Roman traveling coach, or Karuka, currently displayed at the Reinesius Landis Museum in Cologne, Germany.
Here we see a stunning example of technological sophistication achieved by imperial era wagon builders.
Not only does the coach have a well-designed pivoting axle and fine-spoked wheels with iron tires and bearings, but it also features a full suspension system.
These posts are tipped with elaborate iron fittings which support heavy leather straps from which the entire wagon body is suspended.
This system would have greatly enhanced the comfort of the coach's occupants, isolating them from vibrations caused by iron-rimmed wheels rolling across those uneven basalt paving stones on Roman roads.
So, if pivoting axles existed, why don't Roman pictorial representations of wagons show any evidence of them?
Well, these representations invariably depict wagons from the side, an orientation that doesn't reveal much about the axle configuration.
The artists who carved them might not have been interested in these sorts of technical details.
But most importantly, it's clear that throughout the classical era, vehicles exhibiting a wide range of technological sophistication existed side by side.
Thus, the existence of some highly sophisticated vehicles doesn't mean that unsophisticated ones would necessarily have disappeared or that they wouldn't be depicted in pictorial representations.
Given the wide range of known uses from local cargo hauling to military supply trains, from intracity taxi services to chariot racing,
it's entirely reasonable to expect that many low-tech vehicles coexisted with high-tech ones.
This point is wonderfully illustrated at Pompeii, where we can see a finely-crafted cart sporting elegant 12-spoke wheels at the house of Menander
and just a short distance away at the villa of Bosco Real, a crewed farm wagon with solid wheels rigidly connected to rotating axles.
The third principle technology found in ancient vehicles is the traction system, consisting of the draft animals and the apparatus that connects them to the vehicle.
With its high power output and docile temperament, the ox was the ancient world's engine of choice for pulling heavy wagons.
Oxen were typically used in pairs, and they applied attractive force through a yoke, which was connected to the vehicle by a single draft pole.
The yoke was developed in the Neolithic Age and is still used in many parts of the world today.
It consists of a heavy wooden beam fitted over the animal's shoulders and held in place with a harness.
Oxen are particularly well suited to the yoke because they carry their heads low and their skeletal structure provides a convenient hump on the nape of the neck,
a bearing surface for transmitting attractive force from the ox's shoulders into the yoke.
The harness passing around the ox's neck is actually only needed to keep the yoke in contact with the animal's hump.
It doesn't actually carry any of the pulling force.
The ox's principle limitation is its low speed, roughly one mile per hour, and that's with a good tailwind.
For vehicles like the Hamaksa and the Cesium, which carried light loads and had a need for speed, donkeys and mules were generally used for pulling.
These animal's skeletal structures are also fairly well suited to the yoke, and so the traction systems used with these vehicles would have been similar to the ox's yoke.
Somewhat surprisingly, horses were almost never used as draft animals in the classical world, and there's considerable scholarly disagreement about why this was the case.
One very popular theory, first put forward in the 1920s, holds that the horse was ineffective as a draft animal because its skeletal structure was unsuitable for the yoke,
and because the Greeks and Romans failed to develop a suitable alternative traction system.
According to this theory, because a horse holds its head upright and lacks pronounced shoulder blades, the yoke had to be cinched tightly around the animal's neck,
and then when the animal attempted to pull a heavy load, the harness restricted its breathing, greatly reducing its maximum pulling force.
Proponents of this theory suggest that this alleged technological failure wasn't remedied until the horse collar was eventually invented in the Middle Ages.
Although it's still cited in many recent references, this theory has been largely disproven by modern scholars.
Archaeological discoveries and experimental reconstructions have demonstrated conclusively that the Romans developed a very effective horse yoke that used the animal's chest for traction, thus permitting the horse to pull without strangling itself.
So, if a suitable yoke existed, why weren't horses used more often as draft animals?
The likely answer is partly cultural, partly economic.
From the cultural perspective, the horse occupied an exalted position in the classical imagination.
It was seen as the mount for gods and heroes, like Odysseus on this vase painting.
The horse was decidedly not seen as a beast of burden.
From the economic perspective, horses were significantly more expensive to own than donkeys, mules, or oxen.
As evidence, consider that the second highest of the four Athenian social classes was called the hypaeus, which referred originally to privileged men who were wealthy enough to own a horse and fight in the cavalry.
It wasn't just expensive to buy, it was also expensive to feed, because its digestive system is less efficient than the ox's for converting fodder into energy.
Indeed, the horse's only distinct advantage as a means of land transport is its superior speed, and that's why in antiquity horses were used almost exclusively in the few situations where speed mattered and cost did not.
Cavalry, chariot racing, and the state-sponsored courier services, like the Persian royal road system and the Roman courses publicus.
To summarize, no domain of ancient technological development has been more underappreciated than land transport.
Through much of the 20th century, land transport has been dismissed as peripheral to ancient Mediterranean economies dominated by seaborne commerce,
and the supporters' failures to develop the pivoting front axle and an effective traction system for horses have been cited as evidence of technological stagnation in the classical world.
Perhaps these misconceptions simply reflect the fact that wagon wheels, axles, and yokes are far less likely to have survived the ravages of time than stone and concrete structures like the Coliseum.
And so for many decades, lack of evidence was interpreted as lack of development.
Today, both archaeology and scholarly analyses have led us to recognize that Greek and Roman land transport provided a vital and ubiquitous complement to transportation by sea, river, and canal.
We also recognize that classical era developments in land transport were entirely on par with technological achievements in other areas.
We just have to dig a little deeper to appreciate them. Thank you.
