Welcome back.
From the very beginning of the Roman Imperial Era, when the Senate granted the title Augustus
to Octavian in 27 BC, Roman emperors saw the need to sponsor grand public works to win
the favor of the masses, to demonstrate imperial power, and to glorify themselves.
Over the next three centuries, the emperor's patronage and the resources acquired through
imperial conquest stimulated the most remarkable period of construction engineering in history.
And without question, the grandest manifestation of this epic building boom was the Colosseum.
The Colosseum is properly called the Flavian amphitheater because it was built under the
patronage of all three emperors of the Flavian dynasty.
The project was initiated by Bespasian, first of the Flavians in 72 AD, probably to commemorate
Rome's successful suppression of the Jewish revolt two years earlier.
Elsewhere in the empire, amphitheaters were usually built on the outskirts of cities,
but Bespasian placed his great arena in the very heart of Rome on a piece of land where
his much-despised predecessor Nero had built an artificial lake to adorn the grounds of
his opulent private residence, the Domus Aurea, or Golden House, which we'll examine next
lecture.
Construction of the Colosseum probably began in 75 AD, and by the time Bespasian died
in 79, three of his four planned levels had been finished.
The uppermost level was completed by Bespasian's son and successor Titus, who organized inaugural
games there in 80 AD.
After Titus died the following year, Bespasian's other son Domitian added the Hypogeum, a two-story
underground network of corridors, rooms, ramps, and shafts located underneath the wooden arena
floor and used as a temporary holding area for wild animals, gladiators, and scenery.
Now, the Colosseum was unprecedented in scale.
The oval-shaped structure was 620 feet long by 510 feet wide, and as tall as a modern
16-story building, its seating area, called the cavia, could accommodate 55,000 people.
The arena floor was only a bit smaller than a modern American football field.
Its outer wall alone required 130,000 cubic yards of stone and was held together with
300 tons of iron clamps.
Yet the bulk of this extraordinary structure could have been built in just five years from
75 to 80 AD is nothing short of astonishing.
But impressive as they are, these dimensions and statistics can't capture the broader
cultural importance of this architectural marvel.
Just as the colonnaded temple is the iconic symbol of classical Greece, so the Colosseum
has become the iconic symbol of Imperial Rome.
Its immense size reflects the vast encircling reach of the empire itself.
Its purpose reminds us of the brutality and love of spectacle that were so much a part
of Rome in life.
Rome's rigidly hierarchical social structure was literally set in stone in the Colosseum's
rigidly segregated cavia, starting at the lowest level with the emperor's viewing box
and seating for the senatorial class, and then at successively higher levels, seating
for the equestrian class, and then wealthy citizens, and then common citizens, and at
the highest level, wooden bleachers for women and slaves.
The Colosseum's architectural layout, with its well-integrated passageways for access,
egress, and circulation, is a monument to Roman organizational genius.
And Roman Phil Hellenism, or Love of All Things Greek, is evident in the incorporation of
all three Greek architectural orders in the building's façade, Doric on the first level,
Ionic on the second, Corinthian on the third.
Yet here the orders are not used in traviated construction, but rather as purely decorative
embellishments serving only to punctuate a quintessentially Roman system of stone arcades.
The Colosseum is perhaps best known, in these terms, as a concrete manifestation of Imperial
Roman culture, but the Colosseum is also singularly important as a snapshot of Roman engineering
at a pivotal time of transition, a time when the Roman construction revolution was manifesting
itself in radically new approaches to building design, as we've already seen in the Porticus
Emilia, even as traditional architectural forms and methods still remained quite prevalent.
The Colosseum vividly reflects this transition.
Its monumental outer wall and its principal interior load carrying columns were built
entirely of traditional opus quadratum, massive stone blocks connected with iron clamps,
and no mortar whatsoever.
Yet many of its interior walls are of opus testacium, that innovative composite wall
system consisting of brick facings and closing a solid concrete core.
Yet all of its faults are state-of-the-art cast concrete, formed into an amazing variety
of complex configurations dictated by the geometric demands of the building's overall
oval shape.
As such, the Colosseum represents a grand compromise, a characteristically Roman blend
of tradition and innovation.
Here we see the Roman construction revolution underway but incomplete, frozen in time for
us to admire.
The purpose of this lecture is to explore this grand compromise, to examine how the Colosseum
was built and how it works as an engineered structure.
This is not an easy task.
Because of the building's complex geometry, multiple levels, labyrinth of passageways,
and widely varying construction materials and methods, trying to understand it can be
more than a little intimidating.
We'll cope with this complexity by using a computer model to reconstruct the Colosseum
from the ground up, one level at a time.
Now there are no surviving Roman accounts of the actual construction of the Colosseum,
so this reconstruction will necessarily be somewhat speculative.
My intent is not to depict the exact construction sequence, because no one knows what it is,
but rather to help you see this complex system as a coherent synthesis of simple elements.
And in the process, to better appreciate the Colosseum as both a sophisticated architectural
design and an extraordinary construction achievement.
Let's begin where Vespasian's architect must certainly have begun with the overall
geometric layout.
Now the plan of the Colosseum is often described as an ellipse, and while there's still some
scholarly debate on this subject, the shape is almost certainly not a true ellipse, in
the strict mathematical sense.
Let's see why.
Every ellipse has two axes, one long and one short.
On the long axes are two points called foci, that's the plural of the word focus.
They're indicated here by these two bolts, which are projecting from the drawing board.
By definition, an ellipse is the shape formed by a set of points that are the same total
distance from the two foci.
The easiest way to illustrate this concept is to attach the ends of a piece of string
to the foci.
So let's do that.
I'm going to take this loop of string, I'll loop it around the foci, then I'll take my
pen, insert it in the loop, I'll use the string to guide my pen, and as I do so, I will draw
an ellipse.
We know that this is an ellipse, because the total length of the string didn't change
as I drew.
Consistent with the mathematical definition of an ellipse, the total distance from every
point on the figure to the two foci remained constant.
But then why is the shape of the coliseum not an ellipse?
Well, in a few minutes we'll see that the building's floor plan consists of a grid
of radial corridors intersecting with annular or ring shaped corridors that run around the
perimeter of the building.
So if the outer perimeter of the building were an ellipse, then these annular corridors
would also have to be ellipses, arranged concentrically inside the outer one.
And the problem is that, geometrically speaking, concentric ellipses are not parallel.
To demonstrate this, I'll use a shorter loop of string to draw a similar ellipse inside
the first one, but just a little bit smaller in size.
So once again, I'll loop my string over the foci, we'll place the pen in place, we will
once again use the string to guide the drawing.
Once again we draw an ellipse.
But now compare the two.
And again, remember that what we're representing here would be the walls that define a corridor
that runs around the outer perimeter of the coliseum.
Notice that the distance between the two ellipses is not constant.
It's shorter here along the long axis than it is up here at the short axis.
If the coliseum had been laid out as a series of concentric ellipses, like this, then the
widths of the annular corridors would have varied continuously around the perimeter of
the amphitheater in a totally impractical configuration.
In an elliptical layout, the radial corridors would also have been problematic.
And again, I can use this simple diagram to demonstrate that point.
If I draw a series of radial corridors starting at the center of the ellipse and extending
out around the perimeter of the structure, notice that initially things seem to be going
okay.
But as I proceed around the ellipse, notice that the shapes of these modules formed by
the ellipse intersecting with the radial lines form very odd shapes.
Those shapes have a different angle at every corner.
And therefore, constructing the building in this way would have been impossibly complex.
You simply couldn't have cut all the stones to get the corners to intersect properly in
this kind of a geometric arrangement.
But pragmatic Roman engineers figured out a significantly better way to solve this problem.
Rather than using a mathematically correct ellipse, they laid out the plan of the Coliseum
as a series of interconnected circular arcs, each with a different radius and a different
center point.
To see how this works, I'm going to swap out my drawing of the ellipse and replace it with
a simple diagram.
Right now I've started this layout drawing with a diamond shape superimposed over the
two axes of what will become this oval.
What I'm going to do is use a simple compass to draw a series of arcs.
I'm going to begin at the left hand corner of this diamond shape and place the point
of my compass at that corner, and then draw a simple arc originating at these diagonal
lines.
Do the same at the opposite side.
Now I need to adjust the radius of my compass in order to be able to continue that arc,
from the lower corner of the diamond instead.
So I've adjusted my radius so the lines continue to line up, and now I continue the sweep
of the arc around from that point, and finally relocate the point of my compass to the uppermost
corner of the diamond, and continue my arc around the bottom.
Now the result of this process looks like an ellipse, but it isn't.
Because it was drawn with a compass as a series of multiple arcs with multiple centers, this
shape is called a polycentric oval, and because each segment of the oval is actually a circular
arc, we can lay out perfectly parallel corridors quite easily by simply drawing concentric
arcs within the existing ones with somewhat smaller radii, and I can demonstrate that with
my simple compass as well.
So once again, I'll go through that same process, but I'm going to start with a smaller radius.
Here's the end arc, here's a similar arc on the opposite side.
Once again, I need to adjust my radius to use the lower corner, and the upper corner,
and the end result, a pair of concentric polycentric ovals, which are indeed parallel.
Notice that these oval shapes remain the same distance apart around the entire perimeter
of the coliseum.
Radial corridors work the same way, and are equally geometrically consistent using the
polycentric oval.
So once again, I can use my straight edge, now drawing radial lines from the same center
that each section of the polycentric oval originated from.
I can draw these radial lines, which subdivide the annular rings into carters, and as long
as I use the appropriate center, the amazing thing about this construction is that the
radial lines always remain perpendicular to the oval itself, and so the clear advantage
of the polycentric oval is that unlike the elliptical layout, the grid of circular arcs
and radial lines produces a regular array of modules each with four perfectly square corners.
You can see very clearly, if you focus in, that corner is square, that corner is square,
that corner is square, and so on, in sharp contrast to the equivalent set of lines on
our ellipse.
This geometric configuration is quite advantageous, not only for simplicity of layout as we've
seen here, but especially for stone cutting in the actual construction of the coliseum.
Now, once the coliseum's geometric layout was determined, construction began with site
preparation. The man-made lake on the grounds of Nero's Domus Aurea had to be drained, and
then 10 million cubic feet of soil were excavated by hand and hauled away to create a firm level
surface, 40 feet below the original ground level. This mammoth earth-moving operation
would have required 3,000 laborers working full-time for over a year. In this immense
hole, the coliseum's two-level foundation was built.
The lower ring is an oval-shaped ring of solid concrete, 23 feet thick and just slightly
longer and wider than the building's eventual footprint. The second layer, nearly as thick,
was created by first enclosing its perimeter with brick walls and then filling the resulting
enclosures with concrete. Note that the brick walls define not just the outer perimeter
of the oval, but also a series of underground service areas and tunnels called CryptoPortakai,
which provided sheltered access to the arena along the coliseum's long and short axes.
The upper surface of this layer is the building's ground floor, and while this foundation is
largely out of sight today, we can't truly appreciate the monumental scale of the coliseum
without recognizing that it rests on this massive concrete slab with a total thickness
of over 40 feet.
On this solid working surface, the builders would have carefully laid out the first-level
floor plan consisting of 80 of these radial corridors delineated by seven rings of heavy
rectangular columns called piers. For ease of reference, let's number these piers from
outside to inside, one, two, three, four, five, six, and seven.
To organize the work, this floor plan was probably divided into four quadrants, with
a different construction contractor assigned to each. Modern scholars have observed slight
but unique differences in the construction methods used within each quadrant, a pretty
good indicator that each quadrant was built more or less independently of the others.
Within a given quadrant, construction would probably have begun with piers three through
six made of a strong hard stone called travertine. These interconnecting walls were made of much
softer, weaker tufa. Because of difference in strength, it's very clear that the travertine
piers are the principal load carrying elements supporting the structure above, and the tufa
walls really just serve to enclose the corridors.
The huge stone blocks used to build these walls could only have been lifted and positioned
with construction cranes. The standard Roman crane, shown here, was an improved version
of the Greek crane we encountered back in lecture three. Because of its inverted V configuration,
it could pivot forward and backward quite easily, but could only be rotated from side to side
with great difficulty. Thus, the only practical way to build these closely spaced radial walls
was to position one crane on the outside and one on the inside like this, such that a stone
block could be placed at any point on the wall simply by pivoting one or the other of
the crane's forward or back.
Now, as work progressed upward, adjacent inner and outer piers were tied together with travertine
arches to create two annular or ring-shaped arcades.
And here we see a fascinating advantage of the Coliseum's oval configuration. Recall
from lecture six that in an arcade, the lateral thrust associated with each individual arch
is resisted by the counterbalancing thrust of the two adjacent arches, except for the
outermost arches, which require some sort of external support to prevent their outer
ends from spreading laterally. But in an annular arcade, there are no outermost arches.
So all of the arches support each other laterally, and there's no need for any external lateral
support to the arches at all.
Now with that central core of radial walls and annular arcades completed, the cranes
could now be displaced backward and used to erect three more travertine arcades corresponding
to piers one, two, and seven. These arcades define three annular corridors that extend
completely around the perimeter of the building to facilitate circulation of the vast crowds
that would use this facility.
Note that Pier 1 incorporates an engaged column, a term that refers to a half column projecting
from a wall or pier. These engaged columns are purely decorative elements. As we can
see by exploding the pier into its individual travertine blocks, like this. Note that the
engaged column is really just a semi-circular projection on the front of each rectangular
block. Also note the use of iron clamps to connect these blocks together, just like traditional
Greek masonry.
With the stone elements of the Coliseum's first level in place, construction of the
vaulting could begin. Every radial corridor, annular corridor, and stairway required a
concrete barrel vault. In the annular corridors, vaults were constructed on wooden centering
supported on these cornices above the arcades. This arrangement was particularly efficient
because it required no temporary supports below, like the supports that I had to use in the
demonstration of vaulting construction that we did last lecture. And thus allowed workers
to continue using the corridors even while concrete was being poured. Above the centering,
concrete ribs were installed at intervals so that sections of vaulting could be constructed
in separate concrete pours of manageable size, like this.
The vaults over the radial corridors were built in the same way, except there aren't
any cornices here, so the centering would have been supported on temporary props like
these.
Three of every four radial corridors housed a concrete stairway. To build these, an angled
shelf was first cut into the side walls of the passageway at a proper angle, and then
centering was constructed as a series of semicircular frames covered with wooden boards. And finally
concrete was poured in successive lifts to create the steps.
When vaulting is inclined on an angle like this, it's called a raking vault. And note
that the geometry of a raking vault in a wedge-shaped corridor is quite complex, yet building it
wasn't appreciably more difficult than building a simple barrel vault because its shape is
fully defined by the series of simple semicircular centering frames. This is really a vivid demonstration
of the versatility of concrete.
To complete the first level, the radial walls were extended inward from pier 7 and connected
to two more angular corridors. These walls are constructed entirely of opus testachium,
clear evidence of that transitional state of Roman construction I mentioned earlier.
These inner walls support only the lower tier of the caviar on short span raking vaults
shown here, so they're relatively lightly loaded. But the main pier will support one
or more upper floors in addition to the caviar, so their loads are much higher. The engineer's
decision to use opus testachium for the lightly loaded inner walls and travertine for the
heavily loaded piers reflects a strong qualitative understanding of structural load carrying principles,
but also a continued lack of confidence in concrete, even though the material has now
been in use for over 200 years.
Now here's the second level under construction. The second level structure is largely the
same as the first level, with travertine arcades forming two outer angular corridors covered
with concrete vaulting. Here, piers 4 through 6 are cut off at progressively lower levels
to support the raking vaults of the caviar. Note that the upper surfaces of those caviar
vaults are flat. The actual rows of seating, which would rest on top of those, were carved
from marble blocks and installed later.
The only major difference between the second level and first level structures is that here,
opus testachium is used in place of tufa for the infill walls between the piers. This change
is probably prompted by the much reduced floor space available for construction cranes on
this higher level and above. Use of manned portable bricks and concrete rather than heavy
tufa blocks would have significantly reduced the demand for cranes, though a few would
still be required to erect the travertine piers.
Now here's the third level construction, with travertine piers 1 and 2 extending upward
to support the arcades of an outer angular corridor and an opus testachium wall forming
the lower inner corridor, covered with an angular vault that also shapes the top tier
of the caviar. Within this inner corridor is a seemingly minor feature that's actually
one of the coliseum's most significant structural innovations. Recall that on the first two
levels all the stairways were oriented radially, but because the third level is composed entirely
of just two angular corridors, conventional radial stairways wouldn't work here. They
would have completely blocked at least one of those two corridors, severely limiting
circulation. The designer overcame this constraint quite ingeniously by using a pair of narrow
circumferential stairways, you can see here, leading to an intermediate landing and then
spanning across the corridor overhead to access the caviar. This flying stairway is
absolutely unprecedented in ancient architecture, a small but daring structure that speaks volumes
about Roman engineering savvy.
Finally, we reached the uppermost level, the flat floor that supported wooden bleachers,
the proverbial cheap seats reserved for women and slaves. Here the outer wall is no longer
an open arcade, but rather a solid wall of travertine, thickened and strengthened with
opus testachium on the inside. The inner edge of this level is ringed with a Corinthian
colonnade supporting a wooden roof structure, a throwback to the trabeated construction
of classical Greece.
Although the structure on this level is relatively simple, erecting it must have been one of
the greatest challenges on the entire project. These 20-foot stone columns weighed about
10 tons each, hoisting them 19 stories upward and then maneuvering them into position would
have required skillful use of high capacity cranes, yet there was precious little room
for such devices on that narrow floor space. And once the colonnade was in place, the working
space for maneuvering travertine blocks for the outer wall would have been even more restricted.
We'll never know precisely how the builders did it, but the finished product should leave
us in awe of their achievement.
Generally the fourth level, we should pause to admire this row of 240 stone sockets, mountings
for heavy wooden masts that supported the Colosseum's most unusual and innovative feature, the
rope and canvas awning called the Velarium, which shaded spectators from the sun as they
enjoyed the carnage of the day in the arena. We don't know exactly how the Velarium was
configured, but it must have involved some very impressive engineering. By my calculations,
the rope and canvas necessary to shade the caveat would have weighed about 150,000 pounds.
Supporting that load across a 600 foot span would have been quite a challenge, particularly
because the tension in those supporting ropes would have generated huge inward forces on
the wooden masts that hold up the system. It's no wonder that deploying the Velarium
required a large contingent of sailors from the Roman naval base at Mycenum. Who better
than sailors to handle ropes, pulleys, and cloth panels?
The Colosseum was, and is, a magnificent structure. Yet with the exception of the Velarium and
those unique flying stairways, its structural design is actually surprisingly conservative.
None of its arches exceed 20 feet in span, even though spans five times longer were common
during the Zara. Its main structural columns are trite and true travertine, while more
modern opus testacium is used only in lightly loaded walls. Yet it's quite likely that
the Colosseum's engineers made these conservative decisions precisely because they were designing
a building of such unprecedented scale. And so, even in their conservatism, we can see
a sophistication of judgment that modern engineers would do well to emulate.
Most important, while other buildings have surpassed in structural innovation and beauty,
the Colosseum stands alone as the ultimate monument to Roman construction engineering.
It reflects the Roman builder's ability to manage a construction project of almost inconceivable
complexity and to deliver an enduring product in a miraculously short period of time. More
specifically, the Colosseum demonstrated that the raw materials of the Roman construction
revolution, opus testacium and concrete, could greatly increase the efficiency of monumental
construction, not only by eliminating the need for stone cutting, but also because these
materials were entirely man-portable by greatly reducing requirements for heavy lifting.
As we've seen, Roman engineers were quite cautious in adopting these new materials.
The Colosseum represents an important milestone along the road to greater confidence in their
use. Fully developed, that confidence would manifest itself in an extraordinary flowering
of structural innovation in the great vaulted buildings of Imperial Rome.
Thank you.
