Welcome back. The Greek temple. From a functional perspective, it was simply an enclosure for
the cult statue of a god, the deity to whom the building was dedicated. But from spiritual,
political, and cultural perspectives, it was so much more. To the pious, the temple was the
gods personal residence, a sacred place where humans might encounter the divine. To the citizen,
the temple came to symbolize the polis, the Greek city-state, and to reflect state power. As
architecture, the temple expressed Greek aesthetic ideals of proportion and symmetry, and to communities
throughout the Greek world, it was an icon of their cultural identity, a powerful way to
demonstrate Greekness. The classical era temple was one of the crowning achievements of Hellenic
civilization. No other structure of its day could compare in majesty, beauty, or permanence. As such,
we must also regard the temple as an important milestone in Greek technological development.
During this lecture, we'll examine the temple primarily from this perspective. Along the way,
we'll consider some important questions. Where did the Greek temple originate? Why do hundreds of
known examples exhibit such a high degree of architectural consistency, even though each has
its own unique character? How were these buildings designed and constructed? And how did they actually
function as engineered structures? To answer these questions, let's begin by examining one of the
world's best preserved examples, the temple of Concordia, built in the mid-fifth century BC in
a polis called Acragas, modern agragento Sicily. How might this typical temple have come into being?
Well, in a democratic polis like 5th century Acragas, construction of a new temple would normally have
been proposed in the popular assembly, perhaps to commemorate some auspicious event, and then
voted upon. During this era, temple construction was generally funded from the public treasury,
perhaps augmented by the spoils of war. Later, during the Hellenistic and Roman periods, we'll
see great public buildings bankrolled by wealthy citizens, kings and emperors. But this sort of
personal patronage was rare in classical Greece. Indeed, the Greek democracies scrupulously guarded
the public nature of their public buildings. After the temple of Artemis at Ephesus was destroyed
by fire in 356 BC, Alexander the Great offered to fund its reconstruction. But the Ephesians
refused the offer, because Alexander insisted on having his name inscribed on the rebuilt structure.
Once a temple building project was approved by the popular assembly, a citizen committee was
charged with hiring the man who would design the building and supervise its construction.
His title in Greek was architecton. And while the term is usually translated as architect,
Vitruvius tells us that the architecton, or architectus in the Romanized form, also held
the responsibilities we normally associate with a modern structural engineer, construction manager,
and master builder. At the start of the project, the architecton would select a site and then plan
the orientation and overall configuration of the temple. And Greek temples were typically
cited on the Acropolis, that's the highest point of land within the polis, oriented with the main
entrance facing eastward toward the rising sun. Prior to the start of construction, the architecton
probably wouldn't develop a comprehensive design for all of the building's components,
as would be the case today. Rather, these sorts of details would be worked out on the job site
after construction was already underway. Construction could be implemented with any of
three different contracting mechanisms, all of which are still used today. First, the supervising
committee could hire a general contractor and pay him a lump sum to manage the workforce,
procure the materials, and deliver a completed building. Second, they could hire various specialty
subcontractors directly, and then each of those subcontractors would perform a particular segment
of the project. Or third, they could hire the laborers directly, each working for a daily
wage under the supervision of the architecton. We have historical evidence for the use of all
three methods, though the latter two were probably more common. The first method, a lump sum payment
to a general contractor, had the advantage of simplicity, but it was also fraught with risk.
One of history's most egregious breaches of contract occurred in Acragas, in the century
before the temple of Concordia was built. Around 570 BC, the polis hired a man named
Falaris to build a new temple of Zeus for a lump sum of 200 talons of silver, a very substantial
amount. This man, Falaris, hired a crew of workers and purchased all of the necessary
construction materials, but then, instead of building a temple, he used these materials to
fortify the Acropolis. He then formed his construction crew into a private army, seized the
city, and made himself tyrant or dictator. And herein lies the danger of the lump sum contract.
80 years later, when construction of the temple of Concordia began,
democracy had been restored to Acragas and, presumably, the supervising committee chose
a less risky contracting arrangement. Now, as a way to illustrate the structure of the Greek
temple, let's use a computer model to build the temple of Concordia as it might have been done
back in 450 BC. Construction begins with excavation for the foundations. Wherever possible, the
foundation is set on solid bedrock, which could require an excavation as deep as 15 feet. As a
result, some Greek temples actually used more stone below ground than above, a clear reflection of
Greek builders' commitment to achieving permanence in construction. This foundation was often built
of polygonal stone masonry, similar to the walls of those Bronze Age Mycenaean citadels we saw last
lecture. For this reason, earlier generations of archaeologists have often erroneously thought
that these foundations were remnants of earlier temples. But we know now that these polygonal
masonry foundations were actually used quite intentionally throughout the Hellenic and Hellenistic
eras, because the interlocking joints of those polygonal stones actually provided better strength
and less settlement than squared ashlar masonry. The foundation of our temple is now backfilled
with compacted soil, and above it a three- or four-step platform called the crepidoma is constructed
of squared ashlar masonry. The highest level of the crepidoma, or stylobate, forms the temple floor.
Next, exterior columns are erected. As we saw last lecture, each column is built up of cylindrical
drums, aligned with centering pins, and then topped with a capital. The vertical grooves or
flutes weren't carved into the column until it was fully erected. And we know this because several
unfinished temples, like this one in Sicily, have fluting that was actually never carved at all.
Note that these columns have relatively stout proportions and simple unadorned capitals.
These are distinguishing features of the Doric architectural style, commonly called the Doric
Order, which originated in mainland Greece and also became popular in Italy and Sicily.
The Ionic Order, which developed a few decades later in Ionia, the Aegean coast of modern Turkey,
featured more slender columns and capitals with this distinctive double scroll motif.
The third major order, the Corinthian, came much later in third century B.C., and eventually
became the favorite of the Romans. Now, in the Doric Order, the columns are surmounted by a three
level construction called the entablature. The lowest level is the architrave, a series of
plain stone beams spanning between columns. The second level is called the frieze, and on the
exterior of a Doric temple, it consists of a series of alternating blocks called triglyphs
and metopes. The triglyph is characterized by three raised ridges, and is usually placed directly
over each column and at the midpoint between columns. The metope either has a plain front
or on more elaborate temples like the Parthenon is carved with figural sculpture.
The uppermost layer is the cornice, which projects outward to protect the architrave
and the frieze from the elements. On the front of the building, a triangular gable or pediment
is placed above the cornice. The decorative panel within the pendant is called the tympanon,
and it was often elaborately sculpted with scenes from mythology or battles.
The famed Elgin marbles now on display in the British Museum include sculptures from the
Parthenon's tympanon and metopes. Now, recall that all these stone elements are rigidly interconnected
with iron clamps, adding greatly to their strength and rigidity. Nonetheless, of the three stone layers
supported by the columns, only the architraves, the lowest level of the three, are structural elements,
because only the architraves actually span from column to column. The frieze, cornice,
and pediments are built up of many individual blocks, so they add considerably to the load
carried by the architraves, but they don't contribute any significant load carrying capacity.
The architectural term for a row of columns supporting an entablature
is a colonnade, and the defining feature of a Greek temple is the colonnade running entirely
around its perimeter. Over time, the colonnade would be adopted as a design element in many
other structures, like the stoa, a public building with a colonnade along only one side.
But in classical Greece, when we see a colonnade on all four sides of a building,
we can be quite sure we're looking at a temple.
Now, inside the colonnade is a walled enclosure called the sella, the temple's sacred sanctuary,
with the cult statue of the goddess kept. The east wall contains the main entrance to the sanctuary,
set back between the side walls to create a covered porch, supported by this short colonnade.
The west end has the same configuration, but no entrance. This is a false porch,
a purely aesthetic feature that reflects the Greek's appreciation for symmetry.
Finally, the building is surmounted by a complex timber roof, a structure called a prop
and lentil system, covered with terracotta or stone tiles. We'll be talking a lot more
about the prop and lentil system next lecture, and we'll be using this model to illustrate
how that system works. Now, with the addition of doors and decorative embellishments,
a reconstructed temple of concordia is now complete. This iconic architectural form,
with its stepped platform, collinated perimeter, and gabled roof remain essentially unchanged for
over eight centuries. Of course, there were many variations on the theme. The temple of concordia
has six columns across its front colonnade, and thus is classified as a hexa-style temple.
The Parthenon is octa-style, with eight columns up front, and the temple of Hera at Pestum
in Italy has nine columns across its front. Yet, despite these variations, all three of these temples
exhibit the characteristic features of the Doric Order, stout, fluided columns, plain capitals,
and a freeze of alternating triglyphs and metopes. So where did these characteristic
features come from, anyway? Well, the Doric Order is the product of three main historical
influences. The first was a primitive wood-frame temple configuration developed in early archaic
era Greece around the 10th century BC. Over time, this structure evolved into a more monumental
form represented by the 7th century temple of Hera at Samos. Archaeological evidence suggests that
this building had cello walls of rubble masonry and a timber colonnade, as well as a steeply
pitched, factched roof. Second influence. Around this time, Corinthian Greeks invented the Terracotta
roof tile, like the ones we've already seen in the temple of Concordia. This development
significantly influenced temple architecture. Terracotta tiles were much heavier than thatch,
so they required more robust roof and wall structures. And because these tiles were only
held in place by gravity, the slope of the roofline had to be reduced significantly in
comparison with those earlier buildings, like the temple of Hera at Samos. But the third and
most important influence was Egypt. In 660 BC, Greek mercenaries helped the Egyptian pharaoh
defeat an Assyrian incursion, and as a result, a close trading relationship developed between
Greece and Egypt. Through these military and commercial interactions, the monumental,
cut stone temples of Egypt began influencing Greek builders. The result was a wonderful fusion
of two architectural styles. The Egyptian stone colonnade was incorporated into the traditional
Greek timber temple. And in a remarkably short period of time, the Doric Order emerged. By 600 BC,
the newly built Temple of Artemis at Kerkira exhibited all of the features we now associate
with the Doric architectural style, though its proportions were somewhat bulkier than what would
eventually become the fully mature Doric style. The most intriguing aspect of this synthesis
is the extent to which the decorative stone features of the new Doric Order preserved the
appearance of timber structural elements from the primitive wood temples of the previous century.
As we can see from directly comparing the Doric Temple of Concordia and the seventh
century Temple of Hera at Samos, Doric triglyphs were meant to represent the decorative ends of
wooden roof beams. And these elements, which are called mutuals, represent the ends of angled
wooden roof rafters. And their wooden connecting plates, complete with simulated dowel pins,
carved in stone. The fluting of the Doric column is a stylized representation of woodgrain in the
timber posts of the early archaic colony. And in case you were wondering, the Truvius himself
tells us that these resemblances were quite intentional. Classical era attributes to the
timber architecture of an earlier era literally carved in stone. Over time, the Doric and Iodic
orders underwent minor refinements in the sizes and proportions of their elements, even as they
became progressively more standardized. This standardization took the form of an intricate
system of geometric design rules for proportioning every element of a temple in either Doric or
Iodic style. This system, as described in detail by the Truvius, constitutes the first formal system
of building design in recorded history. In Dea architecture, the Truvius tells us that the design
of a Doric temple should be based on a single dimensional module equal to the radius of the
base of a column in the main colonnade. The Truvius then defines all other dimensions of the building
in terms of that module. For example, the height of a column is specified as 14 times the module.
A triglyph should be one module wide and one and a half modules high. The height of the
cornice is one half module and so on. Another of these Vitruvian rules governs the number of
columns in the colonnade. If there are n columns on the front, then there should be two n plus
one columns on each side, which is precisely why the hexa-style temple of Concordia has two times
six plus one equals 13 columns on each side, and the octa-style Parthenon has 17 columns on each
side. Using this system, the architecton could theoretically design an entire temple in just
three steps. Step one, pick a configuration, say hexa-style or octa-style. Step two, define the
module size, and step three, apply the design rules to determine all of the remaining dimensions of
the building. This system of empirical design rules was exceptionally important as a milestone in
the history of technology. In a sense, the system served as a mathematical model of the building,
the distant forerunner of the mathematical models used by modern engineers when they designed today's
most advanced structures. Like a modern mathematical model, the ancient Greek system allowed the
designer to try out various alternatives and then reliably evaluate the results of each trial.
It also fostered the standardization of the Doric and Ionic orders throughout the Greek world,
and it provided the equivalent of a modern building code, an enduring record of proven
construction standards that could be used by builders throughout the world. Now interestingly,
because of the formulaic nature of Vitruvius's rules, some modern scholars have suggested that
the Greek temple wasn't really designed at all, at least not in the modern sense, and that the
architecton was really just a technician following a formulaic cookbook-like procedure.
I find this argument unconvincing. Although Greek temple architecture was indeed formulaic,
it's clear that in practice the design rules weren't applied as rigidly as Vitruvius might
have us believe. After all, of the hundreds of Greek temples built, no two were exactly alike.
And this isn't surprising, because the system described in day architecture probably wasn't
fully developed until the Hellenistic and Roman eras. Before then, design procedures appear to
have been considerably more flexible. By view, the rich variations we see in classical era
buildings reflect conscious, discretionary design decisions by the architecton, who must therefore
have been more than just a technician. To illustrate this point, let's compare two Doric
temples, the Temple of Hera at Pestum on the left and the Parthenon on the right. Note the very
different proportions of their columns, the Parthenon's taller and slimmer, the Temple of
Hera's more sharply tapered, and with a pronounced bulge at mid-height. Vitruvius's rules simply
wouldn't accommodate this sort of variation. And by the way, that bulge in the Doric column is
called Entasis, one of many so-called optical refinements that characterize Greek architecture.
Optical refinements are subtle adjustments to edges, alignments, and dimensions designed to
create pleasing visual effects. In the Parthenon, for example, none of the buildings apparently
straight edges are actually straight, creating what's sometimes called a reverse optical illusion.
Because the human eye actually perceives a perfectly horizontal line as actually sagging
slightly in the center, the Parthenon's floor, or stylobate, is actually built with a slight
upward arc, as is the entangler. The columns have very subtle entasis, and they all lean
slightly inward. The corner columns have a slightly enlarged diameter because they tend to appear
smaller when they're viewed with the sky as a backdrop, rather than the solid building,
as is the case for the interior columns. These optical refinements are purely aesthetic,
they have no structural purpose. Nonetheless, from a construction engineering perspective,
they reflect extraordinary precision in surveying and in stone masonry construction.
In the Parthenon, because of all those very subtle curves, not a single stone block in the
entire structure could actually be perfectly rectangular, they all would have had ever so
slight angular variations from perfect rectangles. And because such tiny variations in elevation
and angle would be lost to even a small amount of foundation settlement, they're also an amazing,
if indirect, testimonial to the Greek's expertise in foundation design.
The Greek Temple. Because of its aesthetic refinements, it's often regarded more as sculpture
than structure. But it is indeed a structure, and its celebrated architectural form has actually
been significantly influenced by structural load carrying concerns. To explore this assertion,
let's look at the basic structural system used in the Greek Temple.
It's called trabeated construction, a regular arrangement of beams supported on columns.
The word trabeated actually derives from the Latin word trabs, meaning beam. And this apparent
focus on the beams in beam on column construction is actually entirely appropriate. Because as it
turns out, an inherent structural limitation on the span length of stone beams has substantially
influenced the design of Greek Temple architecture as we know it today. Let's see how.
As we learned in lecture two, a column is a vertically oriented structural element that
carries load primarily in compression. Stone is very strong in compression, so it's quite
well suited for columns. It turns out that in a typical Greek Temple, the columns are significantly
over designed. The compressive stress they experience is much less than the compressive
strength of the stone used to build them. It's clear then that the Temple's robust stone columns
are proportioned to be aesthetic rather than structural criteria. And this observation is
actually confirmed by Vitruvius himself, who tells us that the standard proportions of the
Doric column were originally based, not on structural concerns, but on the proportions
of the human body. So what about beams? Well, a beam is a structural element that carries load
in bending like this. When a beam bends, its top half carries load in compression. And you can tell
this because the black lines on my model beam have gotten closer together at the top side.
A beam also carries load in tension on the bottom half. And you can tell that because the bottom
of the beam, the black lines are getting farther apart. In addition, for a rectangular cross section
like this one, the compressive stress at the top is exactly equal in magnitude to the tensile stress
at the bottom. Ah, but stone is much weaker in tension than in compression. So the strength
of a stone beam will always be controlled by tension on its bottom surface. To see how this
works, let's head to the laboratory. So here's an architrave beam that would be spanning between
two columns on an actual temple. What we're going to do is to subject this architrave beam
to a load test to determine how its strength characteristics play out here in the laboratory.
What I'm going to do is take the beam and place it across a pair of wooden supports,
which represent the columns in the colonnade of the Greek temple. Now as I load the platform on
top of our loading device with bricks, that downward force is going to cause the beam to bend.
That bending will cause tension on the bottom surface and compression on the top. But of course,
this stone beam is much weaker in tension than in compression. So ultimately, when the beam does break,
it should break by initiating the failure with a tensile crack on its bottom surface.
Let's see how that works. There's one brick.
There's two.
There's a third.
There's four. So good.
Four.
And with the addition of the fifth brick, the beam fails. Again, it fails as a result of a tensile
failure of a material at the bottom of the beam. And as a consequence, the structure can no longer
carry load effectively. Let's unload the device and try another load test with another beam.
This one is identical in terms of cross-section dimensions. Its height and width are exactly
the same, but now obviously the span length is considerably longer. In fact, the span length is
exactly twice as long. So once again, I'll load the beam into my load test device. Once again,
the beam will span from support to support, and each of these supports would represent
the column in a Greek temple colonnade. Once again, apply load in the form of bricks placed on the
platform. And even though our first beam was able to carry five bricks, this longer span beam
failed under a single brick. Now, of course, we could strengthen this beam by making it higher
and wider. But there's a problem. Increasing the beam's size also makes it heavier. Making it heavier
increases the load, which also increases the stress, thus offsetting the benefits of the larger
dimensions. So if we do increase the beam's length, width and height in proportion to each other,
the stress in the beam increases in proportion to its size. Meanwhile, the strength of stone
doesn't change, regardless of the beam's size. And so if we make a series of progressively larger
stone beams, eventually we must reach the point where the stress exceeds the strength,
and the beam can't hold itself up anymore. Simply put, there is a non-negotiable upper
limit on the span of a stone architrave. We can see this upper limit reflected in surviving
descriptions of the great Temple of Artemis at Ephesus, one of the seven wonders of the ancient
world. In this incredible building, which enclosed seven times more interior space than the Parthenon,
the marble architrave beams spanned nearly 30 feet between columns and weighed over 26 tons each.
Based on my calculations, these beams experienced a maximum tensile stress of roughly 600
psi, 600 pounds per square inch, uncomfortably close to the tensile strength of marble.
So it's hardly surprising that the Temple of Artemis was the largest Greek Temple ever built.
It simply wouldn't have been possible to build one larger without significantly altering the
standard proportions of the Ionic order. Thus, the Greek Temple's architectural form was indeed
influenced by structural concerns. The span of the architrave beams and therefore the spacing
of the columns was driven by a fundamental limitation of trabeated stone construction,
the low tensile strength of stone as a structural material. For this reason,
trabeated architecture could never be particularly daring. Throughout the classical period,
the colonnaded Temple remained a very conservative structural form. Even as it came to represent
architectural perfection, the Temple's reliance on stone beams prevented it from ever stretching
the limits of structural possibility. Next lecture, we'll see the same limitation manifested in a
very different context, the timber roof structures of temples and similar buildings,
and we'll learn about the structural marvel that eventually overcame this limitation,
the tie-beam truss. Until then, thank you.
