Welcome back.
Last lecture, we learned that some of the ancient world's most ambitious and inventive
engineering was directed toward the goal of success in warfare.
Of the many weapons systems aimed at achieving this goal, none underwent more continuous
development and none was more thoroughly documented than the catapult.
For these reasons, the catapult serves as a rich 700-year case study for the process
of technological development in the classical world.
Our story begins in 399 BC with the think tank established by Dionysius of Syracuse
to design and build state-of-the-art weapons for his campaign against Carthage.
Dionysius' team of scientists and engineers took on a number of technological challenges,
but the one with the most far-reaching consequences was their attempt to overcome the inherent
human physiological limitations associated with a conventional, handheld bow and arrow.
For this reason, we'll begin today's lecture by examining the bow and arrow as a technological
system.
Now in engineering terms, a bow is simply a beam.
It operates by bending.
And based on your vast wealth of knowledge of beams from lecture four, you recognize
that in this orientation, a beam experiences compression on its concave side, that's the
side closest to me, and tension on its convex side, or the back side farther away from me.
Now when I do the same sort of bending application to a bow with an arrow, as I draw the bow,
my arm does work.
It applies a pulling force through a distance.
That distance is the length of the draw.
The energy input caused by my arm doing work is stored in elastic bending of the bow itself.
And then when I release the bow, it'll spring back to its original shape, and most of that
stored elastic energy will be imparted to the arrow in the form of kinetic energy.
Kinetic energy is equal to one-half times mass times velocity squared.
Therefore, the performance of this bow depends largely on its ability to store elastic energy.
More elastic energy in the bow translates to more kinetic energy imparted to the arrow,
which means higher arrow velocity and therefore longer range.
Now a particularly useful way to characterize the performance of a bow is to plot a graph
of pulling force versus draw length, which archery aficionados call a force draw curve.
Let's try generating the force draw curve for my bow using this ruler instead of an
arrow.
Now as I draw the bow, you'll see that for the first few inches of draw, very little
pulling force is required.
But as the draw length increases, the pulling force gets significantly greater, and by the
time I get out here to about 24 inches, the required pull has increased to roughly 15
pounds.
Now, this force draw curve is such a useful analytical tool because the elastic energy
stored in the bow turns out to be mathematically equal to the area under the curve as shown
in this graphic.
Thus, if we wanted to improve the performance of this bow, as Dionysius's engineers did,
we'd want an attempt to change its physical characteristics in ways that increase the
area under the force draw curve.
There are three possible ways to do this.
First would be to simply increase the length of the draw, like this.
In this case, if I draw beyond that 24-inch mark, the force is increasing significantly.
That means that the force draw curve is extending to the right, and this increases the stored
energy significantly.
Secondly, we could tension the bow string itself by shortening it.
So I'm going to remove the bow string that's currently in place and replace it with one
that's just slightly smaller.
Loop one end in place, flip it around, need to bend the bow a little bit to get it bow
string in position.
So now, as you can see, the pre-tensioned bow string, the shorter string, does in fact
have significant initial tension in it, but in addition, the shorter string imparts some
initial curvature to the bow.
It's already bent a little bit before I even begin the draw, so in effect, I have a head
start on the draw.
I have a couple of inches of draw in place without even applying any force.
More important, that initial bending of the bow results in it being harder to pull back,
and the net effect of that is to shift the force draw curve upward, resulting in a further
increase in stored elastic energy.
Finally, we can make this bow stiffer either by making it thicker or by using a different
material.
A stiffer bow requires more force to bend, that results in a steeper force draw curve,
and that results in significantly greater area under the curve, and again, significantly
more elastic energy.
All of these modifications are subject to an important limitation.
The bow itself must be strong enough to carry the maximum pulling force without breaking.
This limitation could be addressed by using a strong, resilient wood for the bow.
The one I was just using is made of ash, and that's the same wood that's used for baseball
bats, so it's pretty good with both flexure and shock resistance.
But as early as the second millennium BC, bow makers discovered that they could achieve
even better performance by building the bow from three different materials, wood, animal
horn, and animal tendon, generally called sinew.
Thus was born the composite bow, one of the most ingenious applications of biological
materials in human history.
Wood was used for the core of the bow.
Horn carries load in compression more effectively than wood, and so a layer of horn was glued
to the inner side of the core, and sinew is more effective in tension, so a strip of
sinew was glued to the outer side.
Both horn and sinew have far greater capacity for storing elastic energy than wood.
Indeed, sinew has nearly 20 times more energy storage capacity per pound than modern structural
steel.
Thanks to these amazing material properties, the performance of the classical-era composite
bow was limited not by the mechanical characteristics of the bow itself, but rather by three physiological
limitations of the human archer.
First, the length of the archer's arms limited the maximum draw length to about 28 inches.
Second, the strength of the archer's arm, chest, and shoulder muscles limited the maximum
pulling force to roughly 45 pounds.
And third, the strength and dexterity of the archer's fingers limited his ability to
control and release the bow string.
Because of these limitations, the optimal bow was one that required about 45 pounds
to achieve a maximum draw of about 28 inches.
Significantly more powerful composite bows were entirely feasible, but there was really
no point in building them because most human archers couldn't take advantage of that enhanced
capability.
To a large extent, the 700-year process of catapult development was motivated by the
need to overcome these three inherent human limitations by mechanical means.
Now, Dionysius's think tank initiated this process by developing this weapon, the gastrophetes,
or belly bow.
The gastrophetes consisted of a very powerful composite bow attached to a wooden stock.
A wooden slider was dovetailed into the stock so it could slide forward and back.
Its upper surface had a groove to guide the arrow, and an iron trigger mechanism mounted
on its back edge.
The gastrophetes overcame the human physiological limitations associated with a conventional
bow in four ways.
First, to cock the weapon, the archer placed the front end of the slider on the ground
and then applied his full weight to the belly brace, like this.
Thus, the draw force could be three or four times larger than that of a hand-drawn bow,
150 to 200 pounds rather than just 45.
Second, the draw length was now determined by the length of the slider rather than the
archer's arm, and thus could be significantly longer.
Third, a ratchet mechanism along the side of the stock helped control the draw and then
helped the bend bow in position while the archer aimed the weapon.
And finally, an ingenious two-fingered iron trigger mechanism allowed the archer to release
the bow string precisely with the flip of a lever, thus significantly improving his
ability to aim and shoot the weapon accurately.
Because of these enhancements, the gastrophetes could be used with a larger and significantly
more powerful bow than its hand-held predecessors.
Thus it had significantly longer range and could shoot heavier arrows, projectiles that
might easily penetrate armor that would have stopped an arrow shot from a conventional
bow.
The gastrophetes was used for the first time in 397 BC at Dionysius's Siege of Motea,
where it apparently made a big impression on the Carthaginians, as a result it triggered
an arms race that only abated in the waning years of the Roman Empire.
Seeking further improvements in performance, the builders of later gastrophetes used progressively
larger and more powerful bows.
But these larger bows triggered a series of new technological challenges, and the responses
to these challenges eventually transformed the hand-operated gastrophetes into something
fundamentally new, a true catapult, an artillery weapon capable of shooting large iron-tipped
arrows, called bolts, or 50-pound stone balls.
This stage of development is exemplified by an arrow shooter built by Zopyrus of Tarentum
around 350 BC, and described in Bytan's treatise on Siegecraft.
Recall that we first encountered Bytan last lecture in our discussion of the Aleppolus
of Poseidonius.
Here's how this developmental process came about.
As the gastrophetes was fitted with progressively stiffer bows, it became, naturally enough,
progressively more difficult to cock the weapon with the archer's weight alone.
So this windlass was mounted at the rear of the stock and used to pull the slider back.
Like the windlass on a construction crane, this device produced significant mechanical
advantage, but it also made the weapon heavier and more unwieldy.
As a result, the stock had to be mounted on a fixed base to facilitate handling and aiming.
These improvements allowed for an even larger and stiffer bow, but only to a point.
The bow of Zopyrus's catapult was almost seven feet long, and based on subsequent developments,
it appears quite certain that ancient artisans weren't capable of fabricating bows of significantly
larger size.
Thus, Zopyrus's machine, impressive as it must have been, proved to be an evolutionary
dead end.
The composite bow had reached its technological limit.
Further improvements in catapult performance could only be achieved by devising fundamentally
new means of storing elastic energy.
This need gave rise to the quintessential artillery weapon of the Hellenistic and Roman
eras, the torsion catapult.
Even of the torsion catapult occurred in a series of small increments, starting in
the mid-fourth century BC.
By the end of that century, this process had produced two standardized machines, an arrow
shooter called the euthatone and a stone thrower called the palantone.
This is an accurate scale model of a Greek palantone.
Now, actual machines varied considerably in size, but the largest ones were enormous.
The palantones used by Dimitrios Poliarchetes during his siege of Salamis in 307 BC were
about 45 feet long and over 20 times larger than this model.
A later Roman version called the ballista could be even bigger.
Now this device, taken as a whole, should look rather familiar.
The stock, the slider, the ratchet mechanism, the trigger, and the windlass are all functionally
identical to Zopyrus' composite ball catapult we looked at earlier.
Ah, but at the heart of the palantone is something fundamentally new.
These two vertically oriented torsion springs, which replaced the bow as the principal means
of storing elastic energy in this device.
Torsion springs.
Well, so what's torsion?
Torsion is defined as the twisting of a structural element.
In a palantone, the torsion spring is this bundle of rope with a wooden arm thrust through
its center.
When the weapon is cocked, these arms are going to rotate rearward, and that rotation
will be resisted by the torsion springs.
That resistance, as the springs twist, becomes the source of stored elastic energy, which
will ultimately result in the power of the catapult in delivering a projectile to its
target.
Now the torsion springs in my model are made of nylon rope, but most classical-era catapult
springs were actually made of sinew, the same material that was used so effectively
in the composite bow.
Because of its extraordinary ability to store elastic energy, sinew was the ideal material
for catapult springs.
But when sinew wasn't available, horsehair provided a reasonably effective substitute.
And in at least one instance, as borne out by the historical record, during the Roman
siege of Carthage in 149 BC, desperate Carthaginians used women's hair for this purpose as well.
But how was sinew made into rope?
Well, it was an extremely labor-intensive process.
The animal tendon was first dried, then split into fine fibers by hammering it with a mallet.
These fibers were spun into yarn, and then finally the yarn was braided into rope.
Now early torsion springs were built by simply wrapping sinew rope around a rigid wooden
frame, like this one.
The rope is wrapped around the frame, and then the wooden throwing arm is inserted into
the bundle, much as the same way we saw with the palantone, except that now the rigid frame
doesn't allow us the flexibility of applying any pre-twisting to the torsion springs.
The sling is connected to the two ends of the throwing arm, and then in operation the
device was coxed by pulling back the sling as before and then releasing it.
And while the system works, at least in theory, because the bundles are wound around rigid
frames, they didn't provide enough torsional resistance to produce the power necessary
to throw large projectiles with adequate power to be used on the battlefield.
Yet, this failed concept served as the starting point for a succession of design iterations
that eventually produced this ingenious system for mounting, tightening, and making fine
adjustments to the torsion springs in the fully developed palantone.
Let's examine the system by exploding it into its component parts.
Each torsion spring is mounted in a wooden housing consisting of two vertical posts,
called stanchions, and then these two odd-shaped blocks on the top and bottom.
The Greek term for these blocks is translated as whole carriers, and that's a pretty accurate
description of what they actually do.
They provide the two openings through which the torsion springs will be threaded.
Each whole carrier supports this three-piece metal apparatus, generally called a washer,
and composed of three elements, a bronze bearing plate that's fixed to the whole carrier,
above it a bronze cylinder that can rotate freely on the bearing plate, and then an
iron crossbar slotted into the top of the cylinder.
Now returning to my model, we can see how the torsion spring is fabricated.
First I reorienting it, and focusing in on the tops of the two torsion springs.
And notice that the springs are fabricated by looping the sinew rope over the tops of
the two iron bars, and then down through the holes in the washers repeatedly, around and
around until the entire whole carrier is filled with sinew.
Here's the throwing arm which is inserted into the bundle.
But then note that unlike that first-generation torsion spring that we talked about earlier,
here the sinew bundle is now pre-twisted by rotating the washers with a large wrench.
Now I didn't bring my large wrench with me, it's actually a two or three-person operation
to twist the torsion springs, but you can get a sense of it just by simply looking at
the configuration of the springs.
Note that over here on the right-hand side, this torsion spring would be rotated in the
counter-clockwise direction.
Over on the left, that spring would be rotated in the clockwise direction.
In both cases, the direction of rotation tends to rotate the arms forward, and as a result
the arms will be more difficult to pull back, which means that more elastic energy will
be stored in them when the weapon is cocked.
Now once this pre-twisting operation is done, the washers have to be locked into position
so they don't slip back, and that's done by inserting a pair of small retainer pins through
these very closely spaced holes in the upper portion of the washer assembly.
Those closely spaced holes allow for very fine adjustments to the spring tension, and
in a palantone, this was absolutely vital because the tension in the two springs had
to be precisely calibrated to be equal, or the weapon wouldn't shoot accurately.
Now this process of pre-twisting the torsion springs in a palantone is entirely analogous
to pretensioning the bow string of a conventional bow, as I demonstrated earlier in this lecture.
The result is the same, a significant increase in stored elastic energy.
The two torsion springs are attached to the stock by a framework of heavy timbers, and
then a sling is stretched between the ends of the two arms.
Here we can also see why the whole carriers have that odd shape.
It causes the outer stanchions to be offset forward so the throwing arms can rotate through
the largest possible angle.
A larger angle of rotation results in, you guessed it, more stored elastic energy in
the torsion springs.
The fact that so many aspects of this machine have been tailored to maximize stored elastic
energy is a very good indicator of its sophistication as an engineered system.
So let's put this palantone into action.
In order to shoot the weapon, we first have to load it, and to do that I need to start
by pushing the slider forward in the stock, then flipping forward these metal poles, which
will engage with the ratchet when the slider is being pulled back.
I'm going to take the sling and engage the loop on the back of the sling with the trigger
mechanism.
Holding the trigger in place, I'm going to slide this rotating bar underneath, and as
you can see then, the bar holds the trigger in position, prevents it from rotating backward,
and therefore holds the sling in place.
And notice now that all I have to do to release that trigger is simply to rotate this bar
back.
That'll allow the trigger mechanism to tip upward and the sling will slide free.
Before we cock the weapon, we'll add the projectile in an actual full-size palantone.
This might be a stone ball weighing as much as 200 pounds.
In our case, of course, we'll just use a ping pong ball.
Now we're going to cock the weapon.
We'll do that by using these hand spikes on the windlass in much the same manner that
we rotated the windlass on our construction crane a few lectures ago.
As I operate the windlass, you'll note that the throwing arms are rotating backward.
The backward rotation of the throwing arms rotates the torsion springs, which result
in the stored elastic energy that's so critical for the operation of this device.
Notice also that it's the sliders being pulled back.
Those pal mechanisms are engaging with the ratchet.
Each time we get past one tooth of the ratchet, the pal clicks into position so that if I
lost control of the windlass as I'm drawing back the weapon, the slider wouldn't fly forward
more than an inch or two before the ratchet stopped it from moving.
Once the weapon has been fully cocked, as you see here, I'm now able to aim it and prepare
to shoot it.
And aiming of the weapon is greatly facilitated by this mechanism you see here, the combination
of a vertical pin that holds this U-shaped bracket and the horizontal pin that attaches
the U-shaped bracket to the stop.
In total, that's called a universal joint.
It's a device that's quite common in all sorts of modern machinery, including your
family automobile, but it was first used in ancient catapults.
Now, to launch the projectile, once again, all I need to do is to aim the device.
I'll be rotating the horizontal bar on the trigger mechanism backward, and once again,
that'll allow the trigger to flip forward, the sling will fly out from underneath, and
the projectile will be launched.
Now, that was probably pretty hard to follow.
So let's try it again, but this time let's watch a slow motion video of this same machine
launching a golf ball in my lab at West Point.
Here we go.
As I release the trigger in the video, notice that the arms rotate forward, and then the
sling snaps taut, and the projectile flies free.
Now, as this video illustrates, the pound tone is an amazingly efficient mechanical system.
When the trigger is pulled, some of the energy stored in the torsion springs is used to accelerate
the projectile, but a significant portion is also used to accelerate the wooden throwing
arms as they fly forward.
This latter energy would be completely wasted, except that in the pound tone, the forward
motion of the arms is eventually arrested by the sling snapping taut.
And because this tightening of the sling also contributes to the forward motion of the projectile,
it turns out that nearly 100% of the energy released from the pound tones torsion springs
is ultimately transmitted into the projectile as kinetic energy, a truly extraordinary degree
of mechanical efficiency.
As proof of that efficiency, in the lab test you just watched, we clocked that golf ball
at over 100 miles per hour as it left the sling.
This initial velocity corresponds to a range of over 200 yards, about as well as it can
do with a golf club.
Ancient sources suggest that the performance of full-scale torsion catapults was even more
impressive.
In the 1st century BC, an engineer named Aegis Stratus built a euthyton, an arrow shooter,
with a reported range of 700 yards.
In his account of the Jewish War, Josephus reported that the Roman ballistae used against
Jotapata and Jerusalem could throw 200 pound stone balls 400 yards.
Stone ballista projectiles weighing as much as 170 pounds have been recovered from ancient
sites like Pergamon and Rhodes.
Though if Josephus was exaggerating for dramatic effect, he wasn't exaggerating much.
Torsion artillery also had a profound effect on fortification design.
This photo shows the inside of a Hellenistic-era city wall at Side in Turkey.
These arched compartments are called casemates.
They're emplacements for arrow shooting catapults built right into the city walls.
This is a very significant development in military architecture.
Over the previous millennium, the trend in fortification design has been toward stronger,
thicker walls that could more effectively resist attacks by battering rams.
But here, the walls at Side had to be quite thin to provide adequate fields of fire for
these catapults and their casemates, as this graphic shows.
And as a result, these walls would have been quite vulnerable to battering rams.
The fact that the builder was willing to take this risk demonstrates just how important
catapults had become to the defense of cities.
Although the catapults effect on the conduct of warfare was substantial, its influence
on math, science, and engineering was perhaps even greater.
Sometime around 275 BC, scientists and engineers at the Museum of Alexandria began developing
a rigorous empirical design methodology for the torsion catapult.
As documented by both the Truvius and a Greek engineer named Phylon, this methodology consisted
of two steps.
First, an experimentally derived formula was used to calculate the diameter of the torsion
spring.
And second, this dimension was then used as a module for determining the size of every
other component in the machine.
For example, Phylon specifies that the stock of the palantone should be 19 spring diameters
long, and each of its arms should be 6 spring diameters long and one half diameter wide.
If you recall, this is essentially the same mathematical approach that we saw in Greek
temple design, and it's another fascinating example of technology transfer between the
military and civilian sectors of the Greek world.
For the palantone, the formula for the torsion spring diameter was, as shown here, d equals
1.1 times the cube root of 100 times m, where d is the diameter of the torsion spring measured
in dactyls, that's a Greek unit of length equal to about three-quarter inch, and m is
the projectile weight measured in attic minas, a unit of weight roughly equal to one pound.
This formula could only have been determined empirically in the ancient world by testing
many, many catapults of different sizes and then measuring how far they were able to throw
projectiles of many different weights.
Yet, amazingly, this formula is also scientifically correct.
Today we know that the elastic energy stored in a torsion spring is a function of the volume
of the spring, and the kinetic energy of the projectile is a function of its weight.
Therefore, it turns out that the mathematically optimum spring diameter should be a function
of the cube root of the projectile's weight, just as this formula indicates.
The fact that this empirically derived formula correctly reflects the underlying scientific
principles is a real tribute to the rigor of the experimental process that was used
to derive it.
Perhaps most astonishingly, when this formula was first developed, no mathematician had
yet figured out how to calculate a cube root, even though a cube root was integral to the
formula.
Thus, the formula could only be used in the few cases where the cube root of 100 m happens
to be a whole number and thus could be worked out by trial and error.
For example, if the projectile weight m is 22 minas, then 100 times m is 2200, which just
happens to be very close to 13 cubed.
Therefore the required spring diameter would be D equals 1.1 times the cube root of 100
times 22, or 1.1 times the cube root of 2200, or 1.1 times 13, which equals 14.3 dactyls,
which is about 10 inches.
So the spring diameter of that particular catapult would be 10 inches.
But this is one of the very, very few cases where the formula was actually usable.
For most projectile weights, there was no practical way to perform the calculation with
sufficient accuracy, until a Greek mathematician named Eratosthenes devised a very sophisticated
graphical method for calculating the cube root of a number.
And then he invented a mechanical device to implement this method.
And yes, Eratosthenes was quite explicit about his reason for working on the cube root problem
in the first place.
He wanted to facilitate catapult design.
Well, something quite extraordinary has happened here.
Greek scholars used rigorous experimentation to derive a scientifically correct mathematical
model to facilitate optimal engineering design.
And then they devised a mechanical tool to perform advanced computations in support of
that process.
This is a stunning example of the integration of math, science, and engineering, entirely
modern in character, and entirely unique in classical antiquity.
And it was all about catapults.
In modern engineering practice, the availability of powerful mathematical scientific and computational
tools often serves as a stimulus for innovation.
If an engineer can accurately predict how various design alternatives will perform without
having to build and test a prototype for each one, then she is more likely to explore a
wider range of alternatives and to arrive at an innovative solution.
So we might expect that after the mathematical model for catapult design was formulated around
275 BC, a variety of new developments in catapult technology would inevitably emerge, and indeed
that is exactly what happened.
Here are just a few examples of these later developments.
A series of experimental catapults, attributed to the Greek inventor Tassibius, replaced
the torsion springs with bronze leaf springs and pneumatic cylinders.
The scorpion, a Roman arrow shooter, achieved greater power by using forward-curving arms.
The chirobalistra, a small mobile Roman arrow shooter, used iron rather than wood for its
main frame to improve durability, and encased the torsion springs in these bronze cylinders
to protect the fragile sinew used in torsion springs from damage and weather-related deterioration.
The chirobalistra, a revolutionary Roman machine with inward-swinging arms, yielded substantial
improvements in power and range because its arms could rotate through a significantly larger
angle than those of the standard palantum.
And finally, the one-armed onager, a late Roman stone thrower, was actually far less
mechanically efficient than the earlier two-armed machines, but was easier to build and maintain.
This final dramatic step backward was actually a clear reflection of declining Roman military
engineering skill during a period of political strife and barbarian incursions.
The catapult was far more than just a weapon of war.
For seven centuries, it served as a mirror, reflecting the many faces of technological
development in the classical world.
Greek catapults reflected Greek love of mathematics and intellectual rigor of Alexandria.
Roman catapults reflected the Romans' talent for adapting and improving the ideas of others.
Catapult development thrived under the patronage of powerful centralized rulers like Dionysius
of Syracuse, the Ptolemaic kings of Egypt, and strong Roman emperors like Augustus and
Trajan.
But it declined when central authority began to break down.
Next lecture, we'll look at another realm of technology that also powerfully reflects
the cultures from which it emerged, the watery realm of shipbuilding and seamanship.
Until then, thank you.
