Hey, this is Mike Cascio, and you're listening to the BruteStrength podcast.
This week's guest is Daniel Schmockdenberger, co-founder and director of research and development
at Neurohacker Collective, a company that specializes in developing things to improve
cognitive function. Their only product out now is a new tropic called qualia, which is
basically to supercharge your brain. When I went into this conversation,
I had intended to talk all about new tropics and ways to, what are some legal medicines that
people can take to improve their brain function? What we actually ended up talking about was,
first off, what are basically the prerequisites for someone to be meeting
before using these types of supplements? We talked about adrenal fatigue and how to know if
you're drinking too much caffeine. We talked about sleep, a little bit about nutrition,
because the basic premise is that if you don't have some of these basic or all of these basics
down pat, then it's like putting a turbocharger, and I'm using his wording here, a turbocharger
in a car without an engine. Putting a turbocharger in a car without an engine
means that the car will go nowhere, but if you have an engine without a turbocharger,
then your car will still move. We talked about the engine portion of the equation
on this one, and then we're going to do a follow-up soon. Daniel is an incredibly
intelligent guy, and I learned a ton from this one, and I know you will too. Enjoy the show.
What's up, everyone? This is Mike Cashew. I'm here with Daniel Schmockdenberger,
co-founder and director of R&D at Neurohacker Collective. Daniel, I know you're an incredibly
busy guy. Thank you so much for making some time to do this with me, man. I'm very excited.
Happy to be here with you. This is fun. Awesome. So before the show started,
just now we were talking about my personal experience with caffeine, and the fact that
I've been taking way too much caffeine, and I got off completely for a couple weeks ago,
and as we got into conversation about it, it sounds like I may need to take quite a bit more
time off. So I thought it might be an interesting place to start, because a lot of my listeners,
I know, are caffeine addicts. There's even a company in the crossfit space called,
in weightlifting space, called Caffeine and Kilos, and it's very romanticized, and people just love
their coffee. So I think this would be a really useful conversation for us to start out with,
for people to know if they might need to do the same thing that I'm about to do.
So what are the signs that someone is taking too much caffeine?
So step back a little bit and recognize that caffeine is a psychoactive chemical compound,
right? We can say a psychoactive drug, and it's one of humanity's favorite ones up there with
alcohol and cannabis, etc., for a very long time, from tea and coffee and mini sources.
And I think it's a beautiful molecule and can actually have life extension and life enhancing
properties used rightly, and like any tool, and especially the more powerful tool, can also have
life damaging properties used improperly. And it's pretty easy to misuse caffeine. The easiest
way to misuse caffeine is to use it to deal with tiredness from not resting enough. So
if someone is not sleeping enough, or they're not sleeping well, and the way they notice that is
they're either tired in the morning when they wake up, say to alarm, they don't feel
fully rested or they get tired in the afternoon, their answer to it rather than to rest is to
stimulate. That's how adrenal fatigue and burnout happens. And so kind of paradoxically,
caffeine is best used when people are already energized, and they are then using it for enhancement
of metabolic activity in an already healthy system that can handle the stimulus as opposed to in a
under-rested, under-operating system that can't really handle the stimulus without damage. So
that's the biggest thing. And there are so many people who use caffeine as if it is a replacement
for adequate or good sleep or good rest in other ways. And that is a very fast way to make it very
bad for you. Right. So what you're kind of suggesting it sounds like is that one of the
biggest benefits of caffeine is more to do with the metabolism rather than to do with boosting
your energy and stimulating you in that sort of way. Is that what I'm hearing? Well, and even
regarding the kind of stimulant properties, the central nervous system stimulant properties,
the way it inhibits adenosine, the way that it has a dopaminergic effect, those still work much
better on a well-rested system that can handle being stimulated without being damaged, right?
Because if a system is getting tired, it means the body is endogenously down-regulating rather
than up-regulating because it wants to be in a rest and repair point place rather than in a
fully on and utilized place. So when the body needs to be in a rest and repair place and we
stimulate it to be in an on place, that is at the cost of the integrity of the system. Gotcha.
So that's the first big thing with regard to caffeine is it's really critical that caffeine
is not being used because it's needed. It's being used when it's not needed as an enhancement to
the system. Gotcha. And that's not just caffeine. That's if someone's using nicotine, if they're
using theobromine, if they're using any kind of stimulant, it's important to keep that in mind.
So before we go into how to identify if someone is taking too much of caffeine or any stimulant,
why is it even important? What are the dangers to someone's performance and even health?
Yeah. So many things. If you look at adenosine inhibition, and so adenosine is a neurochemical
that helps bring on the sleep impulse, and so caffeine inhibits that molecule. If you're trying
to inhibit it when it's coming on strong because it needs to come on, then you'll end up getting
imbalances in your adenosine cycle and in your circadian cycles, which will look like not getting
as good a quality sleep and not getting as much repair during your sleep, it can then look like
resistance to adenosine inhibition. And so you'll notice that by having less of an effect from
coffee where you can take coffee or any source of caffeine and still fall asleep afterwards.
That means that your ability to inhibit the adenosine cycle has been down-regulated.
And then specifically, adrenal fatigue and adrenal burnout happens largely when you
continue to stress a system that has been stressed and now needs to repair before you give it
adequate repair. And when you understand all of the roles that the adrenal glands have in
converting neurologic impulse to endocrine impulse, it's involved in fat metabolism
and muscle repair and lean body muscle mass. It's involved in everything from genetic transcription
to the regulation of the rest of the endocrine system to immune function to bone density.
And so overstimulating and overtaxing your adrenal system is definitely not something
somebody wants to do. Got it. So what are some other signs that people can look for?
What are some tests they can give themselves? Yeah, one of the common ones is that the stimulating
effect that caffeine had early in someone's use, it doesn't have anymore. And that's the sign of
desensitization, down-regulation. So they used to drink eight ounces of coffee and feel increased
wakefulness. Now they have to drink more coffee to still notice a smaller effect.
If you used to not be able to fall asleep on coffee, now you can fall asleep on it. If you need
more than you used to need, if you are having a sense of needing it or needing it more times
in the course of a day, later into the day, if you're noticing the effects less, these are all
signs of desensitization, down-regulation. So one of the key things with pretty much anything is,
in terms of anything that we're taking in other than like water and air is cycling.
And so just like with workouts, you need to have cycles between stressing the muscles and
then letting them rest and repair. And you want to kind of cycle between different workouts,
because if you keep doing the same workout, you start to desensitize to that particular stimulus
and you will get less from it than if you cycle it to another way of stressing the muscle.
And if you think of it from an evolutionary point of view, in terms of chemistry coming into the
body, pretty much other than water, there was no food source that was always available all year
round. And so our body was consistently getting different kinds of chemical input and then
regulating in a hunter-gatherer kind of environment. So rotating our foods and rotating our supplements
and etc. is valuable and different ones need to rotate on different cycles. There are some things
that down-regulate quickly, like say some, this isn't a supplement, but from a kind of
neurohacking point of view, if someone does MDMA, they don't have to do that many times before
their system will start to acclimate to it, down-regulate and then have pretty bad symptomology
if they stop doing it. So someone really shouldn't do that more than, and it's going to depend on
their individual physiology. Some people might be able to do it a couple times a month, some people
only once every several months. So the cycle there has to be relatively little on lots of off,
whereas say someone is taking resistant starch as a prebiotic, they can take that most of the
time, but pretty much anything should be cycled off now and again. With regard to caffeine,
it's actually a molecule that people habituate to and then get a low level of addiction or
dependence quite quickly, which is the signal of that is getting headaches when you come off of it.
And so letting people stay in an on-cycle longer so that they're not dealing with say,
you know, headaches every week as they're cycling off, you know, on the weekend,
the general recommendation I give to most people is if they want to use caffeine regularly, as
opposed to just now and again, which I think is fine to do if you're sleeping enough and not over
using it, is give or take one week, every quarter, you come off of it. And the first couple of days
suck, you can take ibuprofen for headache if you need to, sleeping those first few days extra is
valuable because even if we're good about sleep, almost all of us end up accumulating little bits
of sleep debt now and again, and sleep banking actually does work to some degree. So at least
a week per quarter off. Now, if someone has not done that for a long time, so they've been on
their caffeine source regularly for years, and especially if they have underslept an association
with that, and especially if they have taken more than the caffeine than they should be to begin
with, and they've kind of down-regulate their sensitivity, they might need to come off for
much longer than a week before they get to re-regulate adequately and move back to healthy
relationship to it. And depending upon someone's caffeine metabolism, which is, you know, largely
genetic, depending upon the health of their adrenal glands and their nervous system, that can be a
pretty huge variance. But there are people who, when they cycle off of pretty intensive caffeine
usage, are still dealing with side effects of coming off for three months. For the time period
that people are dealing with that, it's actually really important to not get back on caffeine
because you really want your system to re-find its homeostasis, right, to find its homeodynamics.
And there are things one can do to support themselves. They can try taking other kinds
of stimulants as a way of stepping down, and then getting off those two. So butamine,
which is a synthetic version of B1, which actually up-regulates the sensitivity of the D1 and D2
dopamine receptors, which are partially affected and down-regulated by the caffeine, can actually
help someone come off of it faster and easier. And so butamine and tyrosine together often
can be utilized for that. Adrenal support in general, B vitamins, adaptogenic herbs, and mostly,
more than anything, is just a lot of sleep, sleep banking. So when people are coming off of
having been on too much caffeine or any kind of stimulant for a long time, taking three or four
days where they just sleep as much as they can, even if that's 12 or 16 hours a day,
can make a tremendous difference to how quickly someone feels better, their cognitive function
increases, their physiologic function increases. Damn. Well, like I was telling you before,
I only took two weeks off about a month ago. And as we were talking, it sounds like my,
you know, I've overused caffeine to a huge extent for a very long time. And I probably have to go
back in and take some more time off. And I didn't get any headaches whatsoever. But one of the worst
things for me was I was just incredibly irritable. Like the smallest things would agitate me or
stress me out. I felt just this enormous amount of pressure when nothing had changed other than
I stopped drinking coffee. It was a crazy feeling. Right. Yeah, coming off of caffeine is, again,
it's going to be much harder for some people based on genetics than others, much harder for some
people based on how dependent they were on it, factoring all those things, how long they've
been doing it, how much they were doing adrenal exhaustion. But in the cases where someone's
dependence on it is stronger, caffeine informer is a good website. And they give a good breakdown
of caffeine in different products and science around caffeine metabolism, etc. But if you
read on there, even though they're a website that, you know, is supportive of people understanding
caffeine and the positives of it well, when you read about the experiences of people who are
going through withdrawals and come downs, many of them sound a lot like people coming off of
stronger stimulants like meth in terms of experiencing irritability, anxiety, and then
worse even depersonalization, derealization. So, and just to kind of step back from theme of caffeine
for a minute, like, even meth is a cool molecule. It's one that, again, people regulate to so
quickly and it creates, it creates override independence in the dopamine-urgic system
so quickly and has so many side effects, I just really don't recommend. But no, it was used so
widely in the, you know, 50s before we recognized all the issues of it. And, and Adderall now is
an amphetamine. It's just, you know, the only different new methamphetamine in Adderall is one
methyl group. But like all of these things have the possibility of positive therapeutic application
to take exercise, right? People can exercise in ways where they exceed what their body should do
and they injure themselves rather than benefiting themselves. And so pretty much anything, even
if it can be good for you or really is good for you in most applications, can also be used
irresponsibly. And the more powerful something is, the more one has to be mindful and the less
one has been mindful, the higher the probability that there has been some irresponsible use.
Right. I love that perspective. I appreciate that. I'm gonna, I'm gonna give it another shot.
So I want to dive into neurohacking. The company you own is called Neurohacker Collective. And I
think everyone out there has heard of the term neurohacking, but I think there are probably a
lot of misunderstandings and myths surrounding the word. So first off, can you just describe
briefly what neurohacking is? So I'll describe the way that we think of it and kind of how we
define it. So neurohacking for us is utilizing any kinds of tools, technologies, processes that have
the ability to upregulate some aspect of brain or nervous system function or associated body
function that then affects brain or nervous system function largely for the purpose of
being able to upregulate some aspect of cognitive or emotional function. We're specifically looking
at the mind-brain interface mostly. Now we could of course look at the brain just for its effect on
the body, like increased coordination and, you know, sensory systems, motor systems, and that's
also kind of in the periphery of it. We're largely looking at how do we support the body to affect
the mind and emotions? Also, what can we do with mind and emotions to affect the body and brain?
And how do we kind of hack the mind-brain interface for both better subjective experience and
increased capacities? And how do we do it in ways that are not just upregulating to some capacity
in the moment, but with side effects and downregulation of something meaningful long-term?
But how do we do it in a way that is sustainable, regenerative, and where we're actually more
focused on upregulating regulatory capacity itself rather than just upregulating some particular
kind of stimulus in a way that might override the integrity of the system?
What do you mean? Can you explain that last bit a little bit further?
Sure. So let's say we're going to talk about stimulants again. Stimulants are
tools of neurohacking, but most of them, most of them don't fit into what we would consider good
neurohacking tools. So let's say we take Adderall. There are outside of its medical application,
there are many people who take Adderall or other kinds of smart drug stimulants to be able to launch
their tech startup, to get through their taxes, to do their midterms or finals, whatever it is,
because they're having a hard time focusing adequately and this is helping them. So Adderall
is primarily working on your dopamine system. It's a presynaptic dopamine agonist, so it's
making your neurons produce more dopamine. And dopamine is involved in the ability to focus
and drive. So if you're trying to do something that is kind of easy to procrastinate and get
distracted from, increase focus and drive are pretty great. Now, how does the body naturally
produce and regulate dopamine? If we think of what we'd call the endogenous dopamine's
regulatory system or the internal dopamine regulatory system, there's a whole lot of
things that happen. You eat protein that contains phenylalanine. The phenylalanine,
the protein has to get digestive, get absorbed through the gut. The phenylalanine converts to
tyrosine, converts to anacetyl tyrosine, converts to L-dopa, converts to dopamine, goes across
the synapse, passes a bunch of enzymes that are trying to break it down, MAOB, COMT, etc.,
gets received into some post-synaptic neurons. There's a bunch of things that happen to have
a regulated dopamine process and we don't want kind of peak dopamine all the time. If you are
wanting to have kind of intense focus, concentration, recognize patterns, the body will naturally
up-regulate dopamine for that purpose. If you're wanting to relax and meditate, calm down,
make love, participate in some art, you might want dopamine to drop a lot. You might want
serotonin to come up, right? So your body is naturally regulating all of these chemicals
in relationship to what's actually adaptive to the environment and what's going on.
Now, so that regulatory cycle has the ability to pay attention to what's needed and then up
or down-regulate levels of anything and anything in relationship with everything else that's going
on. Now, if I just give someone a presynaptic dopamine agonist, if I give someone something
that just basically is going to kind of elevate their dopamine and fix it, then a few things
happen. One, they're no longer as adaptive to their environment because their dopamine is not
being internally regulated, it's being externally regulated, which is why a lot of people on
any kind of psychiatric med, one of the things that even if it stabilizes them that they describe,
is oftentimes feeling more numb because now they're neurochemistry and thus their emotional
state is more fixed and independent of what's happening so they don't feel their own ability
to kind of respond to and react to and feel what's happening, right? That's not desirable.
One of the other things that's happening, if we kind of just fix the dopamine, is the dopamine
is elevated irrespective of all the things that it should exist in specific ratios and
dynamic equilibrium with. So the relationship of dopamine to then the other catecholamines,
norepinephrine, epinephrine, and its relationship then on the other side, the neuro-inhibitory
side to serotonin, we did mess with all those intentionally. So now we start getting kind
of weird imbalances in neurochemistry and then because we're just elevating that in-chain molecule
and being able to keep it elevated, the body's own ability to produce dopamine without it can
start to drop, which is what creates dependence, we call addiction, and the body's ability to
the way it's processing dopamine changes. So if dopamine starts being very high
ongoingly without the body having produced it in the synapse, then the body might start
down-regulating the dopamine receptor sensitivity because there's too much coming through and then
if you get off of the Adderall or Math or whatever it is, now the natural amount of dopamine you
produce is less than it was before and your receptors are even less sensitive to dopamine
because there was these higher amount, now you're experiencing this pretty terrible withdrawal and
crash. And so rather than just give someone a state, we want to support their own brain, body,
mind capacity to produce the states that are relevant in response to the environment in real
time. So that's what we mean by up-regulating the regulatory capacity of the system rather
than overriding the regulatory capacity to just fix a specific state. So something like Adderall,
yeah, let's just take Adderall. So something like Adderall will go in and produce a ton of,
basically fill the brain with dopamine, release all of it at once, and then leave it in worse shape
than it was in in the first place. And what you're kind of suggesting or what you guys are working on
is things that can leave the brain in a better shape than when you found it.
Yeah, I mean, when you think about, I know your audience is very connected to the CrossFit world,
and if you think about the philosophy of the CrossFit world and the sense of
general preparedness and general capability for lots of different kinds of activity,
the whole goal is increasing the adaptiveness of the being physically, right? That it is not someone
that can just lift a lot of weight but can barely move or someone that could run fast but
couldn't handle weight when it can come or it's the sense of kind of how do we make the
being actually more responsive, more adaptive, increase the responsive capacity. And so there's
ways of both stressing the system and then allowing it to repair and then stressing it in different
ways. And so similarly, with our own internal physiology, with our immune system, we want an
immune system that can respond better to different kinds of pathogens faster. We want a repair system
that can repair different kinds of injury faster, right? We want a neurochemical system
that when we want to focus can go into intense focus. But when we need to be able to move our
focus between a lot of things, task switching, we can move it between a lot of things without
feeling stressed or irritated by something moving our attention. So how do we increase our
overall adaptiveness as a being? Now, of course, neurohacking doesn't imply that. A lot of, like,
just if you're doing anything that is changing the way the nervous system operates for some
intentional purpose, that's a broad definition of neurohacking. I'm just taking the next step to say
the kind of neurohacking we actually value and respect is the kind that while it is enhancing
some instantaneous capacity, it is also enhancing long term capacity or at minimum not damaging it.
Love it. I've got a two part question for you next. So first off, before we get deeper into
optimizing brain function, what are some of the prerequisites that people should be doing
consistently before considering some of these neurohacking supplementation,
these ways of supplementing? And if they are not meeting those prerequisites, are things like
neutropics, neurohacking supplementation, are they even beneficial? And so with those prerequisites,
I'm talking nutrition and lifestyle mainly. Sure. It's a nuanced question, so I'm going to answer
it a couple of ways. The first part is, I would say, to the degree that someone can have the
foundational aspects of lifestyle be what they want first and then any kind of enhancement be what
they build upon that foundation, that's a good rule of thumb. And so if someone for instance
isn't sleeping well, either they aren't dropping into deep delta sleep or they aren't getting enough
sleep, then say the person starts taking immune supportive herbs. Well, most of the immune repair
only happens at night when you're sleeping and during delta sleep. If you're not getting enough
delta sleep, those herbs, there's not going to do that much. If you're taking things that are going
to support tissue synthesis, most of the tissue repair happens during delta sleep. If you're
taking no tropics, they're going to support things like memory. Memory consolidation happens during
delta sleep and some aspects happen during theta sleep. And so you're going to get a kind of tiny
fraction of anything that you're taking that's going to help your regenerative capacity if you're
not doing the foundational thing that is where regeneration occurs. We can also look at diet and
say, all right, say I'm going to take some supplements and I take, even if I take a handful
of pills a day, I'm still talking about a relatively tiny amount of grams in comparison to the total
amount of food I eat per day. And all of that food is chemistry that is not just macros that are
going to be affecting my body fat and muscle composition, but they are all of the microbes
that are affecting what my brain is made out of, what my hormones are made out of, what all my
tissues are made out of themselves. And so all of that food is either medicine or toxicity or
somewhere on that spectrum. And so if somebody is taking in food that is not providing adequate
nutrition, and especially if it's providing toxicity, and then they're going to try and just
override that by taking supplements, it's kind of like taking caffeine instead of sleeping, right?
So the reason that the word supplement is used is it means in addition to, right? So
if you think about, maybe I think most people on your podcast will probably be familiar with this,
if you think about the way that like a turbocharger or a supercharger added to an engine moves
more oxygen through the engine so you can get more combustion, a turbocharger without an engine
doesn't do anything at all. An engine without a turbocharger still does a lot. And so if you
think of the engine as lifestyle, and you think about all the kind of hacking as like adding a
badass turbocharger, there's no question it can make you go a lot faster, but it has to be on top
of foundation, otherwise it just doesn't work that well. So now that's the main thing I would say.
And so the foundations, everybody knows what the foundations are and nobody likes to hear about them
because they're hard and we don't really like doing them and we want like new shit. But I'm going
to put to the foundation sleep, exercise, movement, food, diet, nutrition, stress, management, reduction
and those kinds of categories.
We can get into more things that you could fit in there, but let's just call those kind of the
primary foundational categories. I'm going to put sleep in its own category and say that
if someone is having even the tiniest bit of sleep deficit, it has a degree of negative effect on
their whole system that a little bit of poor nutrition or a little bit of inadequacy in exercise
just doesn't have. Got it. Interesting. And so as I mean, we know that exercise affects the
genetic transcription pattern of thousands of genes. That's a huge fucking deal. It's like
our genome doesn't really matter that much genetic transcription matters because if you have a gene
that's just kind of sitting there quiet, even if it does code for elevated homocysteine or whatever
it doesn't matter, right? It only matters if it's actually coding and those
proteins are being built. So you can change what is actually expressing genetically from lifestyle
factors. And so exercise profoundly, if you're looking at being able to affect thousands of
genes, that's a huge deal. It's affecting exercise can upregulate BDNF, which is a brain derived
neurotrophic factor, upregulates the production of new neurons in your brain, which prevents
neurodegenerative disease, repairs nerve damage, increases cognitive and emotional capacity. I mean,
like if you've made a list of all things exercise can do and its effects on decreasing depression
and decreasing likelihood for every kind of major chronic illness, it's hard to imagine that anything
could be more powerful than that. And the same with diet when you think about all the negative
effects of excessive sugar, of so many kinds of processed foods, of toxins that can be in foods,
of inflammatory foods, and the positive effects of having your micronutrients be adequate,
adequate minerals, vitamins, etc. Yeah, there's nothing like all of these categories are foundational.
If you get really great sleep, but eat shitty, you'll have problems. If you get, you know,
really great exercise and eat shitty, you'll have problems like they're none of them replace the
other ones, but you will get more profound problems faster from sleep issues and any of the other
ones. So I really do think, and it's such an easy one, it's such an easy one to cut because it's
just boring and life is interesting and there's a lot of shit we want to do. And it's so easy to
have this like I'll sleep when I'm dead thought give me more caffeine like I want to do stuff.
One of the things that is fascinating to me is in the sleep deprivation studies,
as someone is in moving into deeper degrees of sleep deprivation in time. So one thing that's
very interesting, say someone naturally wakes after eight hours sleep. And so instead they set their
alarm and they were going to get to bed on time, but they like checked one last email or did one
thing. So they now they just got seven and a half hours sleep. That still seems like a lot, a lot
of people only get six, seven and a half, I'm pretty good. But it's actually a half hour of sleep
debt. If you add that up times a lot of nights, right, it doesn't take that very doesn't take
very long for it to be missing a whole night of sleep. And you think about how someone feels in
that case and then missing weeks of sleep, as it as it goes on time, that really happens. And so
we'll notice that some of the symptoms are things like verbal fluency and word recall.
If you're looking for a word or you're looking for a name, it's kind of on the tip of your tongue,
but it takes a minute to find it. That's a pretty classic sign of sleep debt. And that shouldn't
be that's not just like aging or being human or having a high IQ, that's actually a sign that
your brain is not functioning that well. And it can be from different reasons, but it's most commonly
a sleep debt. If you've just completely fucking forgot where you parked, or where you put your
keys or your phone or what you were doing last or, you know, something like that. So your short
term memory has that level of capacity for impairment. That's, that's not normal. That's
actually a sign of dysfunction. And the most common reason for this sleep now it can be for
other reasons, it can be new nutrition deficiency, it can be stress overload, it can be exposure to
toxins, neurotoxins, mold, etc. But sleep is the most common one and sleep helps with all those
other things. So one of the interesting things is that as someone is moving into sleep debt,
at first they notice it and they go, oh, I'm a little bit tired if they had been sleeping well.
And then they're like, oh, I'm getting more tired. But as someone gets deeper into sleep debt,
they stop recognizing that they're getting deeper into sleep debt. And so there is actually a
mismatch between someone's own self assessment of how much sleep debt is there and how much sleep
debt is actually there. It's very much like drunk people who can't recognize how drunk they are
because their brain is misassessing it. The tired brain is misassessing this also from just an
evolutionary adaptation, right? Like think about mothers who have an infant baby, they're just not
going to get enough sleep for a while, right? Unless, unless they just have one of those magical
babies that sleeps all night long and they have a husband that does a lot and maybe a nanny in a
community, they're going to go through a period of sleep debt. And so to be aware of how much they
were in sleep debt would just suck. So they just kind of be, there's this evolutionary adaptation
to be less aware of it. But the problem, of course, is that we can then exploit that lack of
awareness to keep going. And so most people will have a situation where they're like,
say only operating at 70% of capacity, but they only, but they think they're operating at 90%
of capacity. And that misassessment is actually the cause of a lot of problems.
So when you were asking about foundations, I really do put sleep in its own category.
And then next, I'm going to put nutrition and what people are taking in their mouth.
I'm going to put movement. I want, you know, exercise will be a subset of that. And I'll put
the relationship to stress, which is going to have to do with the relationships in their life,
the nature of their work, the way they create meaning, how they've processed old trauma,
whether they give themselves time to meditate, journal, et cetera, do things to process it.
Now then we can put other categories like someone's home environment. That's kind of a big deal. If
they live in a house that say has mold in it, or they live in an environment that's actually
dangerous. So they're stressed out all the time or dealing with physical stressors,
or they're around people who are either particularly negative or have lifestyle habits that influence
them in the wrong direction. So environment, people and physical environment can really kind of be
argued another foundational category. Tell you what, let's stop it right there. I want to pull on a
couple of those categories. And I'm realizing that we could have a four hour conversation and not
get through everything I wanted to get through. So I'm just going to go down a couple of these
different avenues. First off, that misassessment is absolutely fascinating, because one of the
things I was going to bring up is that so many people, they think they're operating at 100%.
And when you suggest a couple of things, whether it be nutrition or sleep advice,
they don't really see the point because they feel like they are operating at 100%.
I'm curious, are there any kind of biggest bang for your buck type interventions or changes that
you think most or all people should make? All is obviously not going to work, but most people
are deficient in a need to change in their diet? In their diet, yes. This is a lot of things. And
there are some things that are true across the board, and there's a lot of things that are
going to be different for different goals and different physiologies. You had asked me previously
a question about a diet that focuses mostly only on macros and being flexible with it.
If someone is focused on their physique, and so they want to make sure that they are
burning more calories than they are consuming in a day or consuming just enough of their big
growing muscle, so they're really macro-focused and being more flexible with which macros,
which foods they can get their macros from so they can actually sustain that for a while,
we totally get why that diet evolved. And it is grossly underware of lots of things that are
relevant other than just short-term physique and flexibility of how one does that, right?
Correct me if I'm wrong, but I think what you might mean is most people that follow that
kind of diet are uninformed on the importance of micronutrients?
So a few things. Micronutrients is going to be the first thing about that diet that is off.
There's several other things. Couldn't you potentially follow that kind of diet,
but also keep in mind all of your micronutrients? Kind of. Okay. I mean, yes, keep going.
So macros are where you get calories from, right? Protein, fat, carbs.
And someone, this isn't the normal definition, but someone can also kind of think of water and
fiber as macros. They're not caloric sources, but they're things that you need a lot of each day,
right? But then your micronutrients are your vitamins, fat soluble, water soluble vitamins,
your minerals, your macro minerals and your trace minerals, and then all the phytochemicals and
polyphenols and enzymes and et cetera that come from a natural diet and a wide variety of natural
foods. You could say, well, can't I just take a multivitamin, multimineral, and not kind of
worry about that. And I would say that's better than not doing it and a far away from actually
having an evolutionally relevant diet because the form of nutrients from natural sources,
let's just say from a plant source, it could be plant or animal source,
you'll have a plant that has a mineral that is bound in multiple different forms. So,
you're not just going to be dealing with, say, salary, you'll have sodium as a little bit of
sodium chloride and sodium bicarb and sodium bifosphate and many different forms. You'll have,
you take a magnesium supplement and maybe it's magnesium citrate. The body has,
give or take, 13 different forms of magnesium that we know of that utilizes and very differently
in different kinds of tissues. So magnesium for brain health versus magnesium for
it's kind of electrolyte properties or in muscles or heart or adrenals, different forms.
Natural foods do a better job of giving you a wider variety of those things, also oftentimes
with cofactors, some of which won't be in the multi, some of which we don't even understand that
well, that will affect absorption. And then things that we don't even usually think of as
micros, like all of the antioxidants and all the polyphenols, all of the plant-based enzymes, etc.
So those matter a lot. What we know about life extension right now,
kind of the best thing we still know about life extension, we know, you know, quite a few things,
is caloric restriction is meaningful for life extension in all mammals, including humans.
And when we look at the people from blue zones who have, who live the oldest, the areas where
you have the most people that live over a hundred, their diets can be a little bit different. But
one of the commonalities is that they are in general taking in less calories than we are.
They're in slight caloric deficit, but they're taking in their calories from micronutrient
rich sources. So their diet is lower in macronutrients, higher in micronutrients, which means
they, you know, are in caloric restriction without being in nutrient restriction.
Interesting. Got it.
Which is the exact opposite of empty carbs, right? So this is why getting food from
organic, biodynamic, local, seasonal, rotating whole food, etc. sources actually makes a big
difference is all of those other compounds. Now, that's one thing, right? Is that actually
getting the good things from food other than macros is really important. One on the other side,
not getting bad things from food is also really important. And not getting bad things from food
means inflammatory compounds. So if, and this is going to be a little bit the same for everyone
and a little bit different, most people will have inflammatory reactions or have a probability of
having inflammatory reactions from a lot of common things. So pasteurized dairy, hybridized grains,
excessive sugar, etc. Those are all going to be probably inflammatory for most people.
And you're not just talking about inflammation in the joint, you're talking about internal
inflammation throughout, like systemic throughout the body, right?
Yeah, starting in the gut and then having systemic effects that originate in the gut.
And are there, are there, is there anything, any kind of identifying markers that people can look for?
Yeah, yeah, rather than, than just going to a lab?
Oh, I thought you were asking lab markers. That's okay too. Yeah, the easiest, the easiest first.
So again, this is tricky because there are a lot of different inflammatory markers and different
ones show up first for different people. So the inflammatory markers that in a normal non-functional
medicine doc will most commonly run is the run CRP and sedrate and maybe homocysteine. And those
are primarily kind of cardiac inflammatory markers that are predispositions for heart disease.
There are plenty of people that actually have full blown inflammatory diseases where none of
those are elevated. They, we might see CalProtectin elevated showing inflammation in the bowels and
we can have kind of inflammatory bowel disease without any of the heart inflammatory markers.
We can see specific cytokines that are elevated that are going to lead to autoimmune diseases,
like lupus or rheumatoid arthritis or fibromyalgia or PMR. So, and then there are people who have
like elevated histamine, maybe just genetically that leads to inflammation. You'd have to
kind of specifically look at that, including neuroinflammation or who have lectin sensitivity,
which you can see through different markers like adenopectin, which leads to sensitivity to lectin
rich foods. So one thing I would say here is for people who are interested in optimizing health,
going to work with a good functional medicine doctor who can kind of take in their symptoms,
take in their goals and then prioritize labs with them and create customized protocols,
it's highly recommended. Think about this. Think about all the times you heard about someone who
got some intense headache, went to the doctor, had a brain scan, found out they had a pretty
serious brain tumor and they got diagnosed with a few minutes left to live. But they were completely
asymptomatic and that brain tumor was growing for years. Similarly, and whether it's a brain
tumor or tumor anywhere else, the absence of symptom does not mean the absence of pathogenesis,
right? You can have the development of pathology asymptomatically for a long time.
And when we're looking at autoimmune disease, when someone starts having enough joint pain that
they actually go check it out and they get diagnosed with rheumatism, it's not uncommon to see
autoimmune antibodies or inflammatory cytokines years and sometimes even decades before
someone would have got that diagnosis from symptomology. Why that's a big deal from a preventive
medicine point of view is if you see the early signs of it and the person doesn't have the symptoms,
it can very easily mean they never have to get them. Because you can stop and you can
prevent progress of the disease and usually even reverse it if you know what you're doing
when you get those markers. So if someone is in symptomology, then obviously go tend to it.
But if someone is really interested in trying to optimize your fitness and your energy levels
and your health right now, but you want to keep optimizing those rather than have them degrade
relatively rapidly in age, then having a sense of what's really going on in your body and being able
to address things ahead of time and have a personalized approach based on what's actually
going on for you is a good idea. And is any is just any functional med doctor acceptable or
there are there certifications and identifying marker marks for those doctors that you would
recommend people seek out? Tricky. One of the things that is on our goal list for our company
is actually being able to make a directory of functional doctors and other kinds of therapists
that can recommend people in whatever city someone's in based on what kinds of trainings they've
done and reviews, etc. There's certainly some things you can look for. So functional medicine
is a specific branded thing. The Institute of Functional Medicine has very good trainings.
It's some of the better trainings that are kind of standardized right now. You can also look at
just people who call themselves naturopathic doctors and integrative doctors and just kind of
see if what they are doing is relevant to what your interests are. Obviously, if you have
some GI issues, having a integrative or functional doctor who has some GI specialty,
or if you're trying to build a lot of muscle, have one that is good at hormone optimization,
right? You'll want to look at whatever your goals are, someone who has some specialization
and experience with those topics. And then right now, the best you can probably do is
check out reviews and then go meet them and see if you resonate. Done. So originally, I wanted to
really dive into natropics and different neurohacking techniques as well as longevity. But for most of
this conversation, it's been kind of like what are the precursors people need to have down before
they consider that type of thing, which I think is a great starting place. So before we wrap up,
I know people are going to have a ton of questions about the nutrition piece. What are
one, two, or three resources that you would recommend people go to that are
widely varied and also digestible for lay people in terms of micronutrients and that kind of that
sort of thing? I think nutrition is actually one of the trickiest topics.
There is so much vested interest in people who have kind of authored books and just hold to a
particular ideology of the kind of food people want to eat of the associated morality and ethics
and lifestyle and culture elements that there are very few topics that are less coherent across the
whole field than this one. Medicine does not, like within the field of integrative medicine,
there's not as much intense difference as there is in foundational nutrition. Similarly,
there's not that much difference in thoughts on sleep. So I mean, a classic example is
people who are in the more raw food and more vegan and more kind of calorie restriction
direction, and then people who are in the more ketogenic diet, primal diet, paleo direction,
they both reference a lot of well done science. And there are really good scientists and doctors
on both sides of that, and they both look at blue zone studies, but in very different ways.
Some of it's because it's going to be different for different people's genetics,
for different people's physiology, how they approach it, etc. So I would say there are
general rules of thumb. To say one should eat closer to the living ecosystem is a generally
good rule of thumb, meaning the more processed and packaged, hybridized, sprayed, etc., something is,
the worse it is in general. It's not an absolute truth, but it's a general truth.
And the closer to things that have been what our bodies evolved to eat over very long periods of
time, and particularly also with less pesticides and herbicides and things that are designed to
kill life on them, and the more they come from healthy soils rather than pretty demineralized
soils and the fresher they are, versus they've been out of the ground for a pretty long time.
These are all, you know, and to the degree it's meats, then grass fed, free range, etc.
That's kind of important across the board, whether you're eating meats or not, or these
ones are not, or nightshades are not, like kind of dial that in second, dial in this general
approach to things that would have been part of a living ecosystem first.
And I would say then the next good rule of thumb is paying attention to how you feel
as pretty closely as you eat different things. So pay attention right after a meal. Do you have
a sense of overfullness in your belly? Like you're having a hard time digesting it? Do you have GI
symptoms afterwards? Do you get tired after eating it? Do you get hungry again right away? Do you have
energy for a while? Do you sleep well afterwards? The more you can do kind of a really attentive,
quantified self-assessment, just even spend a few weeks and journal what you're eating and
then journal how you're feeling in association and dial it in. The combination of the general rule
of thumb of eating evolutionarily relevant foods and paying attention to which ones feel good for
you, that would be foundational. Then study specific diets on top of that, and then do
actual functional medicine where you look at your nutrient levels and your food allergies,
et cetera, on top of that. In terms of resources to go study more, the reason why I was hesitant to
say the resources is they mostly all fall into camps that are very different than other camps,
so I have good things to say. I think Dave Asprey's new book, Headstrong, is one of the best
introductions to health for people who have not got into it yet that I'm aware of. I think it is a
people take different through lines of how they write a book like that, whether it's
understanding healthy fats or whether it's understanding caloric restriction. The through
line he took was cellular health, mitochondrial energy and brain health. That's a great through
line. Then he looked at diet and exercise and sleep and toxicity and hacking techniques in
light of that. I think a lot of what he has in the book is really foundationally great. It's not
going to be appropriate for everyone. People will want to modify, but I think it's a great starting
place. In terms of other people that have a similar-ish dietary philosophy,
a lot of what Dr. Merkola writes on diet is similar and clinically well backed up.
If you go speak to a normal cardiologist, they're still looking at Pritikin's work on
extremely low-fat diets having lower heart disease, living longer and more Mediterranean
diet. I think that is largely just older research, but not irrelevant. I have seen people do
a bulletproof diet, ketogenic diet a little bit wrongly and have their lipid profile get super
whacked. There is some need for nuance. I actually think a lot of the raw food vegan communities
has good things to say on diet. Even if you decide not to be vegan, you decide to eat some other
animal products with it. A lot of the insights on soil conditions and micronutrients and plants
and therapeutic use of herbs and whatever there is great. Those are a few. That's excellent.
I appreciate that. It sounds like there is no perfect diet. One size fits all, which is kind of a
that's the case in just about everything in life.
There are rules of thumb. There are generalized principles and then there's a lot of room for
adaptation. What someone should eat if they are training heavily versus not and training
for powerlifting versus ultramarathons and based on their genetics and age and what kind of medical
conditions they have. That's all going to just be so, so different. One thing I will also say
is the idea that someone should not do kind of more advanced neurohacking,
biohacking things if they don't have the foundations down. This is not totally correct.
I wanted to take that perspective first because I wanted to emphasize foundations,
but say we look at either use of notropics or use of EEG neurofeedback or different kinds of
sleep tech. Sometimes, even if someone's foundations are screwed, they're screwed enough that the
person's behavioral chemistry is out of whack enough that they just can't fix it. They can't
actually get themselves to eat better exercise well, sleep well regularly enough. Sometimes
those interventions actually help the person enough that not only do they get the benefit
of that intervention, but it helps them get the foundations down better. To change their behavior.
Right. Absolutely. One of the things that we have found with qualia and with notropics is
if people are having issues with sleep, if they're underslept or if they have kind of
overused stimulants, they might need to fix that first, but otherwise, if say their diet is poor
or their exercise is poor, it's been very common that people will start. I mean, not all notropics
will be the same. Qualia specifically has a lot that balances the dopamine opioid access. It's
actually helping work on the chemistry systems of motivation and behavior themselves. We've had a
lot of people who just couldn't get themselves to be regular with exercise and diet. They got on
that and then they actually were. The general rule of thumb is someone does want to be focused on
foundations, but if they're having a really hard time focusing with foundations, finding tools that
can not support them to keep not doing foundations and think that they can just augment it, but
things that can actually help them with the behavioral dynamics of doing the foundational work,
that can be super useful. That's a great perspective. I love that. Even if it is a placebo that gets
them to change the behavior, then the important part is that they are changing their behavior,
which oftentimes is the most important piece. The fact that what you guys do is so holistic and
has such long-term effects is just that much better. I love it.
Sometimes therapy actually, the right kinds of therapy can really help someone change patterns
underneath their behavior. Neurofeedback can help neuro-regulatory patterns that
can make a huge difference to just someone's state of health and well-being over all stress
processing, but also then how people react to stress and go into addictive patterns.
We can say both sides. We can say get foundations first and then do advanced techniques. We can
also say if the advanced techniques can help you be able to do a better job with foundations that
you've had as new year's goals every year and not actually been able to stabilize, don't keep
trying and failing at the same thing. See if additional tools can support you.
Right. I love that. Look, I am really dying to continue this conversation. We've opened so many
doors, but we're going to have to save some of it for the next time. What do you want to leave
these listeners with or do you have an ask of them? I enjoyed the time with you and I'm looking
forward to the next time. If this was interesting and people have questions on other topics, my
ask would be that they just tell you what they're interested in that we talk about next time.
Other than that, my ask would be that they take more responsibility for their own health and
well-being in life than they did previously. That means study more so they can actually understand
how to support themselves because that will put them not just in the best position for their own
health, but also in the best position to help other people and be an asset in the world.
That's phenomenal. Well, I'm definitely inspired. I'm going to make a few
behavioral changes and then do some more self-experimentation with quality of myself.
Once that is taking place, then we'll follow up again.
Sounds good.
This is a conversation. Thank you so much, Daniel. This has been phenomenal, man.
Likewise. Appreciate it.
All right, brother. Bye.
Hey, guys. I'm going to invite any of you that are interested to call into a voicemail that
I have set up and leave some questions. Then I'm going to play back your question on the podcast
and I'm either going to answer the question myself or I'm going to get one of my guests to help me
answer those questions. If you're interested, the number is 801-449-0503. That's 801-449-0503.
