Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy. I'm Inyash Brotsky. I'm Stephen Zuber.
And today we have with us a special guest. Hi, I'm Alexander Wills. Hello,
Alexander. We are going to be talking to Alexander today because he piqued my
interest with something that I posted on Facebook and I really wanted to get him
in here and pick his brain on it. But before we get into that, we should, well,
even actually before we do the less wrong post, we should give a quick intro to
Alexander in case people did not hear the last episode that he was on.
Alexander Wills, you are very well known for having written The Metropolitan Man,
a bunch of other Rationalist fanfics, and who is currently writing the very popular
Worth the Candle original fiction. Yep. That's pretty much it. I live in Minnesota.
Stay at home dad. I was a software engineer for seven years or so before I did that.
Kind of burnt out on programming for a while, but that's as much of my life story as you
probably need. I was on programming checks out. Yeah. I was originally planning on waiting until
Worth the Candle was done before I started, but it just seems like that's a very, very bad plan
at this point that I should jump in sometime soon. What are you up to now and how far in
do you think you are? It is, it's at 1.3 million words, which is a lot. Yes.
I think it's in the home stretch. I'm closing more threads than I'm opening. So that's,
I don't know, it's really hard to say. And I kind of try to let myself have some freedom to
go do something weird with the story if I want to. Yeah. Part of my apprehension about reading
works in progress is that more than half the time that they're started, I've found that they just
end before getting to the ending that you're just abandoned. But like at this point, I am pretty
damn confident you're going all the way. So I think I'm going to jump in here real soon. Yeah.
And we have your email and can, you know, hassle you be like, what happens? Yeah. That's awesome.
You're closing it on wild bo length novel there. Oh yeah. Yeah. A worm was I think 1.6 million.
And I'll probably hit that before the end. Awesome. Almost, almost definitely, I think.
I wanted to mention too that Jace is just tardy. I'm not sure if they got something
came up or whatever, but we didn't just not invite him. It's just scheduling conflict,
I'm guessing. So, so if anyone's wondering, where's Jace, the voice of reason on the podcast,
well, he's busy. We will soldier on without him and hope that things don't get too far afield.
Yeah. Alrighty. So as normal, we should start with the less wrong posts. And today,
we had making history available. And what was last one? Stranger than history. I think we actually
forgot to announce this in last week's episode. So hopefully this isn't catching anyone too much
by surprise. But let's get into making history available. Stephen, do you want to start?
Yeah, I'm not sure if this introduces the concept or just where he mentions it again,
but this is the, he mentioned he opens with the fallacy of generalization from fictional evidence,
which is one of my favorites. It's always fun to kind of point these out whenever they happen in
the wild, like just with conversation with friends or something. And once you are aware
that people are actually doing this, I think you might notice that it happens surprisingly often.
I don't hear a lot of things involving Terminator necessarily, but which is what he brings up,
because that's, you know, especially in 2007 was the main focal point for AI in movies.
It's, yeah, I mean, I'm really bad at summarizing. We can just...
It's amazing how much more AI there has been in movies over the past, I guess, 13 years now.
Like Terminator at the time was my go-to example of what AI is. And now it's like not even in the
top five, I don't think. Yeah, it's gotten a lot more mainstream, especially more,
not necessarily realistic, but more nuanced takes on the idea in fiction, especially. But
when he talks about the, and it's not the point of the post necessarily, but the logical fallacy
of generalization from fictional evidence, a lot of what people do is that they hear a story and
they use that as like how they get a handle on a concept. And then that just kind of stays with
them, even if the like fictional example doesn't apply in the real world. Yeah, I love the term
to generalization from fictional evidence. And I think this is the first time it shows up in the
sequences. I'm not actually sure, because it's just become so ingrained in my vocabulary now,
I don't know when I first saw it. Yeah, same. I can't let this pass by just pointing out how
much better. I think a lot of cinema, especially does AI, like or cinema or TV or whatever.
It's not really spoilery. There's AI stuff involved in the towards the end of the TV series,
Silicon Valley, which is a delightful comedy series about computer nerds trying to start a
business. And like it was it was perfect. I think that it did really, really well. I even paused at
a certain part to explain to my wife, like just to throw a jargon at her, because I was like, Oh
my god, they're hinting at this thing. If you read Nick Bostrom's book, this would be the thing
they're talking about. And I think they hit it right on the head. So yeah, things have gotten
at least more, there's more variety to point to. But yeah, this post isn't just about introducing
that concept. It talks about, as the title might suggest, like, because some of us who are aware
of the fallacy of generalizing for fictional evidence, like, we have a propensity to not
consider historical evidence as real evidence. And I think that he has this like, line in there about
how like, what was it? Oh, in our ancestral environment, there were no movies. What you
saw with your own eyes was true. Is it any wonder that fictions we see in life like moving pictures
have too great an impact on us? Conversely, things that really happened, we encounter as ink on paper,
and they happened, but we never saw them happen. We don't remember them happening to us. And so
like, you know, I have memories from, you know, watching movies or playing video games, especially
where it kind of feels more like I'm doing these things. And none of that's none of that's real,
but it's more readily available to my, like, did this happen bucket in my brain than stuff that
I read on a page or heard someone talk about in a class, right? Yeah, that's a good point. I still
have like some visceral memories of playing Soma and the, you know, the experience at the end of
that game. And it just, it never actually happened to me, right? But, but it's still like, kind of
emotionally feels like it did that I went through that journey. Yeah. And that's, you know, to be
clear, this isn't to say that you can't take stuff from fiction, I think it'd be a complete
misnomer to pretend that, A, that's what this is saying or B, that that's true. Yeah. Like,
you can you can even draw real life lessons from from fiction. But the point is that you should
be more inclined than we typically are to take real life lessons from things that really happened
in our real in our Earth's real history. And he did say at one point that one of the reasons he
wrote methods of rationality, well, Harry Potter and the methods of rationality was because he
wanted to find some way to give the experience of being rational and making these discoveries. And
that that wasn't just ink on paper, like the sequences were that were more like a memory
and experience that people remember emotionally. And I think he did a pretty good job. But I'm
biased. Yeah, it's a lot of that that post he goes into, like, trying to get that feeling of
having been there from history, like, when you read about history, trying to actually put yourself
in the shoes of, you know, the people who can can seem very abstract, and who I guess we can
misunderstand fairly easily. Yeah, he said that like it happens right after in the last
episode, we talked about the his mysterious answer, he gave some serious question, and how if he had
lived through vitalism, he would have recognized that was what was happening. And he said he
reiterates that here that he'd only read about them books, but had it actually happened to him,
if he had experienced in the past, and lived through those scientific revolutions,
he would not have made that same mistake. And so this next part, like, I find a really interesting
insight into his mind, because he has this whole thing where he says, he should try to approximate
the thoughts of an Eliezer who had lived through history. He should think as if everything he
read history books has actually happened to him. He says, Why should I remember the Wright brothers
first flight? I was not there. But as a rationalist, could I dare to not remember when the event
actually happened? I had to overcome the false amnesia of being born at a particular time.
And he goes on to describe how he he starts trying to form these memories that never actually
happened to him. And it's really an interesting read. Yeah, go ahead. Sorry. No, I was just going
to kind of concur that it's interesting and fun. And I mean, all these are short, everyone should
just be reading these two. I want to go ahead and pull out to do new two more things near the bottom
that he he says he came to realize as he tried to picture himself actually living through all
these historical events, says the modern world became fragile to my eyes. It was not the first
modern world. He mentions this right after he just describes living in a stable Roman Empire and then
seeing it crumble and overrun by barbarians. So many mistakes made over and over and over again,
because I did not remember making them in every era I never lived. And to think people sometimes
wonder if overcoming bias is important. And then he admonishes everyone to remember things that
they didn't actually live through. He says, remember how you had always thought that slavery
was right and proper. And then you changed your mind. Don't imagine how you could have predicted
the change for that is amnesia. Remember that. In fact, you did not guess. Remember how century
after century, the world changed in ways you did not guess. Maybe then you will be less shocked by
what happens next. So yeah, I like it. And that transitions perfectly smoothly into stranger
than history, which is the second post. And this is the one that like, before we started recording,
I'd mentioned that like, if you knew nothing else about Eleazar Yudkowski, I think you could at
least get that he's a creative guy with a funny streak, just by reading like the first three
bullet points on this post. And so I'm going to go ahead and just read all three of them because I
can't not. So it opens by saying suppose I told you that I knew for a fact that the following
statements were true. One, if you paint yourself a certain exact color between green and blue and
green, it will reverse the force of gravity on you and cause you to fall upward. Two, in the future,
the sky will be filled by billions of floating black spheres. Each sphere will be larger than
all the zeppelins that have ever existed put together. If you offer a sphere money, it will
lower a male prostitute out of the sky on a bungee cord. Three, your grandchildren will think it's
not just foolish but evil to put thieves in jail instead of just spanking them. You'd think that's
crazy, right? And I like that the next three that he puts out to contrast these because
like, you can see the one to one correlation between them says now suppose it were the year 1901
and you had to choose between believing those statements I have just offered and believing
statements like the following. One, there's an absolute speed limit on how fast two objects
can seem to be traveling relative to each other, which is exactly the speed of light miles per hour.
If you hop on board a train going almost this fast and fire a gun out the window,
the fundamental units of length change around. So it looks to you like the bullet's speeding
ahead of you, but other people see something different. Oh, and time changes around too,
which is his, you know, correlation to the painting yourself an exact color will reverse
gravity. This is in the future, there will be a super connected global network of billions of
adding machines, each one which has more power than all the pre 1901 adding machines put together.
One of the primary uses of this network will be to transport moving pictures of lesbian sex
by pretending they're made out of numbers. Which I want to pause real quick to say,
remember in 2007 when the primary form of porn was lesbian sex? Boy, were we naive.
And then finally, your grandchildren will think that it is not just foolish,
but evil to say that someone should not be president of the United States,
because she is black. And I think this does a, yeah, like Steven said, it very well ties into
the previous post about pointing out just how weird the future can be, and how hard it is to
predict what's going to be happening. Because you, you haven't lived through all these
sort of crazy revolutionary statements in the past. So you aren't prepared for a world that's
going to change in such drastic ways. Like, I mean, if you were to compare any two of those statements,
it's hard to say which one is more ridiculous. Oh, yeah. And I mean, then you just generate
like actual future guesses that seem probable. And they sound equally insane, which is like
the hidden inference from this, right? You know, in the future, people will be able to
switch bodies depending on what they want to feel like looking like that day. And
at a whim, they can jump in and out of a matrix like simulation. That's something that I can see
actually happening in the future. But that sounds just as insane as painting myself green and flying,
right? I've always kind of assumed to get this slightly more fraught territory here
that in three worlds collide the fiction he wrote. There's this one chapter where
the protagonist mentioned that rape is legal now in the future. And there's a lot of implications
in my mind in the story that what he's referring to as rape is different from what we think of
as rape. But without getting into all that, I thought of this post the first time I read that.
And I was like, maybe he's doing this thing where he's just trying to
trying to make us understand how weirdly bizarre the future might be that we can read that.
And like we are all shocked and appalled. But perhaps in the future that could actually be
the truth, just the same way that we people 100 years from now, 100 years in the past,
would think that it is shocking to say that it is evil that someone shouldn't be president
if they're black. Yeah, I wonder, like, I can't remember if I mean, because I wasn't there. So
I should remember even though I wasn't because of amnesia. If if he invented the term weird
topia or if that was a TV tropes thing or some third source. But I think that's what
is going for there. Like he wanted to stress that, look, if the future utopia is exactly like
you think it would be, you're probably missing some if or rather, the future utopia probably
won't be just like you think it would be because the odds of you being exactly right on everything
are low. Yeah, your future shouldn't just be an extrapolation of the present based on like
trend lines that you can see coming. So that's never what the future is actually going to be like.
Yeah, I think Charles Strauss said that the future is like 90% totally mundane, normal stuff.
And like 9% 9% just extrapolation of trends and then like 1% total weird bug fuck stuff
that you cannot predict whatsoever. And that's kind of that's kind of his approach to
world building for the future is like if you're writing something that's like 20 years in the
future, there needs to be that that element of just strange things that aren't not necessarily
that aren't predictable, but that seem to people as though they came out of nowhere.
Yeah, yeah, that makes sense. I mean, I kind of feel like it's pointless to try to write a true
future in part because you know, it is so unpredictable, but also because we aren't
writing for future audiences. Like if you go back and read science fiction of the past,
it's pretty obvious that it's like written for the audience of the time and how
how they think what is happening right now is going to affect the future.
And I don't think there's anything wrong with that. Like I think that's kind of legitimately
the place of science fiction to be like, what is the future that we are careening towards if
other things don't change. And let's think about that for a while, despite the fact that we know
well, and very well that something crazy and drastic is going to change. But what can you do
about that? Yeah, it's not like your your audience is people of the future, they cannot buy your book.
Yeah, I think in some sense, the partly science fiction authors ruminate on it a lot just
because that's what they enjoy doing. Yeah, like making their predictions and stuff. It's a fun
thing to do. But it's also partly just to give a bit of to like invest a bit of the zeitgeist
into your work, and then also to add a little bit of realism by taking like current trends
and extrapolating them out and trying to create a world that people will understand. But that kind
of leaves you out on the weird, the like necessarily weird stuff that makes no sense to people from
like 30 years ago. I don't know, I could I could go on and science fiction at length, because man,
I love that topic. But I yeah, we don't we don't have time for all that today. Is there anything
more that either of you guys had about these two posts? I think I'm good. I think talking about
science fiction transitions semi smoothly into talking about the stranger than fiction stuff
that we're talking about here. Although that just sounded better than it actually ties in. So
strange stranger than real, maybe not even not quite whatever.
Before we get to that, I hate to fuck up your transition or segue rather sorry.
We should mention real loss from the start. We should mention the posts for next episode.
Of course. Next episode, we will be reading and talking about explain worship ignore and
science as curiosity stopper. Perfect. Cool. Alright, so I mentioned that this got started
on Facebook, which I don't know, I still use Facebook because I am one of the olds, even
though it is social media, and I probably shouldn't use it as much, but I cannot help myself. I still
stay away from Twitter. So, you know, I am not the worst monster in the world. At least Twitter,
you can just filter by following exclusively comedians and scientists or whatever. I got on
Facebook to set up the meetup that we're going to try and do this month. And like not only was it
a cesspool for the five seconds that I had to look at the whatever dashboard, but like the UI
was terrible. I was on like the beta for the new UI and I eventually just finally figured out how to
switch it back to the old one before finishing what I was trying to do. But I mean, if the content
of Facebook didn't turn you off, the user experience of it should. It's gotten a lot worse
over the years. I've been using Facebook since 2004 when it required a .edu email address.
And the user experience has gotten a lot worse and the people who have gotten on to Facebook have
greatly reduced its utility. Plus, there's a lot of advertising, a lot of people getting into the
game and ruining what was actually pretty decent when, you know, when I was in college and it was
just other college kids, then it was mostly decent. But it's gotten so much worse over the years. I
mostly use it for to share updates about, you know, fatherhood and my kid and and just lighthearted
stuff. I don't typically do, you know, political stuff. I filter out most people who do and most
new sources. So it's like a heavily curated thing. But I am honored that I did not hit your
filter list. Not yet. No, right. That's coming tomorrow. Well, it's it's it's sort of a matter of
how much I think there is to add. If you know, because you can't fully filter or you shouldn't
fully filter by, by, you know, by what you're seeing, I guess, but I had someone who the turn of
phrase was living in accordance with the Constitution. And I was like, it was like, wow,
like, what do you even mean? Like the Constitution? Do you mean like in the spirit of the preamble or
in like the spirit of what the founding fathers meant? Or it sounds like a religious phrase being
borrowed to what's a document that details the limitations of the federal government against
the states, right? So what was and oh, it was, it was one of those people who has not thought very
deeply about things and did not know very much history. Because I'm like, the argument was in
terms of freedom of expression, right, specifically with regards to whether or not she should be
mandated to wear a mask. And it's just like, you know, the Constitution says that you're free
your free expression should not be infringed. And I'm like, okay. But like, first of all,
that was only for the federal government when it was originally written, right? That that was not
the Bill of Rights was not applied to the states for, I don't know, like 100, 100 some years.
Second, like, if you read the federalist papers, they make that argument that it is necessary to
give up liberty in order to have safety. Right. And third, if you go to look at the Supreme Court
cases that have been decided, there are limitations to liberty in order to ensure the public safety.
And that's always been kind of an essential American debate, because Americans play so much
emphasis on liberty. But, you know, it you can go through and you can read Supreme Court cases,
it's been established law for quite a while that there are concerns of public safety where your
basically the bounds of liberty are not absolute from the government, which should be obvious
because the government collects taxes, right? Among among many other things that the government
does that infringe upon your liberty. The court case I cited specifically was a vaccination one.
It was a 19, 1905 one where they're basically like, yeah, a state can enforce vaccination orders
for the public good. And your your liberty does not extend so far that you can just
endanger other people by not getting vaccinated. And she did not like that. And then I blocked her.
I mean, the vaccination that is the story of that drama, but well, I mean, it sounds like I the
vaccination one was a much better example than the facetion one I was going to come up with,
which is like, it's it constrains my liberty to say to tell me which side of the road I can drive
on. And yet if you catch me driving on the left side of the road, I should be pulled over and
given a ticket if not have my license taken away. And like, I think that's right and proper because
I'm a good, I don't know what you call it, who's the person who wants to roll over and give up
deliveries? Yeah, I'm a great I'm a good bootlicker of the government. And I think that if they catch
me driving on the wrong side of the street, they should give me a ticket, or at least tell me not
to. And I mean, my, my again, my other facetious point is that like, the founding fathers didn't
know what a germ was. So like, they didn't have an opinion on wearing masks to prevent the spreading
of disease. Now, obviously, that's not the case they were making they were your your interlocutor on
Facebook. But yeah, actually, George Washington did mandate vaccines for the Continental Army.
Hmm, just because because sickness killed so many people and they had, they had a really crappy
smallpox vaccine that was like, you take, you take scabs from someone who has smallpox and you
like crush them up into a powder, and then you dip a wet needle in that powder, and you poke a
healthy person with it. That was what they did for vaccines back in back during the Revolutionary
War. Yeah, I mean, and that sounds crazy now, but that's actually, you know, given the technology
available, a really innovative solution. Yeah. And that that it gives you a very mild form. I think
it was smallpox, but it gives you a very, very mild form of it. They're still, man, it's still
there's still a fatality rate associated with it even. Yeah, I think it was two or three percent.
Yeah, and they chose to do it anyway. Yeah, because war conditions, especially
a disease can just rip through the barracks so quickly. But yeah, so it's, that's another point
in favor of giving up a little liberty, right? I don't know. I think that there's debate to be
had about the balance of liberty and safety, right? But to say that it, you know, there's an
absolute liberty that comes from the Constitution, especially that that part where it's like, this
this is about the Constitution. It's not about like natural rights, right? It's an appeal to the
Constitution rather than anything that I don't know. That's just like it gets to me. And then I
spend too much time on like Facebook posts that that are just like, I made the mistake of going to
my local news, their Facebook thing, because I think showed up. And then I expanded the comments.
And that was my, that was my, that was my problem. You read the comments. Yeah, well, and I, it's my
natural inclination to try to correct people when they are, when there's misinformation, you know?
Like I'll go track down source and, you know, say what I believe to be the truth. And that's not,
it's not gotten me too great of results, I don't think in terms of like changing anyone's mind,
but I would rather that I do that. It just, it eats up time for, for no real purpose, I guess.
That's just a, well, and as a personal flaw, and that's collateral damage, you might end up helping
somebody, you know, get a better picture of stuff. So that's not a bad thing. And I should mention
too, since you don't know me as well as Enya and maybe our listeners have heard me make this joke
enough, like, I'm not this merging Facebook, like users that they shouldn't be doing it. I'm more
talking about my own dispositions and that I, I don't have the, the gumption to face it.
It's not like I think anyone who uses Facebook is doing something stupid.
I realized a few minutes ago that what I'd said may have come up that way and I didn't mean it that
way. So. No, no, I think that there are a lot of good arguments for getting off social media in
general. Twitter especially, I think Facebook is a little more amenable to curation. And then Reddit
is, um, you can sequester yourself into a community in, and that community has like actual
control in a way that, that is better than the absolute free for all of Twitter, especially
it's just. And Twitter, I mean, it's just made up of small out of context bullets that are flung
around. Whereas with Reddit, especially God, I love Reddit, you can have long conversations
that are threaded or you can quote and reply people. It's, it's really ideal. I wish Reddit was
more popular. But I mean, I guess that's the whole thing. Social media is optimized to spread
itself and the best way to spread itself is to enrage and trigger people and just inflame things
as much as possible. So the more reasonable and, and rational, if I dare say a forum is the less
popular it will be overall, because that's just not how these things multiply. Yeah. And I
think speed is another big factor that really hurts Twitter is that a lot of it is, is near
real time. And so I have this problem with discord is that you like, let's say you're having a
conversation with someone and they say something and you're like, is that true? And then you go
try to find a source and that can take some time. And by the time you come back, the conversation's
over. Oh yeah. And, and if you like, finally print, it's like, no, you're misquoting this source
or you misunderstood this or whatever, if they did, you know, sometimes, sometimes I go to
look things up and it turns out I'm wrong. But you come back and conversations moved on, no one
cares anymore. It's just you left to go educate yourself. And I think it gives a real disincentive
for doing any like homework investigation or deep thought on anything. It's just whoever
can type the fastest. That's not, you know, the full of it. But that's a lot of my problem with
discord and a lot of other chat applications is it being in real time really hurts fact checking
and deeper thought and trying to unravel things. Because you can just hit an avalanche of, of
conversation and every everyone moves on. And Twitter, in my experience, has been a lot like
that too. Because the average outrage on Twitter lasts, you know, a day, maybe, like a handful of
days for the bigger stuff. But there's a there's a great mark between quote,
the like halfway around the world before the truth can put on its pants.
Yeah, it's something to that effect. But yeah, it's, I think about that a lot in the context of
social media, because it's much more true now than it was in in Mark Twain's time.
Well, that that brings us basically exactly to what I wanted to talk to you about, because
the so the uncharitable, uncharitable way to put this is that it seemed to me like you said the
best you were thinking the best way to combat lies is with stricter censorship. And I thought that
was really a very bad idea. I guess the the the quote, I'm not going to read the whole thing,
but my idea was or was the standard liberal philosophy of you defeat bad ideas by exposure
and argument and persuasion. And all censorship does is decide who has the most power, and they
can silence their opposition. Whereas having this open argument and and debate will let people who
are actually correct rise to the top. So in that in that effect, the pressure in one regime is to
be as powerful as possible, regardless of the cost. Whereas the pressure in the other regime
is to have the thing that is closest to the truth. And the way you said to me is that
this this idea that the way to defeat bad ideas is by exposure argument and persuasion
is absolutely not the lesson of the last few decades of public discourse.
Yeah, okay. So, do you know the subreddit who would win? I do not. I love it. Okay,
what am I there's a subreddit called who would win and you just almost all the posts are of
some variety of you know, who would win the Hulk or Superman, right? And before you can answer
that question, and then this case, the question is who would win truth or lies, right? Before you
can answer that question, you have to set some boundaries on like what version of the Hulk are
you talking about what version of Superman. And it's my belief that depending on the circumstances,
and I personally think the circumstances right now are very ripe for it, lies will win over truth.
I think, especially with social media, being one of the dominant methods of discourse,
lies will win over the truth just because people don't do their fact checking,
because a lot of open discourse is not actually open discourse, a lot of how people get their
information is selective. And we don't actually have that that open discourse and that like
charitable dialogue that that it would be great if we did have. And so my belief in
the power of truth to prevail over the power of lies is basically that truth does not have
what it takes at the moment. Well, I so I agree with you that social media is currently an
absolutely terrible place for this and maybe forever systematically a terrible place for this.
But I don't think that the way to win that is to give in and follow their rules and,
you know, find out who can form the largest screaming Twitter mob. It's to stick by the
principles of you guys are just a screaming Twitter mob. And once you can have a recent
debate, come back and talk with us. And in the meantime, we will continue putting forward these
recent positions and evidence and whatever. And we won't censor you guys and you don't censor us.
Well, okay. So I don't think it's just social media. And I don't think it's just Twitter mobs.
I think a lot of the problem comes from people who have platforms and
how they how they choose to use those platforms, right? So the anti-vax stuff started in
like 1998. There's a guy named Andrew Wakefield, who was a British physician and he put out this
paper that got into the Lancet, which was about a link between the MMR vaccine and autism. And
over the next few years, it didn't replicate. It was found out that he had some really pretty
serious conflicts of interest. He had taken 400,000 pounds from a legal group that was attempting to
litigate against the MMR vaccine. He took that money like two years before he published a study
and never disclosed it. It came out, it came out after some investigation and he had filed a libel
lawsuit and it came out during discovery, I think. And he was thoroughly discredited and
there were co-authors that pulled their names from it. He was claiming it was, you know,
silencing of science or whatever. He lost his libel lawsuit and had to pay for legal fees
of the defendants. It was basically never replicated, was strongly repudiated by every
medical institution, right? It's straight up fraud. Yeah, and also a lot of the data was fraud. A lot
of the people selected for the study were brought to him by the same legal team that was going to
do this litigation on MMR, right? It was probably one of the closest, one of the biggest examples
of academic fraud and misconduct, like probably in the last 30 years. Anyway,
yeah, so 2007, Jenny McCarthy comes on Oprah and starts talking about how vaccines cause autism,
right? And Oprah never talks back about that. Oprah never said, hey, I don't think any of this
is true. I don't know if Oprah like didn't have fact checkers or didn't know Jenny McCarthy was
going to talk about whatever. Anyway, 2007 is basically the birth of the anti-vax movement,
right? Jenny McCarthy has said that, you know, she got her degree in the College of Google.
So anti-vax movement starts and now we have fairly regular outbreaks of these diseases that were,
you know, basically eradicated because Jenny, because Oprah, you know, it's for a lot of reasons,
but you can kind of look at these chains of people saying things that are clearly false
and these false things they get their foothold in and then they cause real damage in the real world,
right? That is when I'm looking at the failures of the truth to beat the lies,
that's what I'm looking at. I'm looking at things that are like that. That's one example out of
a lot, but sometimes people are motivated in their deceit and sometimes it's just
biases, I guess, that the things that are not the truth. There's something you said that was
basically that the truth has one big advantage, which is that it's true, right? And you can go
out and you can verify in the real world. The problem with that is that sometimes you can't go
out and verify it, right? Like for myself, I can't go out and personally verify whether
MMR causes autism. I don't have children that I can inject with an MMR vaccine.
You don't have to do this for a randomized controlled trial?
Right. I can't do that trial on my own. I would never get permission to do it. I don't have access
to the data. I might be able to get the data, but even then I'm not, you know, I'm not a scientist.
I don't know enough that I could write my own study and trust it. I know enough about myself to
know that I can't do those things. There's some people who disagree, who think that if they have
access to the data, they can just make their own conclusions from it. I'm skeptical of that
for a number of reasons, because it's failed for a lot of people in the past trying to do that.
But that's the kind of thing that I can't empirically verify a lot of facts.
Most facts, almost, right? And so I want to interject here to say that I agree with you
first that the anti-vaxxers are horribly misinformed, to put it very charitably,
and are responsible for a lot of misery and death. But on the other hand, like,
what would you have done that was different from how things were done? Because almost any
intervention I can see that that would limit people's ability to speak would have even worse
consequences than what we have right now. Well, it depends. It depends on where you made your
intervention, right? What Google does now for a couple different things, but for certain things,
if you Google them, you'll get instead of the normal top result, or instead of an ad or something,
they'll direct you to pages of information. There's also the Landsat publishing that they
were like, oh, we never would publish it if we'd known about these conflicts of interest that
weren't disclosed, like these multiple, multiple different conflicts of interest. And I think the
replication crisis in a lot of scientific fields is an indication that a lot of people just have
not been doing their work as far as peer review goes, right? And there are a lot of systemic
problems there that you could solve that would also solve some of these things. There are things
that could have been done differently and that were, you know, these are problems that were known
about for for quite a while. And then there's structural issues and no one really has the
incentive to fix them. And so yeah, but the only way, yeah, I don't know that that intervention
helps. Oh, okay. Well, I was about to say that's just Google pointing people at the truth. But
okay, you're saying that doesn't help. No, no, Google, Google pointing out people to the truth,
I think does help. Oh, I think that that having, you know, Google return, Google also will hide
results that I don't know if you want to call that censorship. I don't know that I would call
that censorship censorship. I certainly don't know what what you think about it. But I don't know
that I would call that censorship because it's it is in a sense because people go to Google and
they ask Google for results back and they maybe foolishly expect those results to be unbiased
or yeah, Google has, I mean, Google has lost a lot of credibility in my eyes over the past year
because of how they implement their algorithm and how they massage what what you see. Lots of
times if I'm not lots of times, usually if I'm Googling something, I am searching for the same
thing everyone else is searching for when they Google those words. And so Google assuming that
is a thing that saves me some time. But I don't want it to make that assumption because there's
other times when what I'm searching for is actually what I really wanted to search for.
And Google assuming that like, oh, 99% of everyone else who searched for these terms
found this and went wanted to see this, he must want the same thing is not accurate and
like screw you guys for trying to make that decision for me. So I am I'm trying to switch
over to duck. Go more and more. But the thing the thing with Google is like if it's intentionally
hiding results for someone that specifically searched for something, then yes, I would consider
that censorship. If it's more like putting the truth at the top of the list, then that's more
of like a nudge than a censorship. And I wouldn't have a problem with that. Yeah, a lot of what they
do they put they have like their own custom cards that they make that aren't like, yeah,
that aren't like a source that they're pointing to. I know they do that for or did that recently
for COVID where they don't they don't actually even point you at a at a source as the first thing
they just give you the information that you want. They do that for a lot of things. But that is one
of those things that probably helps the spread prevent the spread of misinformation. If you just
have the full accurate information at the top. I know they started doing that recently for
for climate change on YouTube, where if you go to any video that's flagged as talking about climate
change below the video, they'll have their own like, Hey, here's what you actually need to know.
Interesting. They don't they don't remove the videos, but they do put their own,
you know, counter art, like basically the stock counter argument for anything that's that you're
going to find. They put that below the video, which I think is also helpful and more in the direction
of like open debate, right? Well, I mean, because the I want to backtrack just a little bit like
with the anti vaxxers, would you have recommended that a Jenny McCarthy be silenced somehow or
Oh, yeah. Okay. Yeah. Well, in in one of the ways that you can do it is to not silence,
like you don't, you know, put a muzzle on her, but you make it so that they're disincentives for
people to spread misinformation, right? You also don't think fighter on Oprah, like, right?
Skeptoid's top number one place in the top 10 list of harmful promoters of pseudoscience.
Yeah, but Oprah is is Oprah, like, are we going to make a law that says the government has to vet
all Oprah guests first? No, I mean, you do you do post facto, you do you do it after the fact if
if there's something that gets brought to the attention of, you know, whoever that it I mean,
that's that's how a lot of our laws for that are we have a lot of laws that are against free speech,
right? Or that are against some defined things that are not covered under free speech. And I'm
not even necessarily talking about I mean, okay, so there's the government and then there are private
entities. Like, those are different forms of censorship. But Twitter does have the power to
enact censorship, right? Outside of any legal framework, right, it can just it can just silence
people if it wants to. The only thing preventing it from doing that is our market considerations.
And possibly legal considerations, if they're suddenly classified as a, a publisher instead
of a platform, which would have legal consequences and stuff. But legally speaking, like, you
aren't allowed to yell, fire in a crowded theater. You are not allowed to incite violence. You
aren't allowed to defame people. I know there's four of them. But we have we have existing laws
preventing people from speech, which goes too far in whatever regard, right? So I don't think that,
you know, most of them are post facto, though, right, you're allowed to defame someone, you
just have consequences for that. It's not that I guess you can get an injunction against something
that's defamatory. But usually it's it's after the fact instead of before the fact, which is
a lesser form of censorship in my eyes, because you're not, you're not silencing someone.
But there's some sort of due process where we decide if something is so damaging to the public
good that it has to be prevented from being said, right? Oh, yeah. Yeah, there is due process. And
well, I mean, that's the thing, though, there isn't due process in a lot of the public discourse.
There is just wild accusations and mobs. And that is what I'm against. If there was due process,
like someone having to actually take someone to court, maybe Jenny McCarthy, maybe whoever it is
that they want to get canceled and show some evidence, I would not have nearly the same problem
with the way things have been going. It's much more the fact that a passionate accusation of harm
can get almost anything silenced, if the person making the accusation is popular enough.
Yeah, that's well, it's not even necessarily popular enough, because a lot of the calls for
cancellation don't come from like, hugely influential people, they just kind of snowballed
through Twitter, and then smack into someone. Sure. The problem with that is that that's a
consequence of free speech, right? Like, I mean, to some extent, that's covered under
like defamation, but trying to try to put out a defamation lawsuit against
some rando on Twitter, I don't think you're going to get very far with that.
No, right. I mean, that is a consequence of free speech, which is why I prefer to fight it with
more free speech, such as what initially started all this was the Harper's letter saying that there's
too much of this shit going around, and people should take a greater stronger stand against it.
And that that is the kind of fighting back to it that I am in favor of, as opposed to like,
literally trying to stop people through the force of law from from forming these mobs.
Well, I just don't think you're gonna, I mean, you're not going to be able to stop them through
the force of law because the law has a hard time reaching through the internet, right?
Most of these people are not in the same state or even the same country. And trying to like,
you're not going to be able to do it through force of law, you might be able to do it through the
force of Twitter, Twitter corporate. Well, then shouldn't you maybe be on my side with the whole,
you know, we should fight back using our own social pressure and standing by the principles of
stop trying to shut down discourse and cancel it depends on what you mean by shutting down
discourse. There are, I mean, like anti backs, right? I would love if you could argue with those
people, get them to change their mind, make them, not make them convince them that it was correct
to vaccinate their kids, and then have them vaccinate their kids. And then there's less
illness and death, right? I just don't think that's realistic. I mean, I don't think it's
worked so far. I know a lot of people have, have tried. So at some point, you need to
either have algorithmic interventions to, to, you know, make sure that stuff is at least not
being promoted by these dumb algorithms that are in place that are just trying to drive engagement,
right? Or you do the thing that YouTube does, you do automatic title cards or automatic information
that at least will will maybe try to drive people at the right source and automate the process of
arguing, which is honestly, if you've ever argued with an anti-vaxxer, the big problem is it just
takes so much time for so little gain, you know, the one of my problems with open discourse is that
first of all, I don't know, people are big balls of bias, right? And it is very hard. You have to
approach them with, with empathy, and like try to see it from their point of view, try to like model
their world and present what evidence you can, but evidence is not really that powerful of a
thing for a lot of people, you know? But, but so, you know, when we're talking about things that
like Twitter could do, as opposed to things that the law could do, Twitter could do more than it's
doing to, you know, I mean, people are literally dying because of the anti-vaxx stuff. That's not,
I mean, there are a number of scientific studies about the impact of the anti-vaxx movement,
right? In terms of like, how many fewer people have been vaccinated since certain events have
happened, like the track, trying to track vaccination rates, and then trying to track
actual outbreaks, and stuff like that. That's, that's a real thing that happens. And to just say
that, you know, Twitter should, should let those people speak that should, should try to make sure
that this algorithm is unbiased. Like, I would love if Twitter were biased in the direction of the
truth. I'd love if all our social media were biased in the direction of, of open debate and
clear communication and authoritative sources. I don't know. It's just not, it's not where it is,
it's not where we're at right now, which is why I don't think, I don't have a lot of faith in the
truth to win, to win out, right? Well, it seems to me that you, I mean, you're obviously very
fixated on the anti-vaxx thing. And I know you have a young child, so probably rightly so. But
well, actually, I don't even know if your child's young anymore. God knows how many years it's
been. Yep, he's, he's four years old. He's right in the, he's right in the age range where
measles, rivella and mumps would be really bad. Okay. But it's not even necessarily the anti-vaxx
things. I mean, we could talk about other stuff that's just relatively politically neutral, right?
There is a lot of, there's a lot of misinformation, a lot of it very motivated by-
No, I mean, the thing is, like, I, I agree with you that anti-vaxx is bad. And you have,
you have more of a personal stake than I do. So I don't want to come off sounding
callous about this. And I apologize beforehand if I do. But I am worried that the
proposed solution is in the long term worse than the cure would be. Because while right now you
may be only censoring the anti-vaxx people and saving lives because of it. Once you've implemented
this policy of people who have decided they know the truth and have the power to censor people,
not only can but should do so for society's own good, right now that's fine. Give it a hundred years
and you might be back into the position of the church who knew what was actually good for people
and was censoring things like whether the earth traveled around the sun or not.
Yeah. Well, that's, that's a slippery slope. The question is whether the slope is actually
slippery, right? I am in favor of certain instances of Twitter just
and to Twitter and to a lesser extent, the government, right? Because Twitter is a corporate
entity and well, but do you think if people don't want to use Twitter, they can just not use Twitter?
Yeah. You know, but do you think it would literally apply only to the anti-vaxx case
and nothing else ever? No, no, no, I think I think it applies to other things. I think that it is
a matter of degree, right? I'm okay with certain examples of it, of censoring things that cause
direct harm. It's just a question of what the litmus test is and it's a question of
to what degree it's allowed. Now, I think that is a reasonable concern to think that
you start allowing it for one thing, you're going to start allowing it for other things,
the rules going to start creeping up, there'll be like pressure to just censor all dissenting
voices. I think that's a reasonable concern. I just don't think that's necessarily the outcome.
I think it's also realistic to like expect censorship to have like, and I've been mostly
silent just because I'm enjoying the conversation. So like a while ago,
Inyash mentioned about how Google won't return results sometimes. Now that counts as censorship,
but that doesn't strike me as like a necessarily bad thing. I wouldn't want it to be googleable.
Okay, Google, how do I build a chemical bomb out of stuff I can buy it safe way?
I want that to come up with nothing because I don't want people who would use that information
to have it, right? What if you need that information to fight off the Nazis?
That's a risk I'm seriously willing to take. Okay. Given that I can still buy a gun,
and I think that'd probably be more effective than throwing a whatever chlorine gas bomb at
Nazis. You know, maybe we could have a caveat that in the event of a, you know, a full on
invasion, whether it be from, you know, zombie Nazis or aliens, all the search engine firewalls
come down, and anyone can Google whatever they want. But like, I, is that something that you
would find like, A, is that kind of censorship? And B, is that objectionable? Or do you think
that no, as a, as a, as an American, I have a right or as a human or whatever, I have a right
to Google, whatever dangerous knowledge I want, and Google to deliver that to me.
Is the same to me?
Yeah, I think you were the one who was coming off as anti censorship.
Yes. When it comes to things like the ability to make weapons, obviously, at some point, we need
to draw some sort of line, like, it's not that difficult to gather the materials you need
over a course of a year to make a dirty bomb. The the quote unquote radioactive Boy Scout
started doing that sort of thing. And I'm not sure that's the best idea to have that knowledge
easily available. And the more extreme and dangerous these things get, the more likely it
is that we should make it hard to get this information. But it's, it's not like the knowledge
to make basic fertilizer bombs isn't already out there. It's, it's relatively easy to find.
Yeah, I mean, just like it's relatively easy to find, whatever. And I like the anti backs
example, not not just because it's might be, you know, salient for one of the speakers, but it's
it's a it's a good nice example. It has history and has trackable data.
You know, COVID would be another really good example. But we have we don't have 15 years of
data on where all the bullshit around that is going to take us. Like, in fact, you mentioned
like the badges on YouTube and on Google, Twitter is doing that for some stuff. I'm not on Twitter.
I was on there briefly for like, the summer of 2012. And just didn't find the platform useful. But
like, it came to my attention that, you know, if, say, somebody like the president tweets,
mail in ballots will destroy democracy, and there's tons of fraud, there will be a little
badge underneath every reply, or rather, beneath the tweet above every reply that says, here are the
facts or click here to get the facts on mail in ballots. If he says that, you know, COVID's made
up, or whatever, kung flu is a democratic hoax, then there'll be a badge that shows up underneath
that that says click here to get the straight business on COVID. Wait, is kung is kung flu
another term for COVID now? Oh, you don't watch rallies? It's one that Trump uses. Yeah, holy
shit. That's that's a term uses for it. Yeah, if you want to, if you want an aneurysm, watch
his rally in Oklahoma that he did last month. I'd rather no man. I've watched so many Trump
rallies, they are just they're they're mildly tolerable in some sense, if he's working off
teleprompter, but he's usually not. If there was some sort of due process to decide what to get
censored, I would be much more okay with that. Like if we decide that by we I mean, you know,
the government society in general, that decides that the knowledge of how to build a tonic bomb
should be a state secret, then at least that's a policy that is out in the open and everyone
knows about like Germany has a strong censorship policy about Nazi stuff. And we would consider
that impinging on our rights because it is very much censorship of free speech. But I think that
they have a special case in their country why they want to do that. And since it's a matter of
known public policy, it's much more reasonable than if if it was just being randomly determined by
whoever happened to hold their brains of power in in some arbitrary position.
Don't get me wrong. I like I like Twitter mobs as much as the next person. But I'm skeptical of
the hope that a due process judgment on what gets censored would be at all desirable. I'd
rather have it be the mob rather have it be the CEO of Twitter. Because I mean, just imagine if
you know, you get enough of the House enough of Congress and the president to all sign off on say,
no, you know what, we're going to say that windmills cause cancer. And that is the new truth.
Anyone who tries to correct that they get silence like that could pass the due process
because they have the votes. Right. Yes. But what I mean, the point that I'm trying to get to is that
I think we might be slightly talking past each other because it never even gets up to the position
of the CEO of Twitter is what I'm saying. It's someone like what was the latest example. So
Navy guy from 1983 wrote something about women shouldn't be in combat. And someone discovered
it online and they target his employers because people have discovered that employment is the
soft underbelly in the US that you can't live without someone providing your healthcare through
your job. They target his employers. Now he doesn't have a job. Now he's possibly unemployable. And
there was no decision made by any CEO at Twitter or any sort of decision making process at all. It
was just an angry mob on Twitter pushing pressure on a guy's employer. And now he's fucked. And
like the Harper's letter is the sort of thing that says this is bad. We should stop doing it. And
we should be angry at people who do do it rather than a direct statement on government censorship
or things along those lines. Okay. I was thinking along the lines of like what comes back when you
Google stuff. Well I think I think there are different aspects to it. And I think that yes
Twitter mobs suck. I just don't think the Harper's letter is going to do anything. I think people
have been talking about the evils of cancel culture far before it was you know a recognized thing.
Right. And I don't think it's part of what irks me about the Harper's letter is that it's like
pretending that that's a thing that the left does. Right. Is is cancel culture is a a problem
of the left and in no other way does anyone else do it. Right. That's not the case.
That is not the impression I got because I think both sides do it. I personally think it's more
egregious when the left does it because we used to be the side that was standing up against that
sort of thing. But but I don't think it's just a problem on the left. Yeah. All of their examples
were were on the left. Right. All the all their examples that were in the Harper's letter. They
were not. They were examples of the left doing it. That's why I point out there were no actual
examples in the Harper's letter. It was intentionally vague. It was intentionally vague and trying to
allude to certain things that had happened. Would you agree that it was alluding to things that
had happened even if it didn't specifically cite those things. I would definitely say there were
some illusions but the illusions were broad enough that you could apply them to things that happened
on the right as well. It's just that the ones that have happened on the left recently are more
salient to to recent memory. Well the other thing that hurt me about it was I thought they were
very weasley in doing that. Oh I think I thought that was a weasel's way of of just being like hey
we could be talking about anyone and that's in a way that wasn't helpful because if you know if
we're looking at specific examples I think we can make better judgments and I think we can have
arguments about them but if if those are not specific examples if those are just illusions
that you can use to like slip out of any concrete discussion I just found that really annoying
just when reading it. Okay. But yeah it's a problem everywhere basically. I don't know how
involved you were in Gamergate. I was strongly aware of Gamergate but I did not partake.
It was a it was a huge thing and that's like that's to me that the thing that that is now
called cancel culture. Oh yeah. These these harassment campaigns these like dredging up
sometimes hacked emails. It was it was disgusting from the very beginning. It was like someone had
a shitty breakup and all of a sudden the entire world has to be in on it. I'm happy to go on the
record of saying that I somehow completely missed all of it when it was happening and yeah only
have the vaguest outline. In fact if you'd asked me what is Gamergate I would say it was something
that happened in the mid 2010s I think that involved video games. I know literally nothing
beyond that and I'm kind of okay with that. The super short cleaned up version is that there was
a game developer who was dating a game journalist and they had a bad breakup and the developer
brought it to Twitter and basically just shat on their ex-partner and it turned into a whole oh
there's no truth in gaming journalism. They're all like sleeping with people for the clicks or
such. It was it was crazy misogynistic bullshit over something that completely irrelevant to
actual gaming like gaming journalism has never at all been anything that is objective. It's all
about giving AAA ratings to the AAA games and maybe every now and then you'll see an indie game
mentioned but like if it came from Bungie you know they're going to give it a 10 out of 10 and drool
all over it. Yeah well the point being that a lot of that stuff was my first real exposure to
not to the Twitter mob. Okay yeah I don't even think Twitter was yeah Twitter was not as big then
as it is now but but I just don't see something like the Harper's letter actually helping or being
a good approach because I don't think that this is like I don't think that individual first of all
I don't think individual members of the mob are probably even going to read it. I think most people
don't read articles they just read headlines or tweets um that's that's a problem over our time
is that people just oh my god one of the things I hate the most about Reddit is that if you go to
any of the big subreddits you get all these comments and then people are like did you not read the
articles? It's like oh it's Reddit we didn't read the article. Yeah your question was answered
in the article that you did not read or your comment was explicitly refuted in the article
that you did not read. So yeah first of all I don't think anyone's going to read the Harper's
letter that you know is in control of this mob because no one is in control of the mob right
yeah and the mob is the mob because it's just it's just birds engaging in this flocking behavior
and I don't think that during Gamergate it would have helped be like hey this is shitty
behavior please don't do it you know it'd be better for all of us if you did if you weren't
shitty to these people. No I agree you're not gonna stop the mob from being shitty to people
but the point of the Harper's letter is to um put more pressure on elites and employers to
not cave into the mob. I think that's also it's very hard to get someone to take a principled
stand when it costs them which is usually why the people cave in right it's uh or a lot of these
institutions just the way capitalism works where people are running really really close to the line
of profitability and they can't take losing a whole bunch of subscribers or losing advertisers
like that if it's a choice between having to lay a bunch of people off to take a principled
stand in favor of like due process or something it's just not something most organizations are
gonna do yeah but um especially especially because of the all the work that has been done over the
past however many decades of trying to get states to do um like no fault of not yeah it's uh at
will employment right uh that's that's another big problem with it is you know your work can fire
you for whatever reason it wants and as soon as you start losing your work money um I mean that
they kind of have to fire you but I think that's the the purpose of the Harper letter and other
similar movements that are starting now is to uh first of all give people the impression that
if you do stand up for your principles there are good people who are you know well known enough
to be asked to sign an open letter large public figures that are on your side and that maybe you
will not lose as much business and we're trying to turn this thing around like it's yeah it's not
going to make a huge difference overnight and it's certainly not going to stop the twitter mob but
if a lot of employers see that a lot of other employers are also taking the stand together
they can over time create a united front like that's that's the purpose this is building towards
and to in my opinion to like tear it down at the very start and saying oh it's never gonna happen
well I mean yeah of course it's not gonna happen if you tear it down right at the start but if you
can build up this movement of solidarity some people will be able to hold to their principles
and the more people that can do that the more we can push back against the twitter mob losing
people their livelihoods all right well maybe I just have no faith in capitalism but a lot of these
companies are pitted against each other right they're explicitly rivals and one company losing
means another company gains and a lot of the performative wokeness that you see from these
companies which includes like firings and stuff is strictly a matter of trying to extract the most
money from people and getting companies that are in the business of extracting the most money out of
their customers and giving the least amount of money to their workers getting those companies
who are already doing that to to make a principled stand that is not going to make them money
and in fact might lose them money I don't know I am part of the reason that I favor
in some cases censorship is I just I see these structural problems that have created all this
stuff and I want to fix the structural problems right if I could fix the structural problems
and not have to do any censorship right that would be great um failing that there is real harm
being done by some of this minston information um that I just I want it to be stopped yeah I mean
I would also like that harm to be stopped I just fear the long-term consequences more yeah I guess
what I will say to that is that we have had limitations on free speech in America for our
entire existence right there there's stuff that brought in from English common law that
you know you do not have a an absolute right to free speech and I think that we have done
a roughly okay most of the time job in not in finding the balance between liberty and safety
or liberty and the well-being of the people right I I mean I I value liberty but I'm a
consequentialist and if liberty is not providing the best outcomes in all circumstances then
then in some cases it needs to be curtailed by some amount yeah I agree and I think that
we have for the most part done a really good job of it I just think there was a very large shock
to the system uh when social media came out and the old the old regime is struggling to keep up
it feels a lot like when the printing press was invented and what that did to Europe and
I I don't want to forget the things that history taught us in the past to tie it back to the
lesser on posts from earlier by going back to a censorship model when there should be other
ways to deal with the technology that will not will not lead us back to killing each other
yeah can you explain the analogy I'm sorry I don't want to interject no go ahead go ahead
I was going to say can you expand on the analogy between the introduction of the printing press
and social media like I get part of it but it's not clear to me uh exactly what the implications
are or what one should do to combat misinformation like does that make sense uh like what was done
when the printing press came out to combat misinformation I'm guessing nothing right well
it took a while so um my understanding of history and I will admit first of all that this is not
an era that I have spent a huge amount of time in uh but from my understanding uh when the
printing press came out it became cheap and easy to distribute uh distribute ideas far and wide
where before uh ideas didn't travel all that much uh they went with traders and merchants
and there was some ability to prevent those things from contaminating a society too badly
whereas once the printing press came out knowledge just exploded everywhere and a lot of people uh
started having a lot of new ideas which were threatening to other people and they did not
want these ideas to spread go ahead do you want my alternate reading history um sure because this
is this is the way I see it is that these people these people discovered that there is an intellectual
contagion coming of things that are very wrong and will destroy society and even worse will
damn your neighbor souls to eternal torment forever and this could not be allowed to happen and that
led to a lot of strife and we eventually fixed that but uh what is your alternate reading okay um it
is basically the printing press enabled the reformation uh which was not it was to some extent
you know new ideas coming in but to a greater extent it was a challenge to the existing
institutions right it was giving voice to people who previously wouldn't have had a voice
and who now were able to challenge the institutions that that were around them
which in large part was the catholic church and the historical parallel then is these
existing institutions of old media right are being challenged by new media who can now
through social media call them out on their shit um that that is how a lot of the people who are
no one's defending the twitter mobs some people are defending the concept of cancellation um in
different forms right most people won't defend like I don't know well what they're doxxing someone
but yeah but but it's it's basically like you know someone is sexist right and in the past they
would have just gotten away with that right the existing power structures were sufficient to allow
all that behavior to happen right um but then this this freedom of information comes along
and suddenly a lot more people are able to have a voice they're able to start talking and they
can start fighting back against these institutions that have victimized them or have been like the
cause of their problems like if there's a sexist workplace now all that stuff can can kind of come
out into the open and that's the analog to the reformation and the invention of the printing
well I think that's my alternate no that's my alternate I think that's actually a very good
take but I think it's compatible because a lot of the killing after the initial reformation
was uh sects fighting each other over who has the correct interpretation who has the right dogma
and it wasn't I mean the church was also a big part of it they had their inquisitions and all
but much of the murder in Europe was between uh smaller local groups and that is also analogous
to how much of the fighting nowadays is between smaller groups who are more alike with each other
than they are with the old media and they often work more on tearing each other down than on
fighting against the old media dinosaurs oh yeah yeah it's uh I definitely believe the left will
eat itself uh especially I mean it it happens on the right um especially with the rise of of Trump
because just I don't know they cannot keep together an administration I mean on the pen
people people just get thrown under the bus at a moment's notice I don't know but I definitely
do see it a lot and um with cancellation specifically the people most affected by it
are people on the left right I I mean I don't know my most notable examples are on the left
because that is the side I'm on and the people I'm familiar with I don't know maybe it happens on
the right too when I just am not in those circles well structurally I mean uh there are a lot of
people um who are like internet personalities or new media personalities and they make their money
through patreon or youtube or whatever other monetization schemes there are and if the left
is going to cancel someone the only people they have the power to cancel are the people who they
are funding to some extent right now they can attack anyone's employer too they well they can
attack your employer too but how much your employer you know knows or cares about that is
is kind of contingent on you like actually being in their camp to some extent it depends it depends
on what the specific accusations are or you know what behavior is right companies on the left aren't
going to care if the mob on the right attacks them and companies on the right aren't going to care
if the mob on the left attacks them it's only when your actual demographic attacks you that it's an
issue yeah and I mean most companies aren't you know on the left or right at all they just they
just want to make money yeah there are very few companies that are there that have such a strong
ideological bent that they'll let that get in the way of of their market um I mean that your market
to to an extent dictates what you have to do as a company but um yeah it it has been it's one of
the things that a lot of people say especially on the left about cancel culture is that it it
primarily will affect people who like you are a consumer of right so so the only people that you
can have any impact on like I'm the only people you can have any impact on are people who you are
supporting in some way um unless you want to go specifically after their employer and that's
kind of sketchy history of actually working because a lot of employers just a lot of employers
just don't care and like if they're public facing it's a lot different than if they're you know
I think I think like that used to be the case and that's why I wasn't worried and didn't really
say anything before but over the past few years it seems to be more and more the case that employers
will uh drop someone for any sort of mob that comes for them and that is one of the reasons that
I am more worried now and I actually do support things like the Harper letter yeah it depends on
what the mob is coming for you for um and yeah there's a strong pressure on companies to not do
their own in due process yeah I think that's definitely a problem right the companies they
just love money and uh if they're it's gonna lose the money to hold on to an employee they'll drop
the employee and it won't matter if the accusations turn out to be baseless and that's a bad thing and
we should take a stand against that well I mean I I want to take a stand against it to me taking a
stand against it means going after Twitter itself right okay yeah I mean I agree Twitter must be
destroyed well it's not even that Twitter needs to be destroyed I think that Twitter could do
more in terms of like algorithms in terms of like trying to track trends and and like the mob can
form so quickly and it does this little telephone game of of information and spreading information
misinformation I don't know it's it's it's a structural problem not just for Twitter for
you know most social media um and to some extent even you know the so-called old media you know
though old media has always sucked at it like they've always gone for things that are a little
more inflammatory right they've always wanted to get people to buy their papers and in order to
stoke the flames the only thing that has kept old media at bay for the most part is defamation
and the risk of having a suit brought against you um but we you know we have strong uh strong
laws in terms of defamation and it's usually pretty hard to go after the press which is not the case
in some other countries it's not really clear to me what your guys' crux is like I mean the
the Twitter mob example is too easy to be like the like a core intuition pump here
like it sounds like I you know I'm the the Harper letter Harper's letter excuse me doesn't seem to
like I mean yes a handful of intellectuals can take a public commitment to saying this is bad and
well we won't uh like make the choice of you know this whatever the false choice between
justice and freedom um like that that doesn't seem like a solution um you know it like if you
own a small business and uh whatever like Twitter accuses one of your employees of in 1983 writing
a letter of what was then I'm assuming a fairly mainstream opinion I'm thinking of that guy you
mentioned that uh said that women shouldn't be in combat or something yeah like I think 40 years
ago that was a pretty popular thought and so for whatever reason you know the this guy got unlucky
and somebody found that and and whatever doxed him with his employer or something like uh I mean
if you own the business and your town is saying we'll refuse to shop here until you fire that guy
you're like well then I'm going out of business because I'm principled like no one's gonna do that
so like I I even if you sign this letter you're like well I also have to feed my family and have
health insurance or whatever so like I don't see how that's a solution I don't think that
I'm I'm in strongly favor of the ideals of it and I and like as individuals we should all make that
choice but like I guess what I'm getting at is I'm not sure a how that's a solution to any
problem that's going on right now and b like what is being proposed that you have a disagreement with
like as far as solving the easy problem of twitter mobs or like or we can pivot to like a more general
case well so um and I'll I'll let alexander reply to but my my takeaway uh my major takeaway was
that um I mentioned this on the mind killers I was so surprised that the harper's letter was even
controversial that I didn't mention it on our episode when it first came out because I thought
how could anyone disagree with this but the thing is um Europe went through a hundred years of war
and murder over this conflict of ideas and the solution they finally came up with was the liberal
ideals and uh specifically the in this case the ideal of freedom of speech that anyone can say
anything as long as they uh do not like do direct deliberate harm with it uh you let people say what
they want argument gets counter argument it never gets a bullet and this is I mean it's kind of
unintuitive to humans in general but it is a social norm it took like I said almost a century
of killing to get to this point but it becomes a thing that society upholds it is a principle
that people have to stand by even when it costs them personally and it is how they solved this
problem and now it seems to me like we some aspects of society have forgotten that or don't
care and want to uh change things and I think it is very important to stay true to the ideal
that you don't censor people you don't try to silence them by uh threatening them with violence
or threatening their families or threatening their employment and uh you respect people's
ability to speak even when what they're saying is bad and dangerous and will cause your children to
go to hell um or will possibly uh endanger your children's health because that is still better
than the alternative of 100 years of warfare um and that is what I basically saw the harper's
letter as saying that hey guys freedom of speech remember this thing it's a great thing let's all
remember that it stays in place only due to principled people still holding to that and the
social pressure to conform to that and I was shocked when such a vast number of people were
like this letter is bullshit and terrible and how dare people sign on to it well okay so and I know
you didn't personally say that some people did you were much more moderate so I'm sorry I did not
intend to I'm much more moderate but I guess the way I see it is let's say that you are trans right
and you see J.K. Rowling who has an enormous audience uh and whose audience is not really
because she has great ideas right right I mean I mean great great political ideas certainly
no no one is following okay I'm sure some people are but for the most part people follow J.K. Rowling
on Twitter because she wrote a bunch of books that were important to their childhood or whatever
right uh and they want to keep up on harry potter stuff and so J.K. Rowling gets on platform
or gets on Twitter and she uses her platform to say things like you know uh well I'm trying to
not misquote her but um one of the really bad ones that I think she should apologize for was when
she said that uh the movement gives cover for violent predators yeah well J.K. Rowling's position
is you know basically that uh trans women are not real women they are predators who you know
are invading women's spaces and trans men don't exist and uh transition is basically conversion
therapy and a bunch of stuff like that I don't think that's a fair way to point out her position
but she's definitely trending in that direction well she she she did say specifically that transition
was a form of conversion therapy that one I know she's okay um I mean you can certainly fact check
me after I do I do remember something about conversion therapy in the post I don't remember
the details right now but yeah we can trust that no one will actually put in a legwork to fact check
to anybody because of the air we live in yes um but I I do for myself try to hold to the truth
as closely as possible I'm pretty sure that that is it is a slightly uncharitable and it puts all
that stuff that was kind of spread out and tiptoed around in one place but um let's say you're
trans person and you see that I think that you your first instinct might be might be to say
okay well she can say that and freedom of speech that's great and then you think about
whether that's gonna like change anyone's mind and you don't have the platform that jk Rowling
does right jk Rowling has so many I I don't I don't have the numbers but she has a lot of followers
right and that is gonna go out to everyone and even if you reply to her in a tweet maybe she'll
block you maybe just no one sees it right and if it changes people's mind then it's going to change
you know their perception of you personally it's going to cause real actual harm to you
especially if those people start you know voting for people who are going to start taking away
your your medicine that you need for transition or that are going to restrict what services are
available to you from the state um and you look at that and you're like well why you know I I'm
am I going to selflessly give up aspects of my life am I going to allow this harm caused me by
this speech that has like actual real consequences in the real world right or am I going to just
sit there and stand by free speech and for me it's the same thing with the anti-vax stuff right it's
like I you know if it were just speech I'd be fine with it but it's not just speech it's people
vaccinating their kids and my son possibly getting a disease because of that speech and I think that
applies to a lot of these things a lot of these things that where people are upset about what
others have said and why you know cancellation is basically the only recourse if you think that
talking isn't going to work and talking obviously cancellation feels good for those people right
I've never canceled anyone but I imagine that it probably feels good to just be like hey
fuck that guy for all the stuff that he said that is is going to do you know it's going to
negatively impact me he hates me and you know cancellation probably feels good I think it's
also easier than dialogue which is what tracks people to it but when people are kind of iffy on
free speech or the totality of free speech I think that's where they're coming from I think they're
thinking about in the real world I think especially for LGBT people that's they're thinking about how
things used to be where like it used to be that there would be people who'd hang out outside
gay nightclubs with their cameras and they would take covert pictures of people coming out of
these nightclubs and then they would send it to these people's employers you know
and now to be asked to be asked to show leniency and understanding to these people who showed you
no leniency and understanding who I we've said that you know free speech has done fairly well
it's got a checkered history you know McCarthyism definitely happened there have been a lot of
instances of of people um acting out against employers that like cancel culture not only is
it not just the left it's it's also not new it's been going on for a long time that that people's
jobs have been lost for things that they said it's just now so many people have yeah there was their
history discoverable that that it's getting to be a bigger problem it was cancelled yeah but it was
always a bad thing the whole time it was happening yeah no it was always a bad yeah start becoming
good now just because the targets are the quote unquote right targets no no I think I just think
that a lot of people who argue a lot of the argument that is made is made from a position of
why would we not use these tools right I think saying you know we got to be better than our enemies
is is true but yeah okay thank you I would like to say the reason that we don't want to use these
tools is like first of all I I do still think you're the that JK Rowling was slightly misrepresented
to you like she didn't say uh from my recollection that trans people are predators uh the thing she
said was that the movement gives cover to predators which is a slightly different thing it's still
bad like I said this is something I think she should apologize for because it's it's just not the
case and it is highly inflammatory and like you said could hurt people um but my my problem isn't
with people necessarily saying JK Rowling is awful it's the fact that uh if JK Rowling signed the
Harper's letter uh now no one else can sign the Harper's letter or they are in in jeopardy of being
canceled uh it is it is that sort of thing like I know I've made this example before but if Hitler
himself signed the Harper's letter I still think the Harper's letter uh principles are correct and
true and I would still sign it even though I am not for the extermination of Jews at all
or any other minority group uh and that's the sort of thing you see people don't have the power
to cancel JK Rowling directly so they go after anyone who could be uh slightly associated with her
to create a culture of fear uh so that no one dares say anything that might be construed as
remotely positive of Rowling or um or or to be supporting something that Rowling might also support
it is it's like a really horrible chilling terrorizing effect to to have these people
out there ready to cancel anyone who might have uh been near someone who said something
that is uh that is cancelable I think most recently I love Natalie Wynn I watch all the
contra points videos as they come out not always the same day they come out because they're fucking
long but usually within a week or so and um she got canceled not too long ago because she had Buck
Angel as a voice actor to uh read one line for her and Buck Angel is a trans man a porn star
as like 40 years old now super uh super active in the gay community and the trans community
over his years fighting for gay and trans rights and uh Buck Angel is currently canceled because
he has some opinions about the trans uh trans trenders as uh they are sometimes referred to
the idea that some people are transitioning not because they're genuinely uh gender dysphoric
but more because it's a status move and all their friends are doing it and whatever I don't know
I don't really have an opinion on that but Buck Angel huge got huge in the uh gay and
trans rights uh community got canceled and then Natalie Wynn trans woman had him do a voice for
her like one line voice um because he was such a big figure in the trans rights community and now
she was canceled for having that association with him and it's it's this sort of thing that I think
is not just lunacy but like outright dangerous that makes everyone terrified to say anything or
to be associated with anyone who might have ever said anything um I think to some extent it's kind
of like it it's kind of like the war on terror where terrorism was not you forgive me for saying
this terrorism was not a big deal right right it didn't actually kill that many people and now
there's like this culture of fear and the culture of fear is worse than the actual thing that happened
exactly yeah and I just I don't know also contra points has been canceled like three or four times
it's a thing a lot of a lot of people you know um peter coffin is is a youtuber and it's not
as big but he's he's talked about you know he's he's been canceled like you know six or seven times
and it's it's tough to deal with the the harassment that you get first for just saying what you thought
and it's like come on we're on like nominally the same side why are you even doing this it's not
gonna change my mind it's just gonna like it's just gonna piss me off and like cancellation doesn't
help anyone right can I get a definition then of what it means to be canceled like if jk rolling
is canceled like she still has twitter her books are still available um if this one person this
youtuber has been canceled four times like what does it even mean right that's that's the other
problem is basically it just means that people are in some sense the the soft version is basically
just a boycott right you are declaring that you are boycotting someone because you don't agree with
things they said you don't want to financially and that would be fine uh the the hard version of
canceling is going after um going after a person's well it's it's difficult because boycotting is
going after someone's employment in a sense um it's just a matter of like intent then right um
but yeah going after going to someone's employer and saying hey you got fired this guy or going to
advertisers and saying hey if you don't you know drop this your sponsorship of this person
i'm not gonna buy any more stuff right that's usually what it is sometimes it goes further to uh
oh man when it's really bad is when anyone who is associated with you starts to get boycotted
and get the same employer harassment and those things like it is it is at its worst it is the
um attempt to make someone socially toxic so everyone else will have to cut them out of their
lives or suffer the same fate as well yeah and usually that does not work that that you usually
that is not like you have to be i don't know the the fact that a lot of people get canceled
so many times and just never sticks and jk rellen can't can't be canceled uh all right but it still
puts people are making attempts it still puts all that person's friends like through a lot of stress
like your life gets well yeah i'm not arguing that i'm not arguing that these tactics are they're
or yeah but i don't know it's i i at times feel like it's overblown because so many people
just get canceled and then are fine the the real danger is if you are very very small yeah and and
but that's like public shaming right well that's not the problem is like the powerful never have
the rich and the powerful never have that huge of a problem because they're already rich and
powerful the problem is like uh when um when andrew sullivan gets uh gets kicked off of uh
god what the new york magazine was it or the new yorker i i don't remember the exact name right
he's gonna be fine he's already rich he's already famous he has book deals it's all the people in
their early to mid 20s who are working there they just started their careers they're trying to make
it big in journalism which is already a dying industry that it's really hard to make it in
and they see this thing happen and they just shut the fuck up if they have any opinions that aren't
towing the uh the orthodoxy of whoever is leading the cancel mobs and that i think is genuinely
harmful i don't i don't even think that the cancel moms necessarily have an orthodoxy i think
they're just i i think there's something that you can absolutely say is orthodoxy that uh
cis white people are fair game for anything um that uh trans people and uh racial minorities
are are what's the term here they they to be protected is not the right term they're almost
fetishized um yeah i i mostly just think that the mob is not like an intelligent thing yeah but
but the mob knows what's a lot of a lot of the pile on is not like is not like oh that's like
you know we're making a principled stand here it's principled it feels like a principled stand it
feels good to attack people but the mob has an intuitive sense of who they can uh victimize next
and if you watch them you can tell you know some of the signs well i mean the mob
puts out feelers right it's uh if if there are if there are flock of birds you have some birds that
fly like at the edge of the flock and then get brought back in because it didn't work um i i just i
think a lot of it is needs to be analyzed in in terms of of how mobs function and how mobs dispense
justice right like and i don't i don't think i i think yeah there's there there's usually some
ideological underpinning at some point but most of it is just like three minutes hate
or whatever it's just it's just it's just that gathering of hatred toward what may or may not
be an acceptable target and it's not actually about it's not actually about the the object level
thing so much as it is about the emotional feeling right i do have um i'm sorry i was just
gonna say that i i appreciated that uh like i said to you gave me i've been looking around for a while
for like what is meant by the word harm in cases where like that tweet harms people um and like
you know the intuitive sense of harm is you know swinging a fist at somebody and the the
the layout you gave of uh the you know rolling tweet storm was the first articulate example that
actually drove the point home for me so thanks for that i just i i had the thought immediately
after you said it forgot it then i remembered it again and i it's like i knew i was gonna let it
slip if i didn't get it out so so i i guess now we are you seem to be or at least i sort of feel
like i'm just talking about like er the kids and they're canceling these days and i don't want to
be that guy i just i am very much in favor of a freedom of speech even if it has some harmful
effects because i think on net it's good and that was the main thing i guess i came to say because
you seem to be more about censorship is good and justified sometimes yet the other thing i wanted
to kind of drive us back to was like i don't think anyone here loves twitter mobs like and no one
here really loves cancel culture to the extent that it's an actual problem that actually affects
people like i don't i mean i don't want to put words in either of your mouths but i think that
no one's on here saying yes uh that guy who wrote that you know thing in 1983 should have been fired
like none of us are that so like i was i was more interested in like what proposed solutions we would
have uh to solve like misinformation problems and there was an interesting you know the the thing
he said over earlier about um uh you know truth maybe not being the best weapon here i i thought
that was really interesting and if we have time i definitely want to hit that yeah i guess i guess
for me yeah i mean i'll finish up the thoughts they were having on this i don't want to like
say all right conversation over but i i don't know how like that you'll find a resolution
i i don't think there is really resolution to this i because it's it's a difficult problem i just
i think that i mean we have limits on free speech already right we have
some degree of censorship already it's just a question of degree and in in what circumstances
it's appropriate right i mean i i i know a lot of um free speech absolutists uh i they're very
common online who but um my experience being a moderator for communities is that you just there's
a lot of stuff that you just you can allow some amount of disutility to happen if you just do
absolutist free speech because a lot of people will just will just come in and and be a net
negative on your community and there's certain elements of speech that can be a net negative
on a community and um it is it's a problem that can have different solutions to it and
i do think due process is you know good and a thing to be strived for i just i don't think you can
really it's hard i i'm i'm struggling to think of a legislative framework that you could introduce
that for what's essentially a social problem well i think a lot of it is measuring the the
costs versus the benefits like kicking someone off a discord does not have a lot of cost
to their personal lives they're not gonna lose their jobs or their families whereas
going after their job may lose them their job so their sin would have had to have been far
greater to justify doing that sort of thing to someone like why would scott alexander
getting doxxed by the new york times there was no justification for that well i mean they had
a justification it just wasn't okay um yeah no and and that's not even that wasn't even a case of
presumably that was not a case of of them like attempting to cancel in it was just yeah presumably
speaking of his posts are back on his website as of a couple days ago yep he's come back i think the
new yorker put out a piece on it and then the new york times piece is probably not gonna run because
of that yeah i think we talked about the new yorker piece uh episode or two ago um all time it's
fuzzy now but we just hadn't mentioned that yet that ssc was back up and that's exciting um yeah
like so it seems to me like one interim proposed like avenue to at least making things less shitty
i don't know what this would do to like fight the cancel mob but like i i mean i have a very
like small amount of concern for that like not just because i'm too small of a target
friend i want to give a shit about but um like it it doesn't seem to work on a lot of big figures
and it doesn't go after a lot of small figures so like it's bad but it's not like uh you know
as far as like where i can direct my effort like before we started talking we were talking about
effective altruism right like effective effort here um i don't feel like the best use of my time
is fighting cancel culture because it's not like the world's biggest problem but like misinformation
is you know like on the subject it's not the biggest problem but it's a bigger problem and so
like you know if if twitter had uh smarter bots that flagged more content and they're like hey we
noticed you put out a tweet about uh the aggression or the violent aggression rates of trans women
or something here are the actual statistics on that and it had that same sort of badge that it has
for trump tweeting about kung flu right um like yeah that that sounds like a not bad thing to do
it's not censorship you know the tweet stays up um it's uh to be a thousand percent clear again
because you don't let me very well alexander i don't call it kung flu i was making fun of the
president so yeah uh like i think that that might be the way to go there um like i not not to let
anyone i guess not to just force the conversation there but like as far as fighting misinformation
it doesn't seem like truth has the stopping power that we'd like it to have at least not in
the medium term like i don't have current numbers on anti-vaxxers although i do have
approximate estimations on the number of kids getting you know measles and shit which is more
than it was 10 years ago when i last looked into this sort of thing so i'm guessing anti-vaxxing is
at least as much if not more of our problem than ever despite the truth telling them hey you guys
are wrong and do you have like alternate proposals for how to deal with general misinformation
or am i pivoting us way too hard or alex alexander just because it was in the like an email talking
about how like you had said that you know truth might offer an asymmetry but the bigger asymmetry
is on the side of lies which can maximize for emotional impact far better than the truth can
and like that's true yeah um yeah the anti-vaxx stuff especially is um a lot of the a lot of its
emotional appeal uh especially for especially for autism there people want to have an explanation
for why their kid is autistic and they want it to be someone's fault you know that that's one of
the things that's very appealing about the anti-vaxx stuff from an emotional standpoint right
obviously not true but that that's where it's come from as far as remedies go the government is very
very uh slow um i wouldn't want a government solution for for any of these problems basically
i think these are all structural problems right cancel culture is a a structural problem the mob
is created by the structure that the mob sits within um and you know to some extent human nature
right it's it's humans driving that it's human nature driving it rather than humans themselves
and the misinformation stuff is also to my mind structural it's um it is a society that has
sort of blurred the line between information and entertainment and promoted a lot of people who
just basically don't care about the truth whatsoever um opera being one of them right and
have no consequences whatsoever for spreading information um and the the solution for structural
problems it has to be a structural solution right you need to change the underlying issues um
most of it is just most of it is just capitalism honestly it is is inherent problems to capitalism
that have sort of run away and i'm not saying socialism is the answer but um you know what
do you do you have like vague outline ideas of possible solutions i mean you can you can
increase the laws you can make defamation laws more strict or with um higher degrees of liability
like i said uh the united states is uh among the countries with the weakest defamation laws
um in the world so like uh the the standards for defamation are extremely high especially
if you're a public figure right and a lot of the problem with uh these twitter mobs is that
they're just spreading lies right um and there there's no consequence whatsoever right i could
i could lie about someone on twitter and twitter first of all is not going to do anything about it
partly for a lot of these platforms it's because uh doing anything about it would require
artificial intelligence of some kind um like what probably a week one to to go look through
and just be like hey that's actually not true and like we know it's not true and it's not like a
corner case it's not like a matter of arguing opinion it's just it's just false um it's a hoax
or or whatever or it's a misquote um the problem from a lot of these social media platforms is that
they to do any kind of fact-checking at all uh is so burdensome that they would not be
able to stay in business um at the moment right so you can have technological solutions to this
where the open discourse would still happen there would be no censorship whatsoever right
or only to a marginal extent but um the open discourse would still happen it's just that
you would have artificial intelligence that was arguing for uh arguing on the side of truth right
to to keep truth at least somewhat in the mix instead of just an echo chamber of of misinformation
lies um the problem is if you can do that then you can set up the opposite right uh you could set up
bots that will argue any position which i think is um a more substantial danger than censorship
personally but like um other proposed solutions i i think that the platforms can do more in terms of
at least slowing the velocity of the mob like if you can see if you can see the mob forming
and make some effort to disperse it or make some effort to protect against it a lot of it's just
going to come in the form of norms and i think a lot of those norms are going to be in terms of
people protecting their own identity more like i can't imagine starting out on the internet today
as opposed to uh like late 90s when i first got on the internet and maintaining a persistent
identity like i have now that where like doxing me is not you know not even remotely difficult
but i also live my life not putting anything on the internet that i wouldn't want read in court
so i i think that that kind of norm is gonna probably come up a lot more and i i think that
that's a chilling effect of a chilling effect of the cancel mobs right um i would hope that to some
extent people will start changing their own behaviors to prevent misinformation but i
i think that has to start with better education and better critical thinking and i i just don't
know how you how you get that to happen because it feels like we've been on a backwards track
at least in america for the last couple decades i i actually strongly agree with you on
on the the whole better education kind of thing the whole raising the sanity waterline thing would
solve so many problems yeah it's just hard to do it's hard to do yeah i i don't know i i think
automated tools are probably gonna come around i know twitter's been doing twitter's been doing
a lot more to try to do its part to not be a toxic cesspit um they don't do enough but but
they've been they've been starting to try um google's been starting to try starting to to just
be like okay we we do have some responsibility for our algorithm uh and to not just put out an
algorithm that that will push people in whatever direction we'll we'll get the most engagement
right i think that's that's one things that a lot of social media companies have been doing
that's been incredibly toxic um yeah it's promoting engagement they built these yeah they
well they built these algorithms and then it was just sort of the unintended consequences of that
because the most engaging thing is the thing that outrages you and sends you on a on a crazy rant
the most engaging thing is getting triggered yeah um and and a lot of it is just you know
these seductive lies being told that that you are special and the only reason you didn't make it
or the only reason you don't have a perfectly fulfilling life is that someone took it away from
you and you know how dare they i think that for a lot of people especially maybe not necessarily my
age but younger um growing up in the world that they're growing up into uh a lot of that there's
a lot of attempt to take this disillusionment and turn it into um an oppression fantasy yeah
in some sense if something's not fair it's uh it's somebody's fault yeah if something's not fair
it's somebody's fault and you know this this is this is not about you this is you've you've been
wronged and it's you should hate people because that's you know it and and then it feels good to
hate people i know some people don't feel that way like i've gotten pushback on that when i say
it like sometimes it feels good to just so as feel that as someone who is very very much into
revenge fiction hate can feel awesome especially when you get to you know you see that hate fulfilled
by having the the objects that the people that wronged you destroyed for it so i i mean like
anyone who who says that uh hate doesn't feel good i mean like i i don't have hate in my real life
i don't have the i i'm the kind of person who doesn't have the the want or temperament for that
but uh i mean if anyone says oh no that's a terrible thing they've never seen and enjoyed
john wick exactly right not to generalize for fictional evidence but you want to see people
who killed his dog die exactly so this isn't generalizing like truth from fictional evidence
this is just generalizing like an emotion or not generalizing this is internalized this is
synthesizing an emotion that you don't have to go through it yourself but like the only thing
that makes his dog being murdered in the beginning of that movie okay is how many people die because
of it yes right yeah and like that feels great um it's uh yeah i i that was my sidebar there
just to relate that i yeah so i think i think that the algorithms cause a lot of this problem
and then the base structures aside from the algorithms also cause a lot of these problems
and that changing the platforms would help a lot with with various different aspects of of
these structural problems um which includes twitter mobs and includes just disinformation
campaigns and um real harm that's being done to people uh the problem is do you think it it
depends i think in to some extent on altruism yeah i was i was about to say do you think that
principles can count as a structural change like a a principle to uh to not um attack someone's
family i i mean i want to say even the mob uh i don't know if this is actually true if this is
just hollywood uh stuff that i seen in movies but even the mob has rules against attacking the family
members of people in in rival gangs right like there are some principles that we can hold each other
to and if that was really codified deep into uh a society's cultural dna that is that not a systemic
change or are you talking specifically about no i i think it can be no i i think it can be i think
it's just way way more difficult um i i guess the way i see it is that there's this meme of not
attacking or this norm that you need to install and i if if it were easy to install norms into a
society that's like already running and doing its own thing i think you'd see that a lot more and i
think historically when new ideas and new norms have been installed into society it's been always
accompanied by uh by bloodshed of one kind or another right like i just i think about revolutions
and how rare it is to get one that's even relatively bloodless um i don't know i think this
i think this is one of the reasons i feel strongly about some of the principles
needing to be stuck to because they are hard to both instill and uh to keep around afterwards but
it's much harder to instill them in the first place so i don't want to see them destroyed
and and so i worry maybe over much like maybe some some level of of greater change is needed
yeah i i don't know i don't have i don't have a good answer to that i from my perspective i'm i'm
i'm worried about a lot of the same things i'm worried about a destruction of norms i just
and god talking about destruction of norms if the last four years haven't been just a bloodbath of
norms right that most of my worry about the destruction of norms comes from
the right rather than the left uh and i think a lot of you know a lot of when we talk about
harper's letter it seems to me to be directed at the left specifically because a lot of it seems
like it's a defense of um of some people who are in institutions that are just being protected
because they've been there i guess i don't know i i i see a lot of the a lot of the cancel culture
i i am sympathetic to it as is coming out of this place of people who have not previously been able
to um air their grievances or who have been able to air their grievances but just no one listens
and nothing happens you know um like the me too stuff i think that's on balance been good i think
a lot of people got caught up in that that did not deserve it and it started in a good place
it started in a good place and i think you know bill cosby got cancelled right yeah he did get
and i mean i think that's that's one that you mean sent to jail for rape yeah well but i mean like
this might not have happened without the mob fine like this was like his misconduct if you
want to call it that was an open secret for if not decades at least years before fuck all got
done about it and it wasn't until this thing sort of took off online that enough traction
got underneath it to finally bring this down right yeah and i think that's been that's been
a way for the lot of a lot of these cases and i think people do get they get overzealous and then
they they enjoy taking down powerful people who need to be taken down and then they keep looking
for targets i think that is that has been the case for every movement ever that they you know
it is a very rare movement that has accomplished their goal and then just shut down and said hey
we did our part you know you start with Louis 14 and you keep going until you get to you
to yeah to make it perfectly clear i wasn't like endorsing cancel culture i was just bringing up
like a yeah i the i always like finding just like the contrary example of like well look here's
here's a good outcome of it um and harvey once i deserve that shit like a motherfucker right yeah
and and this yeah no there are a lot of people who you know a lot of it had to be in the court of
public opinion because the i mean the actual courts take more than you know four witnesses right
of separate events that are that are yours apart like to actually know i mean the standards of
proof in court are higher and i think especially for public opinion they should be a little lower
i don't think they should be so low as they are now but i i don't know i think i think having
a reckoning for some of these people has been a good thing and i think to some extent when you
have people like jk Rowling who who are talking shit basically i think it'd be good for it to
be the norm to at least have a little bit more empathy for other people than she has shown you
know and and that that is my ideal outcome i don't think that's a real outcome i think a lot of
people are just going to be quiet when they think things and i don't know maybe that maybe
that some good will come out of that of people just like not saying their bigoted stuff that they
think like that might be good for uh for that to be the norm um but but it's hard it's hard to to
not see that chilling effect on speech and be a little worried i i think i think i do agree with
that i i think i see that and agree with it but i don't know at the same time it's just like i'm so
glad that i'm white i'm so glad that i'm male that i've never had to deal with like i've never had
to deal with like going down the street and have a cop see me and i get like yeah anxious or defensive
because you know i don't know what might happen that's never been a concern of mine right um
a decent way to simulate that might be to be like deliberately breaking the law
like seriously walk walk down the street with a ziplock bag full of cocaine in your pocket
holy shit and uh then then like again you're not doing anything but then you see a cop car drive by
and that panic you get might actually simulate what it's like to not have the luxury of being pretty
sure the cops won't bug you um i mean i guess you still have the the low prior factor of like well
they're not going to stop you because you're white and stuff but uh like the fact yeah like
just what you said just uh like if you're on the wrong side of the law uh whether because you're
committing committing a crime or because the law hates you for no good reason um they can both kind
of get that that sense of panic i had this last thought i wanted to say about the uh you know the
the mob kind of continuing going um and you know in this in the case of like Weinstein and Cosby the
mob we don't call it the mob because they did the right thing um but we were talking about like
something like hate feels good i think some people and you know you mentioned every revolution just
keeps going like those people who enjoyed the the fight if you want to call it that um and they're
they will they will keep finding targets because they love that so much right i just thought that
that callback is the only thing i could find just to say that i i think my uh my contributions are
waning even though they weren't that strong to begin with well the one thing i do want to bring
back to is um that less wrong post which was uh making history available right i was thinking
about that a lot in the context of like race and gender and i i don't think it's how he meant it
but when people say check your privilege um like there's a lot of that sentiment in that post
where he's talking about just like think about what it would feel like to have actually been
like you know living under Jim Crow right or i don't know i i think about that a lot in the
context of especially the cancel culture type stuff as far as because i i don't know i none of it
really affects me very much i don't have any skin in the game um i make money through writing
which makes me more at the same time more and less susceptible to ever being cancelled but
like that's not my core audience of the people who are gonna like oh man he said something that was
politically unorthodox i don't it's not really the audience that i have but i i i tried i tried
to think about about what it feels like to kind of live in one of these work cultures that is toxic
and it's a bunch of little things and they just build up over time and you can't really
assemble evidence unless you want to start making a spreadsheet of every single time
that you felt demeaned and no one actually does that because it's not it's that would be kind of
it's self-toxic right that would be dwelling on the all the bad shit and some people do that but
it sucks yeah and and well some some of it you don't even know right you don't know whether it was
a comment about about your gender or about your race or or anything like that you don't know if it
if it actually was intended as that or if you're reading into it or whatever and then i also do
think you know that fear of oh man i said some stuff that i realized now is wrong but i'm not
gonna get any clemency for it no one's gonna i'm gonna have to weather the storm of public shame
for something i don't even agree with anymore you know
although a lot of a lot of the people uh like kevin hart got canceled in the sense that he's
makes millions of dollars and it's still a well-known comedian he got quote unquote cancelled right
i'm not familiar with kevin hart what happened he made a joke he made a joke that was basically
he would kill his son of his son so i laughed already because i'm assuming he did not mean this
seriously right okay okay um like it's a luicy k kind of thing right uh let me see if i can find
the tweet um no i can't i can't find it but it was it was basically a joke but it wasn't like
it was it fell very flat and it was a very uh dicey subject for a fall flat joke it was like
the woman who said yeah she wasn't gonna get aids in africa right yeah um which was a funny story
because she was like she like made that she made that tweet and then like got on an airplane and
missed the whole twitter story yeah and then eight hours later she finds out she doesn't have a job
or any friends anymore when she lands yeah um but yeah kevin hart was was one of those examples
where it was it was something about you know killing his gay son or something and people were
like wow it's not funny and also super homophobic um and then he didn't apologize for it uh which made
the whole thing kind of like okay so like this this isn't a thing where you're like where you don't
agree with it anymore you're just people are being too sensitive and whatever um that happens a lot
there's there's a book that's uh i would recommend called so you've been publicly shamed i've heard
of it um did you read it it's pretty yeah yeah it's uh it's pretty good it's pretty good it's
quite old now i think i mean in in internet years but um it's about 16 months old yeah um
but it's it's sort of a a bunch of issues that i guess it's 2015 that's recent right but but a lot
of it is is about the more general issues of of cancel culture and how people should respond to it
if they want to weather the storm i think it's and i think oh go ahead sorry i think that one
of the norms that i would like that i actually think can be changed is for people to understand
the pr position of like how to deliver how to acknowledge that you're not a perfect person
or whatever you know because i think that's one of the things that actually does defuse the cancel
mob and i think after probably after your fourth time trying to cancel contra points maybe you
start to get the idea that it's not going to work and you should stop doing it has it really been
that many times uh i know i know of at least three uh i'm fuzzy on the third there was one where she
had some tweet a tweet that was like uh i i don't even want to stop it was dumb twitter twitter
twitter is twitter as a kevin heart thing yeah the kevin heart thing was was beyond twitter because
it was um that was not just a twitter mob because it was uh it extended into like
old media as well um but yeah i but yeah there are a lot a lot of people who get cancelled just
they keep on going and they they are negatively affected in that they get a lot of harassment
and maybe they lose some subscribers or some income or whatever a lot a lot of the people
get cancelled are public facing right like as a software engineer um i did practically nothing
that was public facing right so the more public facing you are the more risk there is that someone
will take issue with you especially if you're a more extreme personality but i don't know that's
kind of off track so we've been going for almost two hours uh actually no over two hours i'm sorry
uh it's and what i wanted to kind of bring it to and and is there like final points things
that you would like to cover that we didn't get to or things you would like to reply to
no i'm fine my only point is that i'm not i'm a structuralist i'm a structuralist and a
consequentialist i think censor censorship gets a bad rap all right specifically because of
the slippery slope which uh i don't know if it's actually that slippery right that's that's
that's my the sum the summary of my opinion we didn't need to spend two hours well i mean
i had a good time though and i i that only did i enjoy talking to you i feel like it helped iron
out a lot of things that i was confused about i feel like we are not as different in opinion as i
thought we were before we started this i think we mostly agree on the problems and not necessarily
yeah i am i am much more on the side of you know we we shouldn't stop anyone talking but we should
definitely start to put up some sort of structure for for people to oppose the the censorship and
feel like they can do it without losing losing everything i guess and bolden the employers
because we are on the side of big business and landlords no i i mean i as basically a listener
to this episode i had fun with it so i think that like there is there seems to be less daylight
between your guys's positions than maybe it seems like you guys when you're starting out i do get
you know i don't want to say and now we all agree but yeah like you know the problems are problems
and the solution the proposed solutions are myriad and i don't have anything else to say
apparently so i i really enjoyed like i said mostly listening to this and i thought this was a lot
of fun um so once again at least for me thanks alexander for coming on and and doing this with us
yeah for sure i had a good time and everybody you have just heard how um intelligent and
thoughtful and kind alexander is his fiction is the same way it's really good stuff if you like
the kind of intelligent and kind of stuff it's read his things specifically right now worth the
candle is what is in progress and if you're somehow listening to this and haven't read uh
metropolitan man which isn't a 1.3 million word investment um i i think it's like the it is my
favorite points to an example of like rationalist fiction um not necessarily like my favorite work
ever but uh it's definitely got to be top three rationalist fiction probably top two tied for
first with methods of rationality but it's my favorite to direct people towards because it's
way more consumable and uh you know if like a lot of people are turned off from methods because uh
you know they don't like harry you don't run into that problem with lex luther you're not supposed
to love him as a person you're supposed to love like oh my god he is the best villain ever and uh
the best villain ever is the one who has really good points and i don't know if we mentioned this
in your arm before but basically your point was so good that they stole it for batman versus superman
or yeah which was uh you know his the whole thing with that where he 100 flip flops his position
for no reason by the by the second movie um he has aligned the exact opposite of lex luther's
which was stolen from your book i'm convinced uh in the first one where he says like if there's a
one percent chance that you know he will turn on the world we need to take that he says we need to
take it as a certainty which is not how lex would have put it but then in the second in whatever
don of justice he says if there's one percent chance that this will work we need to take it as
a certainty or something and i'm like you're reversing your argument there's a 99 chance you
could unleash dark superman like what what are you doing but anyway i mean the movies were a
disaster but my point is they were good and they were your book was good enough to inspire
hallowed movies whether they'll admit it or not so yeah yeah metropolitan man is actually like
six or seven years old it it's astonishing to me to think that because it seems like i don't know
it does not seem that old but yeah it it actually wondered man of steel came out i think it might
i think it might have preceded man of steel uh yeah in uh internet years same same year same
year in internet years though that's a really long time yeah in internet years that's that's
very very long so if you would like a smaller easier to consume sample of axander before you
commit to something huge metropolitan man is great uh great sampler yep all right awesome well
thank you for joining us um oh we should thank our patron before we call it a night of course
we can't call it a night without thanking our patrons who keep the lights on around here and
make this show possible this show is is responsible or wait is possible only because of listeners
like you and by you i mean explicitly mars olivia thank you mars you make this possible you let us
speak to alexander wales and broadcast it to everyone so you you have helped uh have speech
promulgate across the internet yes thank you so much we really appreciate it the debate will
continue because of your your contribution awesome well i think that's it then for this episode
we'll see you guys back in a couple of weeks for more bayesian conspiracy okay thank you
everyone for joining us and thank you again alexander yep thanks thanks again one quick
piece of listener feedback that i remembered just at the last minute uh a a person in the discord
said that i should come with sources available if i am going to cite conspiracy theory type
material in the podcast uh and what they were referring to was my statement that the cdc used
really inflated numbers for flu deaths and it came around to bite them in the butt when
covet happened because people could say covet was only twice as bad as the flu when they were using
code uh covet actual deaths versus the flu maximum estimated number and uh first of all
want to say that i don't really think that's conspiracy theory stuff because it seems like a
pretty um normal claim for me to say that a agency could use the highest end estimate of a death
for you know purposes of the public good and then it comes around to bite them in the butt
but um i admit i did not have them in front of me at the time the the sources that i have were
linked on our website the basin conspiracy dot com so people can go there to look them up if they
want to they include a letter from the assistant secretary of the u.s department of health and
human services which made this assertion uh that the flu deaths were inflated at least five times
higher than what they actually are and uh also the journal for the american medical association
so both uh saying basically the same thing so both you know reputable sources that uh have
linked documents on our website so there you go actual source i was not trying to do conspiracy
theory shit didn't we also put that in the episode description yeah it's it's in the episode
description too it was just i didn't cite what they were from directly in the episode and that was
considered a foul on my part i don't know i i don't know who called you out for that or like
how generalizable this is because now we're we're running pretty late but like so my thoughts aren't
100 in order but like i feel like it's okay to say i read this somewhere i can't remember the
name of the book and then drop the book you know as a uh as a in the show notes like i don't think
it's it's fair to say you didn't come with sources if you don't click the the show notes or the you
know go to the website for the you know whatever it is you're listening to to see if it's on there
if like you're just saying shit and you don't back it up then that's really annoying
but if you if you can't back it up in real time on the air as it comes up improv too
that i don't think should prohibit you from saying it yeah i i agree i think this is the
reason we have show notes right in order to put these linking documents in and we don't have to
stop a voice conversation right in the middle to do searches friendly reminder we have show
notes for every episode in the show notes you can find a link to our discord where this piece
of feedback came in um and uh usually follow up stuff on things that we discussed in the episode
so like you know we we mentioned the harper the harper's letter um and like we didn't read it on
here but it also didn't like give you a url to find it but you can click a url in the show notes
and read it there exactly so you can always find that at the basinconspiracy.com or in the show
notes perfect and yeah i mean i'm not sure what like apple's podcast app does these days but my
my podcast app of choice on iphone is uh overcast is that what it's called i don't know what it is
well i know but it just that doesn't sound like thinking out ahead yes well and yeah so i can't
cite that because i can't remember so i think it's overcast that sounds right there will be a link
to your pod catcher in the show notes now i have to find it um the uh like you just swipe right from
like the little play window and it takes you to the show notes and an embedded thing inside the
player and from there you can open it it doesn't even take you to an external browser you can open
it while not leaving your apps so nice yeah it's it's the future guys tech is tight
all right uh that's all i had so thank you oh yeah of course and for anyone listening is confused
where alexander went uh this was brought up like immediately after we ended the episode
he was like all right well uh well wait after we have to up with him and then enash was like oh
i had a piece of feedback so we just jumped back on for that so actually this is the second week
in a row we've done that right i think so yeah yeah or a second episode in a row yeah let's see
how long we keep the trend running of a post-show content all right we'll see you in a couple weeks
bye
you
