The lecturer is Professor Sean Carroll, a senior research associate in physics at the
California Institute of Technology. Professor Carroll received his undergraduate degree
from Villanova University and his PhD in astrophysics from Harvard University. Before his current
position at Caltech, Professor Carroll was on the faculty of the physics department and
the Enrico Fermi Institute at the University of Chicago. He did post-doctoral research
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and at the Institute for Theoretical Physics
at the University of California, Santa Barbara. Professor Carroll is the author of Spacetime
and Geometry, an introduction to general relativity. He is active in education and outreach, having
taught more than 200 scientific seminars and colloquia and given more than 50 educational
and popular talks. In addition, he has written for numerous science journals including Nature,
New Scientist, The American Scientist and Physics Today. He has been interviewed by NPR, the
BBC and various local TV and radio programs and has been quoted in Time, Scientific American,
The New York Times, USA Today and several other publications. Professor Carroll's research
involves theoretical physics and astrophysics with a focus on issues in cosmology, field
theory and gravitation. He has received research grants from NASA, the U.S. Department of
Energy and the National Science Foundation as well as fellowships from the Sloan Foundation
and the Packard Foundation. Professor Carroll has been the Malmstrom Lecturer at Hamline
University, the Resnick Lecturer at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and a National Science
Foundation Distinguished Lecturer. While at MIT, he won the Graduate Student Teaching
Council Award for his course on general relativity. In 2006, he received the Arts and Sciences
Alumni Medellion from Villanova University. Professor Carroll prepared the course guidebook
that comes with these lectures. The course guidebook includes a detailed outline of each
lecture, a timeline, a glossary, biographical notes and a bibliography. To get the most out
of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines or review them
before or after each lecture.
