So this is perhaps my favorite lecture. Don't hold me to that. I might say that other lectures
in the future are my favorite, but this is the one in which you take the expanding universe
that we talked about last time and we ask, what does that really mean? We won't answer
that question until the next lecture, but this question is going to take us into trying
to understand how space and time work. And this is the real thing that made Einstein
quite a famous international celebrity. He is the person who figured out how space and
time work and he figured out how they're related to gravity. So this is something in
which Einstein did better than Isaac Newton did, which is a hard thing to do. So we're
going to go from what Isaac Newton did up through Einstein explaining along the way
how we get there. And it really is a set of deep ideas about the structure of space
and time that are counterintuitive. So we'll be thinking pretty hard about why things are
like that and why they're one way rather than another. So let me start just by thinking
about what the ideas of space and time are supposed to be. Space and time are what help
you locate things. Space tells you where things are and time tells you when things are. So
let's think about space to begin. Scientists like to say that space is three dimensional.
What does that mean? That means that if you want to locate the position of an object,
in principle, you need to give me three numbers. And the way that you can give me those three
numbers can be different depending on the circumstances. So for example, the three numbers
you give me might be the height of something, the length of something, and the breadth of
something. Once you give me those three numbers, you've specified its dimensions entirely.
If you only gave me two numbers, it wouldn't be enough. So we say that space is three dimensional.
Saying the same thing from a different way, if you want to meet somebody for coffee, you
need to give me three numbers to say where to meet them. One way of thinking about that
would be latitude and longitude and height above ground. Where narrowly we're lucky enough
to know the height above ground of the people we're going to meet, but you might tell them
which of the two cross streets you're going to meet at. So it takes three pieces of information
to locate something in the universe. That's what it means when we say that space is three
dimensional. Space is the arena in which things play out. Space is where you locate things,
how two things come together, and how things are distributed all throughout the universe.
Time on the other hand tells you when things happen. So say you're going to meet that friend
of yours for coffee, and you give them the three numbers that say where you are going
to meet them. That is not enough. You will not successfully meet them if you only give
them those three numbers. You need to give them a fourth number, which is when you're
going to meet them. So it takes four numbers to specify a unique point in the universe.
The three numbers to tell you where you are in space, and the one number to tell you what
time it is. You could think about all these four numbers as being part of one four dimensional
thing called spacetime. For a long time, people didn't think that way because there's no point.
Space is something that is very clearly different than time. Part of the revolution of relativity,
as Einstein understood the universe, is to realize that space and time are in fact two
different aspects of the same thing, a single four dimensional thing that we call spacetime.
So what we're going to do in this lecture is start with Isaac Newton. Newton was probably
without a doubt the greatest physicist who ever lived, and one of the things he did was
to put together a very sensible picture of space and time. In Newton's picture of space
and time, space and time were absolute. They are fixed structures of the universe. They
are the stage in which the drama of physics plays itself out. Now, Einstein comes along
and he had collaborators also. He wasn't alone. In 1905, Einstein put the finishing touches
on something called special relativity. Special relativity was a replacement for Newton's
notions of space and time. Special relativity was the thing that first said that space and
time are different aspects of the same four dimensional thing called spacetime. So in
special relativity, there was still a fixed structure, but the thing that was fixed was
one four dimensional spacetime, not separately the three dimensions of space and the one
dimension of time. Then Einstein still thinks he's not done yet. He tries to incorporate
gravity into his theory of special relativity and he realized that they're incompatible.
He eventually throws away special relativity, replaces it with something better, which we
call general relativity. General relativity is just as good as special relativity, but
it also includes gravity. And the profound difference is that now, nothing is fixed.
Nothing is given to you ahead of time in general relativity. The very structure of space and
time themselves are dynamical. They can change. Space time has a geometry and a curvature,
and it's that curvature that we interpret as gravity. So that was the short version of the
story. Let's go slowly through the longer version. Here is a picture of Sir Isaac Newton. As I said,
arguably the greatest physicist of all time, also arguably the greatest mathematician of all
time. It was Newton who invented calculus, among other things, and among the pieces of physics
he invented. He invented the fact that when you pass white light through a prism, it separates
into colors. He invented the law of gravity that we know and love, the inverse square law. The
gravitational force between two objects goes down as they get further away, and as you double the
distance, the force of gravity goes down by a factor of four, the square of the factor of two
that you double the distance by. So that inverse square law of gravity will play a very crucial
role in what is to come, but it is not what we're going to be talking about in this lecture
right now. What we care about today right now is what Newton said about space and time. So we
think that space and time are so immediate and obvious there's almost nothing to say. That's
where things happen. Space tells you how to locate things. Time tells you when things happen. What
more do you need to know? But one of the great features of the Newtonian revolution in physics
was being quantitative, attaching equations to things. It wasn't good enough to just say, well,
space is where things happen. You need to have some equations, you need to have some mathematical
structure. So Newton did that. Newton told us what it means to say that space is an absolute
three-dimensional set of points, and the time is a different absolute one-dimensional set of
points. The basic picture of the Newtonian universe is shown here in this diagram. It's taking the
four dimensions that you need to slice up the universe and slicing them up into moments of
constant time. Sadly, on a two-dimensional picture, I cannot draw all four dimensions of spacetime. So
the two-dimensional planes that we've compressed diagonally in the picture are supposed to represent
all three dimensions of space. So this picture should not be intimidating. It's a fairly straightforward
representation of the universe, the universe according to Isaac Newton. We know better now,
and we'll get to how we know better now, but this is how spacetime worked according to Newton.
There was space, and there was time. So what you see here is little clocks. Each clock tells a
different time located on a different moment of space. So the Newtonian universe is one where
space happens over and over again. It happens at different moments in time, and at every moment,
objects are going to be located in slightly different places. So we call that motion through
space. Things change as a function of time, and that's how Isaac Newton's universe worked.
So the point that I'm emphasizing about Newtonian spacetime is that it is fixed and it is absolute.
So what does that mean? Those are two different words. Fixed means it never changes. There's the
structure that space and time are staying there. They don't change into something else. The rate
at which time flows does not depend on where you are. There's one fixed thing called the flow of
time, and it's the same all throughout the universe. That's what fixed means. Absolute means it's
the same for everybody. The rate at which time flows, with the distance between two objects,
doesn't depend on who you are. It doesn't depend on where you are, on how you're moving through
space. It's just a notion. There's a notion of it took three seconds between this event and that
event. Everyone agrees on the fact that it takes three seconds between these two events, no matter
where they are, no matter how they're looking at it, so long as they take accurate observations.
These will change these notions once we get to relativity. Absolute, in the Newtonian sense,
is opposed to relative. So the absolute fact that a certain object has a certain length is going to
turn to a relative fact in relativity. What that means is that the length of an object will
depend on who is measuring it, depends possibly on where they are, certainly on how fast they're
moving. Fixed is what we'll get rid of when we go from special relativity to general relativity. In
general relativity, space-time is dynamical. It can change, and it can take on different forms,
and it will no longer be absolutely fixed. So to understand the change from Isaac Newton's
absolute space and time to Albert Einstein's relative notion of space and time, we have to
understand how you would go about operationally making sense of Newtonian space-time. In other
words, it's one thing for me to say, yes, there are moments of time that are the whole three-dimensional
universe of space, and those three-dimensional spaces repeat themselves over and over again.
But what does that mean? How do you make sense of it? The way you make sense of it is doing
something that you see in spy movies all the time. You synchronize your watches. So when I say
that there's a moment of time that extends throughout the universe, what that means is I have a
clock right here. It says a certain time, and I can set up clocks all throughout space that agree
with this clock. So when this clock says it's three o'clock, it is three o'clock here and
everywhere else. These are just a set of words. How do I make them real? What I do is, first,
I set clocks throughout all the universe. That's the easy part. We're doing thought experiments
here. These are not real experiments. We have a clock sitting at every point in space, but we have
to synchronize our clocks. So we take the clock that we have here. We take for granted that we
have good clocks. These are clocks that run at the same rate. They are reliable clocks. So we take
the clock we have here. We leave it here, but we take another clock and we set it to say the same
thing as our first clock, and then that second clock that agrees with the first one, we move
throughout the universe. We move this clock, as shown in the picture right here. We move it to
all the other clocks, and when we get to another clock, we align them so they're reading the same
time. By that procedure, we synchronize our clocks all throughout the universe. It doesn't matter
what the clocks are doing. It doesn't matter how they're moving. It doesn't matter where they are.
When we do this, when we take our one clock and we make sure that every other clock, all throughout
the universe, agrees with it, we're done. We've synchronized our watches, as it were, all throughout
the universe. That's what Isaac Newton says happens. There's only one rule in Newton's universe,
which is that you have to move forward in time. In other words, if it's three o'clock here, then
when my watch goes one hour to the future, I will be at four o'clock, no matter where I am in the
universe, no matter what I've done in the meantime. Then Einstein and his friends came along in the
early 20th century and says, actually, it's not like that. We need to replace the absolute notions of
space and time that Newton had by relative notions of space and time. In particular, the fundamental
insight of Einstein can be summed up in the phrase, time is like space. So what is that supposed to
mean? Suppose that you measure the distance between two points. You have a path that goes from one
place to another. Well, you have to actually go down that path and measure the distance along the
path. The distance could be different depending on the path you take. Einstein says that time is like
that, that the rate at which time flows depends on what you do. This is really hard to get through
your brains because it's very non-Newtonian. In some sense, even though Newtonian mechanics is a
great triumph of the human imagination, it's still quite intuitive. It makes sense to us once we
understand it. Relativity is very counterintuitive. Einstein says that the amount of time that you
feel elapsing is personal. It's not a fact of the universe. It's a fact of what you do. It can be
different for two different observers, even if they start and end at the same point. So let's see
how that works. Imagine that you do in Einstein's universe, that is to say, an universe in which
we actually live, what you try to do in Newton's universe. You try to synchronize your clocks all
throughout space. So you take the clock that you leave here. It's reading a certain time. You take
your movable clock and you make them agree. Then you send out your movable clock to synchronize all
the other clocks all throughout space. You think you've done it, but then you bring your clock back
to where it started and you notice that the two clocks don't say the same time anymore. It's not
true that this clock, even though it's a perfectly good clock, clicked at the same rate as it traveled
throughout space, synchronizing all the other ones. In fact, it turns out that in special
relativity, there is no way to make that happen. You didn't make a mistake. It's just a feature of
space and time that when a clock moves around, it measures a different amount of time than a clock
that stays still. This seems weird to us because to make the effect obvious, you need to move close
to the speed of light. The speed of light is the magical velocity in the theory of relativity,
at which all these weird things become obvious. Since we're always in our everyday lives moving
slower than the speed of light, we don't notice them. We think it's very strange for someone to
say the amount of time that clicks off on my wristwatch depends how I walk, depends on the journey
I take through space and time. But once Einstein tells us that time is kind of like space, there's
a way of thinking about it that makes perfect sense. So in this picture, we're drawing an analogy
between distances and times because Einstein says that the two things work the same way. You draw
two different curves that connect two points in space. One curve is a straight line and one is sort
of a curvy thing that goes back and forth. Nobody in the world is surprised at the fact that the
length along those two curves is different even though they begin and end at the same point. Why
should they be the same? They move in different ways. So Einstein says time works in the same way.
Take two points in space time. Take two events, two points where you're both located in space and
time. Two people begin at the same point and they end at the same point, but they take different
journeys. One just sits there not moving and one zips around. In space, it was the case that
the shortest distance between two points was a straight line. Any curvy path you went along
gave you a longer distance. Einstein says that a very similar thing happens with one interesting
twist. Einstein says that the longest time that elapses between two moments is if you just sat
there and waited for time to go by you. If you zip off and come back, you will have experienced
less time than your friend who stayed behind. The shorter time is the path through space time
that zips around. There had to be some difference because we know that time is not exactly like
space, but Einstein is telling us that deep down space and time work in similar ways. Just like
the distance along a path can depend on how you move, the time that elapses on your wrist watches
depends on how you move through space time. So that's the fundamental difference between space
time in Einstein's universe and space time in Newton's universe. But remember, there was one rule
in Newton's universe. You had to move forward in time. That rule gets replaced in special
relativity. And in fact, the rule that you have in special relativity is more stringent than you
one that had in Newton's universe. In Newton's universe, you could move as fast as you wanted
as long as you kept moving forward in time. In Einstein's universe, the speed of light is special.
So if there's an event in space time and you want to get somewhere else in space time,
you can only plausibly get there if you move slower than the speed of light. So if you imagine
drawing a picture of space time and you have an event and you imagine all the light rays that are
leaving that event, those light rays represent the ultimate speed limit. They represent the velocity
faster than which you cannot travel. So there is no allowed trajectory through space and time
that moves faster than the speed of light. Everything you're allowed to do moves up in that
diagram. It eats up more time than space if you like. So that is the fundamental rule in special
relativity. Newton's rule is you have to move forward in time. Einstein's rule is you have to
move slower than the speed of light. That set of things faster than which you cannot go is called
a light cone. The set of all points connected to your original event by things moving at the speed
of light. So the only thing you need to remember is whatever the speed of light is, where you are
in the universe, you need to move more slowly than that. That is the fundamental rule.
So this was a replacement, as we mentioned, for Newton's concept of space and time. Newton was
the greatest physicist who had ever lived. He invented not only this notion of space and time,
but also the theory of gravity and many other things. So Einstein knew that if he's going to
replace Newtonian space and time, he would have to reproduce the other successes that Newton had.
Newton had a very good theory of how gravity worked. He was able to predict how planets moved around
the sun or how the moon moved around the earth. This theory of Newton's was verified to high
accuracy over and over again by experiments. And here comes Einstein saying it's not right.
So clearly you have to reconcile the new theory of spacetime, special relativity,
with what Newton thought gravity was. Gravity was the inverse square law. The force due to
gravity is proportional to the mass of the thing that is pulling you and inversely proportional
to the distance squared between the objects. So after inventing special relativity in 1905,
Einstein devoted himself to this task of trying to figure out how to reconcile gravity with his
new notion of spacetime. It took him 10 years to do it, and the way he ultimately did it was
to realize you needed to throw away what Newton had told you about gravity. The way that gravity
was going to work in relativity is just very different than it works in Newtonian mechanics.
So here's a picture of Einstein. You've all seen pictures of Einstein before,
but usually when you see pictures of Einstein, he's in his older ages where he has let himself
go a little bit. He had the hair going up like that and he was wearing a sweatshirt and he wore
the same sweatshirt for days and days. This is a picture from 1912 when Einstein was young,
a sharp dressed man, and somebody was combing his hair, and he was thinking about the nature of
spacetime and how to make it compatible with gravity. Ultimately, he hit on a thought experiment
that provided the key to understanding how gravity would work in the context of relativity.
The thought experiment actually traces itself back to Galileo, Galileo, the famous Italian
physicist who lived just before Newton, who really invented a lot of the framework that
Newton made sharp and quantitative and attached equations to. Galileo was one of the best
physicists of all time. One of the many, many things that he did was to understand that gravity
is universal. The famous experiment that he may or may not have done, probably not, but it's a nice
visual image, is to drop objects off of the Leaning Tower of Pisa and notice that no matter what
the objects are made of, no matter what the mass of the objects is, they always fall at the same
rate. In other words, gravity as a force has a very strange characteristic that everything
responds to it in the same way. So that's different, for example, than the force of electricity.
The electromagnetic force has the property that there are things called positive charges
and things called negative charges. They move in different ways in opposite directions
in an electric field, but gravity, everything moves the same way. Gravity has this feature of
universality. Everything responds to it identically. So Einstein, because he's smarter than you or me,
realized that this was the key to understanding how gravity works, the fact that it works the same
on everything. What that meant is that gravity is undetectable. That's a bit of a surprise to
say that gravity is undetectable. It seems kind of obvious that if I let something fall,
I see the force of gravity at work. But what Einstein says was, imagine that you're in a box.
You can't see outside. Someone asks you the question, is there gravity in that box, in that room?
Well, you can drop things. You can see them fall and you go, yes, I've seen gravity.
But Einstein says you might be very far away from any gravitational field. It might be that you're
in a rocket, that you're being accelerated at a tremendous rate through interstellar space where
there's no gravity around. In that rocket, if you drop things, they will fall in exactly the same
way that they would fall if there were gravity. This is not true for electricity. You can detect
an electric field because you drop a positive particle and a negative particle, they move in
different ways. But because everything moves the same way under the influence of gravity,
you can never be sure, if you're in a small region of space time in a tiny little box,
that there is any gravity. So again, to you and me, we say, well, that's interesting. To
Einstein, he says, that's the key. If everything responds to gravity in the same way, then gravity
is not a force at all. Gravity is a feature of space time itself. In fact, the feature it is,
is the curvature of space time. Einstein's most brilliant insight was to say that space time
has a geometry. And in 1915, he came up with general relativity, which was to describe how the
geometry of space time, how the curvature of space and time itself manifests itself as what you and
I observe as gravity. So according to Einstein, we have a picture of something like this, although
this is a somewhat colorful conception of what is going on. We have the sun that is warping the
space around it. The usual analogy that is used here that is pretty good is that you put a bowling
ball in a rubber sheet, it distorts the shape of the rubber sheet around it. And a marble that you
rolled by that bowling ball would be deflected by the curvature of the rubber sheet. What Einstein
is saying is that that is what is happening in space time. That is what gravity really is. The
gravitational force that we attach to the sun is really the warping of the geometry of space
near the sun. What the earth is doing is the earth is just doing its best to move in a straight
line. But there are no straight lines because the geometry itself is curved. So what we see the earth
do is to orbit the sun. The orbiting of the earth around the sun is just the earth's response
to the geometry of space and time. This was Einstein's brilliant idea. Now again, it's not enough
to just say words like that. You need to make it quantitative. So Einstein has an equation.
Notice Einstein's equation. Einstein's equation is not E equals mc squared. That is a very good
equation and it is Einstein's. It's very famous and we'll talk about that more later. But what is
known to physicists as Einstein's equation is the equation for gravity. And I'm going to show it to
you here. Again, not because we're going to understand this equation in a great detail, but
it's nice to see just what it looks like because you get an appreciation for the art and the poetry
that are these physicists equation. This is Einstein's equation and what it is is a left-hand
side and a right-hand side. So that part is easy. The left-hand side is describing the way in which
space-time is curved. It's a set of numbers. In fact, it's a four by four matrix, a little array of
16 numbers, and the values of those numbers are telling you by how much space-time is curved.
If space-time is flat, if it's like this tabletop, if there's no geometry, all those numbers will be
zero. On the right-hand side, you have stuff. So you have eight pi and g. These are just constants
of nature. They're just fixed numbers. And then you have the energy and momentum of the stuff in the
universe. Anything that is in the universe comes along with energy, comes along with some substance
and some heat and some pressure and things like that. And what Einstein is telling you in very
specific equations is that all of those things contribute to the curvature of space-time.
What Newton would have told you is that what makes gravity is mass, what Einstein is telling you is
that what makes gravity is everything. Every form of energy, which includes mass, but also includes
heat and pressure and temperature and stress, these all contribute to gravity in some way.
So this equation, Einstein's equation, is the one that should be famous. It's a little bit more
intimidating than E equals mc squared, a little bit less immediately relevant to our lives,
but it's a tremendous accomplishment to conceptualize gravity as a feature of space-time
itself, as a feature of the curvature of space and time. So you're allowed to ask, who cares?
Why should it matter that I use the words, gravity is the curvature of space and time,
rather than gravity is a force stretching through space and time? Is there any difference between
these two sets of ideas? Well, there are differences and the differences are going to make a big
difference to us in our quest to understand cosmology, dark matter, and dark energy. The
first implication of the claim that gravity is the curvature of space-time is that universality,
the fact that everything responds to gravity in the same way, implies as its converse that
everything creates gravity in the same way. There's a universal coupling between the curvature of
space and time and the stuff in the universe. In other words, you can't hide from gravity.
If there is stuff in the universe, if it has mass and energy, if it exists in any substantial
physical way, it will give rise to a gravitational field. So Einstein is giving us a surefire
technique for detecting absolutely everything in the universe. There is nothing that can hide from
us as long as we can detect gravitational fields throughout the cosmos. You can't hide from gravity,
so you can go the other way. By detecting gravity, you can infer that there must be stuff.
If you see a gravitational field pointing in some direction, there must be some stuff there
causing that gravitational field, even if you don't see the stuff. This will be the technique
that we use to infer the existence of dark matter and dark energy. Dark matter, we will say, must
be there because we will see stuff being pulled in some direction where there's not enough ordinary
stuff to explain it. Dark energy has a more subtle effect. It makes the universe accelerate,
and we'll talk about how the acceleration of the universe is a manifestation of the curvature
of space-time in the way that would be caused by dark energy. The second implication of the
motto that gravity is the curvature of space-time is that space-time is dynamical. Space-time can
change as a function of time. It need not be the same in the past as in the future. So it gives
us a changed viewpoint on how we would think about the fact that galaxies, for example,
are moving away from us. Hubble said that we have a velocity to galaxies, and the velocity is larger
if the galaxies are further away. The same phenomenon makes sense according to Einstein,
but we attach slightly different words to it, which is why when I'm being careful, I refer to the
apparent velocity of distant galaxies, not the actual velocity. In the real, careful way of
understanding things, Allah Einstein, the galaxies aren't moving. The galaxies are sitting there,
located in space, and what's happening is space is expanding. Space-time itself is dynamical,
it can change, and what is happening is not that the galaxies have a velocity through space,
but that the space in between the galaxies is growing, it's stretching, it's getting bigger.
More and more space is coming into existence. This is a way of thinking about things that Einstein
gives us that allows us to ask questions that wouldn't have made sense to Isaac Newton. We can say,
for example, where did space and time come from? What happened at the beginning? Did space and
time get created? Was there something before what we now think of as the Big Bang? To Newton,
with an absolute fixed space-time, this kind of question doesn't really make sense. You don't
ask where space-time came from for Isaac Newton. It was always there, with general relativity,
saying that space and time are dynamical and can change. You're at least allowed to ask the question,
why are they here? How do they come into existence? You will not be surprised to hear that we don't
yet know the answers to these questions, but we're hopeful that our understanding of dark matter and
dark energy will be part of the clues that help us answer them eventually.
