In this lecture, we take another turn of the hermeneutic circle that describes the
science is done, going from experiments and observations to theorizing, back to experiments
and observations, back to theorizing, and so forth. In lecture two, we looked at the
universe, we saw that it was smooth, it was more or less the same everywhere, big, filled
with galaxies and getting bigger. Then in lectures three and four, we thought about
that. We said, how can we fit that into a picture of a theory of the universe? And we
talked about general relativity and the expansion of space as described by the Friedman
equation, the smooth expansion of a space that could have a curvature all of its own.
Now in the last couple lectures, we talked about observations again. We looked at the
universe and we took seriously the fact that it's not perfectly smooth. There are lumps
in the universe, there are galaxies and there are clusters of galaxies, and what does that
imply? It implies that we can measure the amount of matter in the universe and what we
find is the total amount of matter is much more than can be accounted for, we think,
by ordinary matter. So now we're going to go back to the theorizing again and start
thinking about what could it be? If there is dark matter out there, if there is more
matter in the universe than can be accounted for by ordinary stuff, what
candidates can we come up with for what the dark matter might be? So to start, we need
to think about what kinds of particles might exist full stop, and that will be this
lecture. We're going to classify the kinds of particles that you can find in nature.
In the next lecture, we'll examine in detail the kinds of particles that actually do
exist that we know of, the standard model of particle physics that tells us enough
to explain all the data that we have about particle physics experiments here on Earth.
Only then can we sensibly start talking about what new kinds of particles can you
invent to be the dark matter. So first thinking about ordinary matter in the
universe, we want to think about the particles that we have which arrange
themselves into atoms. Atoms were democrat's word for the indivisible particles of
which everything is made. Sadly, in the 19th century, scientists jumped the gun.
They gave the word atoms to something which are not quite indivisible, but their
collections of particles that formed the basic building blocks of chemical elements.
We've already mentioned a little bit about what an atom really is. Let me review very
quickly the structure of an atom because we're going to dive into the center of that
atom and figure out what it's really made of. Atoms consist of atomic nuclei
surrounded by electrons. So electrons are very light elementary particles.
As far as we know, or even in the context of our best theories, electrons really are
indivisible. No one has a good model for how an electron could have stuff inside it.
We think it's a fundamental particle of nature, at least in our observable part of
the universe. These electrons are orbiting around a nucleus.
The atomic nucleus is much heavier than the electrons itself.
Almost all of the mass in ordinary matter comes from the nucleus, not from the
electrons. The atomic nucleus is a combination of protons and neutrons.
Protons and neutrons are both heavy particles. They have about the same mass,
about 2,000 times the mass of the electron. The protons are positively
charged and the neutrons are neutral. So you can balance the positive charge that
you get from a collection of protons in the nucleus. With the negative electric charge,
you get from the electrons surrounding the nucleus so that most atoms are
electrically neutral. Most ordinary matter, like this table or me, has a very tiny,
practically zero electrical charge. There could be some stray fluctuations, but
basically in bulk, ordinary matter is electrically neutral. So in those protons
and neutrons that create most of the mass in ordinary matter, turns out that they
themselves do have constituents. Protons and neutrons are by themselves not
elementary particles. They're made of smaller particles called quarks. This is
only something that was worked out in the 1960s and 1970s, and now it is very firmly
established that there are quarks inside protons and neutrons. And it turns out that
there are two kinds of quarks that you need to explain how to make both protons
and neutrons, and they are imaginatively labeled up-quarks and down-quarks. The
up-quarks have an electrical charge of plus two-thirds, the down-quarks have an
electrical charge of minus one-third, and both protons and neutrons have three
quarks each. So you can more or less guess how it's going to go. The proton, which
has charge plus one, is going to have two up-quarks, one down-quark. The neutron,
which is neutral, is going to have one up-quark with a charge plus two-thirds,
two down-quarks with a charge minus one-third each. So the neutron is going to
have a net zero charge. The proton is going to be plus one. It's very nice and
convenient, but not an accident, that the charge of the proton is exactly minus the
charge of the electron. So that's the basic structure that we have for atoms
that we've already talked about. You can take these protons, neutrons, and
electrons. You can arrange them in all the different combinations that fit according
to laws of physics, and you get the entire periodic table from which you can do all
of chemistry and all the other sciences other than physics. However, it's not the
end of the story. We need to tell you why protons, neutrons, and electrons, or if
you like, up-quarks, down-quarks, and electrons, arrange themselves in those
particular combinations, rather than some other combinations. As you know, the
reason why particles stick together is due to some force of nature. So on the one
hand, you have matter particles in nature. You have electrons and quarks, stuff that
make up stuff. But then there's also the forces of nature, the things that hold
those particles together, in the nucleus or in the atom. The most obvious force,
of course, that we have is gravity. That's the one we've been talking about already,
but let's put that to the side for the moment. In the atom, the important force is
the electromagnetic force. Again, about 200 years ago, you wouldn't have used the
word electromagnetic. You would have separately talked about the electricity
and magnetism. These are two separate phenomena. In the 19th century, a series
of physicists working hard, culminating in the work of James Clerk Maxwell, managed
to unify our understanding of electricity and magnetism, so that we now,
physicists, talk about a single force called electromagnetism. In fact, this
unification of electricity and magnetism is precisely analogous to a way that
Einstein unified space and time together into spacetime. Just as the time that
clicks off on a clock will depend on how you move through space, whether or not
you observe a certain field to be an electric field or a magnetic field also
depends on how you move through space. This unification of electricity and
magnetism into electromagnetism was the inspiration for Einstein's theory of
special relativity. So it is the electromagnetic force that takes charged particles
and makes them match up. Oppositely charged particles attract each other,
particles with the same charge will repel each other, that's the rule of
electromagnetism. The way that such forces are carried in nature is by fields, but
there's an interesting thing that happens due to quantum mechanics. Quantum
mechanics is the replacement for the classical mechanics of Isaac Newton that
physicists developed in the 1920s. Quantum mechanics is a very, very rich and
complicated subject, not something we're really going to do justice to in this
course, it requires a whole set of lectures all by its own. But one of the features
of quantum mechanics is that if you start with a field, probating the universe,
like the electromagnetic field, but you look at it carefully, what you see when
you look at that field is that you resolve it into individual particles. This
is the relationship between the electromagnetic field that we know about
and Maxwell talked about and the individual photons that are the particles that
carry radiation. Photons are the excitations, the individual bundles of
electromagnetic energy that quantum mechanics predicts. But that's only part of
the story. Quantum mechanics applies to fields, works for everything in the
universe. According to our current understanding of nature, the universe is
made of fields, and when you quantize those fields, they appear to us as particles.
Not only is there an electromagnetic field that appears to us as photons, there is
an electron field that appears to us as an electron, there is a gravitational field
that appears to us as gravitons, as we will discuss later. So the particle that
carries the force of electromagnetism is called the photon. If you like, you can
think of the reason why an electron is bound to an atomic nucleus as the fact that
that nucleus and that electron are exchanging photons back and forth, and there's
a force carried by that exchange of photons which glues the negatively charged
electron to the positively charged protons in the atomic nucleus. The same thing
happens with all the other forces of nature. It's the same kind of story over and
over again. The next obvious force we need to explain is why protons and neutrons
are bound together in the nucleus, or for that matter, why quarks are bound together
inside the protons and neutrons. The individual protons and neutrons, by the
way, are collectively known as nucleons. Protons and neutrons are so similar that
sometimes it's useful to label them with a single thing. We call them nucleons and
they're the things that make up the nucleus. So what keeps those quarks together in
the nucleons? The answer is a new force of nature. It's not the electromagnetic
force. It's a different force, which again, very unimaginatively, has been labeled
the strong nuclear force. The strong nuclear force is the thing that binds
together individual quarks inside protons and neutrons. So if there's a force,
there's a force field. If there's a force field, there are particles. The particles,
associated with the strong nuclear force, are called gluons, which actually is a
pretty good name when you think of it. They're gluing together the individual quarks
inside the protons and the neutrons. So in the next lecture, we're going to be a lot
more systematic of all the different forces of nature and the particles that are
associated with them. For today, what is more important to us is just to understand
the basic distinction that exists in all particle physics between, on the one hand,
matter particles, and on the other hand, force particles. These two kinds of
particles account for everything that we can observe in nature. There are even
theorems in quantum field theory saying these are the only possibilities. Those
theorems wouldn't work if space were two-dimensional, for example, but in the
world in which we actually live, where space is three-dimensional, those are the
only two kinds of particles we can have, matter particles and force particles.
Matter particles are named fermions after Enrico Fermi, who is the physicist who has
the most stuff named after him of all time. There are particles, fermions. There
is an interaction, the Fermi interaction. There is a laboratory outside Chicago
called Fermilab. There is a unit of length called the Fermi. He was a very influential
physicist, both a theorist and as an experimenter. Fermi was the person in charge
of the first self-sustained chain reaction that human beings put together as part of
the initial phases of the Manhattan Project. But before that, he was a theorist
thinking about what kind of particles can exist in nature, and fermions are named
after Fermi. Fermions are the matter particles in nature. The characteristic
feature that is important to us now is that matter particles take up space. What
that means is, if you have two fermions, you cannot take two identical fermions,
two electrons, let's say, and put them in exactly the same place, in exactly the
same quantum state of matter. If you take a bunch of electrons, you can only squeeze
them so close to each other. Electrons, being matter particles, being fermions,
take up a certain amount of space. That is a good thing. It's very good that matter
particles take up space. That's why this table doesn't collapse. The reason why this
table doesn't collapse is because it's made of atoms. The atoms are made of
electrons in their outer shells, and there's only so close you can pack those atoms
together. The atoms take up space, and that's why the table is solid. If electrons
were not fermions, if electrons were not matter particles that took up space, there's
nothing that would prevent the table from collapsing. This principle that electrons
cannot be put in the same place, that no matter particles can be in the same location,
is called the Pauli Exclusion Principle, after Wolfgang Pauli and other physicists,
and it just says that no two particles can be in exactly the same place doing exactly
the same thing at exactly the same time. Quarks are also matter particles, and when
you take three quarks and put them together, you form protons and neutrons,
which are also matter particles. The fact that you can't put protons or neutrons
too close together because they take up space is not really relevant to our everyday
lives because the electrons take up more space. So the most of the space being taken
up in an ordinary table or in you or in me is because the electrons are taking up
space, but in principle, so do the protons and neutrons. In contrast to this, we have
bosons. Bosons are the force-carrying particles of nature. The important thing about
force-carrying particles is that they can pile on top of each other. You can go from
individual particles to coherent classical excitations of the field. That's the reason
why, in the context of force fields, physicists were confused for hundreds of years as to
whether or not light, for example, was particles or waves. We now understand in the context
of quantum mechanics that it's both. That, in fact, what light is is a set of particles,
but they're force particles. They are bosons so they can pile up on top of each other to
make a wave. So the concept of bosons was invented by Satya Nedra Nath Bose, an Indian
physicist, in 1922, and Bose was actually literally giving a lecture to some of his
students about a well-known problem in statistical mechanics. The fact that when you took a
bunch of particles and added up the different ways they could combine, you didn't get the
right answer. In the 1920s, this was considered to be a real problem, and he was trying to
explain the problem to his students. And by mistake, he solved the problem. The reason
why he solved the problem was he goofed. He made an error, and the error is easy to
understand. Imagine you have two boxes, and you have two balls, and you try to ask,
what are the different ways I can put these two balls into these two boxes? Basically,
there's four different ways. Let's imagine you have a red ball and a blue ball. They
could both be in the left box. They could both be in the right box. The red ball could
maybe be left and the blue on the right, or the blue could be on the left and the red
could be on the right. You have four different possibilities. So according to conventional
statistics, if you said, I know nothing about where the balls are, what is the chance that
both balls are in the left-hand box? It would be one in four. You had a one in four chance.
Bose, during his lecture, made a mistake, and he considered three possibilities. Both
balls are in the left, both balls are in the right, or one ball each. He didn't distinguish
between the two balls being the two different boxes. He assigned a probability one-third
to each of these possibilities, and miraculously, he derived a formula that was in agreement
with observation. So he realized that somehow, fundamental particles of the Bose kind must
be indistinguishable. It must not matter whether the particles are here and here or here and
here. It counts as the same kind of thing. He realized that if you make that assumption,
suddenly everything fits together. And you can see what the consequences of that assumption
are. What he's saying is, two particles on the left, two particles on the right, one
particle each, are three possibilities that should be weighted equally. So now if you
ask, what is the chance that the two particles are on the left, you used to think it was a
25% chance. Now you think it's a 33% chance, a one in three chance. When particles obey
Bose's behavior, they are more likely to be in the same place than if they behave like
ordinary classical particles. Bosons not only can pile up on top of each other, they like
to pile on top of each other. And this fundamental insight is in charge of things like lasers
and a whole bunch of technological applications. So when Bose realized this in 1922, he became
very excited. He realized I figured out a resolution to a long lasting problem. He wrote a paper
submitted to the journal and the journal said, they laughed at him. They said, what do you
mean? You've made a mistake. We're not going to publish this. We're not going to publish your
mistake. No one understood that by making a certain assumption, he was able to explain a
long standing problem. So in despair, he sent his paper to Einstein, who did understand what
was going on and Einstein used his influence to get Bose's paper published and the statistics
that come out of it are now known as Bose-Einstein statistics. So photons are an example of
bosons they can pile on top of each other. Individual photons pile on top of each other to
make a classical electric or magnetic field or an electromagnetic wave. Gluons are also
bosons. Gluons can pile up on top of each other inside the quarks, inside the nucleons
rather, to bind the quarks together. So we get something that is working very nicely as a
system. We have matter particles that take up space, that give things extent throughout
space, and we have force particles that bind them together. It's good for us that we have
both kinds of particles, otherwise the world we know would be a very different place. So
there's another feature of bosons that distinguishes them from fermions, and a lot of times if
you hear on street corners people talking about bosons and fermions, this is the language
that they will use, which is that they have different kinds of spin. It turns out that
every elementary particle has an intrinsic spin, just like the spin of a top or the spin
of a spinning coin, except that for every kind of particle, that spin never changes. It's a fixed
amount that is never going to become some different amount. A top can speed up or slow
down, an electron is spinning, but it's always spinning just as fast. You can measure the
amount of spin in a certain fundamental unit of spin, and in those units for historical reasons,
the spin of the electron is one half. So you can have particles that have spin zero, have
no spin at all, spin one half, spin one, spin three halves, etc. It turns out that all bosons
have an integer amount of spin. In other words, a boson will have either zero spin, will be
spin one, or spin two, or three, or four, etc. Whereas all fermions, all matter particles
will have spin given by an integer plus one half. So a spin one half particle will be a
fermion, a spin one and a half, or two and a half, all of those will be fermions, matter
particles. For our purposes, it's much more important to keep in mind that fermions take
up space and bosons pile on top of each other. That's what makes them matter particles and
force particles, respectively. But it's also true due to something called the spin statistics
connection, that if you know that something is a force particle, you know that it's spin will be
an integer. If you know that something is a matter particle, it'll be an integer plus one half.
So you'll hear about people talking in that language, so I just thought you should know.
So those are the two basic kinds of particles that we can get in nature. Matter particles,
fermions, Bose particles, which carry forces in nature. There are also, you may have heard,
anti-particles. There is something called anti-matter. And the way that anti-matter works is
subtly different for bosons and fermions. Ordinary matter particles, like electrons or
quarks, all have their own specific kind of anti-particle. So you have the electron, which
is charged minus one and a certain mass. The anti-particle will always have exactly the same
mass, but the opposite charge. So the electron has charged minus one, spin one half in a
certain mass. The anti-electron has charged plus one, the same spin and the same mass.
Everything is the same, except the charges of the particles go to minus what they used to be.
So the anti-electron, which is the first anti-particle ever discovered, is usually called
the positron and plays an important part in the early universe. But every fermion has
its own anti-particle. So you have an up quark and a down quark. You also have an anti-up
quark and an anti-down quark and so forth. For bosons, the situation is a little bit
different. Some bosons can be their own anti-particles. The photon is its own anti-particle.
The gluons come in a set of eight and in that set of eight, you have a bunch of particles
and they're corresponding anti-particles. So it's a little more complicated, but also it
doesn't matter as much because it's the matter particles, the fermions, that take up space
and could run into each other. When matter particles and anti-matter particles run into
each other, they annihilate. So you take an electron and a positron, an anti-electron,
bring them together and they will turn into photons. They will turn into energy. That is
the reason why we know very, very well that anti-matter plays very little role in our
current universe. Our universe is full of stuff and even though the universe is a fairly
dilute place, in the past it was actually quite densely packed. If there were a lot of
anti-matter in the universe, it would have annihilated with the ordinary matter a long
time ago. In the early universe, particles were bumping into each other all the time.
And when particles and anti-particles were bumping into each other, they create photons.
They turn into energy in the form of photons. We believe that in the early universe there
were a lot of anti-particles and there were a lot of ordinary particles and what happened
is almost all of them annihilated. But for some reason there was a slight imbalance.
Somehow in the early universe there was slightly more matter than anti-matter. And what we
see today, all of the ordinary particles we see today are the residue, the left over
slight asymmetry between the amount of matter and between the amount of anti-matter. We
don't know why. This is a mystery in physics right now. We have plenty of theories to try
to explain it, but we're not sure which theory is correct. That is an ongoing research
program. I'm going to be alluding to it in future lectures occasionally, but we don't
have time to go into any of the details about the specifics. So you just have to believe
me there's not a lot of anti-matter in the universe. The anti-matter in particular is
certainly not the dark matter. Anti-matter is not dark. It runs into ordinary matter and
shines very, very brightly. That's not what we want for dark matter to be.
Okay, so now we have some knowledge of what exists and what can exist. We have matter particles,
fermions, anti-matter particles, sorry, force particles, bosons, and they each have their
own kinds of anti-particles. So now let's go back into the atom and see what we have.
In the atom, remember, we have a nucleus with electrons going around. The electrons are
matter particles, fermions. So are the nucleons. So are the protons and neutrons that make
up the atomic nucleus. They are bound, the nucleus, to the electrons by the exchange of
photons by the exchange of those particular force particles back and forth. If you dive
into the individual protons and neutrons, you see three quarks in each one, and they are
bound together by gluons, gluons going back and forth between the different particles.
You can then ask, what is making the protons and neutrons stick together in the nucleus?
And there's different ways to answer this question, actually, depending on how you want
to think about what is going on. One simple way of answering is to think about pions,
which are a different kind of particle made of quarks. A pion is an example of a meson,
which is made of one quark and one anti-quark, bound together, and the exchange of pions
between protons and neutrons binds them together. So the pion is a boson. It has one quark
and one anti-quark in it. The spins, one half and one half, add up to zero because they're
pointing in opposite directions. So the pion is a boson, spin zero, it's a force particle.
Pions can bind protons and neutrons together in atomic nuclei. That's one way of thinking
what is going on inside the nucleus. And of course we have gravity, the force of gravity
is the most obvious one in all of nature. Quantum field theory tells us that if we quantize
gravity, we will decompose the gravitational field into particles. We have not succeeded
in doing this yet. We don't understand how to think about gravity in a quantum mechanical
context. Sunday we hope to be able to do so, but we think it's a very robust prediction
of the framework of quantum mechanics itself that when we finally do understand how it
works, it will involve gravitons. It will involve individual particle-like excitations
of the gravitational field. So we believe the gravitons exist even though we don't
currently know how to describe them in any full way. So given the set of particles that
we have, we can start thinking about what those particles do. In particle physics language
what we talk about are the interactions between different kinds of particles. Different kinds
of particles can bump into each other, they can annihilate, they can create things, they
can emit different particles and they can absorb different particles. We have a way, a language
of describing these processes of interactions called Feynman diagrams. Richard Feynman of
course was a famous physicist at the California Institute of Technology where I currently am
and he was sufficiently famous that I now sit at the same desk that Feynman used, which
means that tourists will occasionally come to my office to look at Richard Feynman's
desk. They will not look at my desk that I have had at various places around the United
States, but Feynman's desk is famous enough. The thing that Feynman did that is most obvious
to the life of a working physicist is invent the concept of Feynman diagrams. And it seems
like a fairly trivial idea, you just draw little cartoons of what particles can do. In
fact, to a working physicist, each one of these little diagrams is associated with a number
that lets us calculate the likelihood that a given process is going to happen. So we're
not going to talk about that in any detail, there's a lot of math involved, etc., etc.,
there's a lot of fun, it requires years of graduate education to figure it all out, but
what we're going to do is just to use these little pictures to remind us of what interactions
can happen. So here's an example of a Feynman diagram. It's just a picture of an electron
moving from the left to the right and at some point that electron emits a photon. So the
fact that this is an allowed Feynman diagram is telling us that electrons can emit photons.
The reason why is we'll discuss a little bit more in the next lecture is that an electron
has an electrical charge. The thing that photons respond to, the things that photons
interact with, is the electrical charge itself. So for electrically charged particles, they
can emit and absorb photons. This Feynman diagram is an example of an electron interacting
with a photon. And then there are certain rules about how you can manipulate Feynman diagrams.
There's rules that say if a certain diagram exists and describes an allowed process, then
you know for sure that another specific kind of diagram can exist. For example, if you
have a diagram where a bunch of particles come in, interact and then go out again, there
will be a new diagram which is also allowed that you can get by taking one of the particles
that came out and moving it to the other side, moving it so that it came in. So if we have
a diagram where an electron comes in, spits off a photon and goes away again as an electron,
we can take that photon, move it over to the other side and there must be a diagram
describing the absorption of a photon by an electron. A diagram that has an electron and
photon coming together, joining and going off as a single electron. And indeed, that
happens. So we have a different kind of Feynman diagram that describes a different example
of the electromagnetic interaction at work. Finally, we can do this, not to the photon,
but to the outgoing electron. So we had an example where an electron comes in, spits
off a photon and goes away as an electron. What if we move the outgoing electron to the
initial state? Then we would have two particles coming in and going out as a photon. However,
the rule says that when you take a fermion or something that has an antiparticle and
move it from one side to the other, you need to exchange particles and antiparticles. For
the photon, that didn't matter because the photon is its own antiparticle. But when you
move an electron from one side of the fermion diagram to the other, you need to exchange
it with a positron, the anti-electron. So the fact that there is a diagram when an electron
comes in, spits off a photon and goes off as an electron, implies there's another diagram
where a positron comes in, hits an electron, and they go off together as a photon. In other
words, it must be the case that an electron and a positron can annihilate into photons just
as we predicted. The fact that the electron can spit off a photon implies that it must be able
to annihilate. And of course, this is seen in the data. This is consistent with the physics that we
observe. So these are just a few simple examples of how we can understand the interactions of
elementary particles in terms of Feynman diagrams. In the next lecture, we will be more
systematic. We'll tell you all of the particles that have yet been discovered in the laboratory
and all of the interactions they have. And the point of that will be to say that none of them
can be the dark matter. We need to invent yet more particles to explain that part of the
universe.
