So by now, we know the laws of physics, and when I say the laws of physics, I mean basically
all of the fundamental laws from which all of the rest of physics is derived. We know
general relativity, Einstein's theory of curved spacetime, which manifests itself as
gravity, and we know the standard model of particle physics. We didn't dig down into
the quantum mechanical underpinning of the standard model, but the standard model plus
general relativity is enough to cover every experiment we've ever done and get the right
answer. Nobody believes these are the final answers to the laws of physics, but as far
as all the experiments we can do here on Earth are concerned, they are good enough to match
the data. The best indication that we have that there's physics beyond the standard model
and general relativity comes from the cosmos, comes from dark matter and dark energy, which
we're trying to understand in these lectures. So today what we're going to do is take the
laws of physics and put them to work in the universe. We're going to take the universe
we see, the large universe that is smoothly distributed with galaxies and dark matter and
dark energy we'll eventually see. We're going to wind the movie backwards to the very early
parts of the universe, plug in the laws of physics, and we're going to make predictions
for what we're supposed to see now at the end of all this process, using the laws of
physics and what we know about the early universe, what should we be seeing today. In other words
we're going to be doing paleontology essentially. We're going to be looking for fossils, but
instead of looking them in the ground that are 100 million years old, we're going to
be looking for fossils in the sky that are 14 billion years old, left over particles
from the earliest moments of the universe's existence. Partly this is just because we
want to make sure we're on the right track. We think we have a picture that fits the data,
we want to use that picture to make predictions and then go test them. But also partly we
want to learn about what can come next. We think that we have excellent evidence that
there is dark matter in the universe, for example. The dark matter particles are going
to be relics from the very early universe. We need to understand how those particles
are created, how the laws of physics can be used to predict how many particles of each
kind there are. So we need to understand different features of particles in different circumstances.
We need to understand what particles do when they're by themselves and what particles do
when they're in a box with a whole bunch of other particles. Ultimately the box will be
the whole universe. So what we mean when I say what particles do, we mean a particle
can either decay or it can be stable. It can sit there forever, not moving, or it can turn
into other particles. It can also bump into other particles and that will be relevant
for the early universe when the densities are very high. So let's just think about
particles decaying versus particles being stable. Why do some particles last forever
and other particles go away? Well there are rules that govern when one particle can decay
into some set of other particles. For our purposes today there are basically two rules. One is
that heavier particles decay into lighter particles. The second rule is that there are
conserved quantities. There are numbers that don't change in any process, in any process
in particle physics, including the decay of one heavy particle into a set of lighter
particles. So let's put both of those rules to work in the particle physics that we already
know about. The first rule says heavy particles decay into lighter ones. This is basically
a consequence of the conservation of energy. We know that mass is one form that energy
can take. To a very good understanding, the energy of a particle is the energy that is
in its mass, even if it's just sitting there, plus the energy of its motion, plus the kinetic
energy of the particle flying through space. Those two forms of energy together tell you
what the energy of the particle is. So if we have a heavy particle and we want to ask
what can it decay into, it can certainly not decay into an even heavier particle. There's
no way for the energy of the final state to match the energy of the initial state. A light
particle decaying into a heavy one would violate conservation of energy. But when a heavy particle
decays into lighter particles, it can match conservation of energy, even if the masses
do not precisely align. Since there's only a finite number of particles, it would be
very surprising, in fact, if the masses of the first particle were exactly the sum of
the masses of the second particles, what happens is the extra energy is taken up in
the kinetic energy of the outgoing particles flying away. So, for example, a classic example
of an allowed decay of a heavy particle into lighter ones is the decay of the neutron into
a proton, an electron, and an anti-neutrino. We see that happen in nature. The lifetime
of the neutron is something like 10 minutes, so it must be the case that the mass of the
neutron, the energy of the neutron has from E equals mc squared, is greater than the sums
of the masses of the proton, the electron, and the neutrino. The neutrino is very, very
light, so it almost doesn't play a role in this. But when we look at the numbers, the
neutrino, the neutron, rather, and the proton are both much heavier than the electron. The
neutron is a little bit heavier than the proton. In units of masses of the electron, the neutron
is 1,879 times as heavy as the electron. The proton is 1,877 times heavier than the electron.
So the neutron, 1,879 electron masses, decays into the proton, 1,877 plus the electron,
which is 1. You get a sum, which is 1,878, still less than the 1,879 that is the neutron.
So that's why it's allowed to go. The fact that these numbers are so close, the fact
that the masses of the proton plus electron plus neutrino is almost equal to the mass
of the neutron is one of the reasons why the neutron is so long lived. There's not a lot
of possible arrangements for the outgoing particles. Now consider the possibility of
the proton decaying. What could the proton decay into? Well, when you think about it,
you might want the proton to decay into a neutron, a positron, and a neutrino. That would
serve electric charge because the neutron and neutrino are neutral. The positron has
a positive charge just like the proton. But this event never happens. Protons do not decay
into a neutron plus a positron plus an electron neutrino because it doesn't match energy conservation.
The proton is lighter than the neutron and therefore will never decay. It's interesting
to speculate that the universe would be a very different place if the masses of the
elementary particles were a little bit different. What if the mass of the proton were a little
bit larger than the mass of the neutron? Then it would be the other way around. The neutron
would be stable. There would be nothing for the neutron to decay into. But the proton
could decay. The proton would decay into a neutron, spitting off a positron. What do
all those positrons do? They go around and they annihilate with all the electrons. In
other words, we'd be left in a world with nothing but neutrons and neutrinos if the
proton were heavier than the neutron. That would be a very, very different world than
in the one in which we live. There would be no atoms. There would be no chemistry, no
molecules, anything like that. So we're very lucky that the mass of the proton is a tiny
bit less than the mass of the neutron. The second rule relevant to what can happen in
particle physics is that conserved quantities don't change. That's what the word conserved
means. The most obvious example of a conserved quantity is of course electric charge. It's
sort of intuitively obvious to us that the electric charge shouldn't change in particle
physics reactions. So for example, the electron, for historical reasons, has a charge minus
1. The proton has a charge plus 1. That's because it's made of three quarks. The two
up quarks in the proton each have a charge of plus two-thirds each. And the one down
quark has a charge of minus one-third. So it adds up to plus one. The neutron is electrically
neutral just as the neutrino is. The neutron comes from two down quarks, minus one-third
each, and one up quark plus two-thirds, so they add to zero. So in any process that can
happen, the electrical charge of all the particles at the beginning must equal the sum of the
electrical charges of all the particles at the end. So for example, a neutron cannot
decay into a proton, an electron, and a positron. That will be allowed by energy conservation,
but you would have a total charge of plus one at the end. You had a total charge of
zero at the beginning, so that is not allowed. No one would even have guessed that that should
be allowed. We sort of understand immediately that electric charge is not created or destroyed.
But it's a good paradigm. It's a good example of something that happens, something that
doesn't go away, and we have more subtle examples before us that play a big role in particle
physics. The two other examples I want to mention of conserved quantities of numbers
that don't change in particle physics interactions are quark number and lepton number. Basically,
the quark number is the total number of quarks. The lepton number is the total number of leptons.
The only subtlety there is that when we say the total number, antiparticles count as negative.
So the difference between a particle and an antiparticle is that all of the conserved
quantities for the particle are the opposite of the value of those conserved quantities
for the antiparticle. So you know that the electron has charge minus one, the positron
has electric charge plus one. They're opposites. Similarly, the lepton number of the electron
is plus one, so the lepton number of the positron must be minus one. The total amount of conserved
charge for a particle and its antiparticle will always add to zero, so they will always
be opposites. Quarks have quark number plus one and lepton number zero. There's no lepton
number associated with quarks, just as there is no quark number associated with leptons.
So then you add them up inside a proton or a neutron, and you get a total quark number
of three. There are three quarks inside a proton. Therefore, the quark number is three,
likewise for a neutron. Remember that we defined different ways that quarks can get together
to form heavier particles. We called a baryon any collection of three quarks, all the three
different colors combined to give you one white baryon. So sometimes people talk about
baryon number, which is exactly equivalent to quark number divided by three. So the baryon
number of the proton is one because it has a quark number of three. Now consider the
pion, for example. The pion is a meson. It's made of one quark and one anti-quark. So
if you think about it, the quark number for a pion is zero, or likewise the baryon number
for a pion is zero. Even though it's made of quarks, one quark and one anti-quark, the
total quark number of the pion is zero. You can make as many pions as you want, you're
not changing the quark number. So the way to think about this is almost as if there's
some stuff, almost as if there's some substance that changes its form, rearranges how it appears,
but it is never created or destroyed. Some nugget of quarkiness that can change from
being an up quark to a down quark or vice versa as neutrons and protons inter-commute,
but it never disappears. It never goes from being a quark to being an electron or something
like that. So all the reactions that we can possibly have in the universe will keep the
quark number the same, and it will keep the lepton number the same. Here's an example
you might think if you were only thinking about electric charge, that the proton could
decay, the proton could decay into a positron, an anti-electron, and a neutrino. That would
keep the electric charge constant. You would have electric charge plus one for the proton,
it would turn into electric charge plus one for the positron, plus the neutral neutrino.
The reason why protons don't decay in the real world is because quark number is conserved.
So again, this is a happy feature of the world in which we live. If quark number were not
conserved, the protons would all dissolve into positrons. Those positrons would annihilate,
you'd be left in the universe with nothing but neutrinos and photons. Again, not a very
exciting place. Likewise, lepton number tells you certain things can't happen. Imagine a
neutron trying to decay into a proton plus an electron. This is what people used to think
neutrons actually did. They saw the neutron sit there and they saw the proton and the
electron come out. The total electric charge is zero before and after. The total baryon
number is one before and after. It was one neutron with three quarks turning into one
proton with three quarks plus an electron. However, we now know that that can't happen.
The reason why it can't happen is because it violates lepton number. There were no leptons
before and then there's electron lying there afterward. That's why when a neutron decays,
there must be an anti-neutrino involved. That anti-neutrino carries lepton number minus
one. So the total lepton number at the end of the day, with the proton, the electron
plus the anti-neutrino, adds to zero. So the neutron is allowed to decay if there's that
anti-neutrino there. It wouldn't have been able to decay if there weren't. Now when we
talk about historically, how do you invent these conservation laws? How do you figure
out what is conserved and what is not? You don't do it by saying, aha, I think some
numbers should be conserved. Let me go look at the interactions. Usually what you do is
you do particle physics. You measure what interactions actually do happen, which interactions
happen quickly, which interactions happen slowly, then you try to figure out why certain
things don't happen. That's how people come across things like the conservation of quark
number or the conservation of baryon number. People knew that baryon number was conserved
long before they knew what a quark was. They could see that neutrons didn't decay into
neutrinos or something like that. There must be some conserved quantity there. That's how
the game is usually played. Having said that, we should admit that some rules are more solid
than some other rules. Electric charge really is conserved. It is true that quark number
and lepton number have never been seen to be violated in any experiment that we've ever
done, but we wouldn't be that surprised if someday we found that they were. In fact,
there are theories in which they are. It's just very, very slow that it happens. We haven't
seen it yet. Electric charge is something that we really don't think is violated. If
someone claimed to do an experiment and they found that electric charge was created or
destroyed, basically nobody would believe them unless they had some cachet for other
reasons. It's something that no one expects on a theoretical basis. You can notice, for
example, that when you look at the whole universe and add up its electric charge, you get a
number that is zero, as far as we can tell. They're an equal number of electrons and protons
in the universe. The universe is electrically neutral. That is not true for quark number.
It might not even be true for lepton number. The truth is we don't know because we don't
know how many neutrinos are out there. Neutrinos versus anti-neutrinos contribute to the lepton
number and we can't count them. But we can count the quarks. The quarks show up in protons
and neutrons. We can count them. There are many, many more quarks in the universe than
there are anti-quarks. It could be that that's just how the universe started. The quark number
is truly conserved and there's been this imbalance all along, but honestly nobody believes that.
What everyone really believes is that in the very, very early universe, the quark number
was zero and there was some dynamical process that really did violate quark number and created
that imbalance. That whole game that we tried to play, creating quark number where there
wasn't any before, is called barryogenesis, creating barryon number out of zero barryon
number. We don't understand barryogenesis very well. It's an open research project
that we would like to understand better. Part of the ways that we're trying to understand
it better is actually to do experiments here on Earth that would witness barryon number
being violated. There are proton decay experiments which conceptually are the simplest things
in the world. You get a big vat of stuff that is not radioactive, stuff that doesn't emit
any form of high energy particles. You put it deep underground where no one will bother
it, where no cosmic rays can come in and bump into it and you wait for something to happen.
What you're waiting for is for a proton to turn into, for example, a positron plus a
neutrino that keeps electric charge okay, it keeps lepton number okay, but it violates
quark number. We've never seen it happen, but we're looking. As soon as we do see it
happen, there'll be great advance towards our understanding of the laws of physics.
Okay, so those rules are telling us what happens to a particle sitting all by itself, what
particles can decay into others, which ones are stable. Many of the particles that we've
talked about so far are stable. The neutrino is stable, the electron is stable, the proton
is stable. Why, if you think of it, you can't tell me any set of particles that those guys
can decay into while both being less massive and keeping all the conserved quantities conserved.
The proton is the lightest particle that carries barryon number, that carries quark number,
therefore it can't go into anything else. The neutrino is the lightest particle that
carries lepton number. The electron is the lightest particle that carries electric charge.
So that's telling us why these particles can't decay, they have nowhere to go. The dark
matter is another particle which seems to be stable. One nice way to make new theories
of dark matter is to invent new conserved quantities that explain why the dark matter
particle has lasted for the 14 billion years that the universe has been around.
Now let's take some of that understanding and put it together in the early universe,
where you don't just have one particle sitting there and decaying, you have a bunch of particles.
So the early universe is compact, things are squeezed together, the density is very high,
and this means two things. One thing it means is that interactions happen very frequently.
Particles are right next to each other, they keep bumping into each other. The second thing
it means is that because the temperature is high, the energy per particle is very high.
That's basically the definition of temperature, it's the average energy per particle. So if
the energy of a particle is its rest energy, its mass, plus its kinetic energy, when the
energy is very, very high the particles are all moving very, very quickly. And what that
means is that new things can happen. Consider an interaction where a proton bumps into an
electron. Now that interaction already happens all the time in a hydrogen atom. That's what
a hydrogen atom is. It's an electron spinning around a single proton. You can ask what happens.
The answer is nothing. The hydrogen atom can sit there forever. But if we go to the early
universe when the temperature was very high, instead of just the electrons sitting there
on top of the proton, we have an electron and proton running into each other with a large
amount of energy. What can happen then is they can collide and turn into a neutron plus
an electron neutrino. The total charge of that interaction goes from a total of zero
to a total of zero. The total quart number goes from being three to being three. The
total lepton number goes from being one to being one. Everything is conserved. The only
thing you're trying to do is to add energy to the system so you can turn lighter particles,
a proton and electron, into a heavier combination. You can do that conserving energy if you're
at high temperatures. That's the kind of thing that becomes possible in the early universe
when all the particles are zooming around very rapidly, bumping into each other. This
gives us a way of asking what can happen when you go from the very early universe, when
things are hot, dense, bumping into each other, to the very late universe that we see today.
Today in the universe, things are very, very dilute. Things are not bumping into each other
all the time. And things are very cold. The universe right now, technically speaking,
is not in what we call thermal equilibrium. I am not at the same temperature as the sun
or the cosmic background radiation. But roughly speaking, when we talk about the temperature
of the universe, the thing that we refer to is the temperature of that cosmic microwave
background. That is the relic leftover stuff from the plasma that used to be in thermal
equilibrium. In the early universe, those photons that we now see as the microwave background
were rapidly bumping into everything else. Their evolution in temperature is what sets
the scale for how hot the universe is. And the way it works is very simple. As the scale
factor goes down in the early universe, as things squeeze together, the temperature goes
up. And it goes exactly inversely. So when the temperature was twice as high, the scale
factor was only half its current size. In particular, when the scale factor was 1,1000
its current size, the temperature was a thousand times as high, and that's when the microwave
background itself was formed. If we keep going back, back and back and back, until when the
universe was very, very hot, then we can create new particles that aren't lying around today.
Remember, the temperature is the rest energy plus the kinetic energy. It's the average
total energy of the particles. So by increasing that temperature, by increasing the total
energy, we have enough energy to create heavier particles than we find in the universe today.
Whether or not they're stable, they will come into existence. For example, an electron and
a positron can come together and annihilate, and you can say, what can they annihilate
into? The answer is they can annihilate into any pair of particles and antiparticles because
the total of all conserved quantities for an electron plus a positron is zero. The total
amount of conserved quantity in any particle-antiparticle pair always adds to zero, so any particle-antiparticle
pair can always convert into any other particle-antiparticle pair. So let's imagine we invent a new
kind of particle, call it particle X, and it is a fermion. It comes with its antiparticle,
the antiparticle. The X particle is heavy, we don't make it in the laboratory today,
but in the early universe when the energies were very high, electrons and positrons kept
bumping into each other and creating X particles and antiparticles. What we want to know is
how does the abundance, how does the density of those X particles and antiparticles change
as the universe expands? So there are two events in the thermal history, in the lifespan
of this X particle and its antiparticle, the antiparticle. One is that it becomes cold.
So if you think about it, the temperature tells you the average energy of a particle,
the energy is the rest mass plus the kinetic energy, and there's two different regimes
that you can think about, one in which the rest energy is much larger than the kinetic
energy, the other one in which the rest energy is much smaller. If the rest energy is larger
than the kinetic energy, that translates directly into the statement that the particles are
moving slowly compared to the speed of light, they're more or less at rest, relatively speaking.
We call such particles cold, they're moving slowly, the temperature of the surrounding
gas is small compared to the mass of that particle. In the other limit, when the temperature
is very, very high, the particle's energy is dominated by its kinetic energy, that means
it's moving close to the speed of light, and we call such particles hot. So of course,
as the universe cools down, the temperature of every particle goes down, and there will
be a moment in its life when it goes from being hot to being cold, that's the moment
when the temperature, the average energy, is approximately equal to the mass of these
particles, that's one important event. The other important event is when particles freeze
out, that's when particles stop interacting with the particles around them. Now in the
early universe, not only is everything high temperature and high energy, it's also densely
packed, things are close together. So things keep bumping into each other, and things can
for example annihilate. If you have a positron, it will bump into an electron and annihilate.
Today, however, particles are more spread apart. Imagine that you have a positron here
in this room, and you're in a strange situation where the nearest anti-positron, which is
an electron, is a mile away. It's true that an electron and a positron will come together
and annihilate, but if they're a mile away, they don't even know that each other exists.
They can't find each other to annihilate. So when things freeze out, when things become
so dilute that they don't find each other, they can exist even though there are both
particles and anti-particles lying around. These particles and anti-particles could in
principle annihilate, but they can't find each other. They're left over as a relic abundance.
It sounds unlikely for positrons and electrons, because they find each other very easily, but
then when you talk about neutrinos, or other particles that interact very weakly, they need
to be very, very close together to interact a lot. Neutrinos can freeze out very easily,
they just interact so weakly, they stop finding anti-neutrinos and annihilating. That's the
general picture, and the two different regimes, hot and cold, can happen at different times
with respect to the event of freeze out. In other words, particles freeze out when they
stop interacting. That's one event. The other event is particles go from being hot to being
cold, and there's two different possibilities. You first go from being hot to being cold,
and then you freeze out. You freeze out while you are cold, and you are called a cold relic
particle, or you freeze out while you're hot. The only difference in these two different
cases is how many particles you're left with. If you're hot, if you're moving very close
to the speed of light, your mass is very tiny compared to the energy that is going around.
It's easy to make you. It's easy to make light relativistic particles. They don't weigh that
much. They'll be very, very abundant. When you're cold, however, that means that you're
heavy, you're massive, you're lumbering. It's hard to make X particles and anti-X particles
if they're cold. Therefore, if a relic is cold, when it freezes out, there will be many
fewer of them left around. Now, the obvious application to this kind of analysis is dark
matter. You're going to say, we think that there's a lot of dark matter in the universe.
It's not a particle that we see very easily. Could it be a leftover from some freeze out
process in the early universe? This is where you start examining in detail the possibility
that neutrinos could be the dark matter. Neutrinos are the only particle in the standard model
that stand any chance of being the dark matter. They're neutral, and they're weakly interacting.
What happens to them in the early universe? When do they freeze out? The answer is neutrinos
freeze out when they're hot. They're very, very light particles, so they're almost always
hot. They're almost always moving close to the speed of light. When they freeze out,
they're hot. There's a lot of them. We can calculate very, very accurately the number
of neutrinos per cubic centimeter in the early universe and extrapolate it with great confidence
to the number of neutrinos in the current universe. They could be the dark matter if
they have a certain mass. We know very well what the mass of the neutrino would have to
be to account for the dark matter, but we don't think that that's right. We don't think
that the neutrinos really are the dark matter. Why is that? Because while they're freezing
out, they're hot, they're moving close to the speed of light, and therefore they don't
clump together. The characteristic feature that makes us find dark matter in the current
universe is that dark matter falls into galaxies and clusters of galaxies. We can measure the
rotation curves of galaxies, and we find that most of the mass of the galaxy is dark matter.
We can measure the speeds of galaxies within clusters, or use gravitational lensing to
find that most of the mass in a cluster of galaxies is dark matter. But if the dark matter
was hot, if the dark matter was moving rapidly when it was created in the early universe,
instead of falling together under its mutual gravitational field, it would zip around and
smooth everything out. The feature that you get when the dark matter is hot is that structure
doesn't grow in the universe. The dark matter particles are moving very, very quickly, and
instead of falling together and becoming lumpy, increasing the contrast knob of the universe,
the neutrinos or other relic hot dark matter particles would simply smooth everything out.
This is not a close call, either. The possibility that the dark matter is hot has been absolutely
ruled out by what we know about the existence of galaxies and so forth in the universe.
That's why when we talk about the dark matter particle, we talk about cold dark matter.
We talk about a particle that was massive when it froze out, that was heavy, that was
moving slowly compared to the speed of light. So what you want is a particle that is heavy
and a particle that has enough leftover relic abundance to be the dark matter. If the particle
interacted very strongly, there wouldn't be enough of it left over. It would just go away.
If the particle interacts weakly, you can make enough of it to be the dark matter. So
that is why the leading candidate for dark matter is called the WIMP, the Weekly Interacting
Massive Particle. If it's weakly interacting, even though there are new particles, X, and
anti-particles, X-bar, the X-particles and anti-X particles don't annihilate away because
they just don't find each other. That is the leading scenario for what the dark matter
could be, a cold dark matter particle moving slowly because it's heavy, weakly interacting
and therefore called a WIMP. That's a very general kind of scheme for what could be going
on. In the upcoming lectures, we're going to look at specific examples for things that
can be left over from the early universe. We'll look at specific examples of WIMPs to
be sure for the dark matter, but also more mundane examples like helium, something that
we've actually detected, and even better than that, the cosmic microwave background, all
of which things are going to give us great clues to what the universe was like at very
early times.
