At this point, in the final lecture of the course, we have a great deal to be proud of.
By we, I mean scientists who have been trying their best and put together a picture of what
the universe is made of over the last hundred years.
But I also mean the human race who has been wondering about these questions for the last
several thousand years, and of course all of you who have been watching these lectures.
We've put together a pretty good picture of everything.
Not only do we know that 95% of the universe is this dark sector, 70% of it dark energy
that is smoothly distributed through space and time, and 25% of it dark matter, some
heavy particle that settles in to galaxies and clusters, but we have good reason to
believe that we're not missing anything.
There may be one percent or more here or there, but basically we know everything in the universe.
Measuring the total density of stuff through the curvature of space convinces us that what
we know right now comprises everything that there is to know.
However, scientists are notoriously bad at resting on their laurels.
What we want to do is to focus on the questions to which we don't know the answer, the puzzles
that we're left with by this very, very successful picture.
Fortunately, even though the picture that we have of the universe today is very successful,
it leaves us with tremendous questions and it offers us clues as to where we might find
the answers.
The clues reside in the fact that this picture that fits the data so well is nevertheless
extremely unnatural from certain points of view.
It's perfectly fair to say that our picture of the universe, with 5% ordinary matter,
5% dark matter, 70% dark energy, makes no sense, or at the very least you could have
done better if you were asked to design a simple and elegant universe.
So there's something that we don't understand about why our universe is like this versus
like something else.
So for this lecture, what we're going to do is to step back a bit, look at the big picture,
start with a historical overview of how we got here, and try to go from there to extrapolate
where we might go next.
To try to understand, given what we have learned about the universe, where might we be looking
for clues as to what underlies the particular configuration in which we find the universe
in which we live.
So let's start with how we got here.
A hundred years ago, we knew next to nothing correct about what the universe was like on
very, very large scales.
We did know that there were stars.
We knew that stars were different than the sun.
They were further away, but they were the same basic kind of thing.
We didn't know what those stars were.
We didn't know how they made their nuclear fuel, the stars or the sun.
We didn't know that there were such a thing as a nucleus.
We knew that there were atoms.
We knew there were different chemical elements, but we hadn't yet decomposed atoms into electrons
moving around nuclei.
So the basic energy source for these stars was unknown to us.
We believed that the stars were distributed in an island universe configuration.
We thought that the stars were moving around each other in what we now call the Milky Way
Galaxy, but we didn't know that there were other galaxies.
We knew that there were little fuzzy patches on the sky that were called nebulae.
We didn't know that many of these nebulae were in fact galaxies in their own right,
with hundreds of billions of stars all by themselves.
We certainly didn't know about the expansion of the universe.
We didn't know that galaxies had an apparent velocity moving away from us, and we didn't
know anything about Einstein's theories of relativity, of general relativity.
So we didn't know that space and time could expand.
We believed that an absolute Newtonian universe in which space and time were fixed, they weren't
changing as a function of time, so the dynamic nature of space-time itself was something
that we didn't have access to.
So the modern story really begins in 1915, when Einstein puts the finishing touches on
this general theory of relativity, which says that space-time can be curved, can have a
dynamics of its own, and that dynamics is manifested to us as gravity.
He very soon thereafter started thinking about cosmology and realized that if the universe
was evenly spread all over the place, it would have to be dynamical.
It would have to either be expanding or contracting, but as far as he knew in 1917, it wasn't.
So he changed his ideas, he added a new term to his equation for general relativity called
the cosmological constant, something that would keep the universe static, at least in
principle.
Then of course, in the late 1920s, it was realized the universe is not static.
Hubble taught us, number one, that some of the Nebulae are separate galaxies all by themselves,
and number two, that the universe is expanding, it is getting bigger, so Einstein tossed away
his cosmological constant realizing that it's a dynamical universe in which we live.
Very soon thereafter, Fritz Wickey was looking at clusters of galaxies and he found the first
evidence for dark matter.
He looked in the coma cluster and realized there was more stuff in the coma cluster than
we could possibly account for by what we saw.
He didn't know at the time that that stuff, that dark matter, couldn't be explained by
ordinary atoms, but that was going to come down the road.
In the 1940s and 50s was when we first really realized how the early universe worked.
George Gamov and his students, Ralph Alpha and Robert Herman, figured out how to make
light elements by a nucleosynthesis in the early universe, and as a spin-off they got
the cosmic microwave background, the leftover radiation that we now know provides us a snapshot
of what the universe looked like 400,000 years after the Big Bang.
This microwave background was discovered in the 1960s by Penzius and Wilson by accident.
They were very careful radio astronomers, they kept getting these microwaves uniformly
across the sky, they didn't realize there was another group down the street in Princeton
that was looking for these intentionally, they won the Nobel Prize in the 1970s for
their work.
Then in the 70s, particle physicists put together the standard model of particle physics, so
the cosmological standard model crept up on us gradually.
The particle physics standard model was put together over the space of only a few years,
and it's been extremely successful since then.
Since the mid-1970s, no particle physics experiment has truly surprised us.
Everything that we've done has ficked together into what we already knew as the standard
model.
Also in the 1970s, Vera Rubin found even better evidence for dark matter.
She measured the mass of individual galaxies, looked at their rotation curves, and found
that not only the galaxies heavier than they could be, given only the stars and gas and
dust that were in them, but that there was mass out beyond any of the visible matter.
So eventually we realized that this dark matter was not able to be accommodated in what we
understood about particle physics, it had to be a new particle.
In 1980, Alan Guth invents inflation.
There were puzzles about the early universe we didn't understand.
How is the early universe so smooth?
How is the spatial geometry of the universe so close to flat?
Inflation made all that snap into place, and even though we are still not absolutely sure
it's true, is so the leading candidate to explain why the overall geometry of our universe
is what it seems to be.
Even in the 1990s, observational cosmology became a precision science.
The one watershed moment was the discovery in 1992 of the tiny fluctuations in temperature
in the cosmic microwave background.
This was a result from the COBE satellite of NASA, and what this did was enable us to
begin linking the earliest moments of the universe's history to what we observe today.
At early times, the universe was extremely smooth, one part in 100,000 was only the
tiny deviations that you could see.
Under the force of gravity, those deviations have grown into galaxies and clusters that
we observe today.
And by now, modern technology allows us to observe those galaxies and clusters to exquisite
precision, to compare what we see to the predictions that you would get from the cosmic microwave
background extrapolated in time, and with that to put together the ingredients of the
cosmological model that is so successful.
The final ingredient that we need was found in 1998.
Supernovae use the standard candles discovered that the universe is accelerating, which can
only be explained by dark energy.
By some form of stuff whose energy density doesn't go away as the universe expands.
That made up the extra 70% that was predicted by inflation if you wanted to live in a flat
universe.
And then in the year 2000, observations of the cosmic microwave background confirmed
that indeed we do live in a flat universe.
The fact that 70% of the universe is dark energy, 30% of it is matter, simultaneously
fits the dynamical measurements of galaxies and clusters, the supernova data that tells
the universe is accelerating, and the cosmic microwave background that tells that the universe
is spatially flat.
Since the year 2000, we've been confirming this picture in ever more elaborate ways.
The WMAP satellite has given us extra information that in fact, the ordinary matter is only
75%, that you need some form of dark matter, and that the evolution of structure from then
to now is consistent with what we would think it would be in this model where the universe
is 70% dark energy.
So we land here at a place where we have a very successful model of everything in the
universe.
If you think about it, this model has three basic features, not just the three ingredients
in the inventory, but three aspects that are important to its success.
Number one, the fact that the universe is expanding, and the understanding of this expansion
within the context of general relativity.
In the 1915, 1917 era, Einstein was realizing that the universe had to be expanding.
We now know that it's true.
We can use his equation to extrapolate all the way back to within a minute of the Big
Bang, and we get the right answer, as is confirmed by Big Bang nucleosynthesis.
The second feature is, of course, the inventory, the 52570 split between ordinary matter, dark
matter, and dark energy, which has been tested in multiple ways and is over-determined by
the observations we have now.
The final aspect is the evolution of structure of the universe.
The first two aspects deal with the universe that is spatially smooth, more or less the
same everywhere, which is an extremely accurate picture either at early times or on large
scales today.
But on smaller scales, we see that there are galaxies, there are clusters, there are stars
and planets, and fortunately we're able to understand where they came from going from
the early universe to now.
So that's an incredibly successful picture.
We can go using data from one second after the Big Bang to 14 billion years after the
Big Bang.
We can extrapolate with our theories sensibly back to times like 10 to the minus 30 seconds
after the Big Bang when we talk about inflation, and inflation acts as a way to generate the
perturbations that we see today.
So when we are hypothesizing and speculating about what the universe was like, 10 to the
minus 30 seconds after the Big Bang, we can actually connect those speculations to observations
we are making today.
We're not absolutely sure of what the universe was like earlier than one second old, but
the very fact that we're trying to go back from one second to some tiny fraction of a
second is indicative of the progress we've made compared to 100 years ago when we didn't
know that the universe was even getting any bigger.
But let's step back and ask, given this extremely successful picture, why is it like that?
Why is the universe smooth and homogeneous?
Why is it that 70% of the universe is dark energy versus the 30% that is matter?
You can ask yourself, is this a respectable question to be pondering?
Could we be people who just look at the universe, describe what is doing, and that is our duty
as scientists?
It's not our job to ask why it is like that.
But of course, as scientists, we are not satisfied with the current state of affairs.
We always want a more complete picture.
One of the ways to help us get a more complete picture is to make more experiments, to collect
more data, to take more observations, to find out more about the universe, and we're certainly
going to be doing that.
In the previous lecture, we gave you this very diverse smorgasbord of experiments that
will be done, a portfolio of different things, both highly speculative and guaranteed to
get good results.
But in the meantime, there is another way to think about how we can go beyond our current
understanding, and that's to try to reflect upon whether or not the current picture of
the universe makes sense to us at a deep level, whether it is somehow natural to us.
There are no absolutely strong contradictions in between the different elements of the standard
model of cosmology, like Einstein was lucky enough to have a deep contradiction between
Newtonian gravity and special relativity when he was developing general relativity.
Yet, there are tensions between the different elements, so we were going to try to ask,
is it somehow a natural universe in which we live, and if not, is the fact that the
universe appears unnatural to us, the sign that there are some deeper underlying forces
with respect to which it would seem much more natural.
So we as scientists have ways to think about this concept of naturalness, ways to take
this more or less fuzzy and human idea and turn it into something a little bit more quantitative.
Both for theories that we have and for situations we find in the world, scientists can tell
you whether or not that particular thing seems natural to us.
For a theory, like the standard model of particle physics for example, we say it's natural
if everything that might be happening in that theory is happening, and it's happening with
about the right strength.
Okay, that didn't seem much less fuzzy than the original idea of naturalness.
What we mean quantitatively is that when we look at the numbers that appear in that theory,
the numbers that characterize the strength of different forces, and the frequency of
different interactions, those numbers don't seem very finely tuned.
In other words, if we were to change those numbers just a little bit, you would get the
same basic kind of physics within your theory.
Well when we look at some different aspects of the standard model, we see that there are
fine tunings there.
One example is the, well particle physics, particle physicists call the hierarchy problem.
They look at the mass of the Higgs boson, we haven't detected it yet, but it's probably
something like 100, 150 times the mass of the proton.
But if you look at it, there's no reason why that number, the mass of the Higgs boson,
shouldn't be much, much larger.
Shouldn't be up there near the Planck scale, 10 to the 18 times the mass of the proton.
Why is the mass of the Higgs boson so small compared to the natural scale that it would
like to have?
That's an example of the kind of naturalness argument that particle physicists use.
What they will then do is to try to find some underlying reason.
And in fact, in the form of supersymmetry, there is an underlying dynamical explanation
for why the Higgs boson might be so much lighter than the much heavier scales characteristic
of the rest of particle physicists, of particle physics.
For situations in the universe, it's a slightly different aspect of naturalness with which
we're concerned.
A configuration of stuff in the universe is natural if it's robust.
If you move some particles around, you would get the same basic idea.
This is the kind of thing you might have been exposed to in some physics class long time
ago.
If you have a box full of gas, if all that gas happens to be stuck in one corner of
the box, that's not a very natural configuration.
You let it go, and it begins to fill the box.
We say that all of the air molecules being stuck in one corner has a very low entropy,
and as you let it go, it's going to naturally fill the box.
If you start with the gas filling the box, it will not naturally curl up in one corner.
The configuration in which stuff is all spread out is just much more robust.
You can move a few particles around.
It's still gas smoothly spread out throughout the box.
So we have these notions.
We have these notions of naturalness and unnaturalness.
It is not that if you observed a gas with all the particles in one corner of a box,
you would say that violates the laws of physics.
It's completely consistent with the laws of physics, but it's unnatural.
We say there must be some reason why it's there.
There must be some dynamical physics mechanism why it looks like that.
So we want to apply that same kind of reasoning to the whole universe.
This is a successful strategy that has been pursued before.
For example, the horizon and flatness problems were inspirations for the development of the
model of inflation.
The horizon and flatness problems were, number one, the idea that the universe is smooth
on scales larger than it has any right to be.
If we look at the universe in the microwave background era, there are points with almost
exactly the same density and temperature, but they share no common points in their pasts.
There is no way for them to know to be the same temperature, and yet they are.
That's a naturalness problem.
Physics, meanwhile, is very, very close to geometrically flat, but tends to become less
and less flat as time goes on.
Why was it so close to flat in the early universe?
That's another naturalness problem.
By thinking about these problems, scientists were able to invent the model of inflation.
Inflation solves these problems, and as a bonus, provides an explanation for the perturbations
that we now think grow into large-scale structure.
So this kind of reasoning is not just philosophizing, it can lead us to very explicit scenarios
that help us explain something that we don't otherwise understand.
Well, what can we do?
What is our current universe?
Does it seem natural to us?
Do we have possible mechanisms that make it fit into a bigger picture?
Well, the two things we're concerned about in these set of lectures are dark matter and
dark energy, and for the dark matter and dark energy, the situation is actually very different
in the two cases.
For the case of dark matter, we have scenarios that make dark matter seem very natural to
us.
We have, first and foremost, the WIMP scenario, the weekly interacting massive particles.
If there exists in nature, some particle that is heavy, that is electrically neutral so
that you can't observe it very easily, but that feels the weak nuclear force, as long
as that particle is stable, it will naturally give rise to a density of particles that is
very similar to what we observe in dark matter today.
In other words, you don't have to work very hard to extend the standard model of particle
physics so that naturally a dark matter candidate appears with naturally the right amount of
stuff in the universe.
We don't necessarily know that that's the right scenario, but it's a scenario that
fits in with our understanding of what probably would make sense to us.
And therefore, we take it seriously.
We take this idea that the dark matter is a weekly interacting massive particle seriously
enough that we build very expensive experiments to go look for it on the basis of that hypothesis.
We build particle accelerators to try to produce it directly, we build satellites to try to
look for the annihilation of WIMPs and anti-WIMPs in space, and we build underground detectors
to find them directly in our own laboratories.
Meanwhile, for dark energy, we do not have any models that would pass the naturalness
test.
The simplest model for dark energy, since we know that it is smoothly distributed through
space and nearly constant as a function of time, is vacuum energy.
Vacuum energy is something that is absolutely the same, the same density of energy at every
cubic centimeter of space and time, an absolutely minimum energy that doesn't evolve or fluctuate
in any way through time or space.
It's a simple model, but it's not natural in terms of what we know about dark energy
because it doesn't have the right value.
You can estimate how big the vacuum energy should be.
According to our current understanding of gravitation and of particle physics, the vacuum
energy should be enormously bigger than what we observe.
It should be 10 to the 120 times what you actually get.
So we don't know what is going on.
We have a theory that fits, but only at the cost of an extremely unnatural parameter.
The other thing that we know about the vacuum energy is that it is victim to something called
the coincidence scandal.
If you'll notice, in the current universe, the dark energy is about 70% of the total
energy budget, matters about 30%.
Now by cosmology standards, 70% and 30% are equal.
Those are very, very similar numbers.
The reason why this is a little bit of a surprise is because dark energy and matter
evolve very differently with respect to each other.
Matter dilutes away as the universe expands, so the density in matter, when the microwave
background was formed, was a billion times bigger than the density now.
In the early universe, when things squeeze together, the densities are much higher.
Dark energy, meanwhile, has a density that is constant.
The number of ergs per cubic centimeter is a tiny number that is fixed.
It was just as small in the early universe as it is today as it will be in the future.
So back when the microwave background was formed, the density of dark energy is the
same as it is today.
In other words, it was one one billionth of the density of matter.
These two numbers, the energy density in dark energy and the energy density in matter, change
rapidly with respect to each other as the universe expands.
And yet, today, when we happen to be here looking for them, they are approximately equal.
Why is that?
We don't know the answer to this question.
It might be explained by environmental selection.
It might be that most observers in some large ensemble of a multiverse are going to be born
at a time in their regions of space history when the density of dark energy is similar
to the density of dark matter.
That is a hypothesis, that's the kind of thing that we're driven to contemplate by
thinking about these naturalness arguments.
It may or may not be right, but these give us a clue for the directions in which to move
next.
So here is a picture that we can return to of where we might go in future years after
we study the dark sector in greater detail.
We right now have a very successful understanding of ordinary matter, of the standard model
of particle physics.
We have dark matter and dark energy, which are consistent with the data if they only
interact with us through gravity, but that doesn't mean that that's the final word.
It could be much more rich than that, so there's plenty of possibilities for new physics here
that we're looking for in future experiments.
The dark energy could interact with itself, in other words it might not be absolutely
constant everywhere, it might evolve, it might change slowly with time in one way or another,
it might also change slowly with space, there could be perturbations in the density of dark
energy.
Likewise the dark matter might interact with itself, in fact in every realistic model of
dark matter there are some interactions between the dark matter and itself, there's some
way for the dark matter to be produced in the first place.
More interestingly there could be interactions between ordinary matter and the dark sector
one way or another.
There could be interactions between dark matter and ordinary matter like the kinds that we're
looking for.
It could very well be that the dark matter feels the weak interactions of the standard
model of particle physics, that would enable us to create the dark matter in accelerator
experiments and in deep underground laboratories.
Even if not, even if the dark matter is not weakly interacting, it might interact through
some other force.
The axion is an example of a particle that is electrically neutral, yet indirectly interacts
with photons, so we have separate experiments that are dedicated to looking for the interactions
of axions with photons.
It could be any day now, people begin to actually discover the dark matter directly because
of those interactions, we're looking for them because they make the dark matter theories
more natural in the context of other things we understand about particle physics.
Best of all maybe would be if the dark energy directly interacted with ordinary matter.
If the dark energy is just vacuum energy, if it's just a constant amount of stuff in
every cubic centimeter, then it will not interact.
It's just a background feature of space time and all we'll ever be able to do is measure
its effects on the curvature of space time on the expansion of the universe.
But if the dark energy is something different, if the dark energy is dynamical, something
that changes from place to place, then dynamical fields tend to interact.
We can look for interactions between the dark energy and photons or the dark energy and
nuclear matter and experiments are on going to do exactly that.
It could even be that the dark energy has similar kinds of interactions with the dark
matter.
It could be that the dark sector all by itself forms some interestingly interacting set of
things and we, the ordinary matter, are sitting off by the sides.
So the dark matter could be affected by the dark energy and have its mass change or could
have its interactions change in some interesting way.
We don't know, but it's not bad that we don't know, it's good that there are so many
possibilities that we're going to be pursuing looking for observational evidence for any
one of these things happening.
So for the last part of this set of lectures, I want to end with one dramatic speculation
and one cautionary tale just to bring us back to reality at the end.
The dramatic speculation has to do with, once again, the naturalness of our picture of cosmology.
In this case, I'm not talking about the naturalness of the theory that we have, the theory with
the parameters that describe dark matter and dark energy, but rather the configuration in
which we find our universe today.
Remember that this already worked once, this kind of reasoning where we said, why is the
universe in this kind of situation in which we find it?
It worked with inflation.
Inflation was able to successfully explain why the universe is homogeneous and isotropic
and why it is very close to spatially flat by invoking a dynamical mechanism based in
physics located in the early universe.
But it turns out that there is a deeper question that inflation doesn't quite answer and that
is very closely related to the question of the gas in a box.
That's the question of the entropy of the universe.
Our current universe has what you might call a medium sized entropy.
Entropy is basically telling you how disordered things are.
So if you have gas in a box is stuck in one corner, that's a very low entropy that's very
highly ordered.
Everyone cleaned it up and put it there.
If the gas is spread out all over the place, that's high entropy disordered.
And we understand on the basis of physics that stuff in the universe likes to go from
being low entropy to being high entropy.
Disorder tends to increase just because there are many more ways of being disordered than
being ordered.
So this is a deep feature of fundamental physics called the second law of thermodynamics.
Things tend to become more and more disordered with time.
Our current universe is semi-ordered.
In the far past it was much more highly ordered.
The entropy was much lower.
In the far future it will be much more disordered.
The entropy will be much higher.
The entropy is growing with time as the universe goes from the Big Bang to the cold heat death
where everything is spread out and not radiating.
The question then is why?
Why did the universe ever start out in some phase where the entropy was so low?
You might, and many contemporary cosmologists do, think this has something to do with inflation,
but in fact inflation is begging the question.
Inflation imagines that a tiny patch of universe was dominated by dark energy in an even lower
entropy state than the ordinary Big Bang.
The truth is we don't yet know why the early universe had such a low entropy.
It might, however, have something to do with dark energy.
Dark energy is telling us that in the future of our universe it will not be completely
quiet.
Dark energy means that even in empty space there is some energy that keeps propelling
the universe and keeps giving a little quantum jiggle to all of the fields in the universe.
If you wait long enough, much, much longer than the current age of the universe, it could
be that those quantum jiggles come together in exactly the right configuration to make
what is called a baby universe.
To start a little patch with an incredibly high energy density ready to inflate and separate
off from the universe that we know.
Furthermore, it could be that our universe is somebody else's baby, started off in some
other universe that was cold and filled with nothing but dark energy.
In other words, the dark energy that we've discovered might, we're just speculating here,
play some role in helping us understand why the configuration of our current universe looks
so unnatural.
Looks like it started in such a low entropy state.
That's the kind of thing we're led to think about by thinking about dark matter and dark
energy.
Finally, the cautionary tale is how close are we to being done?
In 1900, a lot of physicists thought that we were almost done with the laws of physics.
We had a really good understanding on the basis of Newtonian mechanics of how matter
and energy worked.
There were just a few little things that were tiny bit bothersome.
For example, if you calculated the lifetime of an atom, you found that it was an incredibly
tiny fraction of a second.
It should be the case that this electron that was zooming around a nucleus should collapse
really, really quickly.
Why was that number so much smaller than the observation that it was supposed to be?
There was also an inconsistency in 1900 between successful theories of physics.
Electromagnetism and Newtonian mechanics didn't quite have the same set of symmetries and
that was a puzzle.
Finally, if you look at the sky, you saw that some celestial bodies were not moving as
they should.
The orbit of Mercury was discrepant.
It was moving in the wrong way, a different way than would be predicted by Newtonian mechanics.
So as it turns out, all of these tiny discrepancies led to revolutions.
They led to quantum mechanics, to special relativity, and to general relativity.
It could have been that you just cleaned up something here and there, or it could have
been a completely different picture of the universe.
The same thing is true today.
We have a number that is wrong.
The number that is wrong is the vacuum energy.
Our number is much smaller than it has any right to be.
We observe a vacuum energy 120 orders of magnitude smaller than we predict.
We have an inconsistency between successful theories.
We have general relativity and quantum mechanics, both of which fit the data, but are mutually
incompatible.
Finally, we have celestial bodies moving in a way that doesn't make sense to us.
We see things orbiting faster than they should.
We attribute these to dark matter and dark energy.
It may be that we're almost done.
It may be that a couple of things will fall into place, and we will have a complete understanding
of the fundamental laws of nature.
Or it could be that a revolution is in the offing, similar to what we had 100 years ago.
We don't know, and that's the fun of science.
The only guarantee is that the next 100 years of exploration will be equally interesting
and surprising as the last 100 years have been.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
