These lectures are part of the Great Courses on Tape series. The Great Courses on Tape
cover a broad array of university level disciplines. The lectures in each course are either 30
or 45 minutes in length. By listening for less than an hour a day, you could finish
even the longest course in just weeks. Browse our catalog or website.
And imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year
in the best college classrooms in the world. The lecturers are university professors
carefully selected by the teaching company and its customers for intellectual distinction
and teaching excellence. The lectures on these tapes are titled
Thomas Aquinas, the Angelic Doctor. The lecturer is Professor Jeremy Adams.
Professor Adams received his PhD in history from Harvard in 1967.
From 1966 to 1974, he taught medieval history at Yale and also served in the
Interdisciplinary History, Arts and Letters program there. In 1974, he began teaching
history at Southern Methodist University where he continues today.
Professor Adams has held visiting positions at St. Mary's Dominican College and Loyola
University in New Orleans as well as the SMU Overseas programs at Oxford University
College and in Madrid, Toledo and Paris. He has written and lectured widely on topics
medieval, ancient and millennial with his specialty being medieval intellectual history.
Professor Adams has won numerous awards for teaching from various institutions including
the Yale and SMU chapters of Phi Beta Kappa and the Danforth Foundation.
Additionally, the SMU student body has awarded him the Outstanding Professor Award
several times. Professor Adams prepared the course guide that comes with these tapes.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline,
biographical notes and a bibliography. To get the most out of this course, you may
find it useful to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1, Thomas' Early Life
Thomas Aquinas, our subject for today and for this series, is either the consummate
master of the philosophia perenis, the grand tradition of western philosophy, or
then a mediocrity, who should be respected but relegated to the museum of historical
curiosities, or then, as Anthony Kenny has put it, he is one of the dozen
greatest philosophers of the western tradition, both overvalued and undervalued.
Today I'd like to take a look at a range of modern attitudes towards Thomas Aquinas,
and by modern I mean the last century and a half, and after a very rapid survey of these
positions, I'd like to move on to a more leisurely look at Thomas' life and the world he lived in,
touching the social, religious, cultural and political aspects of that moment in time
that impinged upon his career and his work. Among the attitudes of Thomas Aquinas,
the most positive attitudes, the one seeing him as the consummate philosopher of the
perennial philosophy, the philosophia perenis, is the attitude of Pope Leo XIII,
who in the year 1879 issued his papal letter entitled Eterni Patris.
Leo XIII was himself quite a radical thinker who tried to find a third way between
communism and capitalism in the late 19th century world, who tried to affirm the rights of
workers without encouraging revolution, and typically radical act of his in the
intellectual sphere was to issue this papal document, which praised Thomas as the
Dr. Comunis, the common doctor, the doctor common that is, to all those who would teach
Catholic doctrine in universities or anywhere else, and he urged, but he did not formally
require Catholic university professors of theology, philosophy and other disciplines
such as law and political science to emulate Thomas as a person and as a thinker.
Now the opposite position is clearly and briefly stated by Bertrand Russell, the aristocratic
English radical atheist for whom Aquinas is disappointingly mediocre, a thinker addicted
to authority and given to circular reasoning, and he expresses this both in his great
history of western philosophy, published in 1945, and is much more popular wisdom of
the west, more widely read, but the same basic position is presented in both.
The opposite position, carrying on in response as a reply to Bertrand Russell's early
statements, was the work of Jacques Maritain, a French convert to Catholicism, who became
an ardent neo-Thomas himself, a philosopher for whom Thomas is not only a great saint
and a great mind of the Catholic past, but a powerful, foreshadowing model for the thought
and life of the modern intellectual. His biography of Thomas Aquinas, written ferociously, full
of youthful enthusiasm, translated into English in 1931, called simply St. Thomas Aquinas,
is one of the best statements of that position, which Maritain continued to mature along with
Bertrand Russell's opposition to it. In our own day, ahead of that generation of Maritain
and Russell, and influenced by both of them, is Ralph McInerney, now professor of philosophy
at Notre Dame. I can think of two particularly attractive books of his that I would recommend,
either his scholarly St. Thomas Aquinas, which is a very balanced and prudent book, or then
his wittily popular, a first glance at St. Thomas Aquinas, a handbook for peeping
Thomas, published in 1990. McInerney is an American Catholic intellectual, as respectful
of the rigor and truth of Thomistic thought as Maritain is, but he is also carefully as
impersonal in his admiration as he can manage to be. At least partly, in order to earn for
Thomism, the respect of professional secular philosophers shaped by the Anglo-American
intellectual tradition so strongly influenced by Bertrand Russell. Another Catholic voice,
which strives for a sort of middle position in Thomas Aquinas, which carefully does not
state the author's own sense of where Thomas belongs in the long train of the philosophical
tradition, is A History of Philosophy by Frederick Copelston, an extraordinary book, beginning
with the pre-Socratic philosophers of ancient Greece and going on into the philosophers
of the mid-20th century. Copelston is himself a Jesuit who lived for many years at Heathrop
College, the Jesuit Seminary, outside of Oxford, but closely connected to Oxford University's
exchange of ideas and exchange of research opportunities. And yet Copelston's book is
much admired for its objectivity by all of those who pursue the history of philosophy
in the kind of traditional modern way, that is, in a way that looks for objective
certitude about statements of philosophical development. In the postmodernist era, of course,
where nobody believes that objective certitude is not only possible, but even reasonably
intelligently imaginable, such enterprises as Copelston's seem terribly quaint. But if one
accepts the kind of thing that Copelston's trying to do, then he tends to be quite respected
by people who do not share his religious convictions, his ultimate commitments. Aquinas appears
in volume two, which is published in 1950. Copelston's own personal commitment to Thomas.
Copelston will stop from time to time and say, this position, of course, is unacceptable
from a Catholic point of view, or this position expresses with particular cogency the Catholic
sense of such and such, but he sets these off separate from his attempt to give a sort of
objective history of the whole movement of philosophy. This work is extended in the Penguin
Pelican book called Simply Aquinas, or Thomas Aquinas, which he extracted from his history
of philosophy, and which he adapted somewhat, making his position clearer. That's probably
a more accessible book if one wishes to look at Thomas Aquinas simply himself. On the other
hand, it has not been as steadily reprinted as the history of philosophy has. If you want
to go to the history of philosophy, go to volume two. A very radical statement about Thomas Aquinas
is that of Martin Blay, the Canadian philosopher. Not yet, alas, translated into English. It
means the other Thomas Aquinas. This is this dashingly, indeed slashingly revisionist look
at Thomism, which rejects the sort of confessional neo-Thomism that came out of Leo XIII's impulses
and calling for a free-thinking rediscovery of what postmodern thinkers think Thomas thought.
It's a fascinating book, and it's begun to produce quite a series of responses. One of
the most compelling and yet useful, I think, useful to the general reader is the work of
Philip Rosemann, just published this year in 1999, which you can see on your bibliography.
It's called Understanding Scholasticism with Foucault. What Rosemann is doing in that book
is looking through the lenses of Michel Foucault and seeing a vision of Thomas which he presents
in a systematic and creatively introductory manner. Okay, these are simply seven books.
There are so many others. A bibliography of basic works in Thomas runs to at least five
dozen items, primary and secondary character, but I think these seven positions more or less
state the range of what is now generally considered respectable assessment of the importance of
Thomas Aquinas in the history of Western philosophy. Thomas has had peculiar luck with his
biographers too, but really now, finally, very, very good luck indeed. For many centuries, our
understanding of Thomas' life was deeply shaped, not limited entirely, but dominated by a
biography written by Thomas' own confessor and chief of staff, Friar Reginald of Piperno, who
in the 1280s, shortly after Thomas' death, brought up precisely the kind of biography which the
Dominican order expected, the Dominican order to which both Thomas and Reginald belonged.
And this is this kind of pious saints' life which states all kinds of things about Thomas that it is
difficult, of course, for any modern person to believe whatever his or her religious commitment
and must have been difficult for medieval people to believe as well in certain cases. The limitation
of Reginald's biography have frustrated serious historians for seven centuries, hemstringing,
I think, the effort to present a rich and full biography of Thomas' life. We can discover the
life, the personality of Peter Abelard and his student, lover, sister in Christ, Eloise in deep detail.
And this discovery is interesting not only from the psychological point of view, it helps us also
understand the way in which Abelard formulated some of his most seerly stated logical positions.
We can't do that with Thomas. We have to go with the text itself. Possibly, that's just as well.
Thomas' life seems to impinge very little upon his teaching.
Nonetheless, I want to turn to Thomas' life because it seems to me that it tells us a great deal.
At least in broad general strokes, once we put Thomas into his context, I think the content of his thought
emerges with much more compelling cogency. We now have a splendid biography of Thomas Aquinas,
a highly scientific one following the norms of old-fashioned modern historical objectivity,
again by a Dominican, a Dominican friar, James Weisheipel, who is as different as possible from
Reginaldo de Peperno in regard to standards of historical credibility.
And his biography released in 1974, though there have been later editions of it, 1974 was the seventh centenary
of the death of Thomas Aquinas. Weisheipel wanted the book to emerge on the 7th of March, 1974,
in 700 years after what Weisheipel said is the only secure date we have about Thomas' life.
Weisheipel was an American-Dominican scholar long active on the Leonine Commission.
The Leonine Commission was a team of scholars commissioned by Pope Leo XIII and all of his successors in the papacy,
dedicating to producing a fully scientific edition of Thomas' enormous body of work,
a job which is greatly complicated by the fact that Thomas' own handwriting,
to which several of his works were committed, usually he dictated as did everybody from antiquity onward,
but sometimes he wrote in longhand himself, and those works are absolutely undecipherable.
Thomas had one of the worst handwritings in human history.
Perhaps a sign of genius is to write as badly as Thomas did.
Weisheipel's biography is painstakingly researched, almost excessively non-partisan and anti-traditional in its conclusions.
It is feisty and contentious. Weisheipel wants the kind of evidence that historians of the Middle Ages usually never have.
A specific statement about a specific event with a specific date recorded in a manuscript that you cannot consider dubious.
We medievalists have got a massage, our evidence, even when we're talking about the itineraries of medieval kings,
which are probably the best recorded items for medieval history.
If we're dealing with intellectual history, with the context of intellectual history, the biography of a thinker like Thomas,
we have to be content with less crystalline and pure kind of material.
But Weisheipel's biography is an absolute must.
Whatever one thinks about Thomas in terms of his importance, if one is curious about him, this is the book to read.
It's a huge book and talks a great deal about his thought and his written works as well.
But what about his life?
Today I'd like to talk about his life up to the year 1248 when he was 23 years old,
and I just finished here what we would call, I guess, his MA, his master's degree in the arts at Paris.
He was born sometime between 1224 and 1226.
I like the date 1225, which seems to be the one on which most scholars settle.
He was born at the castle of Rocaseca in Campania in the great plain of the south of Italy,
stretching south from Rome between Rome and Naples.
And he was the 11th and last child of Landolfo, the lord of Aquino.
Landolfo had been married once and had two children, but the wife died,
and we don't know too much about those children.
They seem not to have come to much public recognition.
But then he married again, and with his second wife Theodora of Feate, he had nine children,
the last of whom is little Tomasso.
Now, these families are quite interesting.
The family of the lords of Aquino, who for quite a long time had been calling themselves Counts of Aquino.
They seized doing that a generation or two before Thomas' birth,
for reasons having to do with the reorganization of the Kingdom of Sicily,
in which they were part.
It was a family which had been ruling that territory since the 990s,
and it had a genealogy which stretches back to the year 707.
Perhaps this genealogy is a little bit elaborated,
but we have at any rate the sense of a family which thought of itself and was thought of by its neighbors
as belonging to the oldest established Italian nobility,
sprung from the lumbered invaders of the 6th century AD.
His mother's family, the family of the lords of Feate, was a Norman family.
The Normans had come into the south of Italy in the 11th century on their way to Jerusalem on pilgrimage,
and they had driven out the Byzantine Greek rulers of the southern part of the peninsula,
and then gone to work in the island of Sicily, driving out the Muslim rulers,
and united both into the Kingdom of Sicily.
The Norman blood was not tremendously widespread, but it was tremendously proud of itself.
Theodora's family had reason to feel even prouder,
because this Norman family was connected with the royal house, the royal house of Altavila,
Ottaville, whose last member, Queen Constance, had produced a son, Frederick,
with her husband Henry VI, the German King and German Emperor,
and this young Frederick was now the brilliant King of Sicily and Holy Roman Emperor.
So there are two versions of the relationship of this family to Frederick II,
the Emperor who was also King of Sicily, and because of that to the other crown heads of Christendom.
Some certainly claimed in those days that Thomas was a kind of third cousin once removed of the King Emperor.
Weissheivel is extremely skeptical about this, and some people working out of Weissheivel
have described Thomas's family as that of impoverished landowners of rural Italy,
which it seems to me is going a little bit too far in the democratization effort.
Thomas was a person of privilege and was perceived by his own time
as a person of very high privilege in social terms.
His part of the world, his birthplace, also had considerable historical distinction
from the Castle of Rocaseca, which is not too far from the Alto Strada leading south from Rome to Naples today.
One can look up and see Arpinum, where Cicero was born.
One looks a little bit further away, and you see the home land of...
You see the town of Marius, the uncle-in-law of Julius Caesar.
Juvenal was also from that immediate valley from that landscape, that horizon,
which the one discerns from Thomas's birthplace.
You look high up and you see Monte Cassino, the mother house of the whole Benedictine family of monastic life.
So it's been quite a remarkable stretch of territory in terms of producing grave male leaders of thought and action.
We know a little bit about three of Thomas's full siblings, the nine born to Landolfo and Theodora.
Two of the daughters, Theodora and Maria, would marry sons of the nearby San Severino clan,
who were great champions of the imperial cause, the gibbaline cause.
The gibbalines fought the Guelphs in medieval Italy.
The gibbalines were more for the emperor than for the pope,
though there were sometimes kind of nuisances to the emperor as well.
The Guelphs were more for the pope than for the emperor.
And this is a family which is not committed to the papal position.
Far from it, it's committed to the gibbaline cause,
which may have posed for Thomas certain problems as he elaborated his political philosophy.
The sibling of whom we know most is Rinaldo, his eldest brother, who was a poet, a gallant poet,
a poet of romance, whose poems show a remarkable sensitivity to the woman's view of things.
Perhaps one should not call Rinaldo a feminist poet,
but I think he could very well be put forward as a candidate for male feminism in the middle of the courtly love tradition,
which was very much ambiguous about this entire topic.
Rinaldo, at any rate, was executed by Frederick in 1246,
Frederick, cousin Frederick, whether close cousin or distant cousin,
for the charge of treason, which he might or might not have merited.
Thomas' family may have been feeling bad about the excesses of Frederick's anti-papal position
and anti-papal action, and may have thought that a more moderate gibbalinism was appropriate,
which would certainly have seemed to Frederick outright treason.
When he was five years old, or probably in 1230,
Thomas was sent to Monte Cassino, up the hills, as an oblate young child offered to the monastery.
Actually, the abbot of Monte Cassino at the time was his cousin Landolfo, who had the same name as his father.
We're told that the family expected that Thomas would in time become abbot of Monte Cassino as well.
That would have been entirely appropriate, although the church was quite reformed at this point
and not simply automatically appointing the children of the local nobility.
Still, it helped in choosing an abbot to find out if the monk candidate came from the local establishment,
as Thomas certainly did.
Now, what kind of vocation does such a child have?
A child who was offered at age five to a monastery?
Is he really choosing the monastic life?
Reginaldo Peperno is concerned to say that he absolutely was,
and what we know of Thomas' character suggests that he was temperamentally perfect for the life of the clergy,
particularly the studious monastic clergy.
Reginaldo tells us the story, though.
He tells us that Thomas' earliest question was, what is God?
And at the simple age of five, he went around asking, what is God?
And this is a sign of his extraordinary vocation.
Now, anyone who knows young children knows that for a five-year-old child not to have asked what God is
in a world which is so saturated with God, saturated with religion,
is more likely a sign of his being rather slow,
but his being advanced in any dimension, intellectual or spiritual.
But that's the kind of information we get from Reginaldo.
A more pragmatic answer is the fact that Thomas' father, Landolfo,
had attacked Monte Cassino in 1229 at the command of his sovereign lord
and perhaps remote cousin Frederick.
And he felt sort of bad about this.
And so in 1230, Landolfo of Aquino is making peace with Landolfo of Monte Cassino.
Very often, when you made peace to end a factional fight,
you would arrange a marriage between members of the family.
In this case, you gave a son to the monastery.
That seemed an appropriate kind of thing to do.
Anyway, whatever the surrounding contextual causes,
Thomas' basic schooling was acquired there in the cradle of the Benedictine family of monasteries.
One discordant note there is Thomas' own terrible handwriting,
the littoral intelligibilis, which is not exactly what you would expect
from someone trained in a monastic school far from it.
It may be that Thomas, like some stutterers, had a mind so rapid
that the hand could not keep pace with it,
just as the tongue of the stutterer tends to be unable to keep pace
with the rapid intelligence of the mind of the speaker.
This is the kind of thing that has kept the Leonine commission still at work,
more than a hundredth century and a quarter after Pope Leo XIII.
It still has documents to edit in a fully accurate modern scientific fashion.
When he was about 14, Thomas went to the newly founded University of Naples.
Let us guess in 1239.
After a short stay at home, thanks to another attack of Frederick's troops on Monte Cassino.
We can imagine Father Landolfo riding out with his vassals up to Monte Cassino
having his son and taking him back home for safety's sake.
This situation is getting bad and Frederick is getting worse and worse.
No doubt, Father Landolfo understood.
Thomas' time for Thomas to do university work,
nothing particularly precocious about going to university at 14 in the Middle Ages.
Today it would be a sign of precocity, but not then.
Thomas lived in the Benedictine house at that cosmopolitan new university.
This was a house supported by the Abbey of Monte Cassino
for Benedictines to not only for its own monks,
but for Benedictines from anywhere who wanted to study at that university
to live where they would have decent food and a chaplain
and spiritually as well as physically safe lodging.
We know that Thomas studied grammar and logic with a man named Martin of Dacia,
which may mean that he came from Asia-Dacia,
modern Romania, but may mean that he came from Denmark
because often in Latin, Danicus, Danish,
it is written as Dasicus and it is difficult to tell.
But Abraham Martin is someone who comes from far away.
He is a brilliant faculty member recruited at a long distance
by Frederick's agents who are trying to make this a showcase university
for all of Europe.
He studied natural philosophy, which meant Aristotle,
with Petrus Hebernis, or Petrus de Hebernia, Peter from Ireland.
And this is a very interesting kind of thing to do
because the way in which Peter the Irishman taught Aristotle
is to teach it according to the commentary of the great Averroes,
Ibn Rushd, the great Muslim scholar of Córdoba,
who had died only in 1198, only some 40 years before.
This is a fascinating kind of thing to do
and a university founded, to be sure, by a king
who is very skeptical of popes and maybe of religion as well,
but which was still a religious, an Orthodox Catholic university.
Averroes had gotten himself into serious trouble
with his fellow Muslim theologians on several grounds
by arguing that there is a double truth or really a triple truth,
that there are three kinds of truth, the simple truth of the Quran,
which is stated in crude terms in order to convert the Bedouin,
the wild desert horseman.
Then there is also the truth of the theologians,
which is a more intelligent interpretation of the literal language of the Quran,
and finally there is the truth of the philosophers,
which often disagrees with the theologians as well.
The good example is what happens to a devout Muslim after devout life.
He goes to paradise where he reclines and silk concussions
to the sound of running water and to the ministrations
of wonderful creatures called hurries, who are female creatures
and who are re-virginated after each encounter with each of these faithful.
This is a very crude kind of idea which might appeal to the wild Bedouin.
Theologians, Muslim theologians say it really means
that the blessed will have an entire happiness,
and those are simply figures for happiness,
and the philosopher can then say,
will there indeed be immortal life at all?
And there are ways working on Aristotle's kind of ambiguous remarks
and discussions of this question.
Aristotle never resolved it, concluded,
as had previous commentators in Aristotle,
that there is no personal immortality.
Well, personal immortality is one of the absolute cornerstones
of both Christian orthodoxy and Muslim orthodoxy,
and indeed rabbinical Jewish orthodoxy as well.
And so, Averroes was a very dangerous heretic indeed
from the Muslim point of view,
whether he was more or less dangerous to Christians or Jews, I don't know,
but the striking thing is that he was the most up-to-date,
cutting-edge commentator on Aristotle,
is exactly what Thomas learned under the direction of this man,
Peter the Irishman, of whom we know little else.
He finished his undergraduate studies in the liberal arts right there,
what we might call the AB degree.
In April of 1244, Thomas' father had just died,
and so Thomas joined the Dominican Order, the Order of Preachers,
recently founded by the great Spanish heresy fighter Domingo Guzman.
The Dominicans had founded a house at the University of Naples in 1231,
a house for Dominicans to study, to live in and pray in and study in
while they took courses at the university,
just as the Benedictines had founded the house in which Thomas had resided.
Thomas had come to know the Dominicans and he was very impressed by them.
He's about 19 years old at this point.
He is very enthusiastic about what the Dominican Order is trying to do.
The Dominicans were enthusiastic also.
The Master General of the Dominican Order, a man named John of Vildeshausen,
known to the Italians speaking Latin as Ioannes Teutonicus,
John the Tutan, was delighted at this acquisition
of an already recognized young genius
who was related to some of the best aristocratic houses in Europe,
possibly even to the royal clan of Western Europe.
Thomas accompanied him on his intended trip to the University of Paris
where the Dominicans had another house by way of the Order's General Chapter.
Every year the Dominican Order had a meeting of the General Chapter
and this was going to be held that year at Bologna,
which had been the center of canon law.
What more appropriate place could you have for that?
And then John of Vildeshausen intended with Thomas in his entourage
to proceed to Paris, from Bologna to Paris,
where he would put Thomas into the Dominican House of Studies there.
Thomas never got to Paris that time anyway.
He was kidnapped for deprogramming by his brother Rinaldo,
apparently as soon as this little group of Dominicans
crossed the frontier of the Papal State moving into Tuscany.
Brother Rinaldo came riding down, caught him and carried him away
because of his family's outrage at his recruitment by this fanatical new order,
as though Thomas had become sort of a Jesus freak
who needed to be rescued by the family for serious deprogramming.
There are wonderful stories here which Reginald tells us.
The gallant Rinaldo decided that Thomas had to give up these ideas
and consent to go back being a monk at Monte Cassino
and eventually become abbot.
And to persuade him of this, he introduced into Thomas' cell,
an extremely, I would imagine, quite a comfortable cell with a good view,
a young woman of dubious virtue, well, no doubt whatever about her virtue,
and she was to get rid of this excessive, unotherworldliness of his.
And if we can read Reginald correctly, Thomas then committed the one
almost violent, almost act of his life.
He said to have gone to the fireplace, picked up a burning brand
and said something like, if we can translate it,
and I think we should translate it, please go away.
And she did.
And Reginald says at this moment an angel comes through the window
bearing with him a sincture of chastity, a belt which Thomas wrapped about his ample loins
and which thereafter would protect him from any such temptations.
As we come to know his temperament, I think we can see that we're dealing here
with a person who is temperamentally little inclined to temptations of the flesh anyway.
A cool, not a cold, but a cooled and disciplined and withdrawn mind,
which is ever quite benign about that world of the flesh which he knows so little.
One thinks of the manual cat, for example, that highly orderly intelligence.
There have been other great minds, Augustine Luther, who seethe with lust
and these temptations, but Thomas was not one of them.
Eventually the family gives up, mama decides, mama Teodora,
Donna Teodora decides that he's just not going to do the Monte Cassino thing
and they probably wouldn't make him abbot anyway and would have wasted that would be.
Let him go off with these Dominicans and follow his own career
and find his own destiny, a remarkably modern decision by a mother.
So he escapes, that is, he's politely let go in the summer of 1245.
By that autumn, he's in Paris for his first of three stays.
He studies for what we would call the master of arts degree, the advanced degree in arts,
living at the Dominican house on the Rue Saint-Jacques, the old Roman north-south street
that rose up from the isle of the city of Paris up to the Mount Saint-Genevieve
where all the scholars lived and it was called the Rue Saint-Jacques
because that is the street on which the pilgrimage to Santiago began.
So the Dominican house at Saint-Jacques must have been a remarkable place
with a splendid library, fine chaplains to advise these students,
decently aesthetic food and all the rest of it.
And there, Thomas finished his novitiate as a young Dominican along with studies in the arts.
When he completed that in the summer of 1248, he left Paris to go to Cologne,
to Cologne to study with Albert the Great, Albert of Saxony,
the remarkable Aristotelian philosopher who is treated by those
who follow the traditional understanding of Thomas Aquinas as Thomas's Socrates.
Albert was to be to Thomas what Socrates was to Plato,
though that's not a very good description because in fact Socrates never wrote anything at all
and Albert wrote quite a great deal and also Thomas is probably closer to Albert's thought
than Plato remained to Socrates' original teaching.
So in the summer of 1248, Thomas went away to the Rhineland to join the new Studium Generale,
a school of special studies founded by the Dominican Order at Cologne,
probably expecting that he would not return to that turbulent city of Paris,
instead a follow-a-life of peaceful contemplation in the bosom of his order.
He could not have been more wrong.
