Lecture 4 The Questiones, Disputatai and Other Writings
This lecture carries on the last lecture's topic, reviewing the other genres in which
the master of the scholastic summa, Thomas Aquinas, also composed.
I want to take a look at the opuskula, short works on a specific topic of current philosophical
discourse. Of great importance are Thomas's commentaries, possibly greater importance
even than the summa. Commentaries on scripture, and of the work of various philosophers other
than Aristotle, who to Thomas was always the philosopher, and whose works attracted
most of his creative energy as a commentator, as well as a formulator of newer propositions.
Next in importance, I guess, are the disputed questions on representative issues of the
time, and having a lot to reveal to us about the concerns and the character, the tonality
of scholastic discourse. And finally, Thomas's hymns, doubted by some, but now strongly
reattributed to him, deserve some consideration, more, I think, than they tend to receive.
First of all, let's talk about the opuskula, and opus in Latin is a work, and opuskulum
is a little work. Thomas wrote numerous short treatises on specific subjects. His earliest,
some say his most important contribution to the long pull of the philosophical enterprise,
was de ente et essencia on being and essence, written at Paris in 1254 or 1255, when Thomas
was pursuing his studies towards the master's degree in theology. In this little opuskulum,
he refined a tradition of ontology of the subsection of philosophy which deals with
being, a tradition which derived from Plato and Aristotle by way of the great Muslim
philosopher Ibn Sina, whom Thomas called Avicenna, that great 10th and 11th century, a neoplatonist
Aristotelian of Bukhara. Thomas's formulation of this issue, coming on from the earliest
days of philosophical discussion, distinguishes, sharply distinguishes, essence and existence
within being, arguing that God is the only being whose essence is to exist. All other
beings like us exist only contingently, not necessarily.
Thomas's commentaries are far more important than his opuskula, although of course they're
not as original as many of them. These are largely edited lecture notes as we have them.
Basically what we have for Aristotle, Thomas's model in professional life as well as in thought.
These would have been presumably the lecture notes for the morning class sessions which
ran from about six to nine in the morning and from nine or so to noon. If we tend to
complain about the complexity of academic demands today, we should remember the demands
of the graduate students of theology as well indeed probably in undergraduates in those
medieval universities. Six hours from six to noon, then something in the way of a lunch,
probably not too luxurious because one should be ascetic since they were all clerics, and
then on for another long stretch of the afternoon, leaving how much time for writing? These commentaries
are closely wedded to the source text, of course. They were what Thomas said about the
source text which everybody was reading, but sometimes they go far beyond it, not only
in extended digressions, but even in shorter kind of treatments. Well, Thomas commented
on Scripture, the Old Testament and the New, on Aristotle, and on the works of other philosophers
as well. In Scripture, Thomas commented on six books of the Hebrew Scriptures, or the
Old Testament, because of course he called them. They're all valuable, but I think none
of them has made a great deal of splash with biblical scholars. Much more important and
much more relevant, in fact, today to the continuing rediscovery of common Christian
themes in the ecumenical movement of the 20th century are Thomas's commentaries on several
books of the New Testament, including The Gospel of John, Several Epistles of Paul, which
he sees in many important ways quite differently from the way Augustine saw them, and most
notably on The Gospel of Matthew. There's a wonderful story that Thomas Aquinas was
coming back from the great Abbey of Sanderny, the city which grew up around the Abbey of
Sanderny to the north of Paris. This was the great royal Abbey where the kings of France
were buried. As Thomas and his group of young Dominicans reached the crest of Montmartre,
the abrupt butte which still bore the name of the Celtic god worshiped there a thousand
years before, they saw Paris spread out before them. It may have been one of those brilliant
blue afternoons for which that region is famous, perhaps around the year 1270.
"'Doesn't it beautiful?' cried several of the students together, we are told.
"'Indeed it is,' replied for our Thomas.
"'If only the city of Paris belonged to you,' one of the push of your youth suggested.
"'And what would I do with it?' said Thomas.
"'You could sell it to the king of France. For such a sum that you could buy every foundation,
you could build every foundation our order desires.' The youth exclaimed and tranced
by even the fantasy of such expansion.
"'To tell the truth,' Thomas replied,
"'right now I'd rather have Chrysostom's commentary on St. Matthew.'
Thomas' rebuke, gentle as ever, was as perision in spirit as his disciples' aesthetic arousal
and his institutional ambition.
John Chrysostom, orator and theologian, patriarch of Constantinople in the late fourth century,
was the only major Greek father of the church who preferred literal interpretation of Scripture
to allegorical exegesis.
The Gospel of Matthew, often considered the most hebraic and human of the four Gospels,
fascinated Thomas, who was eager to comprehend the mentality of the ancient Hebrew world,
of apostolic Palestine, patristic Byzantium, as well as ancient Greece.
Matthew was a source of great influence to the city of Paris as well.
The Gospel of Matthew was of general interest to the Parisians.
It was the source of the iconography of the west front of the Cathedral of Notre Dame
of Paris, whose south transept we see magnificently displayed here.
There's a great presentation in relief sculpture of the last judgment, and of course the last
judgment is somewhat differently recounted by the various Gospel authors, and the source
which was used by the sculptors of Notre Dame of Paris was Matthew.
That section of the cathedral was painted gold, or perhaps covered with gold leaf gilt
in a richer fashion, we can't be entirely sure.
It must have presented an astonishing sight in the setting sun of westerly afternoons.
A very famous preacher of earlier in the century, Jacques de Vietrie, who had a lot
to do with rousing enlistment for crusades, a very popular preacher, but who also was
kind of a, in a sense, a kind of a university chaplain.
Jacques de Vietrie liked to talk about the last judgment, and he referred to the last
judgment very much in the way in which Matthew presented it.
There's one wonderful sermon of his to the students of the university, which says at
one point, when you worry about your final exams, think of the last judgment, and when
you think of the last judgment, worry about your final exams, which is, I suppose, the
kind of advice that students ought to be getting from their chaplains, all this probably not
always tremendously popular.
Thomas's most important commentaries, of course, are his commentaries in Aristotle,
which he began in the 1250s, while at Paris, and carried on until 1272, the year he went
to Naples.
Whether he wrote any of them in Naples or not, or whether the commentaries in Aristotle
are perhaps the most perision part of his whole work, we don't know for sure.
But I think that's entirely appropriate.
When he comes to Naples, he's thinking about other things.
He's trying to wind up the third part of the Summa Theologiae.
He writes the Compendium of Theology and gets ready more than he realizes for his final
rendezvous with meaning.
From 1266, in other words, about a dozen years after he began commenting in Aristotle,
Thomas undertakes a sort of second series of commentaries, second versions of some of
the works in which he had already commented, not all of them, but the greater part.
And he relies, in this case, on translations from William of Merbaca, which he can take
as deeply authoritative translations directly from Aristotle's text understood by someone
who understood his Greek very well indeed, as well as understanding the needs of scholastic
philosophy.
It's nice to think that Thomas was perhaps working on some of these along with William
of Merbaca, but that's not, unfortunately, absolutely certain.
Now, these second-layer commentaries are very, very close to sections, sometimes approaching
that kind of textual analysis, which the French love to call explicazione de text, and which
has been important all the way from the schooling of the 11th century into the semiotic discussion
of the last quarter of this one.
One of the finest of these is Thomas's commentary on Aristotle's work on the heavens and the
earth, a cosmological astronomical work.
The basic keynote of Aristotelianism that we see right here, Aristotelianism in general,
and of Thomas's Aristotelianism in particular, is the keynote of teleology.
The notion that the most important aspect of anything is its end, its purpose, its telos
in Greek.
If you want to understand something, you figure out what it's for, and that tells you the
most essential information that one can use.
There's another wonderful story about Thomas Aquinas while living in Paris.
After the enormously demanding days of teaching, he did not want to spend very much time on
social life, but of course, by the time of his last trip to Paris, his last day in Paris,
he was a world figure, a top celebrity.
And from time to time, the head of the Dominican house on the Rue Saint-Jacques would ask him
please to grant an interview to this or that famous person who was desperate to meet him.
Thomas often went to dinner with St. Louis at the royal table, and there are wonderful
anecdotes about that too, but there's no need to weigh this account down with this anecdotal
material coming from the dubious and enthusiastic pages of Friar Reginald.
But this story, I think, has something of the ring of truth about it.
The notion is that a great duke was terribly eager to see Thomas, and he had been petitioning
for an interview, petitioning for a conversation for a long time, until finally the head of
the Dominican house said, do Friar Thomas, please talk to the man who depended upon his
generosity.
And so Thomas went for a long walk to the streets of Paris with him, perhaps down the
Rue Saint-Jacques, the old Roman north-south street, down to the River Seine, to a place
where caged birds were sold.
This is very likely the Marchéau Fleur, which exists today and which we think existed well
before the 13th century, is just that kind of a place, a place where you can buy potted
plants and birds in cages.
And so Thomas said, something like, I'm translating from the ponderous language of Reginald, I'm
translating, more than translating, adapting.
Thomas, I imagine, said something like, you say you wish to do something for me, well
then, buy all these birds.
You can imagine, Duke was delighted and sold off his agent who bought up cage after cage
and birds.
A huge pile of caged birds was presented right there, and we then turned to Thomas looking
at him with expectation, and Thomas said, open all the doors, and the birds flew up.
And what the merchants thought, I don't know what they sold.
The cages for profit probably are trying to trap some of the birds again.
But the ring of truth that this anecdote has, which I think means that it's probably authentic,
is Thomas' sense, unmistakable in the tale, that to cage a bird is an offense against nature.
It completely violates the teleology of the bird.
It violates the creator's reason for producing birds.
And thus is, I think, the term, a sin against nature is not entirely inappropriate.
Thomas incidentally, when talking about contraception, was of course opposed to contraception.
There was then, and become recently, a moral doctrine of the church.
But he doesn't discuss it as a sin against nature.
There are other reasons for it.
This was a sin against nature to entrap flying creatures so they could not fly.
And this is the teleological Aristotelianism that is the keynote, it seems to me, of much
of Thomas' thought, indeed perhaps of the most important elements, the most important
strains, the most important streams in that great river of speculation, which he represents
and which goes by his name.
Thomas of course commented on other authors as well, although the bulk of them all together
does not equal anything like the importance of his commentary on Aristotle.
First of all, in Boethius.
He commented on several of the works of Boethius, that very important sixth century Christian
father of the church, that great secular philosopher, an aristocrat, consul of the Roman Republic,
one of the last ones, and then minister of the Ostrogothic King Theodoric, who was executed
by Theodoric on a charge of treason, having only, barely to begin, his great project of
the translation and reconciliation of all of the works of Plato and Aristotle, of course,
an impossible project.
But that kind of effort, that kind of desire to achieve a huge, titanic enterprise in the
interest of advancing the reconciled message of philosophy is exactly the kind of thing
that of course attracted Thomas.
More interesting in a way are Thomas' commentaries of the remarkable figure, the sixth century
Syrian monk, who went by the name of Dionysus the Areopagite, and we called Pseudo Dionysus
the Areopagite.
In the year 1261, he commented on the works of Pseudo Dionysus, which would in fact be
extremely important to him.
I suppose it's necessary to step back a little bit and tell you about Pseudo Dionysus.
He was a Syrian monk of a very Neoplatonic strain of Christian thought, who composed
some important works on the names of God, on the celestial hierarchy, all of which presented
what came to be called the negative theology, the via negativa, a very important strain
of Thomas' thought that is now being looked at with considerable attention by postmodern
Thomas, to the sort I've mentioned already.
The reason why this book was given the name of someone other than its author was not a
desire to plagiarize, it would appear in the part of the sixth century monk, but an excessive
example of his own modesty.
He felt that he was passing on the philosophical tradition of Dionysus, who listened to Paul
on the Areopagus, when Paul preached his sermon to the Athenians.
Paul's first sermon preached not from Scripture, but from the theory of natural law, then current
at the time among Stoics and others, and who, we are told by the Acts of the Apostles, invited
Paul home, and according to tradition, then became the first Bishop of Athens, the first
Bishop of Corinth, and then by an extremely improbable bending of church history, was identified
as the first Bishop of Paris.
Even though Denis the first Bishop of Paris, Dionysus the first Bishop of Paris, was executed
in the middle of the third century AD, Dionysus would have been a very long lived figure indeed.
This was very important in the world of Parisian thought, because the Abbey of Sandony loved
this implausible idea.
Were that accurate, it would mean that the Abbot of Sandony was the direct successor of
the disciple of Paul, and thus in theological terms, far outranked the Bishop of Rome, the
disciple of Peter, who was a very good man, a fine organizer, but hardly guilty of much
intellectual.
And this was an idea very, very beloved by the community of Sandony, which of course
had been very strongly rebutted, and Thomas didn't talk about that, but he did pay attention
to the work of pseudo-Dionysus.
What it shows is a striking kind of Christian neoplatonism, and what Thomas is clearly trying
to do in his commentaries on the pseudo-Ariapagite, is to grasp the essential neoplatonism of
that thinker.
Thomas would become a great influence on his own development of the via negativa, the
negative theology, which is now so important.
Just after the passage on the proofs of the existence of God, which is article three of
question two of part one of the Summa Theologiae, Thomas moves on to the subsequent article,
which are the subsequent question, which deals with what God is, or rather what God is not.
Because although our reason can reach the fact that there is a God, according to Thomas,
it cannot tell us very much about him.
What it can tell us about him is how he is different from us.
And this is the great message which comes through.
In this commentary, Thomas does not simply follow the text.
He takes off in significant digressions, which are obviously nuclei of new approaches of
a new kind of theology of his own.
He also commented on a book called On Causes, On Causes, De Causes, which was attributed
to Aristotle, although Thomas greatly discerned it could not possibly be by Aristotle.
In fact, he thought it was by Proclus, a fifth century CE, fifth century AD, non-Christian
theologian in Athens, a member of the Platonic Academy, it would appear, who was a serious
Platonist, and who may have been a technical Christian, although it looks as though he
was still sort of a holdout for paganism.
Fascinating figure who fascinated William of Merbaca, and William of Merbaca had translated
many of his works, and as he and Thomas both clearly saw, this particular work in Causes
could not be by Aristotle, it was more likely by Proclus.
Actually, as we now know, it's from a curious work called the Elementatio Theologiae, the
sort of construction of the elements of theology, I guess would be a good way to translate that,
which is from the teachings of Proclus, no question about that, but not exactly by him.
But here we have a tangle about authorship.
Thomas, instead of being the faithful, medieval person who simply trusts the literary expertise
of his sources, does a kind of proto-Renaissance job of textual criticism, figures out who
the author must be and reattributes it in what turns out to be almost exactly correct,
certainly correct until the 20th century when one separated the elementatio from Proclus'
own work, but this is getting into fairly refined matters.
And then, fourthly, of course, we have Thomas' first great summa, the commentary on Peter
Lombard's book of sentences, which, as Brian Davis has said, really contains the kernels
of all of Thomas' most important lines of thought.
Then there are the questionnaires, edited reports of extemporaneous resolutions of classroom
discussions or of external debates, and these questionnaires are the product of the teaching
function was at the heart of scholasticism, as it must be of every vital institutionally
organized intellectual enterprise.
There are two kinds of questionnaires.
The questionnaires disputate, and the questionnaires de colibet or quadribetales, depending what
kind of title you prefer.
The questionnaires disputate were usually the product of the third great session of
the medieval university classroom day, the three-hour session from something like one
o'clock until something like four o'clock in the afternoon.
As I remarked earlier, imagine how much time this kind of teaching left people like Thomas
to do their writing, which makes the incredible volume of works done in such a short span
of time all the more imposing.
And Thomas was, as we know, from many reports, a committed teacher constantly in the classroom
not avoiding his students.
There are nine books of questionnaires disputate of Thomas'.
The first of these, probably the most important, is the questionnaires disputate de veritate,
the disputed question on truth, which was composed or edited for him sometime between
1256 and 1259.
In it, we find Thomas' fundamental epistemology.
How can we know?
Can we know truth?
Yes, we can.
And just how do we do that?
And that is the issue which is disputed in this question.
There are 12 books of the other kind of questionnaires de colibet or quadribetales, the quadribetal
questions, as they're sometimes called in an English term that must mean very little
to most English speakers.
And these date from 1256 to 1272, in other words, quite a stretch of time.
These are the edited records of public debates, the kind of public debates which forced university
masters to keep up to snuff and on the cutting edge despite their version of tenure.
No matter how tenured you were, you were expected to announce that you would debate on a certain
day at a certain time in a certain place questions on this or on that or de colibet about anything
at all.
And these were thought to be the real test of the professional person's metal.
Thus, one could not simply let one's brain rot, taking advantage of tenure.
On the other hand, those who were constantly questioning tenure and questioning establishments,
angry graduate students, etc., had to put up or shut up as well.
They could not simply complain about the senescence of their teachers.
They had to prove that their teachers were in fact as far over the hill as they claimed.
Very healthy institution which I think the modern university could certainly afford to
revive.
Unfortunately, the conventions of scholastic editing have removed most of the lively give
and take these encounters must have had.
The essentials of conclusions are clear though and the basic argumentation used to reach
them.
Thomas also wrote lots of letters of consultative expertise and some sermons.
He wrote them on a wide range of subjects from economic morality, the question of the
just price, to the ideal curriculum, to astrology which he hated, to the mode of apologetics
that might be appropriate in the Patriarchate of Antioch.
Alexandria was the Patriarchate of Africa, Europe had two Patriarchates, Constantinople
and Rome, the Patriarchate of Asia was Antioch, a remarkable land with its exceptionally rich
religious mix of Muslims, of Jews, of Indian and Chinese religious groups who were constantly
present in the mind of the city of Antioch because it was one of the great termini of
caravan roots.
As well as of course the Christians, the Greek and Syrian and Armenian and other Orthodox
Christian communities, the Nestorian heretics and so on and so on.
And the most interesting of his letters today is the letter on the proper government of
Jews in a Christian commonwealth, the most interesting, it's thought to be most interesting,
people go to look it up and they find it's rather boring and has most to do with economic
arrangements, how fair it is to tax Christians and Jews and so on and what relative proportions
and so on.
It's a response to a letter written to Thomas by Marguerite, a French princess, the daughter
of St. Louis who had married the Duke of Rabant and she wanted to know how to handle this
question properly and Thomas typically responded.
So his life was full of writing, it was full of teaching, it was full of expert consulting,
it was full of all of this kind of thing.
And then we come finally to his poems.
If they are genuine, I want to assume that they are, Weisheipel thinks they are, and
if Weisheipel doesn't doubt something then you can be pretty sure that it's valid.
These are poems which he composed for the office of the Eucharistic Feast of Corpus
Christi in 1264.
They may have been revised later either by him or by their Dominicans to some extent,
but I don't think that affects the fundamental message that they give us.
The wonderful thing that these four little poems, the only poems we have any indication
Thomas ever tried to write, is that rather like the incident about the caged birds, rather
like the story about preferring Christi's commentary in the Gospel of Matthew to the
ownership of the city of Paris, I think they let us look at this person who is so disguised
from us, either by the privacy of his own temperament or more critically by Brother
Reginald's, by Friar Reginald's sense of proper biography, that we really have little
sense of Thomas as a person.
The four hymns I'm talking about include the Panjalingua, which is so familiar to traditional
Catholics as well as to people who enjoy choral singing of medieval music, whatever their
religion may be, as well as the Laudacion Salvatore, a much less well-known hymn, which
is a versified treatise on Eucharistic theology, an amazing exercise in didactic verse.
It's doubted, perhaps unfortunately most revised, is the Adoro Devote or Adoro Te Devote, also
a statement of scholastic Eucharistic doctrine, but concerned with another problem which I'd
like to come to in a moment.
Let me call your attention to the Laudacion Salvatore.
This is the sequence for the Mass of Corpus Christi.
That means a song that is sung by the choir sort of in the middle of the mass between
the reading of the epistle, not the middle, in the sort of the middle quarter of the mass,
in between the reading of the epistle and the reading of the gospel.
It is quite a lengthy poem, I won't read you all of it, but a certain selected stanzas
from it, and try to give some sense of the kind of didactic verse Thomas wrote.
Thomas never tried to write lyric verse, unimaginable or epic verse, but didactic verse, poetry
written simply for an intellectual purpose to teach a point, a formal point.
He did very, very well.
He did it with a felicity of meteor and a felicity of rhythm, which I, who have no singing
voice at all, and whose Latin is probably not the way he Latin was pronounced in the
13th century, may give you only a dim sense of.
This title comes from its very first line, Laudacion Salvatore, O Zion, Praise the Saviour,
Laudadoce met pastore in hymnice at Canticius, Praise your leader and your shepherd in hymns
and canticles, Quantum potes, tantum aude, as much as you can, dare, dare as much as
you can.
Quia mai or omni laude, because he's greater than any praise, nec laudare, so features,
or you adequate for that kind of praise, so such lofty theological praise, none the
less.
Laudis tema speciales, he says, in good classroom tone, good scholastic mode, moving away from
this general exhortation to the worshipers, the exhortation to the members of the new
Zion, the new Israel, that is to say, the Christian church.
Laudis tema speciales, panis vivus ad vitales, ho die proponitor, today is proposed a special
theme for praise, the theme of the living and life-giving bread, which the Lord and
the Last Supper gave to his group of twelve companions, and there's no doubt about that.
Then we go back to a sort of liturgical exhortation, sit laus planas sit sonora, sit yucundas sit
decora mentis yubilacio, let the jubilation of your mind be a full praise, a sonorous
praise, a joyous praise, and a decorous one.
What a notion, jubilation of the mind, the fundamental form of praise in which the didactic
Thomas could be engaged and to which he urged his followers.
He says for now the very solemn day is being enacted, a solemn liturgical day, and we're
talking about the institution of the sacrament of the Eucharist, and he says that ustatem
novitas umram fugad veritas noctem luxe liminat, let the new awareness and that novelty banish
old stuff, let truth banish any shadows, the light dispels the night.
Let us remember what Christ did in the first institution of that sacrament, then he goes
back to his kind of classroom tone, his didactic exposition, dogma dator cristianis, quod in
caranem transit panis et vinum insanguinem, utter simplicity in the Thomistic mode, a dogma
is given to Christians, that the bread turns into flesh and the wine into blood, how can
you get plainer than that?
Quod non copies, quod non vides, what you can't grasp, what you can't see, animosa firmat
vides, pretere rom ordinem, a spirited faith affirms beyond the normal course of things.
And then he goes on to the doctrine of the Latin Christian church, that the Eucharist
was complete in various species, in bread and in wine, which are diverse species, diversi
spaciabus, siniestantum et non rabus, signs and not things, not names rather than things,
but signs rather than things.
And then he goes on to say that the flesh is food indeed, and the blood is drink indeed,
and nonetheless Christ remains complete in both species, the bread and the wine.
And he is not divided nor broken up, nor in any way separated by the recipients, we'll
of course receive only a little bit of bread, not any wine, sumit unus sumut mille, quantum
isti tantum ille, nexum tuts consumitur, one receives the Eucharist, the thousand receive
it, and the one receives as much as the thousand, nor is the one consumed diminished by those
who receive him.
And he says there are different moral purposes, different moral outcomes.
If you're a bad person who received the Eucharist, then you'll get death.
If you're a good one, you'll get life.
Si, he says, vide pari sumtionis quamsid dispar exitus.
See how diverse is the outcome of a similar consumption.
And then he goes on and says, even if the sacrament is broken up, and the priest has
to break up the host, I suppose he means, don't worry, don't hesitate.
Again, it's a second person singular address.
But remember that there is as much beneath the fragment as beneath the whole.
He goes on in this fashion in a remarkable example of the doctrine of the Eucharist.
More compelling and moving, personally, I think, is the Adoro de Votay, also a statement
of scholastic Eucharistic doctrine, but concerned with a problem of belief, with personal communion
with Christ, rather than with precise dogmatic formulation.
It's the closest we can come to this man's personality, I think, sweet, utterly lucid,
living on the cusp of doubt.
He says, I adore you devoutly, oh, hidden truth, hiding truth.
You who, beneath these forms of bread and wine, are truly hidden.
My heart subjects itself to you utterly, because in contemplating you, my mind is completely
inadequate.
And then he moves on to the Aristotelian senses, sight, taste, touch, come to nothing with
you.
Only hearing can be credited.
I believe what the Word of God said, nothing can be sure than the Word of Truth.
Of course, it's a mistranslation.
This is all of the marvelous interplay of assonance and alliteration, and the beautiful
felicity of movement in the verse line itself, which you would need a good singer to convey
to you.
On the cross, only your Godhead was hidden, but here is hidden also your humanity.
But I, believing both, and professing them, seek what the good thief sought.
Plaga secut tamus nonin tuar, your wounds, like tamus, that other tamus, the doubting
tamus, I cannot look upon.
Nevertheless, I profess you, my God, and I call upon you to save me.
And he ends in the lastanza, O Jesus, whom I look at now veiled, when will happen that
which I so much desire, that gazing on your unveiled face, I can be blessed with the sight
of your glory, the beatific vision which had been for Christians for a very long time,
the ultimate promise of human happiness, a remarkable poem allowing us a tiny window
into the tender and, I think, painful zones of this man's intellect, as well as of his
soul.
