Lecture 5 Condemnation and Canonization
Today I want to talk about two opposite and nearly equal reactions to Aquinas' work within
the half century after his death in 1274.
That conflict ended in something of a draw.
Thomas' followers won sainthood and other expressions of official Christian approval
for Thomas and for Thomism, more importantly the approval of the Christian Church institutional
approval.
But the cutting edge of the university intelligentsia, followed by most Renaissance humanists,
tended either to dismiss Thomism or to consider it one of several competing schools of Christian
doctor and philosophy.
One way or the other it was relegated to a position very different from what the leadership
of the church had wanted it to be in the middle of the 14th century.
It s interesting to me that these stances were mirrored with curious fidelity in the
century in a quarter or so from 1879 onwards.
So that the modern reaction to Thomism, the late 19th and 20th century, has been very
like that of the late 13th and 14th century.
Historian, of course, this is not entirely a surprise.
First of all, let s talk about the assault on Thomism.
It was an extraordinarily vigorous and vivid assault, not extraordinary in the sense that
it s not the sort of thing you would expect from university professors who tend to be
creatures of ego and of ranker and of attached to precise formulation of thought.
But it was extraordinary in terms of other attacks upon thinkers within the Christian
fold throughout the Middle Ages.
Some thinkers were, of course, condemned as heretical, but that tended to happen relatively
simply and that was pretty much that.
Some thinkers were disagreed with by others, but Thomas was subject to a ferocious sustained
assault which failed in its goal of getting him declared a heretic and was backed up
after considerable ranker by the forces on his side.
It was a much bigger fight about the orthodoxy of a philosopher than I think occurred anywhere
else in the Middle Ages or at any other time, and it was also quite a significant fight
about not just the orthodoxy, but the acceptability within the seminary teaching tradition.
There weren t seminaries in those days, of course, but this is an application of a modern
term backward to the structures that were brought into existence for the training of
the clergy, basically the universities.
This all began in 1270, the year of the death of St. Louis, who was often his second crusade
down in Tunis.
He died in August, but there was a disputation before that point which some contend might
never have taken place if Louis had been around, and the subsequent consequences of that debate
might not have taken place if Louis had continued to live.
Since St. Louis was a tremendous supporter of Thomas Aquinas, either because he understood
and liked his philosophy, we don t know about that, we have no record of Louis s thoughts
and such things, or because they were remote kinsmen which for a serious minded medieval
man like Louis would have been perfectly good reason for expressing loyalty.
Thomas had also taken part in the conflict between secular priests and the Dominicans
and Franciscans about whether special groups, special interest groups like Dominicans and
Franciscans should get special treatment in the university, and he was of course on the
Franciscan Dominican side, but his own contributions to the debate had been moderate and useful
in leading to Louis s eventual arbitration, so Louis liked him.
Louis died in 1270 to be succeeded by a son, Philip III, who was a very weak king, weak
I think by comparison to almost anybody in the medieval political tradition, but supremely
weak by comparison with his father, who was a tough act to follow.
In 1270, this disputation was a disputation in which Master John Peckham from England,
but then at Paris, and he was a Franciscan, and Master Robert Kilwoodby who had been trained
at Oxford as Peckham had, Kilwoodby was not as advanced in the faculty of the University
of Paris as Peckham was, but they were both members of it in one level or another, and
they debating with other people attacked several propositions taught by Thomas who was then
of course still at the University of Paris.
It appears that Thomas was not at this disputation himself, but that various of his students
were and he certainly must have been very aware of it.
It's a very interesting kind of debate, this sort of debate went on all the time in the
question is disputate of the medieval university, but this particular question had a longer
life than might have been expected.
It succeeded in persuading a pope.
In 1277, seven years later, when Thomas was dead as well as Louis, the pope was a man
named John the 21st, a man who had been known as Peter of Spain, who was a logician.
Now that's interesting, because almost all of the popes of the 13th century had been
canon lawyers, or if not canon lawyers, had been deeply trained in papal diplomacy.
Peter of Spain was something different, something new.
Here was a formal, intellectual, not in the legal tradition, in the philosophical tradition,
the author of a book called the Sumule Logicales, Little Summa's Dealing with Logic.
He was himself a logician, as well as a philosopher.
He becomes pope.
He is disturbed by what he hears about this disputation, and he instructs the Bishop of
Paris, a man named Etienne Tampier, Stephen Tampier, I guess we should say in English,
to investigate.
Tampier is quite an interesting figure who is being explored right now by the scholarly
tradition, trying to find out more and more about who he was, where he came from in terms
of intellectual tradition and so on.
He was very concerned about immorality, quite concerned about the courtly love teaching
that was quite widespread in European upper class culture, and appears to have been making
its impact in the university as well through the faculty of arts.
He disapproved, first of all, of the idea of clerics talking about such things, and
secondly he disapproved of most of what they talked about, which is no surprise.
What is more of a surprise is the fact that Tampier also attached to his concern about
all of these immoral claims and statements and expressions of behavioral propriety that
were current in the university as well as elsewhere in culture.
He was concerned about certain strictly what we would call philosophical or theological
propositions, many of which were distinctively Thomist.
Two hundred and nineteen propositions were gathered by Tampier's investigating group,
and they were condemned.
Now condemned was kind of a loose word.
They were not declared to be heretical.
Many who taught them was not ipso facto excommunicated, but the threat of excommunication of course
hung over the whole discussion.
He was hoping that the condemnation would lead to the abandonment of these positions,
because of course anyone with a career in mind would hesitate to outrage the bishop,
and as everybody knew, the pope who was behind him.
This happened on the seventh of March, an interesting day, because that was of course
the day of Thomas' death.
Thomas had died three years before.
This may have been strictly accidental.
It may be entirely retrospective hindsight to see some kind of strategic insult in this
choice of the date.
What is interesting in terms of the date is that eleven days later, on the eighteenth
of March, twelve seventy-seven, Kilwoodby, who had now gone on to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
inspired a very similar condemnation at Oxford.
And instead of the threat of excommunication, Kilwoodby offered the professors of Oxford
University forty days indulgence for those who would just not teach them, who would
avoid teaching them.
Several things to notice.
First of all, it would have taken much more than eleven days for the word to get from
Paris to Oxford, given the communications of the time.
This shows that this has to have been coordinated in advance.
Kilwoodby and Tompey were delighted to have the pope's approval, and they were planning
to sconce Thomas.
Now the fact that he tried to offer only very positive encouragement, rather than negative
threat in any kind of serious way, is I think tremendously revealing.
It's revealing about the independence, the autonomy of the professors of theology and
of philosophy in the university system of that day, in the mind of the church of that
day.
It's also revealing in the sense that the assumption of Kilwoodby's offer is that people
would of course be teaching these propositions.
They were part of the current of thought, hard to imagine Oxford University professors
teaching much about courtly love, but very easy to imagine them teaching these Thomas
positions which were strongly Aristotelian in character.
And to go to the effort, to make the particular effort to avoid teaching this common and popular
material should be rewarded, and rewarded with forty days indulgence.
The doctrine of indulgences is growing, the practice of indulgences is growing, and indulgence
is a grant by the church of remission from temporal punishment, either in purgatory or
here upon this earth.
It's not forgiveness of sins, but it's interesting that this kind of dubious doctrine, so dubious
when you look at it in the attack of Martin Luther in the early 16th century, is the kind
of thing that the church leadership offers the intellectual cadre of the church's establishment
in order to get them not to do what it wants them not to do.
It's kind of strange and not very potent sort of attack.
Peckham, who had been with Kilroyd B. back there in 1270, attacking these propositions,
Peckham was a Franciscan, Kilroyd B. after all, is a Dominican, and so must have felt
a certain amount of anomaly in attacking the leading light of the Dominican order, the
source of its intense pride, just recently did.
Peckham was a Franciscan and had no such hesitations, and Peckham in 1284 had another
session in which he condemned, he attacked again these condemned propositions and declared
many of them heretical, including most, if not quite all, of the propositions which had
been distinctively Thomast.
Peckham did threaten excommunication, but typically enough he actually got around to
excommunicating only one person, a university Thomast named Richard Napwell.
Not because he napped well, but because he put things well in his knapsack, I suppose.
Napwell's an interesting character who's also being rediscovered by historians of thought.
That's a tough job, because basically, professors tend to leave very little in the way of evidence
behind them.
I think that's true today as well as then.
Okay, this was the attack upon Thomism.
The counterattack was very vigorous indeed.
The year after the 1277 condemnation on Thomast's birthday in Paris, and a little bit later
in Oxford, the general chapter of the Dominican order met at Milan in 1278, and it supported
Thomism against the Oxford-based opposition.
In 1279, it met in Paris, probably deciding that Paris was the place to meet because of
this tempest, which was springing up and appeared to be finding territory much more significant
than teapots.
And it seems that the decrees or the votes, the resolutions of the Dominican order's representatives
at Paris supported Thomism against that Oxford-based opposition.
That had been said at Milan, but it was said with greater emphasis in Paris in 1279.
The Dominican order does not mind sort of stirring up Paris-Oxford institutional rivalry
along with Dominican-Franciscan institutional rivalry.
What's behind this, Albertus Magnus is at work.
Albert the Great is defending his student, his student whom he called the flower in the
glory of the world after he had broken into tears hearing of the news of Thomast's death
some five years before.
In 1279, the Franciscan general chapter met at Assisi, the home place of the Franciscan
order, and it then addressed this question of these propositions, which had been vigorously
attacked by lots of Franciscans, but the Franciscan order as a whole thought it didn't need to
miss into this directly.
Now it felt that it did, and the general chapter of the Franciscans forbade any Franciscan to
teach the condemned propositions, which lets us know that many Franciscans had been doing
so or were likely to be tempted to do so.
And this again tells us something about the tremendous spread, the tremendous credibility
of Thomast's kind of Aristotelian teaching on these matters in the context of the university
world, Franciscan or Dominican.
Three years later, in 1282, the general chapter of the Franciscan order met at Strasbourg,
and it then required any Franciscan who was teaching domestic philosophy, which tells
us that many still were, to use a manual, a sort of corrective manual, which was called
the Correctorium Fratris Tomei, the correctory or the correction of Friar Thomas, and it
was composed by a very well-meaning Franciscan named William de la Maire, once again an Englishman.
We can see that this is English, heavily Oxford based, as well as generally Franciscan.
The Dominicans mocked that well-meaning manual, and before 1282 was out, they labeled it the
Corruptorium Fratris Tomei, the corruption, not the correction of Friar Thomas, and strongly
disciplined any Dominican who would use it.
So this is now moving from partisan politics into competing textbooks, competing manuals,
and is becoming quite a wonderful scandal, the kind of dispute that the Middle Ages loved.
It all ended positively for the Dominican side, for Albertus Magnus' sense of what the Dominican
interest should be, and for Thomas Aquinas' teaching for Tomeism in general, in the year
1323, 41 years after this exchange of insults between the Franciscan Correctorium and the
Dominican designation of it as the Corruptorium.
In 1323, Pope John the 22nd, I think it declared Thomas the Saint, I think it's interesting
that John the 21st calls Tomeism, as well as lots of other things, into question.
John the 22nd, who, of course, chose that name with John the 21st in mind when he was
elected pope, did not follow his chosen predecessor in this regard, and said he was very much
pro-Thomas.
He declared Thomas the Saint and awarded him the epithet Dr. Colmunis, common doctor,
a doctor common to all the schools, that is someone whose doctrine ought to be common to
all the schools.
And this epithet is picked up 550 something years later by Pope Leo XIII, who issued the
papal document, a Terni Patris, which honored Thomas and urged the imitation of the doctor
Colmunis as a personal example, as well as a thinker by all professors teaching in Catholic
universities.
But again, typical of papal action and of action of the high church hierarchy, it urged
it, did not require it.
Fortunately, Leo XIII showed that the Roman Church had learned about indulgences, the
Roman Church continues today to have indulgences, but no indulgences were offered to Catholic
university professors who would indeed emulate the doctor Colmunis, who was sometimes also
called the angelic doctor, because he was so remote from the problems of this world,
at least in experience.
The nature of this controversy is, I think, very clear.
It's basically a recourse to Augustinian Christianity, St. Augustine had been the great
interpreter philosophically as well as theologically of Christian teaching for the Western Church.
And I think if we are familiar with Augustine at all, we should remember that Augustine
was not particularly interested in Aristotle at all and distinctly not in Aristotelian logic.
He tells us in his confessions how at age 19, newly arrived in Carthage, that seething
cauldron of intellectual and sensual delight, he read Aristotle's book on the categories,
and which was so praised and so extraordinarily difficult by all the teachers he knew, and
Augustin read it and said, so what's the big deal?
This is kind of an obvious and sort of dumb book.
And while, of course, he would use logic in his arguments later on, he was not that impressed
by it.
He was more and more impressed by shattering insights, great breakthroughs of intellectual
revelation as well as, of course, spiritual revelation than he was by the careful laboring
on logical chains, which is what Aristotle does and what Thomas and the Thomists had
been doing.
So we have here an Augustinian tradition, which is not only opposed to Aristotelianism
in many of its doctrines, certainly opposed to the radical Aristotelianism that people
like César of Brabant in Paris and Veroïs down in Côte d'Ivoire were pushing, Veroïs
had been pushing in the 12th century, César in the later 13th.
But just fundamentally opposed in temperament, Augustin doesn't care that much about logic,
Thomas cares intensely about logic.
The Franciscan order, which has to be sure some Thomists among it as its own regulations
on this matter make very clear to us, the Franciscan order led the attack against the
Aristotelianism which was espoused by Thomas and by most Dominicans, though not all remember
Robert Kilberby, who was a Dominican himself.
This intellectual disagreement was, of course, aggravated right away by party politics practiced
with the gusto typical of medieval political interaction, especially in that great optimistic
stretch of time before the Black Death came in the 1340s to remind Europeans of the collective
limitations of culture and the collective limitation of human life.
Now this led, in a way, the attackers, the Franciscan Augustinians to describe them a
little bit too simply, it's not true that Thomas is totally Aristotelian, they presented
him as excessively Aristotelian and they can be seen as the champions of Augustinian orthodoxy.
In fact, Thomas is tremendously Augustinian in many regards, as I'll be pointing out in
some other talks in the series, but Thomas was stereotyped, caricatured as Aristotelian
by his opponents who called themselves Augustinians and they won, in a way, in terms of the long
intellectual history they did win.
Pope John the 22nd is declaring Thomas a saint in the way that these kinds of declarations
tend to happen, he's doing it too late.
Thomas is declared a saint after his and the Doctor of Communities of the Schools, after
his intellectual leadership has in fact passed on and has been rejected by the next generation
by the next wave, which is entirely normal in the history of intellectual life.
Many of the most exciting and most fashionable intellectual figures of the next few generations,
all from 1277 to about 1350, let's say, which was a very fertile period of philosophical
speculation, rejected Thomas massively.
One of the most striking of them is William of Occam, born about 1290, who died from the
Black Death in 1349 or 15, we're not sure which, he was born in England, born in Surrey
and he died at the court of the Holy Roman Emperor.
He attacked many things in that the papacy, he's a Franciscan, and he attacked many things
that the papacy liked, but one of his particular targets was in fact Pope John the 22nd.
Pope John the 22nd was in favor of Thomas, he was also in favor of church property, of
the notion of the church as a corporation, let's say the corporate directors of the church,
the clergy, and indeed the Roman clergy as being the church.
The church was pretty much exemplified and summarized by the church of Rome from the
point of view of John the 22nd and many canon lawyers, a very narrow conception of the church,
which previously had been considered the body of the people of God, the body of the baptized
believers, a much broader kind of corporate entity.
And Occam attacked that narrow view, that narrow canon lawyer's view, and he also attacked
the attachment to property, pointing out that Jesus had advised poverty.
What Francis, the great thing Francis did in founding his order was to call the church
back to the life of the gospels, which was a life of poverty.
Francis was kind of romantic and he said that he had this personal affair with Lady Poverty.
His lady, unlike the lady of the other courtly love poets, was Lady Poverty.
And Franciscans were supposed, Dominicans too, were supposed to own nothing.
And personally, I think this carried out, I've mentioned already that Thomas Aquinas
was paid a huge sum by the king of Sicily, King Charles, but for his job, for his post
as the ranking professor of theology at the University of Naples in the 1270s, but Thomas
never touched the coin of it.
That money went into the corporate entities like the treasury of his institute and the
treasury of the order.
They would maintain individual poverty, but of course these individual poor men and poor
women belong to vastly rich corporations by the time we're into the early 14th century.
And they tried to defend, people like John the 22nd tried to defend this anomaly by
quoting certain texts from the New Testament, which William Avakam attacked very, very powerfully,
attacked them in the style of the nominalists of the 11th and early 12th century.
Nominalism is revived in logic and revived partly as a tool with which to attack the
legal and political commitments of the papacy.
Thomas Aquinas gets sort of dirtied by all of this from the point of view of William
Avakam and of most radical free thinkers.
Radical free thinkers are what university students and indeed professors are supposed
to be, and William Avakam was certainly one of them and he was a hero for many of them
as well.
And so, Thomism got a pretty black eye.
In fact, the pope's approval of Thomism didn't help in the long run.
If anything, it probably hurt.
Now why reject Thomas?
I think there were two main lines right here.
First of all, intellectually speaking, aside from all of these political questions of context,
there was a sharp critical look taken at the logical and epistemological assumptions on
which the beautifully ordered Thomistic synthesis had been erected.
These foundations were Aristotelian logic.
Thomas and his predecessors had generally assumed that Aristotle's great works on logic
were correct.
Peter Abelard had rediscovered much of Aristotle's thought without knowing it was Aristotle.
But after about 1150, philosophers in the West were able to read the entire works of
Aristotle, translated either from the Arabic translations of the Greek or from the Greek
directly.
And people like Thomas had had the benefit of having sort of personal translators help
him out in the exact meaning of the Greek text.
And this is all part of a general assumption that the great work on logic, the posterior
analytics, the prior analytics, the categories and so on, which Aristotle had considered
so important, were simply true that this was rather like an early or 20th century notion
of scientific truth.
Now what these younger scholars are doing is saying that's not the case.
That Aristotelian logic is based on certain assumptions, on culture-bound assumptions,
which is very much what the skeptics had said way back there in the late fourth and the
third century BCE.
We can see a kind of skepticism about logic revived by these thinkers that don't know
that they knew those earlier critics very well, that they didn't need to.
The science of logic had gone further and further other than that, and it itself began
to reveal the only relative solidity of the foundations on which Thomas had built his
great edifice.
I think that's what Thomas perceived on St. Nicholas Day in 1273, the 6th of December,
and recognized that all this vast cathedral-like structure that he had been building was built
on sand, maybe not quick sand, but on sand rather than on granite.
What this led to in time was a, not very much time at all, was a return to earlier categories
of the debate about faith and reason.
How much could human reason help us understand revealed truth, revealed Hebrew and Christian
truth?
A debate which agitated many of the early fathers of the church, Augustine thought he
had resolved it pretty much, but certainly if there was any conflict between whatever
reason might say, using the arguments of this boring man Aristotle, for example, and what
the scripture revealed, the scripture properly understood according to Augustine's understanding
in that of his favorite fathers of the church, then obviously the revealed statement of faith
would win out.
This attitude began to say that philosophy has very little to tell us about theology.
If anything, it may be problematic and may present another version of truth, which of
course cannot be true because we know the revealed truth to be the real truth.
And this of course paved the way for the theology of the Protestant reformers.
But what was the distinctive doctrinal character of Thomism, which generally said that Thomism
was first and foremost the acceptance of the integral thought of Aristotle?
Thomas was the last of the creative commentators on Aristotle.
Previous ones had been Alexander of Aphrodisias, who flourished between 0198 and 211 CE in
Athens.
We know he was lecturing on Aristotle there at the Lyceum, the school which Aristotle
had founded in imitation of Plato's Academy.
He was a faithful Aristotelian in that he defended Aristotle's logic against the criticisms
of the skeptics and Epicureans and so on.
But he was an independent interpreter too, who decided that nominalism made more sense
to the moderate realism of Aristotle, and who interpreted Aristotle in a way which would
be very troublesome to Christians later on.
He decided on this famous question of the immortality of the individual person that
Aristotle meant, though Aristotle himself was not very clear in this, we're not all
clear in this, Aristotle meant that when the body died, the soul died too, and that was
that, and there's no personal immortality.
The next great creative commentator in this style was the great Avicenna, as many of the
Westerners knew him.
Actually, Ibn Sina, as I guess a closer rendering of the name of this great Muslim thinker,
born in 980 and died in 1037, a bright flower of that oasis of Bukhara in the deserts of
Central Asia, who tried to combine Neoplatonism and Aristotelianism, who was especially interested
in Aristotle's medicine.
But he also talked a lot about Aristotle's ontology and Plato's ontology, the sub-science
of philosophy which deals with being, the nature of being, more about that later on.
Then came the Muslim tradition, the great Ibn Rushd, Kordava, born in 1126, dying 1198,
known as the Veroes to the west, a tremendously important figure in Thomas' own formation,
as well as in the formation of the radical Aristotelianism, which people like Kilwoodby
and Peckham and so on were attacking.
We should mention, and Albertus Magnus, Albert the Great, Thomas' own teacher.
We should also mention Rabbi Moses, the son of Maimon, Rabbi Moshe ben Maimon, known to
the Hebrew tradition by a sort of acrosticist Rambam, known to standard Western histories
of thought as Maimonides, and known to Thomas Aquinas as Rabbi Moses.
All these people are very important to Thomas Aquinas.
Thomas Aquinas calls Aristotle the philosopher, Veroes the commentator, Maimonides, Rabbi
Moses, and he uses him over and over again.
Now according to the 20th century historian of thought, David Knowles, Thomas Aquinas
his two main achievements were a, integrating Aristotelian philosophical principles with
his traditional Christian speculative philosophy, which in the west had been largely Augustinian,
and doing a better job of that than Augustinian and the Augustinians had been doing because
he was more logical.
And secondly, Thomas' main achievement was rethinking and remoulding old problems and
old materials, and thereby creating a wholly new and original Christian philosophy.
That's a Knowles quote.
And two of the distinctive keynotes of that philosophy are the notion that philosophy
is sharply distinguished from theology, knowing is sharply distinguished from believing.
Believing is good, very, very good, it's necessary in this earth, but knowing is better, and
that in heaven the saved will know God, which means they can no longer believe in him.
So knowing outranks believing, this shocked of course many of the Augustinians, at least
once with George's first maid, once they thought about it, they had to agree.
And then secondly, a major distinctive keynote of Thomas' new philosophy is that the human
soul is the form of the human body.
Now this line of argument has been challenged very recently by an interesting and provocative
book by M.D.
Jordan, a book which is called The Alleged Aristotelianism of Thomas Aquinas, published
in 1992, and Jordan points out that Thomas used lots of other sources than Aristotle,
and he argued lots of things that Aristotle would never have argued that Thomas knew were
against Aristotle's own teaching, and that it doesn't make any sense to call him an Aristotelian.
I must confess that I prefer Knowles' interpretation, and Knowles' great book, The Evolution of
Medieval Thought, perhaps I should defend that a bit.
I guess I prefer Knowles' interpretation because Knowles is basically a historian, first of
all of institutions, then of thought.
Jordan is a philosopher, though he deals with the history of philosophy, and I think that
to the historian's mind Aquinas and his Thomism still appear to be deeply integral Aristotelianism.
Thank you.
Thank you.
