Lecture 2 Thomas' Life, 1248-1274
In the summer of 1248, equipped with his master's degree in arts from the University
of Paris, Thomas moved to Cologne, where the Dominican order had just established a
new Studium Generale, as it had in that very year at the University Towns of Bologna, Montpellier
and Oxford, not at Paris.
The University of Paris was not at all pleased by the arrival of these large establishments
of Franciscans and Dominicans.
These new orders supported by the papacy, strongly subsidized by the papacy, and encouraged
to develop all of the artillery necessary, the doctrinal artillery to strengthen and
to spread the Catholic faith.
The University of Paris, which was essentially a guild of teachers, felt this to be a very
competitive kind of institution, and would not tolerate the establishment of this new
school.
But what the Dominican order found in Cologne, even better than in Oxford, Montpellier and
Toulouse, was a city which did not have anything like a university.
In there, the Dominican College, should we call it that?
It wasn't strictly a college, but it was a Dominican school, not run by a guild of teaching
masters, but run by the order in a proper hierarchical kind of sense.
This was therefore an opportunity to do it right, to start it off in a fresh kind of
situation without all of the bad blood of Paris interests.
That at least was the notion of Albert of Saxony, Albert the Great, as we know him more
familiarly, who was Thomas's teacher, and who became his mentor, not simply at Cologne,
but really throughout his life.
Albert is now in the late 20th and early 21st century, finally, fittingly, moving out of
the shadow, which Thomas's great work ironically cast upon him.
Albert was in fact a very major Aristotelian, a major scientist, as well as philosopher,
who deserves the kind of recognition he is now receiving.
In 1252, four years after coming to Cologne, Thomas left it and returned to Paris.
This was to be his second stay at Paris, which was to last for seven years, when Thomas
was to study and then to teach theology.
The degree of the Master of Sacred Theology, the Sacré Théologie Magistère, as they called
it even then, was granted in those days after the mature student had completed three more
bachelor's degrees in theology.
First of all, the bachelorette in biblical studies, then the baccalaureate in systematic
theology, and finally what was called the complete or the formal bachelorship.
Thomas completed two, the first two, and was dispensed from the third by a papal privilege.
The papacy wanted this now widely recognized young genius to start generating the theology
needed to fight heresy and to spread the Catholic faith.
Thomas got the first of these three bacheloreates, the one in biblical studies, the baccalaureatus
biblicus, these are wonderful titles in Latin, finer than in English, I think, in just two
years, 1252 to 1254, which was remarkably swift, normally this was a four-year course
of study.
His baccalaureate in systematic theology, called the baccalaureatus sentenciarius, because
it was based on the standard theology textbook, the great sentences of Peter Lombard, also
took only two years and produced, as Thomas's thesis, his massive commentary on the sentences,
not much more massive than other master's theses, but for a work done in two years,
a massive indeed, a spectacular and prodigious achievement.
So at age 31, remarkably young for this degree, Thomas was promoted to the STM, the master's
degree in sacred theology, without doing the third baccalaureate, the baccalaureatus formatus
or sometimes completus.
Also dispensed by the Pope was another brilliant and precocious Italian, the Franciscan Bonaventura.
These dispensations provoked a violent reaction on the part of the secular clergy, the masters
who were members of the University of Paris, of the University of Paris Guild, who were
members of the so-called Order of St. Peter, the clergy of the diocese who did not belong
to the Franciscan or the Dominican or the Benedictine or any other such order.
The result was a pamphlet duel, with angry pamphlets fired off by the secular masters,
angry rejoinders written by the Dominicans and Franciscans, and finally arbitrated by
the King of France, King Louis the Ninth whom we know more popularly as St. Louis.
He was horrified of the thought that the center of Christian learning should be rent apart
by this kind of dissension, and he strove to calm the waters.
One product of his arbitration was the foundation of a new college, a royal college, called
the Sorbonne, which name has stuck, attaching itself now in popular terms to the faculty
of letters of the University of Paris.
It got its name from King Louis' favorite confessor, Robert of Sorbonne, a very widely
respected athician and preacher of the time.
In 1257, Pope Alexander, having insisted on these dispensations, Thomas was appointed
to one of the dozen chairs in the theology faculty.
Now, one of those had been established for a French Dominican in 1229, a second one for
a foreign Dominican in 1230, and the first chair for a Franciscan was established the
following year in 1231.
These specifications about which order and which nation they would come from were part
of the general grant.
Faculty quotas seemed normal and appropriate to the university in its earliest phases.
Some today may consider them terrible deviations from the norm, but they did not seem so to
those who were establishing the norm 700 and more years ago.
However, as Thomas delivered his inaugural lecture, which is what a new professor, chaired
professor did, it was terribly evident that the audience was very small, it was made up
mostly of Dominicans, the bishop of Paris, and almost all of the secular masters were
conspicuously absent.
Kind of a sad and awkward position to find oneself in.
And so Thomas responded with eagerness to the call to come back to Italy.
Not that there was any question of his disobeying.
Dominicans were supposed to obey, and he commanded, and Thomas seems to be the sort of person
who responded to his superior's instructions with alacrity and certainly with speed.
Thomas would be in Italy for nine years.
Most of that time spent at the Studium Curie, the university established by the papal court
and moving around with the papal court in its itinerant progress from one Italian city
to another.
This again, like the Studia Generalea of the Dominican Order, was a school founded by
a hierarchical group of clergymen not dependent upon the approval of a self-constituted guild
of masters, which a proper university had to be.
This university, or so-called university, certainly this major school of studies, was
founded by Pope Innocent IV, a tough old warrior, a man who lived into his 80s fighting
the emperors and finding time somehow to write major commentaries on the canon law, which
had been his lifelong profession.
These nine years for Thomas, back home, so to speak, not down to the south of Italy,
but with the papacy in Tuscany and at Rome, were a period of intense scholarly productivity,
a period of prodigious scholarly productivity.
Thomas was at Ananii for two years, 1259 to 1269 to 1261, with Pope Alexander IV.
Why was the Pope at Ananii?
Because his family came from Ananii.
And anybody sensible got out of Rome not only in the summertime, but indeed for much of
the year.
Because Rome was a hotbed of malaria and also a hotbed of political factionalism.
And the papacy preferred to be physically away from the city itself, although of course
the whole point of the Pope's power was that he was Bishop of Rome.
This movement would lead, finally, the Pope's moving to Avignon, a city in papal territory
north of the Alps, but that kind of removal from the city had not occurred yet.
With Pope Alexander IV, Thomas, who had in fact dispensed him from these requirements
to complete the Third Bachelorship, Thomas was assigned a regular secretarial staff.
Reginald de Pernault tells us the story of Thomas's dictating to four secretaries in
the four corners of his workspace within a given stretch of time.
It is very fortunate that Thomas dictated most of his work because his handwriting was
completely illegible, or pretty close to completely illegible.
But it was not because of that that he received the privilege of dictating his work from the
days of the ancients, from the days of classical Athens.
People, writers, had dictated their utterances rather than writing them down manually.
And so it was normal for Thomas to do that.
What was abnormal was that he had four different scribes in four corners of one Rome.
He would dictate to one, and then while that scribe was getting things down neatly, he'd
dictate to another, and a third and a fourth.
Some people doubt Reginald de Pernault in the score.
There's a little bit of Reginald de Pernault's kind of elevation of a statement, but on the
other hand, it is not all that implausible.
Thomas was a man of extraordinary facility of mind and was able to work on several projects
all at once.
This little contextual fact, or at least allegation, is all the more interesting because of the
extraordinary clarity and lucidity of Thomas's prose, which looks as though it was written
and edited and re-edited and narrowed down.
In fact, it appears not to have been, at least not in the initial stages.
From 1261 to 1264, Thomas went to Orvieto with the court of the new Pope, Pope Urban
IV, whose family had connections with Orvieto.
Their Reginald de Pernault becomes his chief of staff directing his team of secretaries,
as well as his personal confessor and his close friend for the much of the rest of his
life.
This day at Orvieto, Thomas very likely met and collaborated with William of Merbica,
born in 1215, dying in 1286, a very distinguished scholar who would later become the Dominican
Archbishop of Corinth.
Corinth is part of the Eastern Empire, which during that period was ruled by Latin rulers,
by Western rulers mostly from Flanders.
William's scholarly knowledge of Greek made him Thomas's medium for the exact understanding
of Aristotle, who was usually known in Western Christendom at that time through Latin translations
from the Greek or from Latin translations of Arabic translations from the Greek.
Thomas's other favorite translator was Robert Grosstest, born in 1170, dying in 1253 before
Thomas, a member of the previous generation, an English priest, often considered the first
Chancellor of Oxford, although there's now a dispute about whether that is an accurate
claim, and later then Bishop of Lincoln.
He was down visiting in Italy from time to time on the business of his diocese, and he
met Thomas probably while Thomas was at Orvieto, and he seems to have been a source of very
important translations from the Greek.
So we see in William of Merbica and in Robert Grosstest a kind of linguistic skill encompassing
Greek as well as Latin, which Thomas did not have and did not strive to acquire.
That's kind of interesting because he grew up in a very cosmopolitan part of the world,
where Greek was a language quite widely spoken, as well as, of course, Hebrew among the thriving
Jewish community and Arabic more in the island of Sicily than on the mainland, but still
part of that polyglot kingdom of the frontier of Christendom on the Mediterranean, which
was Thomas' birthplace and to which Thomas would return at the end of his life.
Grosstest was a speculator on the links between natural science and theology.
He particularly liked to work at optics and light theory, which is one way in which theological
speculation about the light of God can join with physical observation when we see what
material light does to material substances.
And Grosstest also was a skilled translator of Greek texts, especially of Aristotle of
course, but also of that remarkable, mystical thinker of the sixth century known as the
Orvieto Dionysius, of whom I'll have a chance to be speaking more later.
According to Weisheibel, William and Thomas really worked together later when the papal
court moved to Viterbo, but most of the scholarship at the moment still presents Orvieto 1261
and 1264 as the time that Thomas and William came together.
Perhaps Thomas worked with the Williams texts at Orvieto and then met him in person at Viterbo.
We do not know for sure.
In the year 1264, Pope Urban II, who had brought Thomas with him to Orvieto three years
earlier, commissioned a liturgy for the new feast of Corpus Christi, a new liturgical
feast designed to promote public devotion to the Holy Eucharist.
There's a beloved story of Thomas's entering the competition, unfortunately against Bonaventura
as well as others to compose the hymns for that liturgy as well as to select other readings.
It must have been difficult to be Bonaventura.
Without Thomas, Bonaventura would appear as the supreme intellect of the high scholastic
period of the 13th century.
With Thomas Aquinas around, he had always to take second seat.
And if this story is correct, this is yet another instance of the way in which these
two great Italian mendicants, the Dominican and the Franciscan, interacted.
Apparently, though, without hostility.
They do not seem to have been close friends, but they don't seem to have been enemies either.
It was very hard for Thomas to be the enemy of anyone, and I hope of anyone to be Thomas'
enemy, though indeed many attacked him with gusto.
Between 1265 to 1267, Thomas went to Rome itself.
And here he was at the church of Santa Sabina, a collegiate church that is a church with
such a large endowment that it could support many clergy, many clergy who turned to the
study of theology.
And we know that he was then in charge of a new Dominican Studium of Theology, not
a Studium Generale, where you'd also study philosophy, law, and medicine and letters
and so on, but simply a Studium of Theology.
This was the effort of the Dominican Order to establish a school of higher studies in
theology alone, and Thomas had something to do with the curricular plan, probably a
great deal to do with the curricular plan.
What's almost surprising is that he appears to have been put in charge of the operation.
It's hard to think of Thomas as an administrator.
Fortunately, this was a very fertile period for his work as well, because it appears that
the plan and the form of the Summa Theologiae, his greatest and most famous work, and also
if his commentaries and Aristotle were related to the curriculum setting role he had right
there.
He was called back, though, to the Tuscan countryside in 1267 for another two years
stay, 1267 to 1268, at the papal court of Pope Clement IV.
Now, Pope Clement IV is a very interesting figure.
He was the pope who finally expelled the son of Frederick II, the son and grandson of Frederick
II from the throne of Sicily, and who got the French royal family to agree to move in
and take that job.
The kingdom of Sicily had been a papal vassal state since 1130.
It had been established as a collective vassal of the papacy, and the pope as the feudal
lord of the kingdom of Sicily had the absolute right to depose and to reappoint kings.
Needless to say, the family of the Counts of Oatville declared a kind of hereditary
right to be considered as first candidate.
They had a kind of hereditary right to a first option, so to speak, and they had indeed
been kings of Sicily.
King Roger I, King Roger II, King William I, King William II, and Queen Constance, whose
son was the fascinating and from the papal point of view dreadful Frederick II.
Frederick had died in 1250, leading a major war against the pope, and the throne of the
kingdom of Sicily had then passed on technically to a grandson after the death of a legitimate
son.
The kingdom was being run for the grandson by an illegitimate son of Frederick, the brilliant
and heroic Manfred, who was extremely popular, but who could not be considered in a sense
a legitimate ruler.
The papacy was always nervous about violating the hereditary sensibilities, not so much
of the ruling family, but of the South Italian aristocracy as a whole.
These hereditary families liked the idea of the hereditary principle and were likely to
dig in their heels at the appointment of a new king by the pope, the feudal lord.
Club of the Fourth bit the bullet, though, and went ahead, that's certainly an acrobatism,
no bullets at the time, what would one say, bit the crossbow bolt or something, and went
ahead and appointed Charles of Anjou, the younger brother of Louis the Ninth of France.
Louis was declared a saint not long after his death and was considered kind of a living
saint during those very years.
He suggested that there was anything saintly about Charles of Anjou, a profoundly subtle
diplomatist who was on the other hand a strictly legalistic lawyer, an interesting combination
of qualities.
Charles of Anjou had married very well.
He had inherited the county of Provence in the empire from his father-in-law, and now
he was awarded the kingdom of Sicily if he could only come in with a French army and
take it.
That was up to the French crown to back up.
This enterprise, Louis hesitant at first, did however back up Charles of Anjou who marched
in.
There was a considerable war which ended in 1267 with Charles' victory.
And this might have, must have, of course, been a source of terrible upheaval to people
like Thomas Aquinas, whose family tradition was deeply attached to the royal house of
Sicily.
However, Frederick II, in his widening circles of paranoia, had been killing off members
after member of his court on suspicion of all kinds of charges.
And as you will hope you will remember, Thomas' elder brother, the gallant poet Rinaldo, was
executed for treason in 1246, whereupon, of course, the family switched over from the
Gibleen side to the Guelph side.
So at this point, Thomas Aquinas is probably pro-Guelph.
This period, which is a time of considerable political complexity, is the period when Weiss
Haipel contends that Thomas actually collaborated personally, face to face with William of Merbica,
who would some years later be made the Archbishop of Corinth by the papacy.
In November of 1268, Thomas returned to Paris for his third and last stay there to last
a full four years until 1272.
The papacy in the Dominican order wanted him there for action, which meant teaching and
debating and writing on two fronts.
First of all against the Averroists, and secondly against an Augustinian anti-Averroist reaction.
The Averroists were the ultra-Aristotelians, such as the radical seizure of Brabant, born
in 1235, dying in 1282.
A brilliant scholar who, among other things, denied the immortality of the individual soul
as Averroes had done.
He was convinced that this was the truth, that Averroes had properly understood what
Aristotle really meant, and that this had to be absorbed and accepted by Christian theology.
It used to be argued that Seger espoused the doctrine of the double truth, very much like
the triple truth of Averroes, but that has been questioned by current scholarship.
At any rate it does appear to have been a charge that Seger maintained that a statement could
be true in philosophy, even though its opposite and contradiction could be true in theology.
Instead of one of these two statements being false, they could both be true on different
levels.
Now most people saw that reasonably enough as a dodge, as an effort to say that philosophy
was right despite the blindness of theology, a theological position, however which could
not be denied, given the force of Christian doctrine.
So Seger was seen as a very dangerous figure.
Against this position, whether against Seger directly or the Averroist in general, Thomas
composed a short but crucial treatise de unitate intelectus contra Averroistas on the unity
of the intellect against the Averroist, of which I shall talk more later in the series.
Against the Augustinian reaction against the Averroist, a reaction led strongly by the
Franciscan order, and taking the work of St. Augustine as its norm, coming to the conclusion
that Aristotle was so dangerous that Aristotle ought to be dumped.
And this general movement felt that Christianity did better with Platonism, Platonism was truer,
so let us dump these Aristotelian commitments of people like Thomas and the Dominicans in
general and return to a properly Neoplatonic kind of Christianity.
This was also a very probiblical kind of, if you want, fundamentalist or anti-philosophical
reaction on the part of people who were not philosophers at all, but who drew a lot of
conclusions from the great dispute going on in Paris.
Against this movement, Thomas composed another treatise de eternitate mundi contra murmurantes,
which we can translate as the on the eternity of the world against the grumblers, those
were grumbling against what? Against Aristotle.
In this period also, Thomas composed most of the Summa Theologiae, that important work,
and the entire Summa Contra Gentiles, the second of the four Summas that he wrote in
this time, four years, these two small treatises, many other small treatises, many other works,
and these two enormous Summas are the greater part of one of them anyway.
In Easter of 1272, Thomas was called back to Italy, and he would die in March of 1274,
and this would be his last trip home and beyond home, while he was still in his mid-40s.
In that spring, Thomas returned to the University of Naples, returning to the first cradle of
his formal education, to head either a new Dominican Studium Generale, just like those
founded at Oxford, Bologna, Montpelier, and Cologne, or some sort of school of theology
like the one he had been in charge of at the Church of Santa Sabina in Rome.
However it was, and we just do not have enough evidence, enough documents about his Constitution,
it was an institution richly endowed by King Charles, King Charles of Sicily, the brother
of St. Louis, whom Thomas had known socially in Paris.
Had Thomas known Charles in Paris, probably he would have met him, but there's no indication
that there was any kind of a personal connection, either back in Paris or down here in Naples.
But we do know that this was a very favorite intellectual move of Charles, who wanted this
new Dominican school to strengthen his position as king, as well as to strengthen the Christian
faith as Charles understood it in his kind of narrowly orthodox way.
We know for example what Thomas was paid, a huge amount of money, of course Thomas never
touched a single coin of it, it went directly to the Treasury of the Dominican Order, or
first of all I suppose to the Treasury of the School, which was run by the Dominican
Order, money was not Thomas' kind of thing.
One wonders whether the choice of Naples was Thomas' idea, it would have been an appropriate
and kind of sympathetic thing for him to do.
This brief period of less than two years must have been a brilliant time of intensity and
high stress, which culminated in the great event of St. Nicholas Day, 1273, the 6th of
December, 1273, the event that changed Thomas' life for good.
What happened?
Reginald Piperino tells us that after Thomas came back from saying mass, Reginald had served
as the altar boy, as the acolyte, Thomas, as he took off his vestments in the sacristy,
he began to mutter to himself, it's worthless, worthless, and Reginald said, oh what is worthless?
And Thomas said, all the work that I have done, it is to me just a straw after the things
that I have been shown.
So Reginald said, of course, it was a mystical experience that Thomas had been given direct
insight into God's knowledge, and thus all of the hard labor to reach those points of
certitude through the track of reasonable argument seemed just like straw.
This was the true and the brilliant stuff.
And Reginald suddenly remembered that Thomas, in fact, while saying mass had levitated,
that he had risen off of the ground as he was raising the Holy Eucharist, which Reginald
had forgotten, but then he remembered it with the kind of memory that Reginald tended to
have, a very convenient memory indeed.
Weisheipel, by contrast, thinks that Thomas had a nervous breakdown.
Weisheipel, though himself a faithfully orthodox Dominican, is so faithfully orthodox to modern
scientific history that he's not going to buy anything about a mystical experience,
and he thinks Thomas just simply collapsed under the burden of several kinds of pressure,
which were weighing upon him.
Some think that what might have happened was possibly neither a nervous breakdown nor
a mystical elevation, but an intellectual insight, a flash of intellectual insight,
that the vast edifice of Thomas' writings was based on uncertain logical foundations.
Certainly Thomas' logic and Aristotle's logic, on which all of Thomas' work was based,
were being challenged by bright young minds in the universities at Paris and in England.
That might have been a very good reason for Thomas to say that his work was worth nothing
but straw or hay, Thomas' words, not Bertrand Russell's.
In any case, this was the end of Thomas' writing.
And with the news that Thomas was burnt out as a productive scholar, reached Rome, the
papers he promptly kicked him upstairs, probably intending to make him a cardinal, a rank Thomas
never accepted, either because it was temperamentally antipathetic to him or because he just didn't
have time.
In January of 1274, the new Pope, Pope Gregory X, a Pope rather in the style of Pope John
the 22nd, the 23rd rather, summoned Thomas and Bonaventura to serve at the new council
which he was calling at Lyon.
The first council of Lyon, meeting in 1245, had been the work of Pope Innocent IV, the
fierce canon lawyer who excommunicated and deposed from the throne of Sicily, Frederick
II.
And now, Pope Gregory wanted to call a second council of Lyon with reconciliation as its
purpose.
Not so much reconciliation between the papacy and the empire in Europe, between the Gulf
and the Ghiblien causes in Italy, but reconciliation of the Latin church with the Greek church
and the other Eastern churches.
And even a kind of reconciliation of Christendom with Islam and with the world of Jewish thought
seems to have been in the mind of this quite remarkable and foreseeing Pope.
Councils tended to have three presidents, and Gregory wanted the three presidents to
be Thomas Aquinas, Bonaventura, and Eud Rigo, the remarkable Franciscan who had been another
confessor of St. Louis and who had gone on to be an absolutely model archbishop of Rouen
in Normandy.
So Thomas set out obediently enough, but he never got there.
On the way to his niece Francesca's castle at Maenza, he had an accident.
He was riding along peacefully in a mule underneath a low-hanging tree and hit his head in a branch
and fell off and proclaimed a serious headache from that point thereafter.
That evening when he had reached his niece's castle, they ate eels and Thomas fell mortally
ill, and on the 7th of March he died.
Dante, among others, was convinced that Francesca had had him poisoned because she was still
a faithful Ghiblien.
He'd gone over the Guelph side.
That I think is Dante.
There seems to be no indication of this kind of skull-duggery.
His head hit his head.
He may have had something like a kind of brain hemorrhage that at least is Weissheipel's
modern medical theory.
It's also very true that it was very normal in the Middle Ages to die from no apparent
reason.
When you eat seafood in a world without refrigeration, you run this kind of risk even today.
So Thomas did pass away on the 7th of March, 1274, at the Cistercian Abbey of Foslanuova,
right near his niece's castle, near his own birthplace at Rocaseca.
In his canonization in 1323 by Pope John the 22nd until the latter 20th century, March
7th was his feast day in the Christian liturgy, which is now celebrated by the Roman Catholic
Church on January the 28th.
When Albert the Great, his teacher, heard the news, he broke into tears and cried of
Thomas.
He was the flower and the glory of the world.
Think of that, the greatest mind perhaps, the holiest and most sweetly tempered theologian,
but the flower and the glory.
And another biographer of Thomas, Bartholomew of Capua, reports that James of the Terbo,
the Dominican who was also Archbishop of Naples, used to say that he believed that God had
sent his doctors of truth to illumine the church and the world.
First Paul, then Augustine, then finally in these last days, Friar Thomas, whom Bartholomew
said, Giacomo believed no one would succeed or surpass until the end of the world.
This is the basic statement of those who believe that Thomas is the consummate master of the
perennial philosophy.
It certainly shows what confidence medieval intellectuals had about their work.
