Let's talk a bit about Aquinas' political theory, touching especially on his most original
and significant contribution to medieval political discourse, the naturalness and autonomy of
the secular state.
For Thomas Aquinas, political society was part of God's plan for the human creature,
arising from inherent human needs for social life, and the natural human tendency to an
ordered and orderly life as well, even in individual consequences.
In his treatise on the Regiment of Princes de Régime de Principum, which he began but
did not finish, collaborating with nowadays thought Ptolemy of Lucca, though other candidates
have been proposed in modern scholarship, Thomas opens this treatise, which is talking
specifically about the rule of not so much princes, the word princeps in medieval Latin
was the word for emperor, carrying on from the classical Latin prinkeps, the title of
Augustus and the head of the Roman state.
So de Régime de Principum has to do with the rule of absolute rulers, of sovereign rulers.
And he opens this treatise at the very outset with the remark, it is natural for man to be
a social and political animal living in community, and this is more true of him than of any other
animal, a fact which is shown by his natural necessities.
Now what are these necessities, necessities for food, for clothing and defense, which
Thomas felt nature provided animals with in certain ways, which humans did not have.
For humans it was much more complicated to get hold of their food, it involved killing
tools at least, and farming tools and all the rest of it.
Clothing had to be produced from the hides of other animals, or from fabrics and defense
of course had to be constructed in a different way, humans couldn't simply climb up a tree
at the approach of the leopard as monkeys could.
And therefore human beings, even individuals, need organized societies.
For Thomas one of the most interesting indications of this, and a proof of it almost, was the
development of language, human language is kind of the key indicator that for the human
being, civil society is necessary and natural and of course good.
This principle not simply stated in this treatise which Thomas worked on only partly, and without
as much enthusiasm as much of his other work, it stated very clearly in the cellogia itself.
In the first part, in that great section of laws, where Thomas says, man is by nature
a social animal, hence in a state of innocence, if there had been no fall, men would have
lived in society, but a common social life of many individuals could not exist unless
there was someone in control to attend to the common good.
We see here evidently the influence of the Roman law tradition, as well as the influence
of Aristotle's politics.
Aquinas knew two basic types of such political society, one the state, responding to the
human need for communal order and fulfillment in civil matters, as he said over and over
again, the other the church, given to humankind by God is the vehicle for redemption through
the grace of the sacraments.
The state for Thomas is in other words a natural good and the church a supernatural one, although
the church is also a natural good as well, since nothing supernatural is exclusively
supernatural in Thomas's scheme.
The state, as Thomas fully recognized, pre-existed the church and now in Thomas's time coexist
with it, ideally of course in harmony.
This doctrine, which may seem entirely normal and no news whatever, to the modern observer
disagreed radically with the Augustinian view of the state.
Augustine saw the state, like the church, like the school, like indeed most actual human
institutions, as consequences of original sin necessary for keeping us in line and for
transmitting knowledge and values which humans were intended in God's plan to achieve spontaneously.
Augustine's theory of the natural condition of the human being, that is before the mistake
of Adam and Eve, was a condition in which knowledge would be infused, in which we would
never suffer, we would benefit from impassibility, we'd have a kind of immortality.
We would of course leave our present body for a more glorified body, but in a kind of
peaceful, almost death-free kind of way.
This had all been lost by our first parents.
Thomas does not of course deny this, but he does not follow out the consequences of this
premise of Augustine's, his long-extended premise.
Augustine's view, the state was the earthly city, Babylon, set in eternal and vicious
hostility to Jerusalem the alien society of the city of God, alien to this world, which
is dominated by Babylon, by the wicked state.
The church, the only truly valid society, certainly the only transcendentally valid society,
in Augustine's view was inevitably at odds with the earthly city, with the state, except
for certain moments of harmony, for example, under Christian emperors, just before Augustine's
own time, in his point of view, but these moments of harmony were, Augustine, a more surprising
than to be expected.
Thomas by contrast accepted Aristotle's view that man is a political animal, zon politikon
in the Greek, this is what the kind of creature we are, and that civic life is a prime fulfillment
of our nature, a means to express human virtue, and a primary means for achieving and enhancing
virtue.
Of course, for Aristotle the state, meaning the Greek polis, was the primary commutal fulfillment
of human virtue, for Thomas it was one of two, and noble though its natural character and
purpose were, the state was inferior to the supernatural society of the church, indignity,
in other ways as well.
Thomas' chief source for his political ideas was of course Aristotle's politics, the great
work of the philosopher, on which Thomas began a commentary between 1269 and 1272, during
his third and last day in Paris.
He didn't complete that commentary however, important as commentaries in Aristotle's
major, even more than all his minor works, were to him.
Neither did he complete his own treatise in monarchy, the De Regno ad Regim Cipri, on
which he wrote during the same period between 1271 and 1273, right at the end of his life
a little bit later actually than Aristotle's politics.
Others completed these two key works, which clearly seemed less important to Thomas, than
his work on metaphysics, epistemology, ontology, ethics and theology.
The applied science of politics clearly appealed less to his highly abstract intelligence.
Comparably incomplete, in the sense that it's collaborative, is De Regim and a Principum
of course.
A little bit of context I think helps us set this in its proper perspective.
Thomas took up, but towards the end of his life, this commission to write on monarchy
for the king of Cyprus, as a favor to the dynasty then ruling Cyprus, a French dynasty
of the family of Lusignan, Cyprus, majority of its population was Greek Orthodox, the
ruling family was Roman Catholic, and there were significant communities of Jews and apparently
also even at that time of Muslims.
Cyprus was a very interesting kingdom, crucial to the support of the crusading kingdom, which
was having all sorts of trouble on the west coast of Asia.
Eventually when the crusaders were expelled from Accra in 1291, those who survived took
refuge in Cyprus and then went on for the west to Rhodes and Malta and places of that
sort.
So Cyprus was a very interesting kind of place, very important from the point of view of papal
diplomacy, which was supporting the crusade with every resource it could possibly muster,
and also to the French crown.
The Lusignan family were related to the Capetian family, the French royal family, and members
of the king of Cyprus's immediate entourage were familiar presences at the court of the
king of France and the court of St. Louis, which Thomas had indeed known well, and which
he appears to have been a welcomed guest whenever he unwillingly dragged himself away from his
studies, never dragging himself away from his classes, of course, for any such event.
There is, by my digressive moment, to try to set the intimacy of Thomas' connection
with the French royal court and then with any clients of theirs like the kings of Cyprus.
I'll tell you the wonderful story, another wonderful story, coming from the biographical
tradition of Thomas, about Thomas at the royal table at the table of St. Louis at one point.
Thomas didn't much like to leave his work to do these social things, but he much admired
St. Louis and the admiration was mutual.
And apparently in the course of one of these dinners, Thomas seated wherever he was at
the long table, the long banquet table of the royal palace, a struck the table with
his fist, making quite a noise.
And this is entirely untypical behavior for Friar Thomas, who was one of the gentlest
men.
So people wondered, and you can imagine him saying, Friar Thomas, what is it?
And Thomas says, I've got it.
What is it you have?
Friar Thomas, the answer against the manatees.
The minute that St. Louis hears this, he calls for parchment and ink and pen, taped down
immediately what has just struck Thomas as the answer to rebut the manatees.
In Louis' own day, of course, the manatees were the albergensians of the south of France,
who'd been defeated and many of them massacred in several bloody crusades in the reign of
his father and his grandfather.
In fact, St. Louis' father had died on one of these crusades, not in battle, but from
Camp Thievery.
Still, the albergensians remained a serious problem for the unity of the French kingdom.
And we see here a case of the reason why states, monarchies of the type Thomas is writing about,
supported the intellectual work of the Dominican house on the Rue Saint-Jacques, of the church
in general.
They supported it very much, I think, the way modern states support scientific research,
not out of a pure love of science, but in the hope that the scientists will find the
ultimate weapon.
Now, of course, for someone like the saintly medieval king of France, the ultimate weapon
was doctrinal.
The Inquisition wasn't working very well, the institutional solution.
So the intellectual solution had a particular appeal to them.
Well, this is the general context, I think, in which we find Thomas writing about monarchy.
And the specific connection, even after he's left Paris, gone back to Naples to occupy
a chair which has been richly endowed by the brother of St. Louis, Charles of Anjou, now
King Charles of the Kingdom of Sicily.
The context is to try to help the Lusignan clients strengthen their rule over so many
Greek Orthodox and other people right up against the world of Islam, which is advancing west
ward.
Also, of course, important to the Kingdom of Sicily was the stability of the Kingdom
of Cyprus, which was kind of a watchtower from which friends of the West could keep
an eye on the Byzantine emperor as well as on the Muslim rulers.
And this is very important to Charles of Anjou's Mediterranean diplomacy.
So all of these factors are working on Thomas, as he, first of all, in Paris, and then back
in Naples, works on the treatise on monarchy for the King of Cyprus, not a very long work,
but which he never finished.
Thomas was just not as compelling to him as other important issues.
In constitutional matters, though, about which Thomas was compelled to write, asked to write
about them by all kinds of people, not just the kings of France, and Sicily, and Cyprus,
and so on, Thomas consistently favored monarchy over aristocracy or democracy, although he
thought that democracy worked best for the Italian city-state of his time.
Why did he prefer monarchy over democracy?
He favored it by analogy with, for example, God's rule over creation.
Monarchy seemed to be a human imitation of the divine, and thus entirely appropriate,
and he was also impressed by the constitution of insect societies, the rule of the queen
bee over the hive, and so on and so on and so on.
Always we find Thomas, like Aristotle, looking in animate nature, subhuman animate nature,
for models which humans should observe contemplate and are the basis of which humans ought to
be structuring their own kind of societies.
Thomas, like Aristotle, recommended as an ideal constitution a mixed government, a mixed
government which would include elements of those three legitimate forms of monarchy,
democracy, and in between them aristocracy.
Obviously, of course, these could all be perverted.
Democracy could turn into mob rule, one of the most tyrannical and distressing forms
of government.
There had been examples of this in the Italy of Thomas' own time, and he was fully aware
of that kind of reality, though he cites it specifically very, very rarely in his works.
Aristocracy might have commended itself to a person of Thomas' social background and
indeed to a member of the elite order of the Dominicans, but it's interesting that Thomas,
instead of making a major dossier for the advantages of aristocracy, preferred a mixed
government instead and indeed leaned more towards monarchy than to these other two forms.
The great proponent of aristocracy had, of course, been Plato, rather than Aristotle.
Aristotle was aware that aristocracy could decline, could descend into mere oligarchy.
When monarchy descended into tyranny, this Thomas found extremely upsetting because the
king who is supposed to be a manifestation, an earthly shadow of God, the king has a contract
with his people.
His contract is to serve the public good, the good of the people.
And when the king, through selfishness, fails to do that, then he becomes a tyrant who,
in a sense, is worse than the tyrant mob, worse than the tyranny of an oligarchic self-interest.
He becomes the kind of tyrant who deserves deposition.
Now, whether or not people should set out to depose him was something in which Thomas
was hesitant.
His notion that the tyrant no longer a true governor, no longer a king, really ought to
be gotten rid of, whether or not people should take the initiative of doing it, is an idea
of Thomas's that had a very long legacy, ending up eventually in the stock of ideas which
led the founders of this republic in the 18th century to overthrow King George of the terrible
tyrant.
It's interesting to remember that many of the American revolutionaries felt that King
George's tyranny was so terrible that it was comparable to the reign of Antichrist.
This seems a strange kind of statement and that terribly deist in rational world.
But as Alan Heimer has pointed out in his great book about American religious involvement
of the revolution, some very strong apocalyptic strains were there as well.
And there's a kind of an entirely unconscious echo of Thomas's sense of values.
All forms of tyranny are bad, be they democratic, aristocratic or monarchic, but in a way the
monarchic tyranny is the worst of all.
Now all kinds of all of these types of tyranny of violated nature because they worked against
the common good of the people so ruled.
And it was a sad irony, which Thomas remarked, that perhaps the effort to get rid of a tyrannical
monarch might not be worth making because it was always the danger that the deposition
of such a ruler, revolution if you want to call it that, might simply increase the misery
of the subject people by adding more bloodshed and disorder to their already precarious and
unfortunate condition.
So much for the state.
Thomas's view of the church was essentially traditional, deriving from previous centuries
of Christian theological teaching.
His major original contribution to ecclesiastical theory was his argument that the natural state,
although inferior to the supernatural church in the moral order, and required to assist
the church achieve its spiritual ends, was nevertheless autonomous and a product of
nature.
Lines of authority in church and state were parallel, neither was a department of the
other.
This is a very valuable contribution because for a very long time, European custom and
European habit and the canon law itself had talked about a kind of hierarchical pattern
in which Christian emperors and kings were subordinate to popes but had authority over
bishops not only in spiritual matters, not only I should say in temporal matters, but
even in some spiritual situations as well.
So for example, a king was supposed to depose a heretical bishop to be sure of the invitation
of the pope, but the pope possessed only a spiritual sword, the king possessed a temporal
sword, and these two swords were supposed to collaborate.
This is a complicated kind of idea, it isn't simply saying that the church is over the
state because at the top level, this kind of canonistic view posited the church as
being over the state, but then would come sectors in which the state was over agents
of the church and so on and so on all the way down.
It was a very neat kind of structure from the time of Charlemagne on into the late 11th
century, and it worked pretty well.
With the pope and the emperors, the twin heads of Christendom, both of them called head,
the emperors were called heads of the church by various popes, a remarkable kind of concession,
the kind of attitude, the kind of constitutionally significant language, which of course would
be very dear to Henry VIII when he set out to be head of the church in England.
So this kind of interlocking of church and state, which was immensely traditional and
supported by the newly rationalized canon law, the great code of which was issued when
Thomas was about nine years old, very contemporary line of thinking, Thomas disagreed with and
he proposes a very different formula.
Now this distinction amounted to an ideological liberation of the state and indeed of the church
as well.
It was badly needed in medieval Christendom, which had been tearing itself apart for nearly
two centuries in theoretical and practical conflicts between reformist popes and conservative
Holy Roman emperors and kings who relied on the simpler and less logical religious political
thought of the carol engineer of roughly 750 to 1,000.
This liberating distinction is all the more striking since Thomas tended to be much more
papalist than imperialist, much more wealth than gibbaline and spent years working directly
for the popes and the papal curia.
I think it's quite interesting to look at one of the earliest statements of this doctrine
on Thomas' part.
It comes from his earliest summa, his commentary on the sentences of Peter Lambert, which was
written during the 1250s in Paris.
I'd like to comment for you or summarize for you a particularly striking passage which
comes out in his commentary on that great basic manual of Christian theology.
He says, a superior and an inferior power can be related in two ways.
The first way, which he develops at some length, is that when the lower power is totally derived
from the higher power, to such an extent that the whole force of the lower power is
based upon the higher power, for the lower to be based upon the higher seems to be a
contradiction, a mixing of metaphors in English, so let us say to such an extent that the whole
force of the lower power is dependent upon the higher power.
In that case, the higher power is totally in command and to be totally obeyed by the
lower power and by all of its subjects in turn.
Now that Thomas cites his examples, the rule of God over creation, God is the higher power,
anything in the creation that exists in the way of a power is lower and must obey God
immediately and without any hesitation.
Comparably, the power of the emperor over the consul, and Thomas is now referring to
ancient Rome, the ancient Roman constitution, not to any contemporary arrangement within
the Sicilian kingdom or the Holy Roman Empire, but the authority of the higher power of the
emperor over the lower power of the consul was absolute in the Roman constitution as
Thomas understood it, and was another case of immediate and total obedience of the lower
to the higher.
And he cites again, the higher authority of the pope over all ecclesiastical orders, all
orders of archbishops and bishops and priests and so on, these are the lower powers which
are supposed to obey immediately, now of course they did not, the goal of the medieval papacy
from the 1070s on into Thomas' own time was to bring, first of all, the rest of the
offices of the church into direct and obedient relationship to the pope.
In theory, the pope stood at the apex of a great pyramid of authority, but in practice,
in order to get his will carried out by archbishops, bishops and local clergy, the pope had to
work with kings and with emperors, and that old medieval interlocking habit was still
there, even though in theory the papacy wanted to be absolute.
Now I've said that the canon law described this interlocking situation, it did indeed.
There's an important stream of papal theocratic theory which would have simplified the whole
system and set up everything as very simply a pyramid with the pope at the top, this was
however the idea of a few theorists, Thomas did not mess with that issue, either pro or
con, not surprisingly.
To cite as an authority, this statement, Thomas turns to the Gospel of Matthew, Thomas always
turning to the Gospel of Matthew, to the famous verse 18 of chapter 16 of Tuez Petrus
Thou art Peter, and upon this Peter, this rock, I will build my church, and the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it.
Now it's an interesting kind of theocratic text for Thomas to allege for this scheme.
So what we have here is a scheme which would appear to be thoroughly theocratic, that particular
text is what is written above the dome of the present Basilica of St. Peter's in Rome.
This is the great claim of the papacy to some kind of overarching or transcending power,
perhaps even theocratic as a whole.
What's striking here is that Thomas does not say that an example of this first kind of
subordination of this kind of relationship of a lower power to a superior power, of an
inferior power to a higher power.
He does not cite as an ecclesiastical example the authority of the pope over all of Christendom.
He simply says of the pope over all other ecclesiastical orders.
This should give us a kind of an inkling that something rather unusual is about to come.
Then he moves to the second way in which the superior and the inferior power can be related.
And that works this way.
The higher and the lower power both derive from a supreme power.
One does not derive from the other.
The lower does not derive from the higher.
Here both the higher and the lower derive from a supreme authority higher than both
of them.
Now what do we mean by higher or lower?
Thomas means higher and lower in dignity, not in jurisdiction, not in authority, that
is to say in civil authority, in practical authority, higher perhaps in moral authority,
certainly in moral authority, but not in the practical working out of the chain of command.
What he's referring to very clearly, even in this very passage, as we watch his language
shift a little bit, is the spiritual power is higher, that is the church, and the secular
power is lower.
But the important point about this second half of the distinction is that both of them
derive from the supreme power, who is of course God.
Now in this kind of a relationship, the two powers, the lower and the higher, are autonomous
vis-à-vis other.
They are not, neither has to obey the others.
The lower power does not have to obey the higher power except when and if the supreme
power has in fact specifically subordinated the lower to the higher.
Now in the particular matters in which this may have occurred, then indeed you do have
something like the first relationship, which Thomas has lined out with that great Thouart
Peter quote.
But the consequence for the present situation, which Thomas thinks is the actual situation
of the state, and there are references to Aristotle all around here, the higher power
is to be obeyed rather than the lower power only in its own line of authority, in its
own jurisdiction over the other orders of the church, which Thomas has already said.
So the secular power is subordinate to the spiritual power only in so far as it had been
subjected to it by God, that is in matters pertaining to salvation.
The lower power is supposed to obey the instructions of the higher power, the state is supposed
to obey the instructions of the church in regard to matters of stamping out heresy, for example,
which is a major issue in the France of Thomas' time, not as major as it had been one or two
generations earlier, but still continues to be important.
And that's why St. Louis wanted to hear, wanted to have recorded the final answer to the claims
of the manatees.
But in civil matters, things pertaining to the civil good, to take the exact English
translation of Thomas' text, the secular power should be obeyed rather than the spiritual
power.
In other words, if a bishop messes into civil affairs, this is inappropriate, this is incorrect
and the bishop should not be obeyed.
This claim is, of course, complicated by the fact that for many centuries, from the
time not of Charlemagne, but of his successor, the great Holy Roman Emperor Otto I, the high
officials of the church had served as agents of the state.
The bishop of the diocese of Worms of the Rhineland, for example, was also the count
of the county of Worms and ran civil courts as well as ecclesiastical courts.
But Thomas clearly, I think we could say clearly, although that clearly really isn't the word,
I think we can reasonably conclude, that Thomas found this anomalous.
The proper structure was the structure in which the state ran matters pertaining to
the civil good and the church ran matters pertaining to the spiritual good of the people
of God pertaining to their salvation.
Indeed, we have many cases in which we have secular authority fighting with spiritual
authority and one very dramatic recent case of just a few years before had been the final
conflict between Thomas' former sovereign and relative, Frederick II, and Pope Innocent
IV, the tough old lawyer who had in fact founded the people curious universities.
And Thomas' sights, he had been deposed, the emperor had been deposed, but the king
of France hadn't liked that and thought the pope had gone too far.
It looks to me as though Thomas is enunciating a theory which would have been extremely attractive
to King Louis IX, who was soon to be known as St. Louis.
And Thomas' sights as the biblical text to support this interpretation, Matthew 22-21,
render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's and to God the things that are God's.
Now which things are Caesar's and which God's is of course a problem.
But then comes a crucial third paragraph in which Thomas says, unless perhaps the secular
power be joined to the spiritual is in the pope who beholds the apex of both powers, spiritual
and secular.
Immediately one wants to know, does Thomas mean simply in the papal state and the vassal
kingdoms which are vassals of the pope like the kingdom of Sicily or in Christendom in
general?
And we have to ask, I think, is this the caution of the young Thomas or of Thomas the cleric
who was especially dependent on the papacy because he was a member of that papally supported
and papally subsidized Dominican order and soon he would be far more dependent at the
papal university?
Or is it Thomas the complexity acknowledging thinker dealing with complex institutional
data?
And typically for him these questions are not resolved.
