Let's talk now about Thomas' theory of law, which is possibly his most durable and successful
contribution to subsequent political theory and practice.
Thomas saw law throughout the universe and made some influential distinctions concerning
the law that affects humans, or the laws that affect humans.
There is first of all the eternal law of God's universe.
Then there are human laws, natural law, which is for all practical purposes innate, though
not theoretically, and positive, that is to say, legislated law.
Thomas distinguished human law from the divine law incumbent on humans, and Thomas also even
saw a role for custom, even if not formally promulgated in eventual statute form.
Although Thomas Aquinas' writings and politics may seem at times to stress the duty of a
citizen to obey legitimate authority, the citizen of a democratic or aristocratic state, or
the subject for that matter of a monarchy, whether secular or ecclesiastical, and therefore
to subordinate one's private good to the public good, he cannot be presented as a
champion of totalitarian authority.
This becomes entirely clear from his lengthy and detailed discussion of law and the Summa
Theologiae, the first part of the second part, questions 90 to 109, which follow immediately
the six questions Thomas dedicates to human intelligence.
The most salient message, immensely influential, at least partly because of the clarity of
its presentation in question 91, is that there are basically four kinds of functioning
law, eternal, natural, divine positive, and human positive, and the divine positive law
is in turn divided into two, the law of the Old Testament and the law of the New Testament.
The eternal law is the ordered expression of the mind of God, which regulates the universe
and all its creatures who are his creatures, of course.
In this category, we can see what we speak of often as scientific laws, laws of nature,
and Thomas talks about the relationship of them to other kinds of more evident to the
human being at any rate, more immediately evident laws.
The natural law, which is developed in the six articles of question 94, is that aspect
of the eternal law, which regulates human behavior, whether of individuals or of groups.
The precepts of the natural law, Thomas says, are the first principles of human actions.
These precepts are contained in cinderesis, that human mental habit which guides us naturally
in virtuous action.
We talked about cinderesis before.
It's a fascinating aspect of Thomas' thought.
He didn't invent the term, but he certainly gave it far more meaning and content than
it seems to have had before.
What it is, again, is that inner impulse, not innate, because we aren't born with it.
It is formed by the experience of the senses as we grow, but very early on it is within
us and it is infallible.
It is an absolutely reliable guide to right action.
Some individuals may have more or less accurate perceptions of things and perceptions of
the ways in which their desires suggest that they should behave, but fundamentally, Thomas
feels that cinderesis is universal within the species and provides a basis for our behavior,
for our action.
Not only for our action, really, because Thomas has a hard time distinguishing cinderesis
from comparable natural impulses to know the truth.
To know the truth, to act rightly, these are both parts of the same kind of inner certitude,
inner rationality, inner naturality of the human creature in Thomas' vision.
Many different visions from Augustine's or from most modern commentators as well, most
modern thinkers on the subject.
Positive law for Thomas is law which is legislated and promulgated.
Divine positive law is contained in the Bible, in the laws of the church, and thus you can
speak of these being two kinds of law, the old law in the new, the old law preceding the
new, but also preceding it in an inferior way as the boy precedes the man in Thomas'
example.
And very well presented in Questions 98-109, each of which has many articles.
Human positive law, which is presented very interestingly in Questions 95-97, is contained
in the various legislative acts of the human state.
Not all such enactments are legitimate, far from it.
Human law which contravenes divine positive law, or more heinously almost the natural
law, is invalid and should not be obeyed.
When Thomas' classic treatment of this last issue, based to some extent on Roman Stoic
thought and the speculation of early medieval thinkers such as Isidore of Seville, the great
seventh century leader of the church in Visigothic Spain, the author of the etymologies, what
was the vast encyclopedia of the Middle Ages, the encyclopedia of Britannica, when I don't
almost say of the Middle Ages, such thinkers as Isidore of Seville exercised great authority
for Thomas, possessed great authority.
But Thomas beautifully articulates these Roman Stoic and these Isidorean kinds of traditions.
And from his articulation of those traditions has arisen the doctrine of the right of revolution
in the modern western tradition of natural law theory.
I think it'd be very instructive to follow the unfolding of Thomas' argument in this
section of the Summa, which is sometimes called a treatise on law.
Some people interpret the structure of Thomas' Summa, particularly of the Summa Theologiae,
as being a chain of treatises on individual topics.
Not call that Thomas' abordinated the particular topical title to the overall plan in his effort
to provide a completely inclusive sort of general theory of all things important.
This treatise on law goes from question 90 up into the early 100s.
I think you can say it lasts as far as 100 and at eight.
It's very instructive, it seems to me, to follow the text always with Thomas.
Not to rely simply on what someone says about Thomas' meaning, but to follow the text itself.
Because if we don't see things which contradict what we have been told about the meaning,
I think we can see a great deal more in the way of the richness of his thought.
It's always fascinating to watch his method and to see what he does with it.
Among other things to see which authorities he follows.
And this will shift from section to section.
One of the things perhaps that holds the so-called treatises together is the coming to importance
for a while, the emergence for a while of an authority Thomas doesn't otherwise use very much.
Question 90 is called the Essence of Law, broken down into four articles, which are quite interesting.
And the articles, the points of inquiry, are whether law is something pertaining to reason,
concerning the end of law, the cause of law, and the promulgation of law.
Thomas then proceeds to the first article, whether law is something pertaining to reason.
And the objections are interesting.
There are three of them.
First of all, Paul is quoted from Romans, who says that,
I see another law in my members and so on, which suggests that some law does not pertain to reason,
but indeed to the irrational impulse.
The lusts of one kind or another would seriously damage the prudence,
which is one of the most important of human virtues in the whole Christian tradition,
and particularly in Thomas Aquinas.
Second objection says that, in the reason there is nothing else but power, habit, and act,
but law is not the power of reason, nor is it a habit of reason.
And then he refers to earlier statements of his back there in question 57.
One of the interesting things he does in this section, in this whole section of law,
is to bring up arguments of his own, statements he has made,
and present them as objections to what he is now arguing.
Thomas is thus cognizant of the problem of inconsistency within the body of one's thought.
And he tries to take care of that quite candidly, very much up front,
by presenting some of his previous conclusions as objections to the conclusion which is about to come.
And he tries to work them out, of course, in his replies to those objections.
And he then quotes the third objection,
that the law moves those who are subject to act rightly,
but it belongs properly to the will to move to act,
as is evident from what has been said above.
Therefore law pertains not to the reason, but to the will,
according to the words of the jurist.
Now the jurist is, by the jurist he means a personified code of Roman law.
And he gives this particular citation,
Vigorem habet legis, whatever pleases the sovereign, has the force of law.
And Thomas then answers, in a contrary fashion,
it belongs to the law to command and to forbid,
but it belongs to reason to command, as stated above, in question 17, Article 1.
Therefore law is something pertaining to reason.
Interesting kind of beginning, and in some ways it presents the sort of difficulty
that much of Thomistic thought does to the modern commentator,
because it's working with categories which are not particularly ours.
And then Thomas develops his general theory with his answer that,
law is a rule and measure of acts, whereby a man is induced to act,
or is restrained from acting.
For law is derived from ligare to bind, because it binds one to act.
Now this is very much Isidore Seville's way of explaining things.
Isidore, the author of the etymologies, that great encyclopedia whose alternate title
and other parts of the text tradition was Originae's Origins.
Isidore thought that the origins of things, and therefore the nature of things,
could be found from a study of their words from their etymologies.
And Isidore liked the idea that Lex law comes from ligare meaning to bind.
There are other interpretations as well, but this is the one that Thomas holds on to.
It's interesting to see how he replies to Objection 1,
which is based on no less an authority than the Apostle Paul.
And he talks about the way in which Paul could speak of the law of the members,
which is a kind of counter law, a sort of anti-law.
And he refers, without citing Augustine, he refers, though, to a theme of Augustine's thought,
which would have been extremely familiar to all his audience,
Augustine's discussion of the law of sin, which Augustine sensed in himself,
at least as strongly as Paul ever did.
We move on then from this first article to the second article,
whether the law is always directed to the common good.
And we have here again three objections.
One of them only cited on a previous authority.
Thomas simply states the first two objections, which I don't think really need to go into.
But he cites Isidore himself from book five of the etymologies,
saying, if the law is based on reason, whatever is based on reason will be a law.
And then Thomas goes on to extend this statement.
But reason is the foundation not only of what is ordained to the common good,
but also of what was directed to the private good.
Therefore, the law is not only directed to the good of all,
but also to the private good of the individual.
And Thomas answers this, on the contrary, with another quote from 18 chapters later
in book five of the etymologies.
On the contrary, Isidore says that laws are enacted for no private profit,
but for the common benefit of the citizens.
So the common good is the point of law.
We're now talking here about natural law and eternal law,
but also, of course, we're talking about human statute law.
And that's the place in which it seems to me this becomes most important in the subsequent tradition.
Human law, human statute law, the law made by legislators,
be they kings or judges or assemblies of the people, really have to do with the common good.
They shouldn't deal with individuals.
This is a kind of interesting, almost constitutional protection.
That was not uncommon in Thomas' time,
but he certainly gives it particular prominence.
I think his reply to one of these objections is particularly interesting.
Actions are indeed concerned with particular matters,
but those particular matters are referable to the common good,
not as to a common genus or species, but as to a common final cause.
According as the common good is said to be the common end.
Here we are, Thomas, the teleologist,
operating in classic Aristotelian fashion,
although nothing of Aristotle is quoted right here.
Thomas, then, following this theme of the role of the individual in relation to the law,
very important concern for modern thinkers, less so for medieval thinkers,
asked in the third article whether the reason of any man is competent to make laws.
And the objections, of course, claim that individual reason is
we are individually able to legislate, and he cites once again,
Paul from the epistle to the Romans.
Then, Aristotle from the ethics, who says the intention of the lawgiver
is to lead men to virtue.
A third objection, and Thomas answers all of them by saying,
on the contrary, Isidore says, here we are,
back in the fifth book of the etymologies.
This time, chapter 10, a law is an ordinance of the people,
whereby something is sanctioned by the elders together with the commonality,
and he develops this argument in interesting kinds of ways.
He also talks a little bit about the statement of Paul,
developed by Augustine, of the law of God which is written in the hearts of Christians.
A law which is inscribed even, almost sort of engraved into the hearts of Christians.
Hence, he says the same text from Romans goes on,
and it speaks about showing the work of the Lord written in their hearts.
People who do that are the exemplary members,
the exemplary law-abiding members of the people of God,
people being, of course, a law-defined commonality,
and who will, in Augustine's extension of this idea,
become the city of God itself, the civil community of God.
So, Thomas then wants to know whether, since law is not simply something
which one individual does, it's got to be done by a common group, a commonality,
a sort of awkward old-fashioned English word,
which is trying to render a much more current Latin term.
In the fourth article, Thomas questions whether promulgation is essential to a law.
It can't be done by individuals, must it be promulgated?
And, of course, the objections say that it doesn't have to be,
and Thomas says that it does.
And then we come to Question 91, which asks about the various kinds of law.
But typically, what Thomas has done in the fourth article of Question 90
is to set us up for the subsequent passage, for the subsequent question,
and he offers us a definition of law, which is tremendously useful, I think.
At the end of Question 91, he presents us with a definition of law in general,
and then he moves to the question of how many kinds of this are there.
The definition goes this way.
Thus, from the four preceding articles, the definition of law may be gathered.
And it is nothing else than an ordinance of reason for the common good
made by him who has the care of the community and promulgated.
And we can see this reference to him who has the care of the community,
Thomas' preference for monarchic rule.
The various kinds of law is broken down into six articles.
It's a very famous section here, and deals with eternal law, natural law,
human law, divine law, whether there's one divine law or several.
And Thomas concludes there are two, that of the Old Testament and that of the new,
which have a certain amount of inconsistency, show a certain amount of inconsistency,
a certain amount of disagreement between them, which is entirely normal,
as an individual grows from boyhood into manhood, to use his analogy.
Lots of what we do as adult humans are not things we did as children.
As Paul says, when I was a child, I acted, thought, et cetera.
As a child, now that I'm a man, I put away the things of childhood.
And that is the basis for the otherwise dangerous fact that much that is stated
in the law of the Old Testament is contradicted in the law of the new.
And if you admit that this is a genuine contradiction,
instead of just a sort of a developmental change, I hesitate to say an evolutionary
mutation, but that's very much what Thomas is talking about, it seems to me.
Then the potential danger to the faith leading to doubt of the Bible and
of the Bible's precepts can be removed.
He ends this section up asking in the sixth article of question 91 whether
there is a law of sin, which would seem to be the case if you look at certain of
Augustine's remarks.
Okay, we don't need, I think, to go through all of these and
anything like the comparable detail.
We've had some sense of the various kinds of law.
And ending up with this interesting discussion of whether there's a law in
the foam as of sin in the kind of, I don't know what you could call it,
foam as is a yeasted batter which rises into something wonderful like a loaf of
bread or a brioche or whatever.
Here he quotes, of course, of Roman seven.
Once again, I see another law in my members fighting against the law of my mind.
This tremendous division, this kind of dualistic sense of the human psyche,
which is so evident in Paul and so developed by Augustine in the confessions.
Thomas disagrees with.
Thomas is a person who believes in a kind of unity of thought,
a kind of unicity and a kind of simplicity to use his kind of language,
which characterizes human behavior as well as human practice as well as human theory.
So Thomas argues against that and we move on to the question 92, the effects of law.
Question 93 deals with the eternal law.
And 94 moves on to the natural law.
It's six articles.
This is probably the part of this stretch of seven questions,
which is most attended to by people who deal with natural law theory and
with general constitutional theory with comparative law in 20th century terminology.
He moves on from the natural law, of course, to human laws.
And in the course of that, he says some extremely interesting things about human
law.
Again, he returns to Isidor as a great source.
It's quite interesting that in the previous questions,
his primary authority has been Augustine.
Augustine's book on the De Libero Arbitrio, which doesn't simply mean a free will.
It means something like the free exercise of the will, the free exercise of choice.
But when he's talking about human law, Isidor returns as a major kind of authority.
And there are two cases in which Thomas answers the objections by simply saying,
is his contrary statement, to the contrary, the authority of Isidor suffices.
So Isidor is a very major figure for him.
One of the most interesting things that comes up sort of at the end of a section,
Thomas will talk about the law of sin, is there a law in the foam as of sin,
something of that kind.
He then at the end of question 97, which deals with changing in the law,
he asks whether custom can obtain force of law, can custom become a law.
And he answers quite firmly yes.
Particularly in circumstances of a democratic character,
in a democratic context, where the entire people is legislating for itself.
Now this, I think, is a sign of the way Thomas worked.
And a suggestion of the way of the fact that Thomas is considering a great range of issues.
We, looking at them historically, with the perspective of history,
can see a kind of concrete context affecting them.
Thomas himself rarely, if ever, mentions that context.
Why? Why was he so unwilling to refer to specific instances?
Plato had done that.
Aristotle did it all the time.
Perhaps because Thomas is moving for some kind of a long term impact.
And that is certainly the kind of thing which those who admire Thomas' thought
see as one of his greatest significances.
One aspect of Thomas' speculation and law that's not received adequate attention,
even in the 20th century, is his fascination with the old law of the Hebrew scriptures.
He dedicated five questions to it after of 98 onward.
But most modern editors simply omit them in the selections which are available for Thomas' thought.
One finds little or no, more normally no,
reference to his discussion of the Hebrew legislation of Leviticus, Deuteronomy, and so on.
I think they deserve a great deal more attention.
In them, we can see Thomas moving toward the mental habits of the modern cultural anthropologist.
One particularly fascinating example is Article 3 of Question 102,
whether a suitable cause can be assigned for the ceremonies which pertain to sacrifices.
Sacrifices in the Temple of Jerusalem, to be sure.
Let us take a look at this question.
Most of these questions dealing with the old law are much longer
than the questions dealing with natural law, eternal law, positive law,
whether divine positive or human positive.
And in fact, let me give you some sense of it without reading through this very lengthy kind of document.
He asks in Question 102 of the causes of the ceremonial precepts.
He says, there are six articles here,
whether there was any cause for the ceremonial precepts of the Old Testament,
whether the cause of the ceremonial precepts was literal or figurative,
and he now moves to the allegorical interpretation of Scripture,
all of his own preferences, always for the literal,
which is why he liked the Gospel of Matthew so much,
he will sometimes entertain the figurative and does so particularly in dealing with the Old Testament.
I think it would be unfair to see this as a sort of last resort,
a kind of exegesis of desperation because he can't find any sort of up-to-date one.
He does give figurative interpretations,
but it seems to me that as you look at the bulk of each of these questions,
these are much less interesting to him than literal explanations to which he dedicates much more space.
Thirdly, he is concerned about the causes of the sacrifices,
then the causes of the sacraments.
These are sort of oaths.
He sees differences between sacrifices and sacraments in the Jewish legislation.
Here he inherits a certain terminology from biblical criticism,
but I think he uses it in a much more culturally relative, almost anthropological kind of way.
Then he's concerned with the causes of the sacred things,
the furniture of the temple, etc., and the causes of the observances themselves.
And then he says, we proceed thus to the third article,
and of course this begins with objections.
But this time there are no less than 14 objections,
14 objections, quite fascinating ones.
Let me see if I can summarize them.
It would seem that no suitable cause can be found for the ceremonies pertaining to sacrifices,
but those things which were sacrificed were necessary for human life,
such as certain animals and certain loaves, but God needs no sustenance.
According to Psalm 49, 13,
shall I eat the flesh of bullocks, or shall I drink the blood of goats?
Therefore such sacrifices were unfittingly offered to God.
Now this is a radical criticism of the Hebrew religion,
and not simply of the Old Testament as part of the continuing experience of the people of God.
It's a radical criticism of Hebrew religion in general.
What is this referring to? It's referring to the Manichees.
The Manichees deeply disliked the Old Testament and really went to work on it with hammer and tongs.
And Augustine, the young provincial who had plenty enough Bible at his mother's knee,
and it turned strongly against the Bible, loved the Maniki critique of the Old Testament.
Eventually it was very difficult for him to accept the Old Testament.
He does it massively in terms of figural interpretation.
He needs allegory to make any sense of that to him, extremely unpleasant document.
Why is Thomas interested in this?
Why does he bring up so many objections?
Many of them are like this one based on Maniki concerns,
because once again of the Albigensians, who are the most major threat to Christendom in his time,
it is either a heresy as they thought, or some of us might think,
another religion, a rival religion, that is not rising up on the borders of Christendom,
like Islam, but right within the heart of Christendom, and not like the Jewish religion,
which of course has its legitimate place in proper Christian theory,
and which is a religion of a brilliant but small minority,
the Albigensians were moving for mass membership very much as the Catholic Church had been moving for a long time.
Then we have a kind of picky objection.
Only three kinds of quadrupeds were offered to sacrifice to God, oxen, sheep and goats,
but a bird journeyed the turtle dove and the dove,
but especially in the cleansing of a leper and offering was made of sparrows.
Now many other animals are more noble than these.
Since therefore whatever is best should be offered to God,
it seems that not only of these three should sacrifices have been offered to him.
So the opposite position, there should have been all sorts of animals offered,
and it was ignoble, it was inherently irrational.
But it once again is an argument of how bad the Old Testament is.
Thomas will answer that.
And then some objections remarked that fish were never offered and that's too bad,
because man is too many of a fish as well.
And then turtle doves and doves are mentioned indifferently,
and the young of the doves are supposed to be offered,
but nothing is said about the young of the turtle doves.
So a sort of text critique, if you want, of how silly and inadequate this text is, how incoherent.
Further, God is the author of life, not only of men but of animals,
but death is opposed to life.
So sacrificing an animal to God is really an improper way to worship God.
Very modern critique, and that's present there too.
Then we talk about slain animals.
Every defect in an animal is a step towards corruption and death,
but if you slay an animal, you've certainly created a defect, you've removed its life.
So this is inappropriate as well.
I don't know how you sacrifice a living animal without killing him,
but the notion this might lead into a sort of animal rights critique if one wanted.
And also, those who offer victims to God should partake of the victims.
Does not the apostle, that is, Paul say, once again in one Corinthians,
which seems to be his favorite epistle all through the section,
are not they that eat of the sacrifices partakers of the altar?
They should have been allowed, you know, in other words,
it's not true that only the priests should have had a share of this.
Everybody should have.
So we go on to holocaust offering to God of only of male animals
and the distinction about peace offerings, which is extremely recondite.
And since all sins agree in turning us from God,
if we want to reconcile ourselves to God,
one kind of sacrifice should have been offered up for all sins
instead of certain kinds of sacrifices for certain sins.
All animals were offered up in only one way, but that isn't really appropriate.
Sometimes an offering was made of things not slain.
For example, years of corn, flour, bread,
this being baked sometimes in an oven, sometimes in a pan,
sometimes in a gridiron.
At least this this objector is getting extremely interested in the details
of Hebrew sacrifice and Thomas is himself very interested.
No need to go on with all of this.
I hope this gives you a sense of the kind of broad range
of Thomas's interest in this extremely curious question,
this question which makes no sense to people in a different culture
and Thomas tries to be trans-cultural, cross-cultural in his reply.
And so he answers that and it made a lot of sense.
And then he sets out to answer the objections.
And it's particularly interesting, I think,
to see the way in which he makes use of Rabbi Moses,
Moses Maimonides, his primary Hebrew source.
It replied to Objection 6 and he says,
the law fixed the special manner of slaying the sacrificial animals
in order to exclude other ways of killing,
whereby idolaters sacrificed animals to idols.
That's why you have specific statements about how to kill these animals
and which are different, of course,
from the instructions about offering up loaves of bread and grains and all that kind of thing,
which of course you don't have to kill, at least in the same way.
And Rabbi Moses says, in regard to that,
the law shows that that manner of slaying,
which was least painful to the slain animal,
this excluded cruelty on the part of the offenders
and any mangling of the animal slain.
This comes from his great guide to the perplexed,
which is an attempt to help devout Jews in his own time
practice their Hebrew religion in a serious way.
If he replied to Objection 11, shouldn't everybody participate?
The notion that there should be only one sacrifice for one sin,
Rabbi Moses says, we must take note that the more grievous the sin,
the lower the species of animal offered for it.
Wherefore, the goat, which is a very base animal,
was offered for idolatry while a calf was offered for a priest's ignorance
and a ram for the negligence of a prince.
Fascinating, I think, to see the way in which Thomas takes very seriously.
The old law, which is part of the divine law,
which is different from the human law and the natural law and the eternal law,
different from, but not in disagreement with,
because all of these laws conduce to the end of the creation,
which is God himself in Thomas' final,
teleological, inescapable habit.
