I'd like to wind up this series by looking at two related topics.
The Aesthetic Dimension of Thomas' Thought, which is one of the least recognized aspects
of Thomism, and its expression in the four liturgical poems which he composed, though
some have challenged his authorship, for the new Feast of Corpus Christi in 1264.
In this area, we can see Thomas drawing on the Platonic legacy, as well as the Aristotelian
legacy of Western culture.
Thomas is very Aristotelian in his definition of art as rotzio recta factibilium, right
reason in the making of things, which I guess is about the best way one could translate
that.
And we see this very strongly, that particular quote comes from the first part of the second
part of the Summa Theologiae, the Prima Secundae of the Summa Theologiae, Question 57, Article
3.
We see this also in Thomas' notion that art imitates nature, which comes from his commentary
on Aristotle's politics, a strange place to have this kind of commentary, we might think.
But that's a suggestion, I think, a clue to us that Thomas' aesthetic notions are more
widespread, like rather hidden, if you want, throughout the body of his work, to a degree
that we might not at first suspect.
Now, how does art imitate nature, according to Thomas Aquinas, by moving from simplicity
to complexity, almost a kind of evolutionary direction?
Thomas also follows Aristotle in the notion that to be beautiful, something must be large.
This comes from Ethics 4.6 of Aristotle, quote,
head small man may be called well proportioned and pretty, but not beautiful.
This is Vernon Bork's translation in The Pocket Aquinas, his selection of passages from Aquinas'
work, which I think is particularly useful and particularly commendable for the large
amount of attention it pays to aesthetic theory and aesthetic statements of aesthetic practice
in Thomas' work.
I'm not sure that pretty is the right English word.
In Thomas' Latin, the word is formosus.
Small man may be formosi, though not pulcri, in Latin.
Interesting enough, that very word is the word used for the bride in the song of song.
She is nigra, said formosa.
She is black, but beautiful, which raises all kinds of thoughts about the extent to
which there is some kind of an ethnic set of stereotypes in Thomas' mind.
Very, very little of that, evident, and here he's simply, of course, quoting the song
of songs, but exactly the content of that is very much questionable, much as we would
like to find evidence about Thomas' thoughts about racism.
This may all have had a personal resonance for him.
Thomas was known for a largeness of girth rather than of height.
He also remarks in his commentary on Aristotle's ethics, this time his commentary, the first
heading of that, Lecture 13, that he is not wholly happy who presents an ugly appearance.
It's by this fact he is made contemptible and despicable in the eyes of others, again
in Vernon Bork's translation.
I wonder if we don't have here an echo of the painful experience of the shy, fat, taciturn
youth known to glib and contemptuous fellow students in Paris or Cologne is the dumb ox
of Sicily.
Yay, verily, their teacher, Albert the Great, has said we have responded to these snot insults,
but one day his lowings will fill the world.
Thomas followed the platonic tradition in his threefold definition of beauty which we'll
get to in a moment.
More precisely, he followed the influential and mysterious Christian neoplatonist known
as Pseudo Dionysius the Areopagite, a fifth or sixth century Syrian monk too modest to
sign his work, proud enough to attribute it to Paul's Athenian disciple.
The Areopagite, as Thomas tended to call him though sometimes he calls him Dionysius,
since Thomas profoundly in his development of the via negativa, the negative way, the
negative theology, which says that we can describe God more accurately by saying what
he's not than by trying to say what he is.
This is an aspect of Thomas' thought with much interest for post-modernist state students
of Thomas such as that occasionally Foucaultian interpreter Philip Rosemont, a Thomas of
very broad gauge training who was interested in Foucault as well as many traditional interpreters
of Thomas.
And whose excellent book on understanding scholastic thought with Foucault has just come out this
year from St. Martin's Press.
In the Summa Theologiae, Part 1, Question 39, Article 8, Thomas says that beauty has
three requirements, integrity or perfection, in his original Latin, integritas or perifexio,
harmonious proportion, debita proporzio or consonancia, and brightness or brilliance,
claritas.
To repeat them in their simplest Latin form, integritas, consonancia, claritas, or parallel,
perifexio, debita, proporzio, and claritas, claritas is the ultimate norm in which these
two previous ones are, I think, resolved, again in something like a little triadic development,
but one should perhaps not push that notion too far.
These qualities, Thomas says elsewhere, derive from God himself, who is in platonic terms
the one who is also the good, the true, and the beautiful.
Christians love this apparent foreshadowing of the doctrine of the three persons in one
God, the doctrine of the Trinity, and it's not surprising that Thomas, who is so interested
by the Trinity, as indeed every Christian theologian should be, that Thomas is certainly one who
is, is not surprising that Thomas found this a very attractive source for understanding
the nature of the beautiful, the nature of beauty.
It's all earthly beauty, whether of nature or of art, is the participation in the nature
of the first and final cause, and this analysis applies to spiritual as well as physical beauty
in products of nature or of art.
Ugliness is the result of lacking any of those requirements.
I think it's important for us to recognize that Thomas's Latin term, ours, which we translate
simply as art because art is derived from ours, denoted a much wider range of human activity
than the modern English art, certainly included what we call crafts as well as various other
kinds of human creative activity, thus echoing the Greek term technae, which didn't mean
simply the technical, it meant the artistic as well as the technical, just as the Latin
ours meant the technical as well as the artistic.
So we're talking about a lot more than a kind of narrow, post-renaissance, post-19th century
ego-centric individualistic sense of beauty as the property of the creative artist that
rare, rare creature.
In his Aristotelian commentaries, as we've seen, Thomas added to this platonic insight
about the transcendent nature and source and beauty, the fourth requirement of size, due
size, which is very close to his term debita proporcio, appropriate size.
Interestingly enough, Thomas seems to say in several places, for example, this prima
secunde of the Summa Theologiae, the first part of the second part of the Summa Theologiae,
in 157, Article III, that art is a habit of action and hence the virtue, which does not
involve the artist's concupisable or irascible appetites.
Let's recall that Thomas says that virtue is a mental habit, which deals with the intellect
and the will and the concupisable appetite and the irascible appetite, but he says that
art is a kind of virtue in a way more limited but more limited in the lofty direction.
The habit of action, which does not involve the artist's concupisable or irascible appetites,
which would seem to mean, if we pose the question in modern terms, which we always want to do
with Thomas, whether we should or not, that an artist may express lust or anger in his
art or, alternatively, may not, without those concerns having any effect on the beauty or
ugliness of his art on the validity of the art.
To make a temporal reference, anyone interested in the autumn 1999 controversy about the sensations
exhibit at the Brooklyn Museum might wish to take note of this domestic doctrine if
one wants to imagine what Friar Thomas might have thought walking through the doors of
the Brooklyn Museum in that year.
Several 20th century neo-Thomas have gone further with Aquinas' scattered and relatively
undeveloped thoughts on these matters.
W.T.
Noon, back in the 1950s, applied a Thomistic analysis to the writings of James Joyce with
extremely interesting results.
Twenty years before that, Jacques Maritain, interested in the painting of Georges Rouaux,
began to develop a neo-Thomas' aesthetic theory, first of all with art and scholasticism as
it's translated in English, which appeared in that translation 1930, which he extended
in the 1953 Mellon Lectures entitled Creative Intuition in Art and Poetry.
But the most important contribution to this critique so far, it seems to me, has been
Omerto Eco's work on Thomas' theory of beauty in English translation, The Aesthetic of Thomas
Aquinas of 1988.
In this context, it's very interesting, indeed suggestive, to read the poetry traditionally
attributed to Aquinas.
I, for one, hope that he was the author of The Office for Corpus Christi, a new feast
day instituted by several late 13th century popes.
One pope launches the idea, another one develops it finally in 1264.
The office is written in 1274 at the Second Council Leon, which begins just a few months
after Thomas dies, the feast is instituted.
The purpose of this new feast was to celebrate and increase lay participation in the sacrament
of the Holy Eucharist, which Catholic tradition has tended to call the sacrament.
Even though the doctrine of the sacrament, eating the body and drinking the blood of
the Lord, even if you only ate bread instead of drinking wine, unlike the Greeks and all
the other Eastern Orthodox, was such an awesome act, such a presumptuous act, that very few
lay people actually received communion.
This was the goal of papacy, after papacy, after papacy, finally achieving considerable
success with the counter-reformation, although really not until the 20th century did significantly
lay reception of the Holy Eucharist become as common in the Catholic Church as it had
long been in the Protestant churches.
When our sense, even the super skeptical James Weisheipel thinks that Thomas probably did
compose these poems, my hope is strongly reinforced, and so I shall proceed.
If Thomas is indeed the author, these poems open a small but precise window into Thomas'
spiritual and intellectual life, to which the objective blandness of his mastery of
the scholastic style denies his entry, and which again, the implausibility of Freyja
Reginald's absolutely tritely pious biography tends to close for us.
The four hymns for that feast day's liturgy are masterpieces of didactic verse, perfectly
metered and lyrical in their choice of words and arrangement of elements, but dedicated
to precision of thought and statement, rather than to the sort of beauty usually associated
with lyrical poetry.
Nothing lyrical about Thomas, or very rarely so.
The first of them in the usual collection, the Verbum Supernum Proteans, is most familiar
to older Catholics of even sporadic former churchgoing habit, as the truncated hymn
of O Salutari's Hostia, which means O Salvation Bearing Host, and which was usually sung
during expositions of the sacrament on Sunday afternoons, for example, and in traditional
Catholic society.
The second hymn is Panje Lingua Gloriosi, partially inspired by a venerable sixth-century
hymn with the same opening line by Venetius Fortunatus.
That's probably more familiar to the same audience in its truncated form, Tantum Ergo
Sacramentum, which was usually the only part of this kind of thing, that boys and girls
in Catholic schools walked away knowing.
Laudaceon Salvatorem, the longest and most complex of the four, is not surprisingly the
least well-known.
It's a technically precise mini-treaties from the Doctrine of the Eucharist, and it flows
beautifully in its limpid phrasing, and thus is the perfect didactic poem.
We've already looked at Laudaceon, the longest, I think we can say, the most didactic of these
hymns, and only glancingly at the last of them, which is the most personally revealing
of them.
I mean, of course, Adoro Te Devote, or Adoro Devote, depending on which manuscript tradition
you prefer.
It would appear that the authentic medieval text says simply Adoro Devote, and just before
the Reformation, Renaissance humanists in Rome decided that it had to be improved.
Many of the medieval hymns had to be reworded, either because the humanists of the pre-Reformation
explosion, or the people directing the church during the counter-Reformation reaction, felt
that there was something slightly misleading, doctrinally, in the phrasing, or because it
wasn't classical enough.
And so Adoro Te Devote is the form best known since the Reformation, though Adoro Devote,
a much more general kind of statement, is the original version.
I think in this course so far, I've emphasized the philosophical, the rational, rather than
what modern English would call the theological, the strictly spiritual side of Thomas' teaching.
Why have I done this?
Because I thought that this would be of considerably greater interest to a modern audience, predominantly
lay, but perhaps also because that's the way my own interests go as well.
Thomas was a major theologian, and we have to remember that spiritual salvation was for
Thomas the point of all of that philosophical reasoning.
That's what part three of the Summa Theologica was all about.
That's where it was heading when he finished his capacity to write anymore in it.
That's where this teleological thinker was always headed.
And as a kind of small, inadequately compensatory gesture of recognition in that direction, let's
take a closer look at this last, most sacramentally spiritual and personally revealing of his
Corpus Christi poems.
It exists in seven stanzas, seven strophes, I think we ought to call them, to be more
exact in literary language.
And the first one goes, adoro devotei latens veritas, te qui subis formis veri latitas,
tibise cor meum totum subicit, quiate con templans totum deficit.
A lot is packed into those four lines, which rhyme A, A, and B, B, and which follow a very
simple kind of stress meter, capable of being sung by people used to the stress patterns
in the poetry of the vernacular languages of Europe.
When it was altered from adoro devotei latens veritas to adoro te devotei latens deitas,
the arrangers, I think, made a number of very serious mistakes, which were clumsy as well
as renaissanceally snobbish.
First of all, to get rid of the veritas, which ends the first line and make it deitas, sets
up a kind of clumsy repetition with the end of the first line of the third strophe in cruce
la te bat sola deitas, much better to have veritas first and deitas second, particularly
because just a few words before that deitas, in the middle of the preceding line, the last
line of the second strophe, veritas reappears in its genitive form, nikil veritas verbo
verios.
What is this veritas?
This veritas, which appears in the first line of the first and the last line of the second
strophe, which packages them extremely neatly, it is, of course, the divinity, it is the
Godhead.
The point is made in the poem and the way the poem is simply phrased with a kind of elegance,
an elegant understatement that this kind of, in my view, clunky reediting steals from
it.
Adoro devotee latens veritas, I adore devoutly, we don't know what he adores yet in the original
text, something, I mean, he's in the process of adoration, oh, hiding truth, not hidden
truth, but hiding truth, a truth which is actively hiding, personified, of course.
Takequisupis formis verilatitas, you who under these forms are really hiding out, latitare
is sort of a repetitive and emphasized verb of the verb latere, which means to hide.
When this was altered in the Renaissance, takequisupis formis became quisupis figuris,
sort of to be smoother and more classical, who under these figures, well, figures, one
assumes this means the figures of the Old Testament, but that's not really what Thomas
meant.
He was speaking of the forms in which the Eucharist could be received, the forms of bread and wine,
that's the technical term used.
This poem was meant really for contemporary and subsequent recipients of this sacrament
in the Latin rite, it's not a sort of general reference to figural language or allegorical
interpretation.
TV se corbeum totum subhichit, to you my heart entirely subjects itself, quia te con templans
totum defichit, because in contemplating you, it, my heart, is just completely at a loss,
is completely inadequate.
Thomas is saying here that this is a mystery.
A mystery as obscure as that of the trinity, possibly more obscure, and we should remember
that in this same league of high mystery of God's intent is the non-eternity of the world,
which is a message which we were not normally attached to it, but which, given the context
of Thomas's thought, I think we have to remember.
The second strophe starts out with Aristotelian data-gathering senses, visus gustus tactus
intae falitur, sight, taste, touch, or of no use in dealing with you, said solos auditos
tutae creditor, but only hearing can be safely believed, credo quickuid dixit de afilius,
I believe whatever the Son of God said, nikil veritatis verbo verius, a wonderful line,
in the meter it's usually rendered, I apologize for my singing voice, nikil veritatis verbo
verius, in translation that's a nice line, nothing is more true than the word of truth,
well that's good, a little bit clunky I think in English, in Latin, nikil veritatis verbo
verius, superb in terms of the consonants, the coming together of simple sounds.
We have here a very powerful V-alliteration, starting at the first line of the poem with
veritas, tequitubis formis verilatitas, it goes away for a while until the last line
of that double strophe package, nikil veritatis verbo verius, really rolling out and taking
over in a powerful kind of way, third strophe states the kind of paradox that Thomas loved
to work with in his own theology, in his own philosophy, in cruce la tebat sola deitas,
in the cross was hidden only the divinity, the Godhead, said hik latet simul et humanitas,
but here also the humanity is hidden, here in the sacrament of Eucharist and the bread,
the humanity of Christ is not visible.
Wonderful structure right here, next line, ambotamen credens adque confitens, believing
and professing both, that is the deity and the humanity and the truth and the hiddenness,
peto quad petivit latro penitens, I seek what the penitent thief sought.
I think we should take a look again at these three strophes now in terms of the kind of
technical assembly, assemblage of the words, assemblage of the meter that was so important
to traditional classical and medieval and renaissance and early modern versification.
This is not, I know, the way that modern literary criticism prefers to look at poems, but it's
very much the way Thomas was trained to look at it and the way that his readership to use
a modern term, his audience was expected to respond for centuries before him and for centuries
after.
And we could see here the double appearance in the first two lines of the first strophe
of latens and latitas, and the double reappearance in the first two lines of the third strophe
of lattebat and latet, this stem having to do with hiding.
And in the first and second lines of the third strophe we have lattebat and latet, balancing
deitas and humanitas, which are joined in the first word of the third line with umbo,
I don't know whether we should make a point that in the past there was a hiding of the
Godhead, in the present there is a hiding of the manhood, and that Thomas professes,
believes both and professes both of those nearly at all as strongly as he believes and
professes the deity and the humanity which are joined together in this mysterious sacrament.
One thing I think we should notice is that here we find the author and the reader or
the listener together at the foot of the cross.
And Thomas making an extremely striking first person statement, I, believing and professing
all of this together, seek what the good thief sought.
Remarkable line, here's a sort of mile line at first until we think about it a little
bit.
We may notice, for example, just to talk on the technical level of assonance, that a
p-assonance appears, peto quad petivit latropenitens, this will become considerably more important.
It'll reappear in the fifth strophe, a little bit, become much more powerful in the sixth.
These patterns of assonance exist strophe by strophe, and also they interact and connect,
if one wanted to sort of score these assonance patterns musically, I think you'd get quite
an interesting kind of composition, a sort of mini sonata in its way.
We should also notice the reappearance of the stem lat in the word for the thief, the
latro.
So we've had, stanza one, latens latitas, stanza three, latte bat latet, and latro.
It comes to a kind of a culmination, we get three of them together.
Why was a thief called a latro?
According to one sort of standard etymology, current in the Middle Ages, thieves were called
that because they tended to hide.
So the notion of hiding is carried all the way through.
And Thomas, of course, knew his latin in a serious kind of way.
You didn't have to know that, you didn't have to know that etymology, presumably, to be a
reader who was struck by the felicity, even struck quite a subconsciously, by the felicity
of this phrasing.
Let's look again also at what precisely is claimed here, that Thomas, standing at the
foot of the cross, asks for what the penitent thief with the good thief thought.
We don't call him the good thief, we call him the penitent thief.
Thomas seems to be expressing a kind of sense of, if not guilt, of regret, of some kind of
penitential feeling, for what?
Perhaps for a difficulty in leaping forward in belief to the sacrament of the Eucharist,
which really demands belief of the most pure and rigorous kind.
The good thief, the penitent thief, was, of course, on a crucified next to Jesus, and
this is a reference from the gospel to the moment of the crucifixion, which is followed
immediately in the next line, the first line of the fourth strophe, by another gospel reference
this time to the forty days after the resurrection, to Thomas the Doubting Apostle.
Thomas the Doubter, to whom the church had assigned for long centuries, as a feast day,
the twenty-first of December, the longest night of the year.
And here Thomas, obviously, if he's the author, plays a wonderful pun upon himself, a wonderful
kind of authorial word play.
There's word play throughout this pun, and this is one of the clearest of them.
I think that that's a strong sign that somebody named Thomas, maybe Thomas of Aquino, is
traditionally strongly asserted, is, in fact, the author of this pun, because we're led
into a kind of interior association of the author in his own personality, because he
said that is indicated by a name, into the fundamental story of human salvation, which
of course focuses in Christian thought at the cross itself.
And I think it's not irrelevant to take a little look at art history and see exactly
how the Eucharist was displayed in the Feast of Corpus Christi, usually in something called
a monstrance, which is not monstrous at all, but which showed, to monstrivet, the host
to the public, great burst, a sunburst all the way around the host, but usually the
sunburst was placed then, and sometimes is placed in later centuries, against the cross,
that the sun radiates from the joining of the cross.
So here is, I think, an entirely normal, for a major poet, entirely normal kind of sensitivity
to the visual image, which is implanted in a deeply sub-visual, visuality, into the reaction
of the person who's not even thinking about it, simply being there in this liturgical
action.
Plaga sicut tomas nonintueor.
Your wounds, I cannot, like Thomas see, look at, into airy is an interesting Latin verb,
which means not only look at, but the term intuition arises from it, it's a kind of
very involved looking, which with all kinds of mental consequences, and interestingly enough,
it's not talking about touching the wounds, it's just talking simply about seeing them.
This is a poem very much about seeing.
The Aristotelian senses are lined up with visus as the first of them, and the very last line,
as you will see, begins with the word visu, which has a great deal to do with the fundamental
theological message of Thomas throughout his work.
Mayum tomendeum te confiteor.
Nonetheless, I profess you as my god.
Fakame tibi semper magis credere, intes bemhabere, te deligere.
Remarkable pair of lines.
Markable in a number of ways, for which I think we are prepared throughout the poem
by a versification device, which is once again, assonance, the t-assonance, which is far
more powerful, far more constant, than the v-assonance, or the m-assonances, which we
will see are the p-assonance, which intervenes between the v and the m, interestingly, v,
m, and p, are all variations of a basic consonantal sound, the lobbyal consonance, and so it's
not just any kind of assonances that are being played.
But let's go to the very first line.
Adoro de voti, latens, very tass, te, qui subis formis, very latitas, tibis, carmeum,
totum, subicit, quiatec, on templans, totum, deficit, no, you might say, the t's of subicit
and deficit are sort of, we shouldn't credit them, because Latin verbs work that way, and
if you're going to be writing in Latin or talking in Latin, you'll have a lot of terminal
tibes.
But this dental fricative is thus not to be noticed, we might think, but there's an
awful lot of it.
Even in double pairs, there's a latitas and totum, and totum twice in that first trophy,
which suggests that it's more interesting.
What does this sound do, m's and are very soothing, v's as well, p used to be sort of
plosive, the lobbyal plosive, the t is a sound we don't often think about very much, it's
a sharp sound, and possibly one might argue a certain kind of criticism in the 20th century
would have argued that this suggests a kind of clarity and sharpness of purpose.
We see visas gustus, tactus, in te, falitur, solus auditus, tutte, creditur, creditur,
quick with dixit, that's one of those sort of giveaway t's, a terminal t, just simply
a product of Latin inflection, but you might as well take cognizance of what the language
gives you.
Nikil veritatus verbovarius, encroche latte bat, double, soladitas, sedhic latet, double,
it's his favorite key words, latens and veritas, do contribute to this particular sonic effect
to this consonancia, is it a debita proporzio too, usually consonancia and debita proporzio
are the two terms Thomas uses to describe that quality of beauty which we speak of as
harmony.
Ambo tum and cretens, pecto quad petivit, latropenitens, the t and the p are working
to the very nicely then, well we could go on with this over and over and over again.
I think we can see not just a consonancia but a debita proporzio in those last two lines
of the fourth strophe, make me always believe in you more, have hope in you and love you.
This could be elementary latin and modern american school in the first month and I think
there is a very strong debita proporzio between the simplicity of the statement and the gravity
of the statement.
And why is this a grave statement?
Because I think it indicates a crisis of doubt.
Now Reginald said no, that Thomas and St. Nicholas Day of 1273 had a mystical experience
which he saw a truth.
Weisheifel is not at all sure of that and I think we can see in this poem as elsewhere
a statement about Thomas' awareness that he thought and lived moving along the very cusp
of doubt.
This poem ends up with the request, Jesus who I now see veiled, quando fiet ilude quattam
copio, when will that happen which I so desire?
Rebellata cernans facie, that I seeing you with your face unveiled, visus imbeatus tu
e gloriae, that I shall be blessed with the sight of your glory in the beatific vision
which is the end and the goal of the entire creation, when God's creation sees him and
which was indicated in the minds of contemporary biblical critics, wrongly as we now know but
they didn't know that by the term Jerusalem which they thought meant the vision of peace,
peace being the fundamental gift which God gives because it is an extension of his own
nature.
Well I hope that we can see enough debita, proporzio, conson ansia, claritas, all of
those things in this remarkable seven-strophe poem which remind us also of the qualities
of Thomas' rational prose, with the prose which constitutes it seems to me a thing of
beauty not just of distant coldness, even in the aesthetic sense a cluster of works
of art.
Thank you very much.
I'll enjoy this course.
I'm Tom Rawlins, president of the teaching company.
We hope you've enjoyed the lectures on these tapes.
To order more courses or to receive a copy of our most recent catalog, call 1-800-TEACH-1-2
or visit our website at www.teachco.com.
Thank you very much.
