Lecture 9 Sex, Love, Marriage and the Family
Thomas Aquinas' teaching about the phenomenon of sexuality, human sexuality in particular,
is a fine instance of his commitment to Aristotelian teleology.
That is, the principle that the most important thing to know about anything,
the key question to ask about it is its purpose, which comes from the Greek word telos, which means end or purpose.
However, the procreation of the species is not the only end of sexuality in Thomas' view.
A mode of intimacy made possible by human sexuality,
an intimacy surpassing that of friendship, which was a very lofty ideal in medieval society,
is perhaps equally important, at least in some of Thomas' discussion of marriage.
Besides, Thomas sees the end of sexual mating as the education of offspring even more than their procreation.
Thomas discusses marriage at some length in the ethical sections, the Summa Theologiae,
especially the second part of the second part, the Sekunda Sekunde, as it was called in his own time,
and still is, I think, for convenience sake in modern English.
But his presentation of it in the running format of the Summa Contra Gentiles,
a work designed for non-Christian audiences, most of whose societies were polygamous,
is particularly interesting today, I think.
What Thomas says in the Sekunda Sekunde of the Summa Theologiae is pretty much what one would expect
from a spokesman of the church who is teaching theology to future clerics.
He says the usual things, marriage is indissoluble.
It's an indissoluble contract, but indissoluble nevertheless,
except for some very extraordinary kind of situations,
which of course would dissolve any other kind of contract as well,
or comparable difficulties would dissolve it.
And he talks, interestingly enough, in the Summa Theologiae
about the competence of the partners for marriage,
their competence to make this kind of contract.
And one of the interesting things that comes out of that is the discussion of the marriage debt.
That is the mutual requirement of conjugal intercourse.
If either of the partners is either incapable or unwilling,
voluntarily, mentally incapable, so to speak, of paying this debt,
of performing this requirement, then the marriage is invalid.
That's kind of a radical thing to be saying in the 1260s and 70s,
since the canon law of the church has been moving for over a century
towards extremely severe notions of the insolubility of the marriage bond.
Many a pastoral document from the 13th century suggests that
if one is married to an atrocious partner,
a partner negative, hostile, sexually withholding, brutal even,
then one should thank God for this,
because this is an occasion to work out one's temporal punishment here on earth
and to shorten one's time in purgatory,
and if one takes the attitude properly, to avoid hell.
Thomas is not nearly that severe, although he reasserts the indissolubility.
In fact, when he talks about innate incapacity for this contract,
which is of course a teleological problem,
if someone is incapable of performing the end of an agreement,
then the whole agreement is seriously in doubt.
What's interesting about this, from the point of view of comparative religion,
is that the Eastern Christian churches,
Greek, Syrian, Armenian, etc., by now Russian, Bulgarian, Slavonic, and so on,
maintained the doctrine of divorce, which was part of Roman civil law,
and there were basically four grounds for divorce in the Eastern churches,
including violence of one partner against the other, even of the wife against the husband,
that was of course assumed that the husband was more likely to be the violent person.
But impotence in the husband's parts to religion, the wife's part of violence,
and certain other types of aberrant behavior,
were considered grounds for the dissolution of a Christian marriage in the Eastern church.
The Western church is moving against that, and Thomas of course goes along with it,
but here again he provides a kind of anchor,
he's sort of providing a kind of cautious,
let's wait a minute and look at this kind of doctrine.
This is particularly interesting, it seems to me, in view of the context once again.
He's here not going against exactly the general direction of the canon law,
Thomas is never a canon lawyer, though he has some important things to say about the philosophy of law,
but he is always in touch with his Greek sources.
His Greek sources not simply pre-Christian Aristotelian,
but also his Eastern patristic sources,
his knowledge of the Eastern fathers of the church, which was extremely important to him.
Gregory of Nissa was one of the most important of the Eastern fathers to Thomas,
this is now being brought out more and more strongly
by the work of the great Don Balash of the University of Dallas,
a distinguished pre-monstretention scholar.
I think much more interesting is to take a look at the way Thomas deals with marriage
in Book 3 of the Summa Contra Gentiles,
aimed at, as I've said already, a non-Christian audience.
Book 3 of the Summa Contra Gentiles deals with providence.
Book 1 is about God, Book 2 is about creation, Book 3 is about providence, divine providence.
And one of the prime provisions, according to Thomas,
which God made for the human creature is marriage,
of the teleological significance of which is assumed,
after earlier statements in that book,
for example, sections I've mentioned already,
chapters 16 and 17 of Part 1 of Book 3,
for instance, that the end of everything is a good,
and that all things are ordered to one end who is God.
So, teleologically speaking, for Thomas,
the goal of marriage was ultimately God,
and this, of course, is entirely typical of the way in which Thomas approaches everything.
Let's take a look at what he does in Part 2 of Book 3,
in the 120s, chapters 121 to 129, I think, are particularly interesting.
In Part 2 of Book 3, chapter 122,
Thomas presents a dozen arguments why simple fornication is a sin,
according to divine law, and matrimony is natural,
meaning a feature and an important feature of the natural law.
He does take care, four chapters later,
to affirm that not all sexual intercourse is sinful,
which may sound like a backhanded recommendation,
but doesn't develop at all as negatively as the title suggests.
If we go beyond the title in the text, we see some very interesting things.
Chapter 122, the reason why simple fornication is a sin,
according to natural law, and that matrimony is natural,
begins with an attitude, a statement about the nature of fornication,
the sinless nature of fornication in certain circumstances,
which is one of the doctrines strongly condemned by Bishop Tampier in 1277
in the condemnation, which singles out 219 propositions currently being taught
in the schools of Paris, which the Pope and the Bishop of Paris are concerned about.
And this, as you will recall, involves some of Thomas' specific teachings.
One of the teachings that is certainly not Thomas'
and against which Thomas goes quite strongly here in the Summa Contra Gentiles
is the notion that simple fornication is not a sin.
And I think it's interesting to go through a little bit of the position stated.
Thomas gives three subheadings to this position.
He breaks it down into three lines of argument,
rather as he handles objections in the Summa Theologiae.
For they say, says Thomas, suppose there's a woman who is not married
or under the control of any man, either her father or another man.
Now, if a man performs a sexual act with her and she's willing,
he does not injure her because she favors the action
and she has control over her own body.
Nor does he injure any other person because she is understood to be under no person's control,
so this does not seem to be a sin.
Now, this, of course, is a very 20th century attitude,
which has been elevated by many to practically a moral preset.
Thomas was opposed to that, and this is the kind of attitude that Thomas has
towards most of those 219 propositions condemned by Tompey
and then by Kilroyd B. and then by Peckham and the others.
There's a second reason that Thomas alleges, he says,
now to say that the person who commits fornication outside of marriage
would not, to say that he injures God would not seem to be an adequate answer.
For we do not offend God except by doing something contrary to our own good, as has been said.
But this does not appear contrary to man's good. Interesting.
This is the sort of opening towards a larger view that is quite striking.
To have sex does not appear to be contrary to man's good.
Hence, on this basis, no injury seems to be done to God.
Well, that's what he Thomas is doing, of course, here, as always,
is giving fair statement to positions with which he disagrees
and about which he ought to be concerned, I suppose.
Certainly, Bishop Tompey would think so.
Likewise, it would also seem an inadequate answer
to say that some injury is done to one's neighbor by the action
and as much as he may be scandalized.
But as Thomas points out, it's possible for neighbors to be scandalized
by something which isn't a sin.
In this event, the act would be accidentally sinful,
but our problem, says Thomas, and this is very typically tomistic
and very typically ontological, tomism.
But our problem is not whether simple fornication is accidentally a sin,
but whether it is so essentially.
And then he moves in part four to look for a solution,
a solution to these earlier considerations.
This is very typical of his method.
He goes on to talk about God exercising care over every person
on the basis of what is good for that person.
Here again, divine, the tiliology of divine providence,
which is the constant running theme of all of part three
of the Summa Contra Gentiles, comes out very strongly,
he develops it strongly, and he comes now to his concern
and the concern of all moralists of that time,
perhaps a particular concern of celibate moralists
for the semen, the generative seed.
And now, this is not what is sought in the case of semen, says he,
but rather to emit it for the purpose of generation
to which purpose the sexual act is directed.
Tiliological sexual ethics, no surprise.
He goes on to talk about, to give a kind of exception.
It's not bad to emit semen when generation is not possible.
For example, in the case of the sterility,
either partner, particularly of course of the wife,
who was normally thought, females were normally thought
to be more normally sterile than men.
But sins of this type are called contrary to nature,
but if by accident, generation cannot result
from the emission of semen, then this is not a reason
for it to be against nature, or to be a sin,
as for instance, if a woman happens to be sterile.
So we have here a sterile either before the normal age
at which women no longer are capable of reproduction,
but all the way through.
So marriage is for a long life.
Marriages of people who are beyond the age
of reasonable expectation of procreation is no problem,
as he'll explain later on.
Although he doesn't do that right here,
because now he's focusing, as I say many,
a celibate cleric has done on the semen itself.
And he goes into a long discussion of the need for the payer
not simply to produce offspring,
but to give them a proper upbringing.
And he goes into this long discussion
by analogy to zoology, especially birds.
He's fascinated with dogs and birds.
Dogs misbehave, and you know, are promiscuous and so on,
polygamous to put it mildly.
Birds, however, in his view, tended not to be.
And birds tended to be monogamous.
This is an interesting theme coming from classical literature
and from Thomas' own time.
We remember Plato's remark and the myth of Ur
that ends the great republic that many of the heroes,
when they choose bodies for their souls to enter
after the thousand years of pregation
in the happy fields, the illicit fields,
some of them chose swans because swans were known
to be magnificently monogamous,
and this was a very noble sort of thing.
Also, the sovereign of Thomas' childhood,
his cousin, whether close or distant,
depending on your theories about this,
was Frederick II, the king-emperor,
who was one of the major contributors
to modern empirical science,
because he himself wrote in Latin,
de arte venandi cum avibus,
the art of hunting with birds,
the first treatise on falconry,
in which he paid a great deal of attention
to the pairing up of raptors and other predatory birds,
and to the raising of the offspring after
hatching the eggs and feeding the chicks
after the eggs are hatched and so on.
So this is a topic of considerable vitality
in Thomas' own moment,
as well as in the long pull of his tradition.
And he says, so you have to have the husband there.
The husband is not just enough to emit the semen.
The husband must stay around and raise the offspring.
And then he gives again consideration of an exception.
Someone would say, what if the woman is a woman of wealth?
What if she can take care of the child by her own wealth?
Well, that isn't any exception.
The natural rectitude in human acts
is not dependent on things accidentally possible
in the case of one individual,
but rather on those conditions
which accompany the entire species.
And so the notion here is that most wives
are not wealthier than their husbands,
and that's striking as a kind of note about social history.
We know that in Thomas' own class,
the class of the medieval nobility,
that it was absolutely normal for a man to marry upward in status,
and that often meant upward in wealth as well,
so that this would have been a normal condition
for which he's dealing right here.
And so it's not surprising
when we look at the individual situations that he presents
as either exceptions to the rule
or deflections from the running line of argument
that these should be issues
which are not simply his personal interests
or just a quirk, but are in fact relevant to his moment in time.
The sort of thing that historians have thought,
looked for and emphasized whenever we see them
and we see them all over Thomas Aquinas.
Again, we've got to consider that the human species
has to raise its offspring out of the offspring's requirement
not only of nourishment for the body,
but also in the case of humans,
unlike other animals, the need for education of the soul.
And then it is important to have discipline as well.
And the husband is needed for correction,
and now comes a statement which is certainly not sympathetic
to modern feminism.
Now a woman alone is not adequate to this task.
Rather, this demands the work of a husband
in whom reason is more developed for giving instruction
and strength is more available for giving punishment.
Thomas is a part of his time,
and we should not expect him to be a way beyond it.
Although sometimes he is quite remarkably,
somewhat apart from the dominant thought of his moment
in a direction that offers all kinds of openings
to later ethical thought.
He then moves to a discussion of homosexuality
about which he is extremely negative.
He is not a homophobe,
but he is certainly not in favor of relationships
between members of the same sex, same sex relationships.
And he says after the sin of homicide,
whereby human nature already in existence is destroyed,
this type of sin appears to take next place
for by yet the generation of human nature is precluded.
I said that Thomas does not come across as a homophobe,
but he certainly belonged to one of the centuries
in which homosexuality was particularly condemned
by the common consensus.
This point is made very clearly by Boswell,
John Boswell in his remarkable book on homosexuality
and Christian ethics,
which won the National Book Award,
has made a tremendous contribution
to the discussion of this issue.
The 13th century was particularly strong
against same sex relationships,
as was the 19th and at least part of the 20th century as well.
And it's interesting, I think,
to see what Thomas then moves to for authority.
He cites Deuteronomy.
He cites Leviticus.
He cites Paul to the Corinthians,
from which we get the most famous condemnation
of homosexual relationships in the New Testament
nor the effeminate nor liars with mankind
shall possess the kingdom of God.
Now, exactly what Paul's Greek means about that
has been questioned quite intelligently
by some modern scholars,
but for Thomas it's very clear that what Paul means
is what the anti-homosexual consensus
ascended to assert.
He then moves on into the argument
that matrimony should be indivisible.
This, I think, is particularly interesting.
What he means here is that there should not be polygamy,
and particularly the type of polygamy
that was most shocking, I think,
to most male dominant societies, polyandry.
The women should not have several husbands
or several mates, because, first of all,
of course, the line, the paternity
of the child will be most unclear,
and the male will not be inclined, therefore,
to provide both nourishment and instruction,
which is thought to be important.
For the female needs the male, he says,
not merely for the sacred generation,
as in the case of other animals,
but also for the sake of government,
since the male is both more perfect in reasoning
and stronger in his powers.
This old-fashioned attitude gets restated
with some regularity in this period.
Yet, on the other hand, he appeals
to simple equity, and that's entirely unfair
for a man to choose a woman,
as he says, at the time of her youth
when beauty and fecundity were hers,
and then send her away after she'd reached
an advanced age, he would damage that woman
contrary to natural equity.
So marriages are supposed to last through
old age long beyond the possible ages
of generation.
Then he says, it's obviously inappropriate
for a woman to be able to put away her husband.
Women cannot divorce their husbands.
The Islamic law, which was the dominant law
of most of the people, or very many of the people
to whom Thomas was directing
the summa contra gentiles,
makes divorce extremely easy for the male,
but indeed not for the female,
and this doctrine would, no doubt,
have resonated well with teachers
of the Muslim law.
And his reason is, again, not something
that modern feminism would approve of,
how could it, because a wife is naturally
subject to her husband as governor,
and it is not within the power
of a person subject to another
to depart from his rule. Now this is quite interesting,
because elsewhere, Thomas talks
about the right of revolution against a tyrant.
I suppose that
that doctrine, which has had
such tremendous impact on later thought
in natural law, and a direct impact
upon the founding fathers of this republic,
though they probably being good deist
Protestants, good deist ex-Protestants,
formal Protestants, would have been
a bit distressed to learn that Thomas Aquinas
was at the root of much of their claim
of the right of revolution. I suppose that
that general direction of Thomas's
thought so important for modern thought could be
sprayed with this one, because he would say
that a tyrant is not a real governor. The tyrant
has abandoned the position of governor
by his own misbehavior, and thus
the people have the right to rise against him.
Then we move on
about the solicitude of fathers
for their offspring, and moves to a very
interesting statement, which I think is more attractive
to the modern thought, that what happens
in the sexual relationship
is a kind of friendship that is
most extraordinary, and that goes
beyond other kinds of friendship.
Now, friendship was a powerful
ethical norm for a
very, very long time, from Cicero
onward, if not earlier.
And the ideal
of friendship, not only between men
but also between women
was strongly emphasized in the 12th century,
the very humanistic sort of proto-Renaissance
12th century, when Cicero was
sort of the reigning figure of classical thought,
more important than Plato or Aristotle,
the latter of whom was hardly known in much of the
12th century. And what Thomas
is doing here is fairly striking, by
saying that the friendship
of the married couple
is nobler and more
full of capacity to enhance human happiness.
That's his teleologically finer
than ordinary friendship, non-sexual friendship.
And that is a very interesting kind of stance
again. Then he mentions the epistle
of Ephesians with the analogy
between Christ and the church
and the husband and the wife, and
carries on in ways that we might well expect.
His biblical sources at the end are heavily
from Matthew and from
the first epistle to the Corinthians.
Once again, we see Thomas's particular
attraction to the Gospel of Matthew.
He could have cited other Gospels as well, but it's
Matthew. Matthew and Corinthians, all the way
through here, are very, very strong. He also
then goes on to argue against
polygyny, polygyny, one
husband, several wives, enormously
normal in all of the parts of the world
to which the summa contra gentiles was
directed. He talks here, here
the doctrine of friendship becomes far stronger.
It's simply not possible to have
a real friendship in that kind
of polygamous situation. It's got to be a
one-on-one relationship. So I think
you can see that in a way what strikes us
as modern readers about Thomas's doctrine
is not the familiar kind of
medieval mindset, but what strikes
me at any rate, I should say, but
is something that is really quite distinctly
not medieval. The notion that
illicit sexual union marriage is
higher than friendship. Some of the
writing on courtly love, which so
distress Bishop Tompey and lots of other people
moved in this direction, but a lot
of it did not. And here, Thomas
is very strongly on this side.
Very powerful here. His simply
one biblical source. Hence
it is said in Genesis
224, they shall be two in one
flesh. The very most powerful statement
of the equality and the
unicity of the married couple really
is one person, which Paul will pick up again,
of course, that are on. At the very end
of this chapter 124, Thomas says
by this, having cited Genesis
224, they shall be two in one
flesh. He goes on to say by this,
the custom of those having several wives
is set aside. Okay, this is
good old polygyny. And also the opinion
of Plato, who maintained that wives
should be common in the Republic. This
of course was a very shocking kind of thing, but
Thomas gets rid of it in part of one sentence.
This does not seem to have been a major
problem in his own time.
And in the Christian period, he
was followed by Nicolaus, one of the
seven deacons. That's at least as what
Augustine said, and this gives rise to
the sin of Nicolaism, which
becomes the marriage of the clergy
with Nicolaus originally was simply in favor of
polygamy. Now he becomes the villain
in the notion that clergy
should be married, against which of course
the time was very strongly opposed. He says
some fascinating things about incest,
matrimony should not take place between
close relatives, because
for a number of racing reasons, that the
kind of friendship we're talking about
is different from blood relationship, from
family relationship. These two kinds of
association should not be confused with one
another. Also he does say that there's
something about sexual intercourse, about which
he's been so positive so far, that involves
a certain amount of shame. The fig leaves
of Adam and Eve and so on, once original sin
contracted, and this isn't appropriate
within the family context.
One has to remember, I think, that Thomas came from
what appears to have been a very happy and
coherent family. He was sent away, of course,
as a boy of five to the local monastery,
but it was the local monastery, and he was
always in touch with his family. So we have
a sort of vivid image of a kind of large,
tumultuous, friendly, and
definitely correct decent family
as his norm.
There are, by the way, ten arguments.
They're talking about incest, and he doesn't let
that happen easily. He provides ten arguments
to argue this.
But Thomas' discussion of marriage at various
places in the body of his written work
indicate some aspects of his thought
that are, although he is a medieval
thinker, a particular interest to modern
Westerners living around the end of
the second millennium of the Christian
era, that is now.
Marriage has a higher potential for human
fulfillment than friendship. Lofty is that
is, as I've said already.
Thomas does not say that marriage is the
kind of friendship. It's a different kind
of social personal bond.
I think that he means, if you
treat him logically, which he liked to
treat everybody else, that what we end up
with is the necessary conclusion
that marriage is loftier.
The friendship of marriage, if that friendship
existed in marriage as it should, but certainly
doesn't always, that friendship of marriage
is loftier than that of friendship
between members of the same sex.
He does say that it's a different kind
of social personal bond.
There's no blur, but I think that this
conclusion comes out of his argument,
and I find all of that something
of a surprise from a celibate cleric
who spent his entire life without
as far as we can tell, any kind of impulse
towards marriage in his own part.
He also says very clearly in several places
that the partners in a marriage should be
equal or as close to equal as their
circumstances permit. Males have some
strength, females another. Some spouses
are smarter or more virtuous than others
and so on. Spouses on either side.
And he makes a great point that
polygamy induces a kind of slavery
in the relationship between husband
and wife or the slavery of the wife.
As he says in societies which have polygamy,
we can observe that women are more
like slaves towards their husbands
than like partners or friends.
And this of course would have to resonate very strongly
in Islamic society and in most of the
polygamous societies of Asia. It's interesting
to remember that Judaism had just
recently, only just recently
finally put an end to the permission
of polygamous marriage, which had been
a very strong feature. Some think that the
book of Genesis was put together by
teachers who were arguing against
polygamy, but it was a long haul
from Genesis up to the 12th century
when the consensus of the rabbis finally
declared monogamy not just the ideal,
but also the requirement
for Israel. Contraception
is of course against the natural law,
but the reason why
is that it frustrates procreation
and the world needs to be populated.
This last reason
is a good case of Aristotelian teleology.
As Louis Dupré
pointed out over 30 years ago
in his remarkable book, Contraception
and Catholics, an extremely slim book,
but a real bomb in the discussion
of the time, what would happen
to Thomistic thought?
What would Thomas have thought, what should
modern Thomas think, if the world
were adequately populated or indeed
overpopulated, as practically everybody
agrees it is today?
As Dupré suggests, the teleologically
minded Aquinas
would have to conclude that
contraception was according to the natural law.
Now what he said this in the 1960s
that deeply upset the defenders
of Catholic doctrine and the subject
that had been Catholic doctrine from
the 4th Lateran Council of 1215 onward,
deeply founded in Augustine's own reaction
to his own practicing of contraception
as a young manatee, living in
concubinage with his mate
about which he had extremely complicated feelings.
Dupré also goes on to
notice that Thomas does not question
the legality of polygamous marriages
in polygamous society,
and some have taken that argument so far
as to claim that Thomas
thought that polygamy was according
to the natural law in polygamous societies
just as monogamy was according to the natural law
in monogamous societies. I think that's
pushing Thomas a bit forward, but certainly
Thomas is not as narrowly
committed to some of these positions
that we tend to think of as standard Catholic
as we might suppose.
I think what we can see in looking at what
Thomas does with human sexuality
is a very interesting range
of positions. First of all, he reaffirms
what was standard Christian
teaching at his time, but the way
in which he does it is so
Aristotelian, so teleological,
and so aware of other cultures,
so conscious
of cross-cultural reality, of
counter-cultural reality, that what he
merges is a whole series of statements
which can serve as points of departure
for very different ultimate
interpretations.
The influence of Thomas' doctrine of
teleology is at play here, but also
of course the Christian doctrine of providence.
And what you get in these opening
points, these plan de départ
for a new, more open, more modern
Thomistic ethics are not simply
signs of Aristotelian
commitment, but also
Thomas' sense of the long Christian
tradition of divine providence. And that
is kind of a surprise.
Thomas' family ethics turn out
to be surprisingly flexible,
whether medieval-ly flexible or modern-ly
flexible, despite the preference
of some modern Neotomist for rigid
moralizing, including
some of the close advisors
of Pope John Paul II.
