Lecture 3 The Four Samhain
Thomas Aquinas composed in his short life of 49 years, during only 21 of which he wrote
anything that has come down to us, an enormous body of work. According to one reckoning,
his works number over five dozen separate titles, including three very large sumas,
a new genre specific to the scholasticism, which he exemplifies so thoroughly. His complete
works fill several dozen large volumes worth of modern printed editions. That he did anything
other than write is the marvel, the final proof of his benign and unassuming practical genius,
the sense that he was a committed teacher all of his professional life, as far as we
can tell, committed and active, deeply engaged. And what I want to talk about now is the sumas.
The four sumas that he composed, the four great ones, although only three of them are large,
one is small, but in its own way very great indeed. Now what was a suma? It was a new
genre of philosophical writing developed in the mid-twelfth century, especially at Paris.
It's specific to the scholastic mentality. The classic example and the first very great
one is the Sentenciae or Sentences of Peter Lambert, an Italian theologian who became
Bishop of Paris for the short span of four years between 1156 and 1161 he died. The Sentences
of Peter Lambert would remain the standard Catholic theology textbook in seminaries well
into the 18th century, and with this abbreviation and that alteration would be a classic book
in many Protestant seminaries as well until about the same time. Well, there are three
great characteristics to a suma, it seems to me. First of all, its comprehensive character,
secondly, a very elaborate logical structure, and thirdly, certain features of language
and style. Let's talk about the comprehensive scope of the suma to begin with. In four books,
but these are huge books, the Lambert, as Peter Lambert was called, covered God, book
once for God, that's reasonable size, I think one could say. Book two deals with creatures,
that is, the creation and the history of the world up to Jesus Christ. Book three deals
with the incarnation of Christ and his redemption of the human race, and the fourth book is
dedicated to the sacraments and the four last things, death, judgment, heaven and hell.
Now, each of these books and all of the books of all the Sumas composed after the Sentences
of Peter Lambert is structured logically and in a very elaborate kind of fashion. Thomas'
great suma theologiae, or suma theologica, as it used to be called, is divided into parts,
questions and articles. Each article is structured as a unit of dialogue, dialogue as well as
logic, in strict logical order and language. Article one of question two of part one is
entitled, for example, whether the existence of God is self-evident, a position held by
some famous and authoritative Christian and other theologians, such as the 8th century
John of Damascus and the 12th century Anselma Beck, whose famous ontological proof of the
existence of God continues to fascinate agnostic academic scholars to the present day. Thomas
concludes that the existence of God is not self-evident, and he does so as follows. He begins
with three objections to his conclusion, each citing a major authority, John Damascene,
Aristotle and Christ, Christ speaking through the Gospel of John. He replies to the contrary,
as the formula is saying, on the contrary, and he has here a statement of conviction,
a logical statement backed by authority, in this case, two works of Aristotle and Psalm 53.
Then comes Thomas' developed answers, in which he says, respondio quia, I answer that, which is
followed by our specifically focused replies to each of the three opening objections. Let's
take a little look at how that works. Question two opens with a kind of a short preface, which
I'll get to in a moment, then moves on to the first article, whether the existence of God is
self-evident. And most of these articles have a title that is a question. So this whole work is
raising questions and then looking for answers. And the text says, we proceed thus to the first
article. Objection one says, the existence of God is self-evident, because those things are said
to be self-evident to us, the knowledge of which exists naturally in us, as we can see in regard
to first principles. And the quote is from John Damascene's great work on the Orthodox faith.
Damascene, a fascinating Syrian Christian, who, while a very serious Christian leader, was also
the wazir of one of the early caliphs of Islamic of Muslim Damascus. So tolerant was the Muslim
faith in those days. And he was also very much an Aristotelian. So for Thomas to cite him is not
surprising. Therefore, says Thomas, the existence of God is self-evident. Then comes objection two.
Further, those things are said to be self-evident, which are known as soon as the terms are known,
which the philosopher says is true of the first principles of demonstration, the philosopher.
This means Aristotle. And what Thomas is quoting here is a passage from Aristotle's work on logic,
the posterior analytics, book one, section three, if you want to go into that any further. What
comes then is a summary of the argument of Anselm, that once you understand what the term God means,
then you absolutely are in control of the notion of God. And you recognize that God must exist for
various reasons. Objection three. Further, the existence of truth is self-evident. For whoever
denies the existence of truth, grants that truth does not exist. And if truth does not exist,
then the proposition truth does not exist is true. And if there is anything true, there must be truth.
But God is truth itself. I am the way, the truth, and the life. John 14.6. Therefore, God exists
is self-evident. Now, thus we see Aristotle, John Damascene, and the Gospel itself cited as
authorities for positions which Thomas opposes. And Thomas then says, on the contrary, no one can
mentally admit the opposite of what is self-evident is the philosopher states concerning the first
principles of demonstration. Now he's quoting Aristotle's metaphysics and also his posterior
analytics, in both of which the same statement is made. But the opposite of the proposition God is
can be mentally admitted. The fool said in his heart, there is no God, Psalm 53. Therefore,
that God exists is not self-evident. And Thomas then goes on to say, I answer that a thing can be
self-evident in either of two ways. On the one hand, self-evident in itself, though not to us.
On the other hand, self-evident in itself and to us. Classic to mystic method, classic to mystic
clarity. And then having developed his argument, Thomas replies to Objection 1, and then to Objection
2, the great Anselmian ontological proof, and Friday to Objection 3, which is kind of simple
minded. And his answer is very kindly, I think, as well as simple. The existence of truth in
general is self-evident, but the existence of a primal truth is not self-evident to us. So here,
in short scope, is a very major issue of Christian philosophy, of general philosophy, and of Christian
philosophical theology, as well that the existence of God is not self-evident.
Thomas then will move on to the next question. Is it demonstrable? Can you prove, can you prove,
from human reason, from human logic, not exactly without the Bible, but without needing the Bible,
citing the Bible only as authority, can you prove that God exists? Not all Christian
theologians have thought so. Neither early Christian theologians nor those who challenged
to mystic logic, which is Aristotelian logic, from the late 13th century onwards,
through the 14th and 15th centuries. But for Thomas, it is clear that human reason,
little aided by Scripture, perhaps even unaided by Scripture, can, in fact, reach the knowledge of
God. And this is a major claim, that's the claim that you could expect an Aristotelian to make,
that you could expect a certain kind of scholastic to elaborate in the way that Thomas does this.
Now this whole article, this article, which is stating that the existence of God is not
self-evident, is preceded by a short introduction to the whole question, which reveals the structure
of the entire Summa Theologiae. Let me read it to you. Question one is the perfect
polygonal for this kind of work. It's a discussion of method, of methodology. What is theology?
What is the science? Can there be such a thing as a sacred science? And what is its object?
And so on. And then having established to his satisfaction that theology is a valid intellectual
pursuit, he then launches into the material of this enormous work, this Summa of theology.
Question two begins with this introduction. Because the chief aim of sacred doctrine is to
teach the knowledge of God not only as he is in himself, but also as he is the beginning of
things and their last end, and especially of rational creatures, is as clear from what has
been already said. That's a reference to article seven in question one. Therefore, in our endeavor
to expound this science, and by science he meant not what we mean, the term science in English
is usually restricted to things like physics, biology, chemistry, the natural sciences.
Social scientists, of course, protest. They also want to be involved in the scientific enterprise,
and in certainly continental languages, German, French, Italian,
a séance, a Wissenshaft, a Schianz, etc., are the terms used for any kind of systematically
organized study. So there's a science of literature, a science of history in those tongues,
simply not in English. So he may be a little bit startled when Thomas speaks of his endeavor
to expound this science. It means much more than simply laboratory science.
We shall treat, he says, one of God, two of the rational creatures movement towards God.
This is part two of the Summa Theologiae, and three of Christ to his man is our way to God.
This is part three. So you have the whole plan of the entire Summa lined out right here.
In treating of God, which is the subject of part one, there will be a three-fold division,
how natural to be triadic here, whether it's a Christian Trinitarian habit expressing itself
or the habit of Aristotelian logic, which likes to operate through syllogisms from
major premises to minor presences to conclusions, whatever the source is, this triadic character
is very strongly present in the structure of Summa's, not only Thomas's.
In treating of God, there will be a three-fold division, for we shall consider one,
whatever concerns the divine essence. That's what he's dealing with right here at the beginning
of question two. Two, whatever concerns the distinction of persons, which will begin with
question 27. And three, whatever concerns the procession of creatures from him,
which is what begins with question 44. So there's the plan all lined out of the first part of the
Summa. Now we come back to that first third of the first part. Concerning the divine essence,
we must consider one, whether God exists. And this is what we're dealing with right here in
question two. The manner of his existence, or rather what is not the manner of his existence,
this will be the subject of question three. And then, whatever concerns his operations,
namely his knowledge, this begins with question 14, his will, it begins with 19, and his power,
25, which rolls on into the early 100s, 25 to 100, and I forget how many. The discussion of
God's power is the section in which Thomas talks about law in a fascinating way that I want to
deal with in considerably more detail later on in this series. Concerning the first, that is,
whether God exists. There are three points of inquiry, and each of these is an article,
whether the proposition God exists is self-evident, whether it is demonstrable, whether God exists.
Okay, Thomas's Summas, of which I've given you already a clear example, I think,
are much admired by aficionados of medieval culture who find them wonderfully similar to
Gothic architecture, and to the polyphonic music of the 13th century, both of which art
forms arose in Paris or in the surrounding region. Paris is the center of the radiation of this kind
of style. There's this marvelous book by Irwin Panofsky called Gothic Architecture and Scholasticism,
doesn't talk about music, but it talks about architecture and scholasticism and talks about
mental habits. And Panofsky proposes the notion that there is some kind of a fundamental mentality
sort of radiating out of Paris, which gives rise to Summas to things like Notre Dame of Paris,
Cathedral, Chartres, and all the others, and we could add on to that to the remarkable
organum and the remarkable motets of later polyphonic musicians. Panofsky's theory has been
a much attacked, but it's come back again. One has the sense that it will be attacked and then
revived and attacked and revived, rather as Aristotelian thought has been across the long
pull of the centuries. Well, Thomas wrote four Summas. The first is the Summa Theologiae,
sometimes possibly even more frequently known as the Summa Theologica, the older title. Very
little difference. Whether you call it a Summa, a theological Summa using the adjectival form
Theologica or a Summa of Theology using the noun form Theologiae makes a little difference indeed.
This is a question of what it was called by its earliest copyists and earliest editors. It was
incomplete, in fact, when Thomas stopped writing in December 1273 after that remarkable event,
which was either a mystical experience, a nervous breakdown, a crisis of intellectual doubt,
or something else. In structure, I hope that structure has become clear to you already.
It's composed of three major parts, generally called the Prima Secunda and the Terzia, the Latin
words for first, second, and third, which it's very convenient to use as references and I will
sometime dealing with this subject later on. These three parts deal with God and the going
out of all things from Him, the Prima, as we've heard, the return of human beings and affairs to
Him, which means law, vices and virtues, economics, contemplation, ethics, in short. The Secunda
is actually in two parts. There's the Prima Secunda and the Secunda Secunda, and the second of
those, the Secunda Secunda, is the part which contains Aristotle's influence, which shows
Aristotle's influence even more strongly than the rest of the work. Then thirdly, the Terzia
deals with Christ and the sacraments as the principal means of that return of all creatures
to their Creator. A remarkable work indeed. The Terzia remained incomplete at the death of Thomas
Aquinas and Reginald tried to finish it. Reginald, who in so many ways tried to be to Thomas what
Thomas could not quite manage, like getting the secretaries organized, getting, I suppose,
I suspect, pretty much of anything organized, and then telling the rest of the story and finishing
the rest of this most theological part of the Great Summa of Theology. Thomas composed the
Secunda first. This is his most original, his most Aristotelian element of the great work.
He composed it during his nine years in Italy, from 1259 to 1268, while he was mostly the
papal court. He composed the Prima and the greater part of the Terzia during the four years of his
last day in Paris following his time in Italy, 12 from 1268 to 1272. Now this, the Summa Theologiae,
is the most monumental and authority-reaching of Thomas' works, even though he intended it
for beginners, as he says. Beginning students of serious theology, I think, is what he meant,
but perhaps there's a little bit of an echo here of a kind of subtitle that appears in most of the
manuscript tradition of the Benedictine rule, a rule for beginners. This, like the Benedictine rule,
is not meant to be a final word, a kind of culmination. It's meant to be the way you can
approach it. Anybody can approach it. And this is, I think, one of the reasons why language
is so important to Summas, a special kind of language that is extremely simple. It's extremely
structured. It's extremely cold. It's extremely lucid. But that's designed not to be inaccessible,
to be beyond the reach of anyone who has not gone through all of the intermediate
initiation into the sciences. It's meant to be simple so that simple people can read it,
if they're literate, or have it read to them if they're not, and can either assent or not.
This is also meant, the Summa Theologiae was, to be a major alternative to the teaching methods
at Paris, and it departs from those teaching methods very resolutely. I think it's interesting also
to contemplate a little bit the nature of technical language. The scientific jargon
that we use today is a technical language which is different from ordinary speech
because of its desire to be more precise, and to convey important thoughts in a fashion which
cannot be confusing. And that was very much the desire of the Summa writers of the Middle Ages,
and many of them achieve the same kind of impenetrable obscurity that scientific language
achieves today, that much of the work in formal philosophy achieves, heavily dependent upon
mathematics and on highly technical terms, that indeed we find very much in new deconstructionist
theoretical writing about literature. People do not use the ordinary English language because
they are trying to express thoughts that are more specifically refined than is the case in the normal
Hurley-Burley of the given take of daily speech. Thomas is trying to do all of those things,
no doubt, but I think the end result is much, much simpler than is the case with some of the other
kinds of jargon writing that I've spoken about. He has his own jargon, no question about it,
but what I've been reading to you is a perfectly straightforward English translation
of this perfectly straightforward Latin. It is a kind of terminology which can be grasped,
I think, by anyone who really wants to make the effort, and it seems to me that that is Thomas'
fundamental idea. The next great summa, the one much less well known, although it's almost as
large, is the great summa contra gentiles, the summa against the gentiles, by which Thomas means
the unbelievers, people who don't believe in the Christian faith. This is a fascinating work.
It is structured very differently than the summa theologie, and I think it deserves
much more attention than it tends to get. What you usually find in discussions of
Thomistic thought of any kind of Thomistic proposition is a presentation of it from the pages
of the summa theologie with secondary references to the summa contra gentiles. That seems to me
kind of ironic, since those of us who live in the 20th and the 21st centuries are living in a world
which is, according to the description of many, a post-Christian world, and it was precisely
a non-Christian world, not to be sure a post-Christian. Thomas would have hoped pre-Christian world
that he composed the summa contra gentiles. Now it was composed in response to a request
from the papal court, but really originating from an individual and enthusiastically endorsed by
the papal court, a request for a work which could convert Muslims, Jews, and even the
Buddhists and the animists of Central Asia and of East Asia, of which European Catholic merchants
and missionaries were becoming increasingly aware. We should remember this is the historical moment
of Marco Polo. By 1325 there would be a Catholic Archbishop of Beijing, a Dominican as it turns
out, Dominicans and Franciscans held these posts, and there was a tremendous outreach. Not yet had
Europeans begun to sail south of the great forbidding band of the Sahara which blocks off the
Atlantic in memorable ways to reach sub-Saharan Africa, but there was a very major effort to get
through to China and to strengthen contacts with the Christians of India, the Christian community
of India which had gotten going roughly in the apostolic generation and which by the 13th century
still maintained a certain amount of independence and a good deal of self-consciousness was thought
to be led by an extraordinary king named Prestor John. Prestor John who lived for a very long time,
actually the notion was that one of these Christian kings of Asia after the other was
another Prestor John, Prestor John the 17th, Prestor John the 27th, and so on. And many of the
organizers of the Crusades who were constantly developing their strategy and their diplomacy
at the papal court where Thomas was working were trying to establish contact and develop it with
Prestor John. In fact there was a moment when the Mongol conquest, Iran was considered to be the work
of Prestor John because the word had come through to the west that the court of the great Khan was
Christian. That meant that some of the children of the great Khan by some of his Christian wives
and it was thought that the great Khan really was Prestor John. So I go into these details
in this digression because I want to try to evoke an extraordinary moment in the western
consciousness, a moment of tremendous openness and tremendous outward expansion. This would not in
fact last. The black death, the bubonic plague would come along and zap the entire enterprise
by 1350, something like a third of the population of Europe in 1346 was dead
and Europe sort of recoiled under this tremendous demographic blow. It recovered
remarkably enough. The next time Europeans went out to meet the Chinese and the Indians
and the Sub-Saharan Africans whom they had just discovered, they came with ships loaded with
cannons and goods. They came as imperialist merchants and conquerors, not as missionaries,
carrying each of them in its pocket a section of the Summa Contra Gentile. And the encounter
between Europe and the other civilizations of the world would be much less benign
than I at least like to think it would have been if the program of the Summa Contra Gentiles
had been worked out if demography as well as the inner dissensions of Europe between
folks and emperors and all of that that very desedifying conflict had not paralyzed the movement.
This request came actually from a specific man, a fascinating man named Raymond of Pena Fort,
a Catalan, a canon lawyer, a missionary active in Spain who was also chairman of the Papal
Commission to draw up the Code of Canon Law, which had been promulgated in 1234. The Code of
the Civil Law had been promulgated by the Emperor Justinian centuries before, a remarkable work
indeed dealing with the whole body of Roman legislation in a highly rational fashion,
its first book being a summary of all the principles of law, the second book and extension
of them, and then in the specific, specific statutes. That's another logically structured
way of dealing with the great topic. The Summa writers of the 12th century drew up quite a different
kind of logical structure to deal not with law, but with philosophy. And yet there's a certain
kind of common mentality here, an organizing mentality, what we can call a kind of scholastic
obsession with order, which is at work in the request of Raymond of Pena Fort to the Papal
Court for some kind of a manual with which to convert Muslims, Jews, Buddhists and people
who believe in the polytheistic religions of India. Raymond himself is a quite a fascinating figure.
The Papacy had appointed a commission to draw up a Code of Canon Law comparable to the Code of
Civil Law of Justinian, compiled in the 520s. And many long years of work, chaired by Raymond
of Pena Fort, several commissions sort of reported to a few higher commissions, which were finally
chaired by Raymond. It produced this remarkable code, which was promulgated in the easy to remember
year of 1234. And this remarkable work would not be seriously revised by the Roman Catholic
Church until 1917, at which point the one medieval thinker who is cited as an authority
in the post 1917 Code of Canon Law is Thomas Aquinas, a sign that Thomas's presence,
although he was not a lawyer, was very real to this kind of thing. Raymond is interesting and I
think attractive to the modern taste as well in his missionary activity. He was of course trying to
pressure the Jews and Muslims newly conquered by the Kingdom of Aragon to accept the Christian
faith. And this is not the kind of ecumenical dialogue that is approved of today nor probably
should have ever been approved of. Many Christian missionaries in Spain did the same kind of thing.
But what's different about Raymond is that he tried very hard to use persuasion rather than force.
In fact, he never made any plans to force anybody. He would ask the King of Aragon to require all
the Jews of Valencia or of this or that town, all the Muslim caddies, the leaders, the Muslim
community was much, much larger. You could have the whole community there to come together at a
certain place to dispute with Christians. And obviously these must have been sort of one-sided
debates. One has the sense that the Muslims and the Jews did not really give the Christians all
the rhetorical artillery they might have, but at least there was at least the pretense of interchange,
of interfaith dialogue. And this is the mood of Raymond very strongly. I can't help but tell
you about a wonderful miracle which was attached to Raymond. He was not made to sing until quite,
quite late as a matter of fact. He was the Blessed Raymond even in the 20th century,
even though he had a very remarkable miracle. He was in the Balearic Islands at one point,
newly conquered by the King of Aragon, and knew that an important meeting of some, I don't know,
what sort was about to take place in Barcelona. And so we are told in affidavits attested by
people from the time that he was seen to walk to the wharves of Palma de Mallorca and then to
take flight rather like Thomas levitating after his mass on St. Nicholas Day in 1273 and move
across the Mediterranean to Barcelona rather like a hovercraft and made quite an impression upon the
longshoremen of the Barcelona wharves and so on. What does this have to do with Thomas Aquinas?
It shows, I think, the extent to which the world of the miraculous is thought by their age to impinge
very closely upon the world of the relentlessly rational, the organization of vast codes of
canon law, the organization of these immense Sumas. The Summa Contra Gentiles was very likely
composed by Thomas between 1258 or 59, in other words, you know, in a very short period, and then
again between 1261 and 1264, that's almost entirely during Thomas' stay at the Papal Court in Italy.
It's very different in structure from the Summa Theologiae. It is a kind of running argument
format. Thomas will bring up a topic and then give a whole string of reasons. There's this reason
and that reason and the other reason. And it doesn't have the attractive but very cumbersome system
of the objections and the, on the contrary, statement from authority. And then the I answer
that statement followed by specifically keyed in answers to the objections which have let it off.
It just argues on very much as one might in the course of an interchange with a person of one of
these opposite faiths who was at the same level of an election, which is not a terribly lofty level.
Lots of these arguments are quite ordinary and to the point. Thirdly, Thomas composed,
thirdly in importance but first in sequence, composed a great commentary on Peter Lombard's
four books of sentences. Brian Davies, the great Brian Davies, formerly a Fordham now of Oxford
University, I think the most authoritative voice on Thomas' philosophy today, says that Thomas'
major conclusions can all be found in this first important work of his. He shifted his emphases
but he did not change his mind radically from the time of the commentary on the four books of
sentences throughout his life. This Brian Davies maintains in the introduction to his remarkable
book, The Thought of Thomas Aquinas, published by Oxford in 1992, which I recommend to one and all.
This earliest summa was composed while Thomas was a graduate student in theology. It was in effect
his master's thesis and therefore we know that it must have been written in Paris between 1253
and 1257. In structure, it simply follows Peter Lombard's great summa and comments upon it.
The last of Thomas' sumas, last in time, and I was probably least probably in significance,
is a brief thing, a small thing but his own and very valuable to many people who have tried to
follow out either Thomism or to some basic understanding of Christian theology. It's called
the Compendium Theologiae. It's a summa in scope but very, very short in order to be a useful manual
for as many people as possible. It reaches out to the widest conceivable audience. It is in other
words an epitome of the subject of theology, not unlike the great Christian theology of Peter
Abelard, composed in the middle of the 12th century, which was in fact the very first effort to
encompass and compress the essence of Christian belief into a brief manual. Here again, Aquinas
follows Abelard as a model, following in some of his teaching but more importantly here in a kind
of pastoral purpose. This was written in 1273 during Thomas' last philosophically productive
year in Italy. Four summas, three of them huge for four diverse audiences, composed over 20 years,
really over a dozen.
