Let's talk now about Thomas' view of the human creature, as, first of all, intended
by the creator, as, secondly, partly, though, far from completely vitiated by original sin,
and thirdly, is capable of salvation thanks to supernatural grace. Aquinas' conception
of human virtues helps illuminate this vision of the human being and serves, I think, as
a logical pendant to this threefold anthropology which Thomas developed, particularly in the
third part of the Soma Theologiae, although all of these issues are discussed elsewhere
as well in that work and in Thomas' other works, besides, which, as we have now learned,
I think, is the standard pattern of his thought.
One of the domestic doctrines most of variance with the Augustinian tradition, which had
dominated Western Christian thought since the fifth century, is Thomas' perception of
the human being. St. Augustine had followed Plato in seeing the spiritual dimension of
things as supremely real, and the material dimension of things as largely illusory.
Thomas followed Aristotle instead, especially Aristotle's book on the soul, De animas,
it's often called Peri-sur-Fey in Greek, which argues that the soul is the form of the material
body and thus of the unified human being. This theory is generally called hyalomorphism.
It goes along with Aristotle's fundamental principle that human knowledge comes from
sense experience and depends on the integrity of the bodily senses.
Plato and the Christian Platonists have preferred to see the human being as essentially a soul
using a body, perhaps imprisoned by it. For Plato, who believed in reincarnation, this
made a lot of sense. For Christians, who believed in the eternal destiny of each individual
human soul and person, it led to some more problematic problems.
William of Sanctiari, a great 12th century Augustinian thinker, great leader of monastic
thought, perhaps expressed this Christian neoplatonism best in his statement that nearly the totality
of the human is soul, its least portion is the body. For this tradition, knowledge comes
from divine illumination, divine illumination working in the soul's innate rational capacities,
rather by a kind of deductive process, rather than by the inductive sorting of the experience
of the senses of data derived from the senses in the Aristotelian style.
Now Thomas didn't just set himself an opposition to the Augustinian tradition, simply affirming
an Aristotelian psychology instead. Instead, he set out to reconcile these two traditions
and in the process came up with an original notion of the human being, a distinctive vision
of our nature and destiny. As Anton Pages put it very well, some 30 years
ago and more in one of the Villanova Lectures on the Augustinian tradition, Thomas sees
the human being in the following fashion. According to St. Thomas, Pages says, the existence
of the human soul as form of the body, far from being engulfed by the body, rather raises
matter to a spiritual existence and a spiritual life. As a result, within the soul's spiritual
existence, there is constituted the most paradoxical of all creatures, man himself, a compositive
spirit in matter living wholly and uniquely with a spiritual existence, that most paradoxical
of all creatures. Thomas reveals the paradox and prefers the paradox to either the Aristotelian
or the Platonic simpler versions. For Thomas, quoting Pages again, man is the soul in the
fullness of its nature, an incarnated spirit whose unity is that he is holy spirit, but
a spirit whose destiny is to fulfill itself on the horizon of matter in a dialogue with
matter and in a progressive approach toward intellectual formation and spiritual unification.
This lecture has been published in 1963 by Macmillan at the origins of the Thomistic notion
of man and it's an extraordinary study, I think, of the way in which Thomas integrates
and synthesizes not simply Aristotelian Christianity, but the Christian Neoplatonism of the Augustinian
tradition as well. To reach this vision, Thomas managed the philosophical feet of using the
thought of both Aristotle and Augustine, not just the lumber of their arguments, but
in some remarkable way, the key elements of the structure of both of these buildings of
theory. Again, as Pages 3 aptly puts it, we have inherited two great psychologists from
the ancient world, the moral psychology of Plato, which Augustine inherited and passed
on, and the biological psychology of Aristotle. What Thomas's great feat was, was to reconcile
Plato and Aristotle on this point at any rate, remember it had been Boethius' desire
to reconcile them in all points of impossible desire, and in the process to reconcile Augustinian
Christian teaching about the human condition with Aristotelian teaching as well.
Now, original as Thomas's fusion of these two powerful sources is, it's also strikingly
close to a vision of the human being discernible in the Hebrew Scriptures. This is not to claim
that Thomas understood that he was reviving a kind of Jewish anthropology, perhaps even
earlier Hebrew anthropology, but it is remarkable to see the way in which Thomas's understanding
of the human being makes more sense with a modern commentary upon what emerges from
the Hebrew Scriptures. Then it does, it aligns much more easily with that, than it does with
either the Aristotelian or the Platonic Augustinian Christian Neoplatonic version as they existed
before Thomas. And I'm reminded again of the way in which Thomas and his great and famous
five proofs, or his disappointing but still an infamous five proofs, depending on the
way you look at it, picks as the key text for his on the contrary statement that passage
from Genesis in which God from the burning bush says, from Exodus rather, in which God
from the burning bush says, I am who am. Right back to these fundamental insights of the
Hebrew tradition. Of course, his view of this integrated spirit living along the horizon
of matter in a constant discourse with matter, and with a destiny which is spiritual unification,
intellectual formation. This insight is remarkably close to 20th century existential view of the
human condition. The existentialist in Pages was delighted to see this. Pages was not himself
a committed existentialist, but he was very conscious of this school of thought which was so
important in the middle of the 20th century. I think we can say was so important, because I
think one can say that existentialism is over. But anyone who spends any time with the history
of thought is perfectly aware that any major school is lined up ready for revival. It's
simply a question of whether this happens soon or late. And when existentialism comes
back, should it come back, I'm pretty sure it will, then Thomism, at least on this point,
will be just as interesting as it was about 40 years ago. And of course, for any Jew,
for any Christian, for any Muslim, anything deriving from the Hebrew Scriptures continues
to be a matter of compelling interest. So here, not only in terms of 20th century style,
but in terms of long term relevance to the Abrahamite tradition, Thomas' perception
of the human being comes across as being more adequate than the perceptions of the human
being made by the great pagan philosophers Plato and Aristotle or by the Christian interpreters
of Plato who have tended to dominate the Western tradition on this regard.
Thomas arrived at a vision of the immortal human being which emphasizes four things.
First of all, the human destiny to know God, that is our destiny. Secondly, the strongly
intellectual character of the human being, human nature is an intellectual thing for
Thomas more than it's anything else. Thirdly, the role of material heredity, which is the
other side of this equation, all the way through his anthropology, Thomas is balancing
remarkably powerful statements, and I think Pages picked the right language when he talked
about Thomas' anthropology as being an anthropology which reveals the most paradoxical of all
creatures, the human creature. And fourthly, important to Thomas is the acute individuality
of each human person, each human person charged with this weighty destiny. Let's get back
a bit to that spiritual destiny of the hyalomorphically unified human. As Pages put it, the destiny
of the human being is the destiny of progressive movement toward intellectual formation and
spiritual unification. What do these polysyllabic terms mean? Intellectual formation involves
both intellectual knowing things and developed sensation, feeling things. Spiritual unification
amounts to personality integration almost in the modern therapeutic sense of those terms,
the even post existential psychology of the human.
The human destiny to know God is important to Thomas because it's a destiny which we
have to come to terms with if only to know ourselves. We cannot know ourselves unless
we know God. Thus, knowing God, believing in God, being a devout atheist is not only
a nice thing to do, it's an inevitable essential thing to do if we are to be more than a sub-sentient
blob. This knowledge of God, which is also knowledge of oneself, Thomas saw again as
a three-fold thing, how often is he Trinitarian? And it operates from the rational processing
of data which are derived from the senses in good solid Aristotelian style, from divine
illumination in the Platonic and Augustinian style, and from a body transcending and counter
with the divine, either in heaven, after the death of the body, or occasionally on
this earth, occasionally in the mystical experience, the experience that Friar Reginald thought
Thomas had had himself after Mass on St. Nicholas Day of the year 1273.
Next in importance to Thomas, it seems to me, is the strongly intellectual character
of the human being. Thomas was of course himself deeply intellectual, not terribly sensual
as far as we can figure out, if sensual at all. For Thomas, the intellect is freer to
act than the will is. I'm not so sure that that was true for Augustin or for Martin Luther,
but it was true for a certain kind of thinker, for Thomas, for Immanuel Kant, for many a
professor of philosophy today. Our will, which Thomas also saw as capable of great liberty,
even without the aid of divine grace, was able to act on its own. We are not crippled
by original sin, unable either to think straight art to will coherently, which is pretty much
what Augustin says, and what many a thinker, not only a Christian thinker, has tended to
say, I think of some of the agony of existentialists, of pre-existentialists like Kierkegaard, in
regard to the human condition. We who are so handicapped, Thomas did not see us that
way. Thirdly, the role of material heredity, we would say genes, is tremendously important
for Thomas, as is the role of each individual's biography, the accidents of our life in our
tremendous diversity of unequal talents and potentialities. Now, it's important to recognize
that for Thomas, greater intelligence does not mean greater holiness, as would have been
the case for Plato, for Aristotle, for almost anyone of that deeply aristocratic elite tradition
of Greek thought, who often didn't bother to state this in so many terms, but it comes
out at every turn. Clearly for Aristotle, the happiest man is, first of all, a man,
a male human being, who is freeborn, who is a citizen of a powerful polis, and who is
not only freeborn, but also born with a certain endowment of wealth, and a fundamental mental
capacity, who doesn't suffer any kind of debilitating strokes as a child, or later on, someone who
is socially, economically, physically, politically fortunate. And if you are not so fortunate,
well, that's just too bad. And you will never be able to rise to the peaks of understanding,
which, in his more religious moments, even Aristotle saw also as peaks of a kind of
sacral experience. For Plato, of course, the sacral and the intellectual were so intimately
joined, so joined at the hip that one could hardly make a distinction between them.
Thomas went to some trouble to say in some of his pastoral works, he wrote sermons and
poems, as we know. He went so far as to say that the ordinary cleaning woman who stumbled
through the offices of Paris professors had not only an equal chance of salvation and
of sanctity with those professors, she probably had a better chance, I suppose, because of
being less prone to the terrible egotism, which is the specific vice of the academic
profession. But Thomas was concerned to assert that misfortune in all of these things Aristotle
considered so important to happiness could be not only not an obstacle, but indeed an
asset to the achieving of the very best kind of happiness, which is an understanding of
God. Nonetheless, Thomas was quite aware that circumstances of our gestation and our birth
have a great deal to do with our capacities in a number of regards. And thus, he was very
much appreciated by psychologists of the 1950s and 60s who developed the theory of the endomorph,
the mesomorph, and the ectomorph. Personality types, capacities for physical action, or
for mental action, which are dependent upon the three layers of the placenta, which are
determined or certainly deeply influenced very, very early in the nine months of our
pre-birth experience. Thomas would have found no difficulty, whatever, in deciding that,
in saying, in recognizing, not in deciding, simply saying, in recognizing that a person
with a certain kind of brain, a physical brain, would be capable of doing higher mathematics
much more easily than a person with, for example, my kind of brain. And that people with a
certain kind of classic mesomorphic structure could be magnificent swimmers with superb
coordination, extraordinarily powerful athletes, and so on and so on. So our material condition
has a great deal to do with the way we are, with the way we grow up to be whatever we
do become. The intellect of ourself, our fundamental intellectuality of destiny, in Thomas's mind
coexisted perfectly easily with this very strongly material sense of human capacities,
which might have led, instead, to a kind of genetic determinism. He is neither a pure
intellectual and the general modern understanding of the term, nor a genetic determinist, which
is kind of surprising, but entirely typical of the way Thomas tends to think. He is also
concerned to assert the acute individuality of each human person, both here and in the
afterlife. Not for him, who was Plato's notion that this soul, which is really us, has to
put up with this that or the other body, and then finally gets freed, thank God, from this
life with death, and then goes on, eventually, to make its own choice of a new body. All
of Thomas's circle had summaries of the Republic, if not the entire text in Greek or in translation,
but most of them seem to have known about the great statement of metepsicosis of reincarnation
to give it its more familiar term, with which the dialogue of the Republic ends. And according
to this dialogue, the souls who have spent a thousand years of propagation from the deep
unpleasantness of physical existence, then have a chance to choose what new body they
will enter. And it is not necessarily that the higher your spiritual condition, the more
human and the finer the human body you will pick. Some of the noblest of the heroes chose
to be swans instead of humans. Why? Because swans were known to be unshakably monogamous,
which Plato considered one of the highest of virtues. For Thomas, none of that, nor
for Thomas the strong tendency of Aristotelian thought to decide that once the body dies,
that's it. Aristotle's solution to the problem, which Alexander of Aphrodisius had already
cast in the direction of no immortality, was that the body dies, and our intellect, which
is divided into two parts, partly dies and partly doesn't. The passive intellect does
die along with the body. Its job is really to receive sense data and pass it on the active
intellect to which the passive intellect passes on sense data, continues to live, but it loses
any individuality. It gets reabsorbed into a kind of reservoir of spirit, which has something
to do perhaps with the world soul of the tonic notion which Averroes was willing to play
with from time to time. No for Thomas the infant conceived and gestated, although for
Thomas the human being of the soul was not very certainly active or present even until
the sixth month of gestation. This is a domestic doctrine that is not very well received by
leaders of the Catholic Church or of other Protestant churches who are now fixated upon
abortion and who are allowed by a certain interpretation about a genetics to fix the
moment of the coming into existence of the person at the mingling of chromosomes. Thomas
did not think that at all, but that once we have become a person somewhere in the last
three months of gestation, then we have an eternal destiny which we can never shake.
If we mismanage everything horrendously, then we go to hell for all eternity, though Thomas
didn't like to talk about that if we respond to grace and even sometimes if there is very
little grace at all. If we simply use our intellectual qualities, if we use the will
as the will naturally wants to be used and is always available to be used, then we will
go to heaven with God. One of the problems for some Christians in the centuries after
Thomas has been the ease with which one can interpret Thomas as saying that anyone who
leads a virtuous life will be saved. Of course that means that God will give that person
the grace, but Thomas doesn't emphasize that gift of grace. He emphasizes the proper use
of the gift of ourselves which God gave us to begin with and which survived the great
mistake of the first parents in very important ways.
Now this leads us of course to the question of original sin. Thomas affirmed the essence
of Augustine's doctrine of original sin. As a professor of Christian doctrine in the 13th
century, he could hardly have done otherwise. What is Augustine's doctrine of original
sin for us? Some will protest. Of course it's not Augustine's, it's Paul's, and it's
certainly true that Augustine develops his notion of original sin from his interpretation
of several key epistles of Paul. But I think the historian has to recognize that the way
in which Western Christianity has talked about original sin depends massively on Augustine's
own personal experience, as Thomas Aquinas would have agreed. Augustine tells in the
second book of his Confessions about the experience of stealing pairs from a pear tree
along with his bad boy buddies when he's back home in his entegaste out of school because
the family doesn't have tuition and he's got nothing to do but get in trouble. And like
most country boys or most city boys at that age, he and his friends tended to do that.
And telling the story of robbing the pear tree not because they wanted to eat any pears,
not because they disliked the owner of the pear orchard, but just for the sheer pleasure
of doing something mean, Augustine then begins to use the term pecatum originans. Later on
he'll say pecatum originale, original sin rather than originating sin, or originating
flaw, originating error. And the way in which Augustine cast it all, the way in which he
then talked about grace or thought about grace, and the way in which he put these insights
together into his doctrine of predestination, again taking off from some language of Paul,
though you could certainly read Latin translation of those Greek words in Paul's epistles in
a way very differently from the way in which predestination is developed in Western Christianity.
Then formulated a doctrine of original sin and grace and predestination, which has been
decisive in the Western experience, not simply I think in the Western Christian experience.
One could maintain that anyone who is a determinist of any kind is really an heir of Augustine's
predestination. He may have gotten rid of the Christian loading of it, the Christian
baggage, but the notion that we are determined and there's not very much we can really do
about it is the notion that Augustine gets. The one exception to this insight of Augustine's
is the extraordinary fact of the gift of grace, which Augustine also experienced as he tells
us in book seven of the Confessions, when grace rained down from heaven and suddenly
he could do what his intellect wanted, but his will could not follow through on. He could
live the Christian life. I think it's interesting to look at this in the broad scope, Catholics,
Protestants, agnostics and atheists of the Western tradition, as we like to call it,
have been deeply shaped by this. To those who inherit the tradition of Eastern Christianity,
of Eastern orthodoxy, this all seems very strange. The same problem, which is all over
the Bible, of which Paul talks about, is presented in the Eastern Orthodox tradition
as a problem of the icon. Each of us is born as kind of an icon, and our job, this icon
gets messed up somehow, or it is not fully complete, and our job is to either develop
and complete or then to restore the icon to what it was supposed to be. And from the point
of view of Eastern orthodoxy, the Western fascination with original sin is just another
one of those proclivities of Westerners towards heretical thought, a tendency of Western culture
from the Eastern point of view. Okay, Thomas had to affirm these fundamental
doctrines, and he does so, though I think we don't have to read too ingeniously to see
a certain kind of discomfort in the passages in which he does so. It's hard not to sense
his discomfort with the way that Augustinian theologians continued to develop Augustin's
radical insight. Thomas' temperament and the well-insulated innocence of his personal life
could hardly have been more different from the stormy, diversely sensual character of
Augustin's experiences of human life. Augustin knew life, as we tend to use that term in
sort of the American vernacular, far too well. Augustin understood the sensual world intensely.
He was a man of intense sensuality and experienced, explored many of the directions in which the
human being can express sensuality. Thomas, by contrast, was, according to Freyoreginal,
freed from sensual temptations by the angel which descend came through the window of the very
pleasant cell in which Thomas' brother had imprisoned him, bringing with him the synchrochacity,
the belt of chastity, which freed him thereafter for many such temptations. And as I remarked
already, I think anyone who reads Thomas' life with any care senses and reads Thomas' works
senses that here is a personality which simply did not get terribly disturbed about such things.
What Thomas says is quite extraordinary. In discussing original sin and in discussing
human sexuality, which he does without discomfort, despite his extraordinary innocence, he says
that human sexuality is consistent with the innocence of the creature, that human sexuality,
as we know it, is entirely consistent with God's plan, that it has not been massively
vitiated by original sin. Now, this could not be more different from Augustin. Augustin, who
discussing his conception of original sin, tries to persuade his readership of its existence by
saying, look simply at human sexuality. Look at what a total mess that is at any rate for males.
Augustin was, I guess, not very interested in women. He had known women very well, many kinds
of women all his life, possibly too well from his point of view, maybe from those women's
point of view as well, perhaps too well in the sense of too self-confidently and too arrogantly.
And for Augustin, the nature of our sexual impulses is so deranged, is so incoherent,
is so out of touch with reason that it shows original sin. This is not to say that for Augustin
original sin was a sexual sin, not at all. It makes very clear that it was a sin of disobedience,
but it expresses itself in our sexuality, at least in male sexuality. If anyone wants to read a
passage in which Augustin goes into this in rather amusing ways, simply turn to book 14 of the
City of God, in which Augustin talking about the human creation and what's happened to it says
over and over again that our sexuality is so constructed that our body does what we do not
want it to do, and it will not do what we want it to do. There's not simply a disjunction between
intellect and will. There's a disjunction between the will and the body in regard to male sexuality.
Thomas Aquinas, perhaps, didn't know about that. Certainly he didn't think about it that way,
and he sees human sexuality, and I want to repeat this, as entirely consistent with God's plan.
That's remarkable indeed, and from it also come some of his quite amazing statements about marriage,
about the partnership of men and women in marriage, which are not to be sure modern feminists,
but on the other hand are not quite what one would expect from a celibate cleric of the 13th
century. All this brings us, it seems to me, to the question of virtues and vices. Now Thomas'
conception of virtues and vices is kind of a surprise. Augustin had concluded that original
sin so thoroughly vitiated the human being that we are incapable of truly virtuous action without
the assistance of divine grace. Without the assistance of divine grace, we are totally deprived
to use the classic Calvinist formula. Thomas, however, saw human nature is still coherent enough
to be capable of virtuous action, perhaps even without grace. Virtue for Thomas was a power
inherent in the human person, inherent in our nature, by which we discern a good and we will
to act in order to achieve that good. That power is inherent. Without it, we could hardly exist.
Now Augustin felt that we existed quite vigorously and quite vitally, unfortunately,
without virtue. We could do that all too frequently.
Just as Thomas argued that the human intellect can attain to a certain knowledge of the existence
of God by the unaided use of reason, he contended that we can act virtuously even without the
assistance of grace. As one of his favorite maxims puts it, grace does not dispense with nature,
it perfects it. Now how do virtues operate? For Thomas, they are habits of action which
express themselves in regard to four of the powers of the human personality, the intellect by
which we know, the will by which we make choices about some of the things we have come to know,
and are moved to action toward, the concupisable appetite by which we desire such things as
property, food, sex, and so on, and the irascible appetite by which we feel anger, indignation,
and the like. The capacity to act rightly about any of these, the intellect, the will,
the concupisable appetite, or the irascible appetite, the capacity to act rightly about any of
these is a virtue. And out of his most useful presentation of this general notion is in the
famous disputed question on virtue in general, one of the finest of his question is disputate.
Now since all humans are not equal or similar in our range of potential virtues, and since some of
us learn more quickly than others, or move more attractively or swiftly because of better muscular
coordination, or more courageous or more sensitive to music, then we have to try to understand how
there can be any kind of consistency within human virtue without which, for example, it would be
extremely difficult to have functioning civil laws. Key to this problem is Thomas's notion of
cinderesis, an inner, but not inequality, an inner, a sense of right which operates infallibly within
us. We all have cinderesis, the Greek term that Thomas used, because we are, not because we are
born with it, but because we are born with the potentiality of it. Sense, experience teaches us
what is right, we respond, and we act according to it. And thus it is possible to imagine a
Thomistic natural man devoid of grace. That's heretical enough to get him many condemnations
for many churches.
