Welcome to this lecture on aspects of western philosophy module 24 and also lecture number
24. This lecture is going to be on the philosophy of one of the very important thinkers of
western philosophy Hegel. And we would focus on the following topics in this lecture.
We will first of all see the concept of Geist or spirit, mind, it is translated in various
ways. Then we will concentrate on this method of dialectics or rather we would conclude
this lecture with that in between we will discuss the concepts of being, non-being and
becoming. They are all interconnected notions in Hegelian philosophy.
Well, when we talk about the importance of a philosopher in the history of philosophy,
normally we consider two criteria. Number one, the contributions he or she had made
to the history of philosophy and number two, the contemporary relevance of these thinkers.
So, in that sense we can see that you know many of these traditional or even ancient
philosophers like Plato and Aristotle are still very important, because even today their
thoughts inspire us, inspire philosophers. But when you try to understand, when you try
to evaluate Hegel in the light of these criteria, I would rather say that both of them, I mean
if you consider both the aspects like the contributions to the history of philosophy,
history of thought and history of human intellectual history, we can put it in that way, the entire
human intellectual history owe a lot to Hegelian philosophy. Hegel has inspired thinkers from
all aspects, all intellectual disciplines and of course, the contemporary relevance
of Hegel. There are many philosophers in the contemporary
world, go back to Hegel's thought, notable philosopher Charles Taylor and many others
and as far as Indian philosophical tradition is concerned, there is a tendency among some
Indian philosophers to compare the Hegelian system of absolute idealism with Vedanta.
So, in that sense Hegel is a very important thinker for us and we will start with concept
of gist or absolute or spirit, but before that let us see some basic details about Hegel.
He was born on August 27th, 1770 and his association with Friedrich Halderin, a very
important poet, German poet and Schelling led him to read and spend more time on the
critical philosophy of Immanuel Kant. So, this association with these two great thinkers
played a very important role in Hegel's philosophy and in Hegel's intellectual development.
Then he published his first major philosophical work, the phenomenology of spirit in 1807.
There are many other works he published during his lifetime, I am not going to mention about
all of them, but the attempt is to understand how a philosopher such a great thinker like
Hegel has actually started his philosophical career and probably in the next lecture we
will concentrate on this whole idea of phenomenology of spirit.
When we talk about the philosophical sources of Hegel, the French rationalism of course
is played a very important role and then comes the British imperialism like all thinkers
of modern enlightenment philosophy or post enlightenment thought. Hegel was also influenced
by the two great traditions of rationalism and empiricism and also Kant, Kant's transcendental
philosophy. Kant being a German, it was quite natural that Kant would have influenced Hegelian
philosophy, Hegel's intellectual growth in a significant manner.
But another very interesting influence on Hegelian philosophy is Romanticism which is
a little condensious, but at the same time we can see that you know Hegel's attempt
to totalize everything or to develop a philosophy, a totalizing theoretical framework owes a
lot to Romantic approach or Romanticism. And another important contribution probably
or influence of Romanticism is visible in Hegel's attempt to spiritualize philosophy
which is little against the kind of prevailing systems or prevailing approaches to philosophy
in the Enlightenment age, because Enlightenment always try to see nature as material, but
we can see that Hegel was trying to spiritualize it.
So we can see in Hegel's philosophy all these trends the rationalism, empiricism, transcendentalism
or critical philosophy of Immanuel Kant, then Romanticism all these you know intellectual
developments converge in a unique manner in Hegelian system of thought.
Now when we talk about Hegel's task as a philosopher, he was trying to formulate a
philosophical theory that will reach to infinity. This again a very interesting aspect, because
when you talk about infinity particularly in the backdrop of Enlightenment philosophy,
the critical philosophy of Immanuel Kant, we have already examined in detail that when
Kant discussed the critic of pure reason, he drew a very clear line, he said that it
is impossible to think this side of the line, you can be here, but never try to stretch
it and try to apply the categories of human thinking or rational categories to your understanding
of God or infinite reality or anything. So in that sense, Enlightenment philosophy
drew a very clear line between finite and infinity, something which is finite, something
which human beings with their finite minds can understand and there is an infinite reality
which we can never probably comprehend. So this line is something which Hegel was trying
to cross. Then again formulated totalizing philosophy that comprehends all reality, when
you talk about all reality, I mean it includes all aspects of reality, all phases of reality
not just one. For instance, for Enlightenment reality is constitutive of the material domain,
rather ultimate real is something which is unknowable according to Kantian philosophy
and the phenomenal reality is something which is confined to the domains of percepts and
concepts. So it is basically talks about scientific understanding, but for Hegel history is equally
important like physics. So in one sense we can say that Hegel is historicizing philosophy
or rather is a historian of philosophy, he is definitely not the first historian of philosophy
or first philosopher of history, but Hegel's contributions in this domain, this area is
phenomenal. So in that sense we have to understand this particular standpoint that trying to
develop formulate a totalizing philosophy that comprehends all reality, the historical,
psychological, creative, philosophical, scientific, physical, all aspects of reality into one
system. A philosophy that accounts for all human experience, the totalizing philosophy
that incorporates all knowledge and wisdom, present in science, history, religion, politics,
art and literature are all synthesized in the unique manner in Hegelian system. So in
that sense there are some philosophers, some historians of philosophy would say that Hegel
was the most perfect philosopher, because everything converges into Hegelian system
and the influence of romanticism is quite visible as far as this aspect is concerned.
We will have a brief look at what romanticism is to understand to appreciate Hegelian philosophy
in a more comprehensive manner. It is a new moment in the realms of literature, philosophy
and arts. There are romantic poets, romantic artists who adopted a kind of very unique
and very different approach to nature, the relationship between man and nature, the
importance they have given to experiencing nature, the importance they have given to
emotions. Say for example, people like Wordsworth, the importance given to emotions, passions,
the passionate and experiential way in which you relate yourself with nature, all these
things were emphasized by the romantic thinkers and artists. They advocated by artists and
intellectuals who rejected the enlightenment philosophy dominated by reason, logic and
mathematics. As we have already seen, enlightenment philosophy was dominated by these aspects
reason, logic. For instance, we have seen it in Immanuel Kant, used literature to express
the inner world of human feelings. So, that is what I meant, the world of feelings, emotions
and passions were highlighted by these thinkers. They protest against the domination of science
in culture, highlighted the inability of science in exhausting the complexities of human
experience. Now, for instance, how do you experience a flower? The beauty of a flower,
it is more than just having the perceives and concepts as Kant has mentioned about it.
There is something more than that, you know, you experience is that part of an environment
or being part of that experience, all these things are emphasized by these romantic thinkers.
It misses the totality of experiences and the feelings associated with it and to understand
the world, not science, but experience as it is lived. So, there is a concept of lived
experiences which is emphasized by them and naturally their conception of reality is also
drastically different from the enlightenment conception, where reality is material as I
already mentioned, reality is spiritual. Nature is spiritualized by the romandist which
you can see a trend in Hegel also and nature is not like Newton's mechanical world, but
it is a living spirit which we will find in the conception of geist or spirit in Hegel.
The will is important and not reason, because for the enlightenment reason was the major
tool for understanding the world, but for these romandist it is the will which plays
an important role, which thus justice to the non-rational aspects of human life.
The idea of polarity, human thought and feeling are characterized by a polarity, there is
a two sidedness which again figures in Hegelian philosophy in the form of dialectics, in the
form of contradictions, we will see it later. And again in the pursuit of the infinite,
never get confined to one more of thought which is again Hegelian, Hegel absorbs these
insights, because for Hegel also the whole alone is true, truth is the whole not one
particular concept is only a partial truth, it can never represent the whole of truth,
the whole of truth cannot be represented by one concept of one more of thinking.
So, this is again Hegelian and never be static, with this understanding in the background
let us come to examine some of the important features of Hegelian philosophy.
An observation by Bertrand Russell says that Hegel's philosophy is very difficult, he
is I should say the hardest to understand of all great philosophers, probably that is
true to some extent to a philosopher like Bertrand Russell, who subscribes to the analytic
tradition of philosophy, he is more cance in that way, he is more mathematical in that
for example, Russell we would see later in the course of this lecture series, that would
be appreciating more a mathematical scientific approach to philosophy which Hegel is not
subscribing to.
Hegel's central thought is as I already mentioned only the whole is real, a totalizing
approach this is visible in the concept of the gist or spirit, being the central concept
which unifies everything.
So, Hegel was trying to formulate a concept which could successfully comprehend all aspects
of reality and unifies everything that can be understood and that concept is the concept
of gist or spirit.
All partial facts are abstractions, they have to be brought into connection with the hall
in order to gain validity.
So, this is again a very important Hegelian notion that taking things in isolation is
to abstract them, isolate them from the picture of reality, reality is constituted of the hall.
Reality is hall, the self-subsistence of finite things is an illusion, nothing can exist in
isolation everything is necessarily connected with the rest.
So, this is the essence of Hegelian philosophy in one sense and here Russell says once again
Hegel seeks to demonstrate nothing exists independently of relationships against separated
ness influence of mysticism is visible in this context.
This is according to Bertrand Russell, he interestingly says that here as far as this
aspect of Hegelian philosophy is concerned he is influenced by his early mystic affiliations
because Hegel started his career with I mean he joined a monastery and from there he learned
theology and philosophy.
So, this early affiliation with mysticism would have prompted him to conceive things
in this way this is Russell's opinion.
Now, let us come to Hegel's concept of reality as I mentioned here the stresses on the hall,
the complex system comparable to an organism against Spinoza for whom substance is a simple
or reality is a simple substance.
So, here on the one hand we can see that Hegel was also emphasizing like Spinoza did for
Spinoza also there is only one substance, one reality that is the substance and for
Hegel also there is a kind of I mean he too points to a notion of reality, a notion of
absolute spirit or mind which is universal.
But the difference is that here the reference is to a complex system which is comparable
to an organism as far as Hegelian system is concerned separate things are not an illusion
according to Hegel each has a greater or lesser degree of reality which is not the case with
Spinoza and many others those who are modest.
But for Hegel the separate things the individual things are not illusions and again the reality
of separate things consist in them being an aspect of the hall.
So, at the same time Hegel emphasizes on the importance of the hall.
So, the individual gains its meaning and its significance only in connection with its
being a meaningful part of the hall.
The hall is the absolute.
So, there are concepts these are some of the concepts very important concepts which Hegel
introduces in his philosophy the concept of absolute mind, spirit, geist and there are
several terms which Hegel uses in this context.
And again this reality for Hegel again it is very interesting to note this difference
the difference between the conceptions of reality advocated by Hegel and how he has formulated
it as opposed to the enlightenment conception.
In enlightenment conception for example, the Kantian view of reality the phenomenal world
is a world of cause and effect though this is something which the mind attributes to
the world.
It is true we are the law givers according to Kant, but at the same time it is governed
by a cause effect relationship the phenomenal world is governed by a cause effect relationship
which to some extent Hegel also except, but he makes a major deviation here he says that
it is governed by the principle of teleological causality.
So, here he is very close to Aristotle, Aristotle also has a conception of teleology that everything
has a purpose a higher purpose to be realized and there are two principles which are relevant
in Aristotelian philosophy at potentiality and actuality.
And in the process of change according to Aristotle every change is evolution we have
already seen it in one of our previous lectures.
Since every change is in evolution in the process of evolution what happens is that
an object realizes materializes its potentialities or actualizes the potentialities.
So, here again something like that we can see that everything progresses towards what
the absolute according to Hegel.
So, governed by the principle of teleological causality and not just mechanical efficient
causality.
The meaning of each stage is realized in the hall which is the rational and again a revision
of the conception of rationality which is advocated by the modern philosophers by enlarge
and particularly the enlightenment thinkers like Kant to overcome Kantian separation of
Nomina and Phenomena.
Because if you approach reality with the Kantian model then it is impossible to know the Nomina
there is a clear separation as I already mentioned a line is drawn between Nomina and Phenomena
something which you can know and the reality which you can never know.
That is because Kant and the enlightenment philosophers advocated a very peculiar conception
of rationality by means of which reality is comprehended.
This rationality has two aspects I have already mentioned it in my previous lectures the
percepts and concepts with the interaction of these two reality the phenomenal world
is revealed.
But something which lies beyond that the nominal reality can never be known.
But Hegel was consciously making an attempt to overcome this dichotomy to know Nomina
and that is why the principle of teleological causality is important in Hegelian system its
identification spirit as activity.
So reality is being identified as a spiritual phenomena as an activity not as a static thing
but as an activity which comprehends everything even the comprehending mind even the mind
which understands it is also part of that.
So it encompasses everything the conception of reality and then again there we can see
Aristotle's influence where identification of the fully substantial being with spirit
which is in essence is activity.
So here also we can see that reality or the absolute or the spirit the absolute mind is
conceived as an activity as a process which progressively takes us to the reason to the
infinity.
Again things have meaning the process is rational there is a rational order.
So this is another important feature of Hegelian thought that he says that this process by
means of which reality exist reality itself is a process it is not a static entity but
it is a process a dynamic process but this process has a meaning it is teleological and
also it is a rational process it is a process of rational unfolding we can mentioned in
that way.
Hall is like an organism that is rational purposive and with full meaning.
Again the Kantian approach is not suitable to know it because the Kantian approach will
never accept this comprehensive perspective for Kant there is always a separation the
subject and object are different for Kant for Hegel the subject and object can never
be different both are comprehended or both are encompassed by the single reality called
the absolute.
Then again Kantian rationality is insufficient in knowing this process because Kantian
rationality employs the twelve categories of understanding which limits everything to
a certain structure which is provided by the mind transcendental a perception which is
not acceptable for Hegel.
Now let us come to the Kantian problem because we have been discussing about Kant and Kantian
model of rationality a lot let us see what happens here the ego the mind because we have
already seen that Kant was I mean it is being stated that Kant is initiating a kind of Copernican
revolution in philosophy and this Copernican revolution consists in placing the subject
the mind the ego at the center of the knowing activity as I have already mentioned in this
lecture sometime back that we are the low givers of the universe this is the Kantian
position.
Now what is this ego the low giver the ego or mind according to Kant is the condition
of the possibility of things appearing to the subject.
So this is the Kantian position it is a precondition that is why it is called transcendental critical
philosophy because it talks about the condition of the possibility of things appearing to
the subject and again ego is an abstract account of the forms of thought or categories of
understanding.
So Kantian ego can be understood in terms of this an abstract account of the forms of
thought or categories of understanding there are twelve categories of understanding according
to Kant.
Kantian ego can be equated with that the empirical ego can be equated with that and
again reason for in that framework is a faculty of the soul or ego constituted of a combination
of principles forms or rules according to which we think.
So these qualities quantity modality and relations these twelve categories would enable
us to think in a particular way.
So the world as such can never be known but we understand it by attributing certain principles
and laws from our side to it that is the Kantian peculiarity and mind is separated from the
world as I mentioned mind is the low giver of the world.
So it is not only epistemologically different from the world but is also ontologically
different from the world.
Forms of thought from what they are forms of mind from what they are forms of the world.
So Kantian philosophy introduces several such categories there is the mind the domain of
the ego the low giver the forms of thought then there is a world the phenomenal world
what we know and there is a nominal domain of reality which we will never know.
So these are all various aspects of Kantian philosophical systems and again the problem
is that there is a gap between mind and the world.
There is a gap between the mind and the world here which can be better articulated by separating
the phenomena with the nominal.
The nominal reality is constitutive of higher realities which can never be known and the
phenomenal reality is something which is spatio-temporally given to us which we experience.
So this gap between nominal and phenomena is actually the gap between mind and the world
and the problem of the nominal or things in themselves which can never be known.
Things in themselves can never be known again problem of antinomies which we have already
discussed when we try to apply these categories of understanding to the nominal world or entities
in the nominal world reality as such say for example when we try to understand the solve
about which we do not have percepts but we try to categorize it without having percepts
we are ultimately bound to end up with antinomies where you have certain contradictory statements
which apparently both of them seem to be equally valid.
Now Hegel's phenomenology of spirit attempts to give an alternate account of this relationship
and show how that this gap can be overcome.
So this is what ultimately tries to say phenomenology of the mind or phenomenology of spirit which
basically talks about the evolution of the human mind from through several stages to
the ultimate stage where it reaches the absolute or which where it realizes in the absolute.
So this process we will examine in detail in the next lecture.
So it is here with this work Hegel tries to overcome the distinction between nominal
and phenomenal realities.
And when we talk about Kantian philosophy Vizavi Hegelian thought Kant we had seen already
that was influenced by the physical sciences and thinking is confined to the scientific
level that is why he has this model of thinking which is constitutive of percepts and concepts.
Then again contradictions in thinking are inevitable at this level because you have you are limited
to the percepts and concepts and when you are trying to apply this to a world which
is apparently not limited or not confined to any of these constraints then you are bound
to end up in contradictions.
Hegel on the other hand adopts the approach of a historian this is what I mentioned earlier
that there is an approach of a historian historical approach in philosophy.
Thinking as an activity of spirit or reason and not confined to the scientific level and
he rises above contradictions to their synthesis.
So that we will see in the later part of this lecture the concept of synthesis which is
the culmination of dialectical process.
Now Hegel's view of reason we can see that reason is the law according to which being
is produced constituted and unfolding.
He has a very an extremely comprehensive concept of rationality or reason where it is a
law according to which being is produced the entire reality is not different from reason.
So rational and real are one and the same.
So later on Hegel would proclaim really is rational and rational is real.
It is constituted and unfolded in reason and both subjective faculty and objective reality
are constitutive of this reason.
See this is again a very important deviation from the enlightenment conception.
In the enlightenment conception we have seen that there is a subject and the object they
are different from each other and they are constitutive of different realities ontological
different epistemologically different.
But in Hegelian system both the subjective and the objective faculties are constituted
by reason.
See reason according to Hegel is a subjective faculty as the essence and norm of our thinking
or our thought the way in which we think what our thinking itself is and on the other side
it is an objective reality as the essence and law of the evolution of things.
We have seen this whole notion of categories of thinking when we have discussed tension
philosophy and Hegel also was interested in this idea of categories the categories of
human thinking.
But the major difference is that for Hegel these categories of thinking are not just
subjective elements of our thinking as Kant conceived it is it is not just subjective
elements but this categories of thinking are according to him the categories of reason
itself and reason according to him as I already mentioned encompasses comprehends everything
it involves everything.
So in that sense they are the basic law of the universe of reality as such are also modes
of being of the things themselves.
So they are the categories of thinking are not only the subjective elements which we
possess but are also the modes of being.
So he is ontologizing them in one sense we can see not empty frames the categories are
not just empty frames which receive their concerns sorry which receive their contents
from without but are substantial forms that give themselves their own content.
See for instance in Kant these categories are empty frames and Kant himself says that
percepts without concepts are blind and concepts without percepts are empty.
So these categories remain empty if they are not provided with percepts from without but
for Hegel they are not so without by their substantial forms the categories of thinking
are substantial forms that give themselves their own content both the forms which mold
my thought and the stages of eternal creation the categories and here we can see that there
are certain very clear objections raised against Kant's idea of pure concepts in limiting
the number of concepts Kant has said that it is 12 and Hegel opposes this conception in
limiting them to the use of sensory experience Kant would say that sorry Hegel would say
that the categories of thinking should be employed in order to know the hall of reality
and then again in limiting the knowledge gained by the categories to the status of
appearance the division can maintains between phenomena and phenomena.
Phenomenal reality is the only reality which we can know with the help of these categories
and according to Kant these categories these phenomenal reality the phenomenal reality
is a mere appearance reality as such can never be known.
So in that sense Kant has confined limited what we experience to the domain of mere
appearances and he opposes the deduction of categories in terms of empirical enumeration
of pure categories.
So here again we can see categories of thinking there is a distinction are not separate from
but are intimately connected with each other even in Kant and he attempted an a priori
deduction of the categories and empirical enumeration of pure concepts which Hegel opposes.
For Hegel these categories of thinking are transformation of one and the same fundamental
category the idea of being because for Hegelian philosophy in the true sense of the term there
is only one reality which encompasses everything that is the idea of being and not just
empirical enumerations but a real deduction which Hegel aims it and in order to deduce
them in the real sense Hegel wants us to just leave them just allow them to unfold and
observe what is happening.
This point onwards we can try to understand what constitutes Hegel's method.
Number one Hegel was trying to build upon Kant he retains Kant's idea of the primacy
concepts have over sense impressions.
These are important in Kant for Hegel also concepts retain their primacy over sense
impressions but in a very significantly different way.
Again to build upon the romantics extend the use of rational concepts to understand the
vast variety of experience and knowledge in psychology, religion, history, culture, literature
and art.
So, here we can see a merging of Kantianism with Romanticism the Kantian categories which
are rational and the romantic approach of reality as a hall to which incorporates all
aspects of reality psychology, religion, history, culture, literature and art.
And again to construct a new theory of reality a new metaphysics.
So, in this context we can examine the metaphysical task of Hegel it is to bring the vast
reaches of the human spirit into unification in one theory.
So, everything that human spirit endeavors to or everything that the human spirit covers
in compasses to bring them into one theory.
To bring together the totality of concepts used in the vast structures of all knowledge
all the arts and sciences, religion, political thought and history which you have already
seen the totalizing tendency in Hegelian philosophy.
All these aspects of reality are brought under the concept of absolute spirit the Geist which
is rational.
So, in that sense the concept of Geist or spirit or we can even translate it as mind
because the German word Geist means spirit mind or soul and for both spirit and mind
Germans use the word Geist and for Hegel it is both rational and rationally comprehensible.
We can also understand it for Kant there is an important difference here for Kant it
belongs to the domain of ideas which we can never understand.
But here it is both rational and rationally comprehensible in logical structure in natural
science and in historical process.
So, it is the Geist is manifested in all the aspects of life in logical structures in
natural sciences and also in the process of history.
The same spirit the same Geist is manifested to show that thought and the matter of thought
are not separate.
The separation was made by all epistemologists subject and object the epistemological
traditions both rationalism and empiricism emphasize on this distinction.
But Hegel was trying to sort of overcome this to show that thought and the matter of thought
are not separate forms of thought arise historically through the interaction of subject and object.
So, again this interactive aspect is emphasized by Hegel because he is approaching philosophy
from the perspective of a historian.
Psychology as a hall including nature, humanity, history is shaped by and is a manifestation
of Geist mind or spirit.
So, everything every reality every aspect of reality every sphere of reality is nothing
but a manifestation of Geist or spirit.
It exhibits self consciousness or self articulation and the manifestation of the self consciousness
of Geist in psychology, history, religion, drama, art and philosophy.
So, everything every human endeavor the manifestation of this spirit is visible according to Hegel
and in this context he proclaims that the real is rational and the rational is real.
The absolute spirit or God is the ultimate reality.
Reality is a complex totality of rational concepts constituting absolute spirit or
God again the real is the rational and the rational is real.
The totality of thought is absolute and infinite unlike the finite minds of human beings Geist
is the objective mind.
So, here he makes a distinction between the objective mind and the finite subjective minds
of the human beings.
Our minds are finite which tries to understand the infinite mind and this understanding is
possible because our finite the so called finite mind is nothing but a manifestation
of that universal mind.
We are now going to discuss that aspect in the next lecture when we discuss the phenomenology
of spirit.
But the point here to be noted is that reality is a complex totality of rational concepts
constituting absolute spirit of or God.
So, there is nothing else but only this rational structures and here there is a very
interesting quote from Alfred Weber's book he says I quote according to Hegel the common
source of the ego and of nature does not transcend reality.
So, in one sense he advocates a kind of immanence which is Aristotelian it is imminent in it
mind and nature are not aspects of the absolute or a kind of screen behind which an
indifferent and lifeless God lies concealed but its successive modes.
The absolute is not immovable but active it is not the principle of nature and of mind
but is itself successively nature and mind the succession this process this perpetual
generation of things is the absolute itself.
So, everything is included under the notion of absolute.
So, let us discuss Hegel's absolute idealism in this context.
Reality according to Hegel is rational conceptual totality and then integrated and total
structure of conceptual truths.
So, it is the totality of the conceptual truth reveals itself in all areas of human
experience and knowledge which I have already mentioned any aspect of human life you take
any aspect any sphere any domain of human life in all such aspects you know you can see
the manifestation of this absolute.
Reality is rational the vast structure of rational concepts that include all areas and
again the real is rational but not different one what is existent naturally there could
we can ask the question all that exist in friend of us the events historical events
the material things how can you say that they are all rational what he says is what
Hegel says is that when you say real is rational and rational is real the real is rational
but not different from what is existent.
He only says that the rational is the existent object more deeply understood the rational
structures need to be understood for that you have to really go to the depth.
So, a deeper understanding of reality reveals the rational structures of it again the deeper
understanding of the vast realms of physical and organic nature and of society of history
of psychology of everything reveals the rational structures.
Rational concepts are not independent or transcendental apart from the concrete world
like Plato for example, for Plato the rational ideas are independent of it but for him it
is not so.
So, here you can see an aspect of Aristotelianism rational concepts constitute their rational
core of the world of things.
Reality is noble its rational structures are noble since human reason and reality share
that the same rational structure our finite man can know the infinite reality this is
against the Kantian idea the Kantian separation between nomina and phenomena.
The absolute mind incorporates all differences so in that sense the absolute mind is a unity
in diversity because it includes everything even contradictions are part of it.
The absolute reality manifests itself to us in ordinary experience in logic and natural
sciences in psychology politics and history in painting poetry and architecture and in
religion and philosophy all aspects of life everywhere what is revealed what is manifested
is the absolute reality the one and the same absolute reality and its rational structures.
Its rational structures are revealed to us because we also possess that rational structure
our mind has that ability to think this actually takes us to the problem of dialectical method.
The absolute being and logic the absolute being is the common root of the categories
of pure concepts it is the emptiest and at the same time the most comprehensive reality
it is emptiest because it is not anything for example quote and quote it is not quote
and quote something or quote and quote some specific entity which can be determined which
can be limited so in that sense it is empty but at the same time it is most comprehensive
reality because it is everything something which is everything cannot be something that
is a actually the contradiction which later on Hegel results with a concept of synthesis.
The most abstract and the most real the most elementary and the most exalted notion all
our concepts express modes of being and our transformation of the idea of being.
So everything all our concepts all that exists outside everything is a mode of a manifestation
of this absolute reality now what is the nature of being how does being which is everything
becomes anything else this is the problem which I just mentioned something which is
everything the guy is the spirit includes everything it involves everything it encompasses
everything something which is everything cannot be something how can it be something then
virtue of what principle or inner force is it modified into something so that we can
determine what it is how does being which is complete and static initiate movements so
that it can become something see in order to become something there should be a movement
and movement presupposes what a space to move but the concept of being includes everything
and there is no space left even that is also part of it.
So how can you conceive of a movement which would make the absolute something being is
the most universal notion and hence the poorest and the emptiest since it is the most universal
it cannot be anything specific it cannot be anything determinate it becomes totally indeterminate
because it is everything something which is everything cannot be something to be something
it needs to be determined as a thing but being is by definition indeterminate if you define
it or determine it as one thing then it is not everything but being without any determination
is non-being so that is the paradox here on the one hand since being is the most universal
and the most complete it is also for the same reason it is the poorest and the emptiest
in order to become something it has to limit itself which means that it has to cease to
be being since it is being it cannot be something but being without any determination is what
non-being being pure and simple is equivalent to non-being it is both being and not being
both itself and its opposite which is under normal circumstances philosophers consider
this as a paradox this as a contradiction which cannot be entertained because philosophers
or logicians are against such contradictions but Hegel says that wait hold on this is not
the time to say that you know contradictions are to be opposed because contradictions constitute
the very core of reality according to Hegel so here he introduces the concept of becoming
it is both an immovable and barren thing and for that reason nothing or not being because
it is both it becomes something and the contradiction contained in being is resolved in the notion
of becoming or development so there is being and non-being and this contradiction between
being and non-being because this being is at the same time being and non-being a contradiction
and this contradiction involves a tension this tension initiates a movement and as a result
the contradiction contained in being is resolved in the notion of becoming or development becoming
is both being and non-being both are contained and reconciled in the notion of becoming so
as a result what happens something else evolves it becomes something and when it becomes something
again the problem is that a new contradiction results which is resolved by a new synthesis
and so on until we reach the absolute idea so here we can see the notion of dialectics
so Hegel was interestingly proposing that we should reach the absolute through contradictions
contradictions are not something which we should be afraid of or we should completely refrain
ourselves from but contradictions are the very core of reality contradictions are the very
core of human thinking once you approach human thinking once you approach rationality human
rationality and once you approach reality historically this thing would be very clear
this contradiction is reconciled in a unity a synthesis this is what Hegel says and this
is contradicted further and then synthesized is another unity contradictions and unity is
go on disappearing and reappearing in the process of development until resolved in the
final unity of the absolute idea so it is something like you have a contradiction between
two opposing ideas and as a result there is a third idea which is the result of a synthesis
of these two opposing ideas and this synthesis itself forms an idea it asserts something
and automatically generates its contradiction so the thesis then becomes or the thesis automatically
generates its antithesis so you have thesis and antithesis which would generate a synthesis
and once the synthesis is generated the synthesis itself becomes a thesis asserts itself as
a position which generates its own antithesis owing to its limitations and finite nature
anything finite is incomplete so any finite thesis is bound to generate its opposition
or its antithesis and then which would ultimately result in a creative conflict of these two
a contradiction which will generate a synthesis which would again become a thesis synthesis
antithesis synthesis so it goes on and on and finally reaches the infinity or absolute
idea now contradictions exist not only in part but also in the things themselves this is
what Hegel says it is not just confined to human thinking or thought but objects the
world itself the reality itself is composed of or its constitutive of such contradictions
antinomies pointed out by Kant are natural they lie in reason and in reality contradictions
lie in the nature of reason and since reality itself is reason or rational reality is also
bound to be constitutive of contradictions.
Then found in the idea of being is resolved in the notion of becoming so you have concepts
of being non-being and becoming thesis antithesis and synthesis in the process of becoming being
determines itself explains the process of historical development and the development
of human thinking as well the dialectical element in thought and reality the dialectic
is manifest in every phenomena natural organic political and historical.
So in all aspects of life in all spheres of life reality can be seen as a manifestation
of this dialectic it constitutes the moving soul of scientific progress we can see that
a scientist or a scientific theory is being advanced since it is a definite finite scientific
conceptualization it is bound to generates its antithesis its opposition and in that
creative conflict between this thesis and antithesis the opposition the conflict a synthesis
a better a mature theory evolves and in that way science progresses.
So human thinking progresses through dialectical process contradictions are the motive force
of all reality the principle of all moment and of all activity we find in reality and
they are not unthinkable according to Hegel because thinking itself constitute the very
core structure of thinking itself and contradiction is the root of all life and moment because
without contradiction everything would become static everything tends to change or pass
into its opposites without contradictions everything would be dead existence static
externality nothing would be happening but everything would be static without that.
And again it suggests that no single concept represents the whole truth truth is the whole
the position which we began with this lecture that the whole alone is true all concepts
are partial truths.
And when we talk about contradictions and their overcoming truth like rational reality is
a living process constituted by the entire system of concepts nature does not stop at
contradictions but overcomes it.
So what Hegel was trying to argue is that though there are contradictions in nature
in human thinking there are contradictions in reality nature or reality does not stop
with contradictions there is always a tendency to overcome each event of contradiction to
a higher form synthesis.
Then again it encounters a contradiction over there which is again synthesized or which
is again overcome and the process take us to absolute infinity.
The process encounters contradictions and overcome them and resolve all of them in the
absolute reason can capture this moving reality with the application of the method of dialectic.
So the dialectical method which is a method suggested by Hegel to understand this process.
Dialectical method basically suggests that reason is not a static faculty of the human
mind it is a product of our social heritage the historical development of our social group.
So this is where you know the historian in Hegel is relevant in understanding his philosophical
concept.
So he says that reason is the product of our social heritage the historical development
of our social group and reason encounters contradictions and proceed by synthesizing
them in that process.
And dialectical thinking is a process that seeks to do justice to moving living organic
existence.
So this is something which Hegel talks about reality it is not a static entity it is living
dynamic moving reality.
What is dialectic?
Dialectic is a very old philosophical concept which is present in ancient Greek tradition
the pre-socatic thinkers themselves have discussed about it or the element of dialectic is visible
in their thinking as well.
Say for example when ancient Greek thought talked about the theory of four elements earth,
water, fire and air where reality is composed of earth and air which are sort of
contradictory fire and water which are also in opposition.
But these apparently contradicting or opposing elements when they come together they constitute
a reality.
So this conception of dialectic is present even in the thinking of the ancient Greek
philosophers and the history of dialectic Socrates plays a very important role and also
play too because Socrates uses dialectic is employs it the use of argument in order to
make the opponent contradict himself.
We have already examined this in the process of Socrates dialogues what happens is Socrates
persistently raises certain questions and in that process make his opponent contradict.
So the contradictions are exposed in that process.
So you make your own or rather the concepts which you hold as true to contradict themselves
and then realize that there is some problem in it in the whole process of thinking.
But Hegel's concept of dialectic is it is different it is rather richer than any of
the other concepts because he conceives it as a synthesis of opposites.
Every concept we have has limitations and hence will pass over into its opposite a negation
of itself.
So in one sense the contradictions according to Hegel we have already seen is a very principle
the very core of reality.
So in that sense the scope of contradictions of the scope of dialectic is rather infinite
in Hegel's philosophy.
But when it comes to reason he understands it in this way every concept or every proposition
which we assert has its limitations and hence will pass over into its opposite a negation
of itself.
It is a process which consists of three stages or moments thesis, antithesis and synthesis
which I have already explained.
The three moments of dialectic is the dialectical process move from a first stage by proposing
a thesis.
Say for example the entire universe revolved around earth which is a geocentric view of
Ptolemy.
So here a thesis is proposed advocated but since any and every position every concept
or every thinking concept is bound to be partial and incomplete the thesis which is advocated
that the entire universe revolves around earth Ptolemy is bound to generate its own antithesis
which says that this is not true.
It is not true that the entire universe revolves around earth owing to the finite nature and
finite feature of any single proposition or any single concept.
Now there is a thesis and an antithesis.
So the dialectical process moves from a first stage by proposing a thesis.
This moves to a second stage which negates opposites or contradicts the first and thus
initiates an antithesis it is not the case.
And now we have in the history of astronomy Copernicus who proposes a heliocentric view
which is much advanced view a mature view than the geocentric view of Ptolemy.
This opposition is overcome by a third stage in which the opposing stages are synthesized.
The opposing stages of Ptolemy's view and not Ptolemy Ptolemy and not Ptolemy is synthesized
in Copernicus.
So in one sense we can say that Copernican view the synthesis presupposes both thesis
and antithesis antithesis presupposes the thesis.
So all these things are interconnected in that way.
So if you concentrate or if you focus on only one of them you seem to think that this is
that contradiction this needs to be avoided but Hegel would say that this is possible
because of that.
So there is an interconnectedness between these things.
In synthesis a new concept emerges as a higher truth which transcends the theses and the
antithesis.
So the three functions of the synthesis number one to cancel the conflict between theses
and antithesis because between Ptolemy and not Ptolemy the conflict between these two
needs to be cancelled by Copernican view which is much superior to preserve or retain the
element of truth within the theses and antithesis and then the third one is to transcend the
opposition by sublimating the conflict into a higher truth.
So the higher truth is the Copernican truth which is which asserts a heliocentric view
and let us conclude here our discussion on this.
If you examine this process we can see that this process of dialectic of encountering
contradictions and overcoming them of having theses antithesis and synthesis involves
the process of negation preservation and elevation.
So what happens a theses that is initiated is negated example Ptolemy's geocentric
view is negated it is not Ptolemy we can put it in this way symbolically Ptolemy and not
Ptolemy by the Ptolemy's view by virtue of being a finite assertion a partial assertion
generates its own antithesis automatically generates its own antithesis.
Now the synthesis preserves both the theses and antithesis in Copernican view Ptolemy's
preserved in terms of being what made the former possible Copernican view was possible
or rather Copernicus even conceived of such a problem because of Ptolemy and not Ptolemy
because of the theses and the antithesis which was initially initiated the synthesis
was made possible because of the theses and antithesis.
So in that sense it is not only negated but also preserved and then there is another stage
that synthesis also elevates as the new account is superior to both the theses and the antithesis.
So in that sense the dialectical process involves these three stages negation preservation and
elevation.
We will discuss these aspects and some of the other details relating to these aspects
and some of the other important dimensions of this dialectical method in the next lecture
where we will also be examining the concept of spirit the phenomenology of spirit in a
different way.
So we will wind up this lecture here thank you.
.
