We start off with a scenario, got a bunch of guys, young guys, prime of life, guys roaring
on testosterone. They all know each other since they were kids. They're like practically
brothers. They're brothers at arms. Actually, one pair of them are brothers. There's a bunch
of cousins. They've all been hanging out since they were little. They get along.
Who they haven't been getting along with is a bunch of guys over in the next turf there.
They've usually avoided each other, but every now and then they have to encounter them.
There's tensions. One day, our guys, knowing they're heading out to look for the others,
get themselves all riled up, all of this communal ritualistic stuff to get themselves in a frenzy.
They go out to the edge of their territory and as a group, they run into one of the
guys from that next group and they attack him. They beat him. They savage him. Just
to show that we're serious here, this is not West Side Story. It's sort of beaten up.
They rip his testicles off. They mean it. So they go back all triumphant and a few days
later, one of them is out checking out the edge of there and the guys from the next group
over catch him and do the same thing in return. You know exactly what's going to happen now.
Things are going to start escalating. They do indeed a few days later, our guys get together.
They get themselves in this frenzy there, but this time they bring some weapons. They've
made them. They bring some weapons and they encounter some guy from the other group and
none of this beating stuff here. They kill the guy and empowered over the coming weeks,
they go about systematically killing every single male of this next group.
Okay. What do we got here? Gang warfare on a certain level. This fits the technical definition
of genocide, killing individuals merely because of the group they belong to. And here we have
a fairly sorted picture of human behavior, but in this case, it's not humans. A group
of chimps, male chimps and the violence, the organized violence, the premeditated proto-war
fair like violence with which they can do in all the members of the neighboring group.
Another domain. Here we got a bunch of individuals living together, males, females. You want an
easy metaphor. They're all living in a college dorm together. And this one demographically
is an atypical dorm. Normally in this realm, it would be a one to one female to male ratio.
For some quirk, it just happens to have a predominance of females in this group. The
males there are very atypical. They're not very aggressive for males. They're particularly
socially affiliated. Not only are they all nice platonic buddies with the females, all
the guys get along well with each other. And it happens every now and then. You get a new
shipment of freshman guys shipped in there who are coming from some big, bad, aggressive,
uncooperative world out there. And you come in and what these folks are really good at
is assimilating these new individuals into their special culture so that within about
six months or so these new males are no longer acting like these jerks and instead they're
nice and affiliative and unaggressive. A whole world of sort of humans hanging out in dorms
and I don't know where Reed College or Oberlin. No, this is a bunch of baboons. A troop of
baboons that were studied in East Africa over the last decade or so where a fluke led to
the systematic killing of half of the males, the males who were most aggressive and least
socially affiliated. And what you saw there in the aftermath, a troop with a predominance
of females, the remaining males, low aggression, high affiliation. And as new males came into
the troop at adolescence, it would take about six months or so for these guys to be assimilated
into the social milieu of this troop. What are we seeing here in the species that is
not human? We are seeing cultural transmission. Another realm on first pass that would just
sound like humans. Okay, you've got a female and she's got some skill. She is highly skilled
at some craft, building something or other, making it or something or other. This is a
traditional skill. She learned how to do this by watching her mother and her mother in turn
watched her mother and this female skilled at this craft of course would like her kids
to acquire these skills as well. And she has them around watching whenever she's doing
this and they're kind of learning it and perhaps no surprise to her, perhaps to her disappointment.
She's noticing her daughters are learning it just fine. Her sons aren't very well because
they can't pay attention. They're all screwing around and wrestling and chasing and breaking
things and the daughters learn this craft far better than the sons do. Humans, as you
were guessing by now, no, not at all. In this case, chimps. Chimps in the 1970s, Jane Goodall
upending our very definition of what makes us humans. We are the only species that makes
tools. No, as she discovered, chimps make tools. Chimps make a variety of different
types, some of which involve multiple steps, planning a fair amount of dexterity and these
toolmaking skills are passed on multi-generationally and a study showing, well, yeah, kids observe
their mothers and learn how to make tools that way, but the sons don't learn anywhere
near as well as the daughters because they don't pay attention. They're too busy doing
other stuff. Okay, another domain where first pass, we'd be assuming we're looking at humans,
not just any humans, but humans who are the finest of our kind, pro-social humans, individuals
who look out for others who are willing to do something altruistic, even spontaneously
so and here these individuals have a choice. There's two scenarios. They're hanging out
there and there's someone else, maybe they know them, maybe they don't, maybe they can
communicate with them, maybe not, but they have a choice. They can have, in one scenario,
they could choose an option to get X amount of something wonderful, X amount of M&Ms,
X amount of free kidney transplants, who knows what, where they have a choice between
they can get this or second option, they can get this and this other individual can get
that same great thing as well. They have the opportunity to act selfishly or act pro-socially.
And in this recent study of chimpanzees, what was shown was at a much higher than expected
rate, these chimps are acting pro-socially. Given the option, they would rather choose
a scenario where both of they and this other individual get a reward and it becomes more
likely if that individual was giving some sort of solicitive gesture, but they will
do it as well, purely spontaneously. However, yet another thing that's familiar, if that
other individual is making a complete pain of herself begging for the food, this one
is less likely to do the pro-social sharing. Very, very human scenario. Final one here,
where once again, what initially seems a very human set of behaviors and it ain't us after
all. Here we have that one, you're with a friend who's totally phobic about going to
the dentist and they drag you along because they're in terror of it and they're in the
chair and they're getting drilling and their legs are twisting of the pain and you're
just empathizing there like mad and you do something like you would bump into the doorway
and you recoil because it hurts, what are you showing there? Your empathy with your
friend's pain has lowered your own pain threshold and this could be shown experimentally, we're
formally observing someone else having some sort of pain lowers your own pain threshold
and where it works much better if it's someone you know and you like. Okay, this sounds kind
of human and this particular study demonstrating these exact attributes done with laboratory
rodents where you have animals observing another one, getting shocks, hearing the vocalizations,
the ultrasonic alarm calls that one is giving off, it lowers that animal's pain threshold,
is this empathic response of in effect feeling the other one's pain and most amazingly you
would get this effect when you were dealing with cage mates but not between two strangers.
What do we make of this when we look at all of these supposedly human realms of sociality,
emotions, identification, violence, all of that and you got to ask this question, are
we just another animal species? Now switching gears a bit, beginning to think about the
brain, there is this brain chemical and trust me there is no need to panic at this point
for the jargon if it's important we will hear about it, plenty more in the subsequent lectures,
there's this brain chemical called vasopressin, don't even write that down. Vasopressin is
one of these neurotransmitters, some parts of the brain use it to communicate with other
parts and vasopressin has certain interesting functions, certain interesting things it does
in the brain, it's got something to do with social affiliation, it's got something to
do with social bond formation, particularly in males, male rodents, male monkeys, whole
literature studying this. Now this vasopressin stuff comes out of one type of neuron and
it has an effect on another neuron, another brain cell, the way it does it is that it
is detected by a vasopressin receptor on this next neuron and that next neuron goes and
does its thing in response to it. So vasopressin is coded for by a gene, there's a gene for
the vasopressin receptor and it turns out there's a number of different genetic forms
of this vasopressin receptor and look in humans, human males and there's variability as to
which type, which flavor of vasopressin receptor gene you have and what a recent study has
shown is have one particular variant and you, that human male are more likely to be in a
stable monogamous relationship, are more likely to derive satisfaction from that and you go
and you look and that same variation occurs looking at two different species of rodents,
one of which has male monogamy and the other has male polygamy and the male monogamy version
of that gene is the one you see in the guys who are barreling towards their 80th wedding
anniversary and amazingly in the rodents do some fancy gene therapy, take the monogamous
version of that gene and stick it into the brains of the polygamous male rodents and
they suddenly become monogamous. Whoa, throw some little switches there and you suddenly
have a very different profile of behavior. Okay, another domain and here we have once
again variations on those formal economic games, do you cooperate, do you compete, do
you do this or that, under what circumstances, golden rule, tit for tat, here's a classic
game that's used in these studies, a game called the ultimatum game, an economist study
this and sort of negotiation people and diplomacy, ultimatum game, you've got two players and
what you do is the first one starts off with a hundred dollars and that individual makes
a executive decision, they decide how to divide that money between them and the other individual,
they split it 50-50, they're a creep and they keep 99 of it and give one to the other person,
whatever it is, they have all this power. However, after that is done, the other individual
has the power, they have the power to accept or reject the offer and if they reject the
offer, they don't get whatever they've been offered and this individual doesn't get what
they've had either, this person has the ability to reject an unfair offer. Notice that in
doing that, if I've just gotten this crummy offer of 99 goes to that one and I only get
one, I reject it, I'm doing something totally irrational, which is, I'm choosing to get
zero instead of one. Yeah, it's a lousy deal but it's better than nothing, most humans
and most cultures have been studied are going to reject extremely unfair offers, this is
economically irrational, if you're pure machines of economic rationality, you take whatever
the offer is, instead what you see is it's usually around a 60-40, if what you get is
40 or lower, that's when people begin to reject the offer. There's a whole world of research
done on this as to under what circumstances, does the refusal rate change, if you know
the person, if you have multiple games against them, differences in the rates as a function
of what cultures people come from, but here's a very interesting study that was done. You
have somebody playing the ultimatum game and what you do is, you take advantage of
a fancy new technique called trans-magnetic stimulation, it's a technique where you can
use a powerful magnet that does actually have a clue how it works, you trans-magnetically
stimulate somebody or other, you're stimulating a part of their brain, the surface, because
it can't penetrate too bad, the surface, the cortex, you stimulate one particular region
of the cortex and what the stimulation does is it silences that part of the brain, you've
taken that part of the brain offline and when you do that with this one particular region,
you change people's ultimatum play. You make people far more economically rational, far
more pragmatic, far more willing to accept some lousy offer from the executive and the
alter, you have changed somebody's attitude towards cooperation, revenge, all sorts of
stuff like that by turning off one part of the brain for 10 seconds while they make a
choice. Here's the really cool thing, okay, so you would speculate, well maybe this is
some non-generic, just sort of some messy, non-specific effect, two different controls,
try this with another region of the cortex, you don't get the same effect. Okay, so whatever
is going on here, it is specific to this part of the brain, but maybe you just start making
people change their pattern of play, no, you're changing their pattern of social play. How
do you prove it? You use this technique to take this part of the brain offline and you
don't change somebody's behavior when they think they're playing against the computer.
This is not changing strategy, it is changing strategy in a social context and all you're
doing there is throwing a little switch on your trans-magnetic stimulator machine.
One final example, and this has something to do with another one of those brain chemicals,
this one called oxytocin, and we're going to hear more about oxytocin down the line
as well, oxytocin does some very interesting stuff also. In some ways it's kind of sort
of a cognitive vasopressin, oxytocin has something to do with social bonding among female rodents,
oxytocin mediates females bonding, imprinting to their babies, oxytocin plays a role in
females and rodent species where they form pair bonds for life with the male, oxytocin
facilitates that. Isn't that interesting? Just like with vasopressin, having a vasopressin
receptor, there's an oxytocin receptor in parts of the brain that make a whole lot of
sense, muck with oxytocin receptors in rodent female brains so they don't bond to their
infants, all of that makes wonderful sense. How about oxytocin in humans though? And suddenly
things look kind of familiar in terms of oxytocin being able to throw some switches in our own
brain. Here's these studies, in these cases you're not spritzing oxytocin into somebody's
brain but instead you get some volunteers and what you do is you get some nice aerosolized
perfumes spray laden with oxytocin and you spritz the stuff up somebody's nose or the
control group getting spritzed with just some placebo stuff and what happens, oxytocin
goes up the nose and it turns out because of the chemical structure of this thing, it
gets into the brain pretty readily, you are now spritzing some of this bond formation
causing in rodent mothers loving their babies neurochemical into the brains of humans, what
happens, people become more trusting when they've been spritzed with oxytocin. You do
this experimentally, people listen to a supposed political pitch by a supposed candidate, oxytocin
on board, they are more willing to trust the individual, they are more willing to say the
person is making sense, would get their vote. Remarkably people become more charitable when
they've been spritzed with oxytocin and this is not just the social realm of here is the
needy person right in front of you, empathy, feeling their pain, their desperate oxytocin
and you choose to sign over even more units of money. This is people spritzed with oxytocin
become more charitable in the abstract sense of saying they'd be more willing to have their
taxes used for charitable purposes. This is really abstract, this is not a brain chemical
tapping into our social affiliate, this is really abstract stuff. Oxytocin doing this
spritzes into somebody's brain and their capacity to feel somebody else's pain or
turn the page and go on with their interests is altered. Now this oxytocin has given rise
to one of the truly alarming neologisms in all of the world these days, this horrible
term of neuro-marketing, a whole realm of people who are now convinced that if they
get you into the right shopping mall with the most crappy gigas being sold as long as
they're spritzing oxytocin and clouds all over the place, you're just going to be buying
the stuff till the cows come home. What are we seeing here? We are seeing all these ways
in which you ultimately have to ask a second critical question. After listening to chimps
having warfare and having pro-social altruism of all these familiar things, we had to ask
the question, are we just another animal species? And after hearing things like muck
around with the function of this part of the cortex spritzing oxytocin, we have to ask
a similar question, are we just a bunch of neurons? Now this oxytocin thing tells us
something very interesting that we will hear more about in a while, which is all of this
works in social context, but even hearing on a first pass, we are stuck with these absolutely
galvanizing questions which is, okay, we as a species, are we just another animal, are
we just another mammal, just another primate, and is we, is I, merely the aggregation of
us being just a bunch of neurons? That's what this course is about. My name is Robert
Sapolsky and I am a scientist and what I do is study the biology of behavior. And I do
it in two different realms that wind up being very pertinent to this course. I spend part
of my life being a laboratory neurobiologist, studying how the brain works, what it has
to do with behavior, social behavior, what abnormal behavior looks like in the brain,
all of that speaking to the world of, are we just a bunch of neurons? Also, I divide
my time between doing that and being a primatologist. I study baboons out in the wild in the National
Park in East Africa and that troop, that college dorm of Oberlin College baboons, were a troop
that I have studied, and that's a very good realm for me, spending a lot of time thinking
about, and are we just another primate species? And what this course is about is exploring
these issues. Where do we place ourselves in the world of social species, making sense
of where humans are exceptional, human exceptionalism, and where we're just like every other beastie
out there? And how do we make sense of this in a reductive framework? At the end of the
day, our us-ness is the outcome of just a gazillion neurons going about their business.
How do we think of ourselves as a species? Now, rather than going at this in a systematic
way in this course, and I have a prior course that you, the purchaser, may be interested
in through the great courses, looking at these issues methodically going from the level of
the nervous system down to genes going through evolutionary history. Instead, what this course
is going to be being somewhat of a sampler, just a survey of some of these ways of thinking
about our lives as humans in the context of our species, exceptionalism, or lack thereof,
in the context of there's just a bunch of cells up there that creates us. So if there's
a common theme that runs through all of this, it's one that should be apparent by now, which
is if you want to understand what we're about as a species, you are up the creek. You're
not going to have a prayer of understanding what's up unless you have biology as part
of the scenario. Now, in doing that, what's implicit in that is it's going to be a very
fancy, complicated version of the biology, wrestling with humans as just another social
primate, wrestling with humans like any other behaving animal as simply an aggregate of
neurons. Now, as we begin to approach this issue, this whole issue of you can't understand
behavior outside of the context of biology, which is you can't understand the brain outside
of the context of it sitting there in a body. The brain, your mind is not only inbrained,
your brain is embodied, and you can't make sense of that outside of that realm. As we'll
see, part of what this does is it does in one of the great dichotomies that goes all
the way back to Descartes, the notion that the brain handles cognition and emotion very
differently. We'll see that that's gibberish. It also does in the classic philosophical dualism
of minds and body are separate. They are not separate in the slightest, and we'll be seeing
that in a few of these essays in here. One is a remarkable, bizarre, disturbing world
showing how some parasites can get into our brains and change our behavior. That sure
gets at the fact that if this parasite knows how to make neurons work differently and suddenly
our behavior is different, that sure makes us have to think in terms of, are we just
a bunch of neurons? Another one of the lectures gets at this also saying how much of our moods,
how much of the emotions that our brains come up with, how much is that due to your brain
paying attention to what's going on in your body? And as we'll see in that lecture, anatomy
of the bad mood, what's going on often is your brain is trying to come up with an explanation
for some extreme physiological state in your body, and it often comes up with completely
irrational ones. Now implicit in those provisos, you've got to make sense of this in the context
of the individual person's psyche, in the context of society at large. What we're seeing here
is you can't make sense of behavior outside of the context of biology, but you're up the
creek just as readily if you think biology is going to explain everything. And another
theme that's going to run throughout these lectures is particularly cautionary, not just
if you solely depend on biology, but if you solely depend on a certain type of biology. And what
this is about is currently the most exciting sort of bandwagon-ish realm of biology and what it
has to do with behavior, the notion that stuff is really determined by your genes, by genetics. This
is the heart of sort of Western sciences focus on reductionism. Reductionism, if something isn't
working like a clock, how do you fix it? You break it down to its component parts, and you find a
little itty bitty part that's somehow out of whack, and you fix it or you replace it, and then you
put all the pieces back together and it runs perfectly. The notion that to understand a complex
system, all you need to do is understand its component parts. Now that's been great for Western
science. That's been a much better way of, say, dealing with polio coming up with a vaccine based
on reductive Western science than deciding the way you deal with polio is to, like, sacrifice a
goat and wave its innards around at some, whatever. This is great. However, it has its limits. And
when it comes to understanding behavior and the brain reductionism, ooh, all you need to know is the
genetic makeup of an individual and you have them in your palm exactly how their brain is going to
work. As we're going to see over and over, that's not remotely the case. In that realm, as it always
goes, reductionism is great for teaching you why a watch isn't running anymore. It's not very good at
teaching you why a cloud isn't raining enough. When it comes to behavior, when it comes to the
vagaries of how we're just another animal, and we're just a bunch of neurons, how that translates
into behavior and the individual aspects of it, we are much more like clouds than like clocks running
on simple gears. So those will be our tools in this, constantly this dual pair of questions. How do we
make sense of ourselves as just another primate species? Make sense of ourselves as an aggregate of
neurons with a theme that biology is going to be relevant every step of the way in these lectures. At
the same time, it's sure not going to explain everything. Individual, psyche, social context, all of
that are going to be running throughout. Now, we particularly hit that, are we just another species of
primate, as we transition into the next lecture. And what that one shows is when it comes to making
healthy food choices and dealing with health consequences of it, we most definitely are just
another primate. So that will be our first topic.
