Remember Jean-Jacques Rousseau, the 18th century Swiss philosopher?
An enormous, enormous impact on Western thinking.
Unfortunately, I know next to nothing about it other than he was the 18th century Swiss philosopher.
OK, here's all I know about the guy.
Something about Noble Savages and that he was probably a much more fun dinner guest than that bummer of a Thomas Hobbes guy.
And fortunately, that he's got two S's in his last name so I could look him up on Wikipedia.
Rousseau, Noble Savage versus Hobbes and his short nasty and brutish Coke versus Pepsi.
This has been an issue people have been wrestling with for a long period.
What is the nature of our primordial ancestors?
Are we by nature good or are we by nature even?
Nobody really thinks about this much anymore.
I certainly don't.
When we think about our primordial ancestors, what we're mostly thinking was, how'd they look?
Were they looking good? Were they healthy? What were their diets like?
What was the Zinjantropus aerobic exercise routine?
What was the Neanderthal diet? How can you do kickboxing like homo habilis did?
What we see here is an interest in basically asking, so what were cholesterol levels like in the Garden of Eden?
What was our ancestral diet? What was our ancestral level of health?
And what can that tell us about how we should be doing our lifestyle stuff these days?
Now remarkably, people have actually put a lot of effort into trying to understand what was the diet of primordial hominids.
Among other people, one of the first, the physician anthropologist named Melvin Conner did an ingenious job
of trying to reconstruct the Chromanian diet, the preneolithic diet,
and coming up with a picture of, these are folks who had lots of fiber and lots of simple sugars
and no complex ones and very little salt and all the stuff you're supposed to be doing.
Really ideal diet.
What we have as an example in modern times are studies of traditional hunter-gatherers.
And in lots of ways, they have served as a surrogate for our ancestral hunter-gatherers.
One of the best-studied populations are the Kung people of the Kalahari Desert in Botswana,
and they have long been studied to try to understand what the relationship is between the traditional,
long-standing human lifestyle of hunter-gatherers and what that has to do with health.
Now it was perfectly obvious what the answer was going to be because these people have miserably difficult lives.
They're short, nasty, and brutish, and it wasn't until anthropologists started studying them in any sort of detail
it became clear that this in fact was a pretty great lifestyle.
Traditional hunter-gathering soon referred to as the original affluent society,
and these are folks who actually don't have to work very hard for their days, calories,
and it's a much, much easier lifestyle than people anticipated.
And when you look at the health of traditional hunter-gatherers, all sorts of bits of medical dogma go down the tubes.
What we're viewed as some of the inevitabilities of aging, for example,
that resting blood pressure tends to increase, that cholesterol levels tend to increase,
that there is inevitable cardiovascular degeneration, that hearing gets worse as you age,
and what the studies have shown was traditional hunter-gatherers in these Kalahari populations,
none of those are inevitable features of aging.
They're virtually inevitable features of Western aging, but not of standard human aging.
And as has been said, if you want to be optimally healthy, here's what you want.
You want the vaccines of Westernized humans, and you want the diet and lifestyle of hunter-gatherer humans.
And as you look at this, or at least as I look at this, thinking about the fried Twinkies that they've got out there during the next break,
it's hard to avoid the feeling that we have fallen from a state of metabolic grace.
Now, a lot of what this falling from grace has been about was one of the great turns in human history,
the transition to farming, to agriculture, about 10,000 years ago in the Fertile Crescent in the Mideast.
And what has always been sort of hammered into our heads was this was one of the great leaps forward
of human history. This is when we figured out how to do, by farming, intensive settlements,
we produced material culture. This is what made it all possible, farming.
When you study the bones of humans from various periods, over time, what scientists can tell you is a very different story,
which is the onset of farming was a turning point way for the worse in terms of human health.
As you transition from a traditional hunter-gatherer diet to the ones of farmers, what are you doing?
You're going from a world in which there's hundreds of different food sources from plants to a relatively small number of them.
You're much more vulnerable to famine, to drought, that sort of thing. And our bodies showed this historically.
From the time humans started agriculture, the average human height started shrinking.
As soon as humans became farmers, they became less healthy. You could tell this in the bones from them,
more evidence of malnutrition, more evidence of delayed maturation.
It wasn't until around 1850 that humans started being as tall again as chromaniens were.
Agriculture, as this great mistake, you think about medieval knights, and we all think of them that they're like as big and manly as Liam Neeson.
They were all like little bull terriers, and when you combined it with sort of the bad teeth and the fact that they never dry cleaned their armor with all the sweat in there,
this was not a very appealing picture. Agriculture as being this downward trend in human health, for a bunch of reasons.
Not only was there that feature that you are now much more vulnerable to famines and such,
you also were suffering the consequences of sedentary life.
Hunter-gatherers always on the move in widely dispersed populations, farming what that allows you to do is to begin to invent the permanent settlement,
the permanent community, the permanent higher density of humans living together.
And what do you do then? Somebody's got an infection and it is going to bounce around and move a whole lot faster than in far more dispersed hunter-gatherer populations.
Start having sedentary human communities and infectious disease begins to take more of a toll.
Interesting feature of that, if you think about it, and my bet is you don't think about this often, but if you do, one of the features of traditional hunter-gatherer hominids,
one of the features of all the other apes is you rarely sleep in the same place two nights in a row.
Interesting consequence of that, thus you rarely sleep in close proximity to your excrement from over the last few days,
and dramatic life-changing transformations as soon as humans had stable sedentary lifestyles and stable settlements,
which is you're spending a lot of time living on the detritus of your physiology, another vector for a lot more infectious diseases coming up and spiraling around.
Now, when you put these pieces together, the onset of agriculture produced a remarkable 30% decrease in life expectancy.
Now, I will try not to have too much of a rant here, but it's clear in retrospect that the invention of agriculture of domestication was one of the all-time stupid moves on the parts of humans.
Sure, it allowed you to begin to have a sedentary lifestyle, pluses or minuses, but that eventually forced us to invent health clubs.
Sure, it allowed us to begin to have food surplus, but the minute you have surplus of some resource, we're a species that's really, really good at having the surplus be unequally distributed,
all of this being ways of getting us into trouble.
So the transition from the hunter-gatherer lifestyle to that of agriculturalists, not really great things in terms of health effects.
Things could even worse with the transition from a traditional agricultural diet to that of westernized humans.
And this has been very well studied in two different realms.
One is when you look at people who have migrated, emigrating from a more traditional culture on this planet, moving to one with a westernized diet,
and you can see exactly what happens there in terms of changes of health risks and such.
And this represents a perfect study because you've got a control group.
Somebody picks up and emigrates from wherever they were to whatever place in the developed world,
and they're going to have some siblings or cousins or who knows what back there continuing that lifestyle,
having the new one with the same genetic background, great way to do comparisons.
Or there's a second way in which a westernized lifestyle can suddenly come sweeping in,
and this is not when you move to the westernized world, but when the westernized world suddenly moves in on top of you.
This has been well studied a lot of islands in Polynesia where over the last century,
western influence came pouring in there along with western diets.
Sometimes you don't have to be an immigrant to have a different culture suddenly envelop you.
OK, so what is seen when you now study the effects of this transition to a westernized diet?
And the results are not good.
You have people who traditionally, while not quite in the range of hunter-gatherers in terms of pristine health,
but who nonetheless in more traditional agricultural settings have very low rates of hypertension,
very low rates of cardiovascular disease, very low rates of all of those,
and suddenly throw in a westernized diet and up goes hypertension,
up goes cardiovascular disease,
up goes the incidence of a disease that our like great-great grandparents never even heard of,
adult onset diabetes, insulin resistance diabetes.
This is a disease of aging in a typically westernized way, becoming even more sedentary,
putting on weight.
This once unheard of disease is just on the edge of being the number one killer on this planet.
And what the studies have shown in some of these Polynesian populations is,
as a westernized diet sweeps in, populations that used to have essentially a zero incidence of diabetes,
suddenly 70% diabetes rates.
Now, one of the most sort of informed ways of studying this has been another one of those perfect human populations
that provide you with the experimental and control group.
This is with a Native American population, the Pima, who live in Arizona,
and about half of the Pima population lives in Arizona,
and what makes for the perfect experiment is the other half live across the border in Mexico.
And over the last century, the Arizona Pima folks have gotten the standard American westernized diet,
while the folks, the relatives across the border in Mexico diet has changed far less,
still much more of a traditional diet.
And what you could see is astronomically high rates of the diseases of westernized lifestyle,
particularly diabetes, astronomically high rates on the American side of the border,
and virtually no change on the Mexican side.
And perhaps most remarkably, you compare the two populations
and an average of a 30-pound difference in body weight.
So the question, of course, becomes, why does this happen?
Why when people transition to a westernized diet do you get such a catastrophic consequence?
I mean, diabetes is very prevalent and increasingly so in the United States, for example,
but a 70% rate is not typical of what you see in the general American population.
A 70% rate, though, is what you see among the Pima or among these Polynesian various islands there.
Why such catastrophic responses to when westernized diets are first introduced?
And it turns out there's a great deal of logic to this and a great deal of evolutionary logic.
When you deal with traditional human diets, traditional primate, hominid diets, over long
periods of time, there's not a whole lot of calorie-dense sources of food.
There's intermittent periods of famine.
What you have gotten is selection for bodies that are really good at storing energy.
How does this work?
One domain for this is the hormone insulin.
Insulin comes out of your pancreas.
You eat something, your blood sugar levels rise, and you secrete insulin.
Insulin is this hormone of plenty, this hormone of surplus.
What it is doing is saying, I've got enough energy in the bloodstream
that I'm going to secrete insulin, and that's a signal to store stuff away for the future.
Insulin triggers energy storage.
So you're somebody with a traditional primate, hominid, whatever diet,
which is one where your body has to be really good at storing energy,
because there's not tons of it intermittent.
What you have is a super sensitive pancreas that the slightest hint of nutrients hits your
bloodstream and quick pour out that insulin and store the stuff away.
You have kidneys who are really good at their job also.
Very little salt in the diet.
Kidneys that are great at retaining salt.
What would wind up being called thrifty genes?
Genes related to energy storage, food storage at the level of the pancreas, the kidneys.
Thrifty genes, because natural selection has sculpted people to be more surviving
and more adaptive when they have these thrifty genotypes.
And then along comes the Western diet.
And what you see is thrifty genotypes, thrifty genes, plus westernized junk food,
and that's when people get mowed over with these rates of diabetes and such.
So you say, wait a second, what about everybody else saying the United States,
who isn't having 70% rates?
What that means is most of us are descendants of ancestors who,
when westernized diets swept into Europe, for example, a number of centuries ago,
the ones who didn't have the thrifty metabolisms and got killed early on in life from diabetes,
the ones who had sloppy metabolisms.
All of us are descendants of folks with a propensity towards a sloppy metabolism.
So what does this wind up meaning in terms of how this works in the body
and where the lack of health comes from?
You can see there's an interaction not just between the genetics of how this works
and the selection over the years for a body that genetically is really good at storing energy.
You could see a similar outcome as a function of experience early in life.
And this is a remarkable phenomenon called the Dutch hunger winter.
1944, towards the end of World War II, Holland occupied by the Nazis.
And because of uprisings there against them as punishment,
the Nazis that winter diverted all the food from the Netherlands to Germany.
And the people end, Holland thus went through the Dutch hunger winter.
Tens of thousands of people starved to death.
Eventually, after a number of months, Holland was liberated by the Allies.
Food is suddenly back and available.
And the abrupt onset of starvation now has an abrupt recovery
back to the more typical European westernized diet.
A remarkable finding came out of that,
which is if you spent the Dutch hunger winter as a third trimester fetus,
something changed in your body.
Turns out during fetal development,
one of the things that's happening in the third trimester fetus is
the body is metaphorically deciding what's it like out there in terms of nutrient availability.
Is there a lot of food out there? Is there not that much?
And be a Dutch hunger winter fetus and what your body is deciding then is realizing is
there's not a whole lot of food out there because your third trimester mom is going
through the Dutch hunger winter. There's not a lot of nutrients coming through.
And what happens, the jargon now used is the metabolic system of fetuses then,
under the circumstances, imprinted, became more efficient.
We're set up and away for the rest of the lives of these individuals.
They're better and faster at secreting insulin and storing stuff away.
They're better at salt retention. There was programming, another term used there,
programming during the third trimester to deal with food availability.
So that ends. The individual was born. The siege is lifted.
Everybody goes back to normal diet. And what happens now?
It's like you've just migrated from the womb of your mother during the Dutch hunger winter
and migrated into a more typical westernized diet.
60 years later, people who were third trimester fetuses during the Dutch hunger winter,
almost a 20-fold increase in their risk of diabetes, cardiovascular disease,
metabolic syndrome, we see here two ways in which you can get into trouble.
One is if natural selection has sculpted you to have very thrifty genes and suddenly you need
a westernized diet, or if prenatal experience and the imprinting, programming effects of that time
set you up to have instead of thrifty genes, thrifty metabolism,
and off you go into a westernized diet, catastrophe.
Okay, in my own work, I've been able to see an interesting domain where not only you see the
health effects of a transition to a westernized diet, but a transition to a really lousy westernized
diet. And this is some research I've been doing as I alluded to in the first lecture.
I do baboon research in addition to neurobiology research. Over the last 30 years, most summers
I go and I study a population of wild baboons living in a national park in East Africa,
trying to understand the relationship there between social behavior and health and that sort of thing.
If you want to study baboons, this is the perfect place on earth to do it. This is the greatest
ecosystem around. Baboons would kill to get to live in the Serengeti. You only have to spend
about a third of your time getting your day's calories. You live in these big safe troops
that keep the lions away. Your diet is ideal. It's virtually vegan. Even the highest ranking male
who is able to hunt successfully, less than 1% of this diet is meat. Animals are walking 5-10
miles a day for foraging great healthy setting. But then, in one of my troops, something changed
in a very interesting way. What came up was a problem that occurs in lots of national parks,
lots of reserves the world over, which is there's a challenge of what to do with the garbage being
generated in the hotels, the tourist lodges, because you want to make sure the animals don't
have access to it. And that's not always handled well. And it happened in my park. It was not handled
particularly well or rather it was particularly handled unwell or whatever it was, the garbage
wasn't being handled well. There was by this one tourist lodge a big garbage pit that had been dug
out there by tractors and every day leftovers garbage from this lodge was dumped there and
this was a gold mine for the baboons living around there. There was this one troop that had
the good fortune to have this lodge within their territory and as soon as this garbage dump opened
up, they were suddenly just transformed in their diet. They suddenly stopped doing normal foraging.
Why do that? They've shifted these nouveau riche baboons to living entirely off of the garbage
pit, the food refuse in there. And suddenly they're not even like going back to their nought and
they're sleeping in trees at night just above the garbage pit. The garbage tractor would come
every morning around nine o'clock to dump the stuff in it. 8.59 these baboons would waddle out of
the trees to get over complete transformation as to what their lifestyle was. Now this was an
amazing place. This would be this garbage pit smelling in the tropical heat and burning and
there's not only baboons there, there's hyenas, there's jackals, there's vultures, there's marabout
storks. This is like going for a picnic in a Hieronymus Bosch painting. It was like totally
disgusting and to make it even more disgusting, one time I decided in the name of my science,
I was going to don lab gloves and I waded into the garbage pit to try to get a sense of what was
the food in there that these guys were feasting on. And it was leftover drumsticks and beef and
rotting sun-warmed puddings and other desserts and these were the four horsemen of the apocalypse.
It was processed sugar, salt, fat, cholesterol. This is about as bad as you can get. What had
happened to these baboons, they had become junk food monkeys. So what did this do to their health?
And over the years I was able to study one of these troops and eventually with a colleague named
Gene Alton from Princeton University studying a garbage dump troop at another national park
and what winds up happening to baboons when suddenly they get this junk food diet. Interestingly,
some of the outcomes are good. These animals hit puberty earlier. They developed faster,
something that's been seen in humans over the centuries as westernized diets have gotten richer.
What the documentation shows quite clearly is the onset of puberty of the time of first menses
in human girls has gotten earlier and earlier, something known as the secular trend. So
baboons were now maturing faster, developing faster. There was lower infant mortality rate
because of the faster maturation of these kids. There was a shorter interval between
when you gave birth and when you weaned your child and started ovulating again.
In other words, more kids. You also got buffering from the occasional ecological catastrophe.
In 1984 there was a tragic drought in East Africa that mowed over both humans and animals left
and right except for these garbage dump troops because famine or drought or otherwise there
were still tourists and thus there was still food for the tourists and thus there was still
westernized tourist food left over and the garbage dumps these animals did not suffer
during these droughts. So there were some plus sides to suddenly becoming a junk food monkey.
But then you start looking at the physiology of these animals and things are not so good.
And this was work done again in collaboration with Gene Altman but also some other scientists,
Glenn Mott, the University of Texas, Joe Chemnitz at the Wisconsin Primate Center,
what I'm able to do out in the field is dart these guys and anesthetize them and they're now
unconscious and you can check out their bodies with some of the exact same clinical tests
as you would use on humans and say, well, how are they doing? How are these garbage dump
junk food monkeys doing in comparison to the folks next door with a normal diet?
And it was not a nice picture. Female baboons in these garbage dump troops,
they were heavier than their counterparts in the normal sort of troops.
The heaviness was due to increased amounts of fat producing an increase in the number,
the dread number that haunts our waking hours increased BMI. All the baboons, male or female,
were beginning to show the first indices of what is called metabolic syndrome,
very interesting trend in medicine. In recent years, what used to be the case was
metabolic diseases like diabetes, they belong in one subspecialty, cardiovascular disease,
completely different types of physicians, the two groups never even talked to each other.
What metabolic syndrome is about is the recognition that some of the things that can go wrong
predisposing towards diabetes can also increase cardiovascular disease risk. Some of the what
goes wrong there can that they're not separate subjects. And metabolic syndrome is the first
hints of vulnerability in both of these domains. These garbage dump baboons were having the earliest
signs of metabolic syndrome. They're circulating triglyceride levels were elevated, their cholesterol
levels were elevated and not just cholesterol levels in general. Lots of you who are cholesterol
aficionados will know there's two different types of cholesterol. There's good cholesterol and bad
cholesterol, HDL and LDL cholesterol. One, the good kind is being scraped off your blood vessels,
the bad kind is being deposited there. So if you're going to have your cholesterol levels be
optimal, it's not just the total levels, it's the ratio of good to bad. These garbage dump
baboons, they started having that diet and not only did total cholesterol levels go up,
the ratio, the amount of the bad cholesterol went up as well. Other aspects got bad. They began to
show insulin resistance. Some of the first steps of moving towards diabetes, they started to have
elevated insulin levels, all the stuff that you see in the settings of westernized diets when
we're all being junk food monkeys, the increased incidence of all of these metabolic disorders,
increased risk of cardiovascular disease. These are wild primates that are now coming down with
some of the same diseases that get us as we're walking out of the 7-11 on a regular basis.
There turned out to be one additional vulnerability that came in there as well,
and this didn't become apparent until a few years later, which was there was an outbreak
of tuberculosis. Tuberculosis in this part of my park, tuberculosis bovine tuberculosis,
and it turned out there was an identifiable source after a great deal of work and sleuthing.
I was able to identify the source being contaminated meat at the lodge that wound up in
this garbage dump and thus got into the baboon populations and eventually got into some of
the baboon populations living their normal foraging lifestyle, and those guys tuberculosis got some
of the animals that had some degree of spread in this garbage dump troop. It mowed them over and
killed the majority of the troop. How come that same issue once humans started having
sedentary high-density communities if instead of foraging every day where the nearest baboon
to you is 100 yards away for half the day, if instead all of you are jammed into this place
hauling out over all this tubercular meat and having a grand old time competing,
high density, one individual's illness is going to get passed around a whole lot faster?
So we've got here this classic kind of question which is, so was this a good thing or a bad thing
for these baboons? Is a westernized lifestyle a good thing or a bad thing for us? These transitions
and what we see is some advantages, some disadvantages, some things that have extended our
lifespans, some that have put us up more at risk for degenerative diseases, and remarkably this
whole garbage dump story with these baboons show the exact same pluses and minuses.
In other words, like everything you're going to be hearing about in this course,
it's complicated. And remarkably at the end here, it seems that even for a baboon, just as for us,
there are very few unambiguous rules for figuring out what to do with the choices that life throws
in our laps.
