Now, I'm a scientist and like most scientists, I go to conferences now and then and confer
with other members of my tribe and being a neuroscientist, I occasionally go to
neuroscience meetings. Now, there is a grand society of neuroscience known as
the Society for Neuroscience which every neuroscientist in the country
belongs to and there's an annual meeting and it is really quite something
because you walk into this convention center and there are 28,000 neuroscientists
there and you were there for a week and over the course of the week there are
typically 14,000 lectures or posters. It's wild. It's totally odd. One of the
oddest things about it is everywhere you go there's neuroscientists. You go into
a restaurant and people are about talking about neuroscience. You go into an
elevator, you go into the bathroom and there's guys on either side of you at
the urinal and they're arguing about giant squid axons. It's a totally weird
experience. Now, what you do is you go there and the purpose is to find out the
newest, the latest and often this is really important stuff for shaping your
own work and you'll get hints of there's a poster that's absolutely critical and
it's always the same thing. You go to see it and you know you must see it to
shape your work and there's a huge crowd of people laughing and congratulating
and you can't even push your way through the crowd or you go to this critical
poster and it turns out it's in a language you've never even heard of or you
go and you actually get to see this poster and it turns out what this person
has done wonderfully and completely is exactly the experiments you were about
to start next week. So this can be somewhat of a bruising experience and I
remember a few years ago I was at one of these conferences and at some point I
needed a break and I went outside and demoralized. I sat down sort of on the
curb there and in front of me there was a sort of stagnant pool of water and I
remember thinking there are microorganisms in there that understand
more about the brain than all 28,000 people in there put together and that's
the subject of this talk. For the very simple reason that it turns out that all
sorts of parasites can manipulate behavior of the organisms they infect.
Now what are parasites? Parasites come in lots of different forms. You can have
the simplest versions, viruses, which depending on your taste, do or do not
count as living. Bacteria, single cell organisms that are parasites, fancy
multicellular worms, protozoa, all of that, they all by definition have one
thing in common, which is these parasites parasitize you. They invade and
target organism and do things there for its own benefit. For example, the
parasite can steal the energy from the host organism. It can use it to
reproduce, to make more copies of itself. It can hijack the reproductive
machinery of the host species in order to make more copies of the parasite. There
are some wild examples out there of ways in which parasites, independent of
altering behavior, do things for their own benefit. Really bizarre complex
examples. One example, a virus called herpes, herpes simplex virus, HSV, and
lots of us know about herpes. You get a herpes cold sore infection and what it
has done is infect your nerves. It's at the nerve endings in your skin and as we
all know, herpes after an initial infection disappears. It doesn't really
disappear. It becomes latent hiding inside some of yourselves. Now what we
also know is when you've gone into latency with herpes, when does it come
out of latency? When you're stressed a year later, half a century later, stress
of all sorts, chemotherapy, social stress, bereavement, all of those, and herpes
comes out of latency. Why is that a good idea? Because it turns out that stress
suppresses your immune system. So period of stress, your immune system is on the
floor. Great time for herpes to come out, make more copies of itself, and then go
hide back, go latent again. So the question becomes, how does herpes know
that the host organism is stressed and this virus is able to measure levels of
stress hormones in your bloodstream? Another example, a parasite, tropanosomes,
and what it does is evade your immune system in an amazingly clever way. Now
normally what you have is your immune system is always on the prowl to spot
something that doesn't belong, a foreign invasive cell, pathogen, whatever, and how
the immune system does this, is look for alien markers on the surface of the
parasite and say, hey, that protein sticking out on the surface of this is not
in our library of us proteins, and thus your immune system begins to develop
antibodies, which within a week or two is ready to attack the parasite and free
you with it. What does the tropanosome do every week or so? It withdraws its
surface proteins, uses genes to juggle and shuffle the cards a bit, and puts up a
completely novel surface protein. In other words, just when your immune system is
ready to go after it, it's immunologically invisible. Now another parasite, the blood
fluke schistosomes, schistosomes, which call schistosomiasis, even more clever,
what it does is it steals some of the surface proteins from your own cells so
that your immune system doesn't even notice it doesn't belong there. So all of
these are cool, amazing examples of parasites being complex and parasitizing
you. Where the really interesting stuff happens, though, is when the parasite is
manipulating the behavior of the host for its own benefit. Now there's some
examples that involve ectoparasites. These are parasites that don't actually get
in the body of the organism, but are just outside and doing their parasitic
thing. Here's one example. There's a mite, some type of mite, which is an
ectoparasite for ants. What it does is it rides on the back of an ant, and it's
not clear to me at all how you ride on the back of the ant, but it's even
riding on the head of the ant. Now what it does is it parasitizes one aspect of
ant behavior, which is in this species of ant, they got some food or other in its
mouth and they come back to the nest, and there's some behavior where they use
their something or others to tap on the mandible of the other ant and the ant
disgorges its food. What does this mite know how to do? It could lean forward and
do the same thing, tap on the mandible of this ant, the ant disgorges food, which
is soon happily consumed by the mite. Another example where an ectoparasite
is altering behavior, this is some type of pinworm, and what it does is it lays
eggs on the fur of a rodent. And what it has the chemical means to do is make the
rodent unbelievably itchy. Rodent needs to scratch itself, groom itself, how do
you do that if you're a rodent? You gnaw at it with your teeth, you groom there,
you use your mouth, and in the process you ingest some of those eggs from that
pinworm and inside the gut of a rodent is the ideal place for these to reproduce.
Now what gets really interesting is when you look at endoparasites, endoparasites
which get into the body and alter behavior. Now some of the most interesting
examples of this involve sequential parasitism. What's this about? This is
where a parasite to do its thing to go through its life cycle has to infect one
type of species and then gets transferred to another one where it does its
reproducing and has to get back to the original one, a multi-species cycle. And
all sorts of clever ways in which this is done, there's some parasite that blind
the organism they infect so it's less able to evade a predator, a predator
which is the other species it needs to get into. It can weaken the energetics of
the animal so it's less able to get away from a predator. Here's a great example,
one parasite which moves between a species of fish and a species of
water bird. What it does when it's in the fish is it messes with functioning of
the gills so that the fish has to swim closer to the surface to get more
oxygen, more readily eaten by the bird, bird eventually, secretes, excretes, the
parasite in the species falls back in the water, eaten by the fish, goes around
in a circle there. Now these are cases where you are changing the behavior of
an animal basically by messing it up, making it less than optimal. What happens
in some cases is when you are truly altering the behavior, you, the parasite,
of the organism you have invaded. Now I'm going to spare you from all those
Latin taxonomic terms and continuing with just commonplace terms. First example
with barnacles. There's one type of barnacle that parasitizes some kind of
sand crab and what is able to do is somehow inject hormones, crab hormones
into the crab. Remarkably it injects some sort of estrogenic hormone. Estrogen,
typical of females, estrogen in crabs feminizes crab behavior. You see we're
getting to very strange terrain here and when injected into a male crab, the male
starts doing female typical crab behavior including digging a nest in the
sand to lay its eggs. Now this male crab is not going to be laying any eggs but
the barnacle does at that point. It has gotten its host to make a nest for it and
when this barnacle gets on female crabs it does the exact same thing but first it
castrates the female, it destroys its ovaries what's called parasitic
castration. So this is pretty weird. More examples. Here's a truly strange one.
This is a type of worm. This is a hair worm whose life cycle involves getting
into crickets but it can only reproduce in water and I kid you not what it does
is produce a desire. A desire. What it does is it makes crickets jump into
bodies of water where they drown and that's just when the hair worm comes out
of the crickets body and those of you who only have the audio version you are
missing one of the most grotesque pictures imaginable right now of showing
one of these worms exit. They know how to produce a suicidal state of
existential dread in crickets or whatever it is they're doing this being
another example. The examples get even stranger. Now we are dealing with a
Brazilian moth which when it's in the caterpillar stage can be parasitized by
a type of wasp. What happens? The wasp stings it and in the process lays eggs
inside the caterpillar. Now after a certain amount of time the eggs inside
are hatching and using the innards of the caterpillar for nutrients but no more
than that what happens is eventually these eggs and the pupae they've made
burst out of the caterpillar but some of them stay inside and like these little
homunculi in the middle of the nervous system of these caterpillars make the
caterpillar defend these new hatchling wasps make the caterpillar take this
strange stance where it goes waving back and forth what does that accomplish
careful experimentation shows that this chases off stink bugs that would
otherwise be eating these baby wasps. You have forced this caterpillar into
defending your babies even stranger. Now there's an example here of a fungus
that infects a certain species of ant a certain rainforest ant and when it gets
in there ingested by the ant down on the forest floor it induces a behavioral
change in the ant. The ant develops what is called a phototropism which means it
is suddenly attracted to light. These are ants that are normally spending their
time on the floor of the forest and instead they have this desperate desperate
pole to bask in the sun they climb up trees and when they get to a particular
height facing in a particular direction at a particular temperature the
parasite takes over and causes the ant to chomp on a leaf there where it stays
and dies and at this point what happens is the fungus emerges and grows on the
ant. This is totally bizarre and what you can do is careful scientific studies
showing that if you prevent the ant from going quite that high or go in a
different orientation in the tree or go even what you get is the fungus doesn't
grow this is the optimal place somehow the fungus is able to make the ant go
to precisely the height that it needs on the tree. Now here's an even more bizarre
creepy example if you haven't been a nerve by this so far and this involves
the cockroach which is parasitized by a wasp and this is without question the
most disgusting example so far. What you get is the wasp stings the host the
cockroach and lays eggs in there we've seen that theme already but what this
parasite this wasp these baby wasps when they hatch knows how to do is change the
neurochemistry the brain chemistry of the cockroach. Now cockroaches don't
actually have brains but they have clusters of neurons that are sort of
proto-cockroaches brains and what happens is that the wasp is able to
change the neurochemistry of the cockroach and the cockroach loses its
capacity for volitional movement and at that point the wasp I kid you not gets
a hold of the antenna of the cockroach and walks it over to its nest and the
term that's actually used in these scientific papers is the wasp leads the
cockroach as if on a quote leash. At that point you've got the cockroach
positioned exactly where you want it to be and everything is perfect at that
point and then it does what you really wanted to do which is burst out of the
body of the cockroach conditions that would make Sigourney Weaver horrified
body bursting open and what did this involve bringing this cockroach and this
zombified state leading it where you need it to go how are they doing it
people are beginning to learn more and more about this and again in some cases
changing the brain chemistry you know with a cockroach example it's very hard
to read and figure out who you're less interested in rooting for the wasp or
the cockroach because they're both kind of disturbing in this one actually what
you mostly wonder is like what goes into the brains of people who decide to
devote their life's work to figuring this out but figuring it out they are
indeed doing and figuring out some of the mechanisms how do these parasites pull
it off and they make parasite versions of some of the neurochemicals and the
host organism and inject them we're beginning to understand that now the
really interesting domain of parasites manipulating host behavior is when we
start looking at mammals because as we all know mammals are so much cooler than
bizarre little cockroaches and pinworms and crabs and barnacles when you get
parasites that can alter the behavior of mammals for the benefit of the parasite
itself now an important distinction here which is parasites can induce what
would be called sickness behavior the behavior of the host organism changes
not because the parasite is manipulating in a way for the benefit of the parasite
itself but just because the organism is sick and its behavior changed that's not
what I'm talking about here these are cases where the parasite is able to
selectively target a particular behavior of the mammalian host for its own
benefit and remarkably one example of this has been known about for centuries we
all know this one which is rabies virus rabies virus is like all viruses
some form of parasite what does rabies virus do we all know it is finding a
way to make as many copies of itself and pass them on now there's lots of ways
this could be done rabies virus could have evolved the means by which it gets
into you and gets into your nasal passages and what it causes you to do is
sneeze dramatically and spritz the stuff all over the person sitting in
front of you at a movie it could give the infected organism this insatiable
need to lick somebody else and pass on the rabies that way what we all know is
what rabies does is it makes you rabid that's the way it is transmitted it makes
host organisms rabid more aggressive it more likely to bite another individual
and copies of the virus virions copies are lurking around in the saliva there
of the rabid animal and fraudily get transferred to the next organism
altering behavior think about this you've got scientists who sit around they
squabble they have childish fights they try to block each other students
doctoral theses they get into it at conferences all of it try to understand
the neuroscience of aggression and rabies virus understands how to
manipulate aggression better than all those scientists put together but there's
one vulnerability on the part of the rabies virus though and as we'll see
shortly another example bypasses it what's the vulnerability it's the non
specificity of what the rabies virus does which is it makes a host rabid which
may then bite another organism another organism where rabies doesn't have the
means to manipulate behavior and get passed on it may be transferred into a
dead-end species and that's a vulnerability for rabies thank God
rabbits for example may get rabies but not get rabid because it doesn't get
passed on from there that would be a dead-end now we transition to the most
amazing example of all of a parasite manipulating mammalian behavior because
as you'll see it avoids this non specificity of accidentally stumbling
into a dead-end species for the most part it has a way to make that less
likely so this involves a protozoan parasite called toxoplasma full name
toxoplasma Gandhi Gandhi I believe and from now on just to avoid that potential
mistake we will refer to it as toxo in a very familiar sort of way now toxo
toxoplasma will be familiar to all sorts of people people who have been
pregnant or have hung out around pregnant people because what you're
supposed to do at that point is become terrified of toxoplasma and where is it
found in cat feces cat scat and it is well known if you are pregnant the cat
box should go outside you shouldn't do gardening in a way that may expose you to
cat feces why because you may get infected with toxoplasma which can get
into the fetal nervous system and wreak all sorts of bad havoc there but that's
not what toxo is normally about because it has a distinctive life cycle that
involves a remarkable manipulation behavior one of those sequential
parasites that moves one species to another and has to go back again now
for reasons of great mystery toxo has this limitation it can only reproduce
sexually in the guts of cats actually probably not mysteriously I'm sure
there's people who know all about this I happen not to but it can only reproduce
in the gut of cats reproduced sexually there gets excreted in the cat feces
feces are frequently eaten by rodents and now toxo is inside the rodent and what
has toxo's evolutionary challenge been to find a way to get the infected rodent
inside the stomach of a cat to complete its life cycle now what does it do we
could have seen one of those scenarios alluded to before it could cripple the
mice it could that sort of thing the rodent may not be as capable of evading
a predator here's what it actually does you take a lab rat you take a lab mouse
you take one of these that's a descendant of 11 d zillion generations of
laboratory rodents who have never seen a cat in their lives and you take some cat
pee and put it over in the corner of the cage and the rodent will move to the
other end it has an instinctual hardwired aversion to the odors of cats so
what toxo does is it gets rid of that aversion rodents who are infected with
toxo stop being afraid of cat smells and what is most amazing is they now
develop an attraction to it the first paper describing this coming up with
one of the great all-time titles for a paper fatal attraction in toxoplasma
infected rodents it makes the rodents like the smell of cats you take a rodent
and you expose it to cat smells one of the other things that happens is its
secretes stress hormones it doesn't when it's infected rodents like the smell of
cats when they are infected with toxoplasma toxoplasma thereby makes
the rodent more likely to wind up in the stomach of the cat because it came way
close to it to investigate its beloved source of attractive odor and toxo has
just completed its life cycle now the explanation for this is obvious which is
well of course the rodents behavior is messed up because they've got this
parasite in them as it turns out in their brain and they're just like not
active normally that's not the case these toxo infected rodents they show
perfect normal learning their olfactory system works normally their social
behavior is normal you are not just laying waste to their nervous system
okay so you say it's a little bit more specific than that you are laying waste
to the part of the brain that does fear that does aversion you should be
knocking out all sorts of hardwired instinctual fears in these rodents
because toxo is just turning the fear part of the brain into Swiss cheese but
no that's not what you see either which is rodents that are infected with toxo
are for the most part still afraid of the other things that rodents are
instinctually afraid of big open spaces bright lights it is not just
generically doing in fear pathways in the brains of these guys it is doing it
selectively this is absolutely amazing this is like there's some parasite that
infects you and it doesn't change anything about your behavior your
predilection for how you dress your SAT scores what TV programs you like to all
that it does is give you this insatiable need to break into the zoo at nice and
French kiss the pissiest looking polar bear around and that's how the parasite
completes its life cycle this is absolutely wild and you can see another
measure of the specificity of what toxo is doing you look at closely related
parasites proto-parasites are they able to induce this fatal attraction in
rodents no they don't and they don't have this limitation of only reproducing in
cats you look at what infected rats feel about the smell of other predators and
it doesn't change those and there's actually a company called leg up where
if you look for Christmas present you can get an assortment pack of urine
samples from all sorts of different predators minks and bobcats and tigers
apparently also and you can just run wild and as we did in my lab studying
this it is only a loss of aversion to the smell of cats this is totally amazing
so how does this work how does this work this is something my lab has been
trying to understand for a number of years now and we're getting a little
bit of a sense of it so toxoplasma gets into the body of rodents gets into the
gut because we heard the rodents will ingest infected feces from cats so it's
now inside the body of the rodent and what you see is slowly over the course
of weeks afterward it migrates from the gut into muscle for example but it also
migrates into the brain into the nervous system of these rodents where it does
its trick of changing behavior now the way we think it does it is it knows
exactly where in the brain to migrate actually winds up all over the brain but
it preferentially goes to the perfect brain region that is most famously
involved in fear aversion a part of the brain called the amygdala like if you
want to muck around with an organisms fear anxiety phobias whatever you want
to land in the amygdala and start manipulating things there so it knows
how to get to precisely the right place what we see as of taping now in 2011 is
once in the amygdala toxo is able to cause neurons there to atrophy
disconnecting circuits is disconnecting some of this fear circuitry how it is
selectively doing to the fear of cat smells as opposed to the fear of bright
open spaces we have in a clue we're trying to find out but okay what if we
just explain the loss of aversion but that only explains half of it how is
toxo managing to now produce an attraction a fatal attraction for the
smell of the rodents and remarkably what we see is toxo is able to do some
rewiring in the brain and a circuit is hijacked a circuit that normally
responds to sexually arousing odors in these rodents listen to this what
toxo does is have a rat that smells cat odors and thanks to undoing this
circuit and being able to divert things into this other circuit the animal
reacts as if he is smelled a sexually arousing pheromone from a female rodent
he has decided that cat urine smells sexy and thus he soon winds up inside
the stomach of the cat this is very very unexpected alteration behavior of
course what you're wondering right now is well do humans get infected with
toxo does it have any behavioral effects and the answer is yes there's by now a
very solid literature showing toxoplasma infection is associated with an
increased risk of schizophrenia that's kind of interesting and it turns out that
it causes some changes in neurochemistry brain chemistry similar to some of the
things that seems to go wrong in schizophrenia schizophrenics have a
higher than expected rate of having had toxo exposure somewhere earlier in
life cats when they were a kid cat exposure of their mother during
pregnancy so that's one domain but there's another as well which is it has
more subtle effects on behavior there's now a literature showing that men who
are infected with toxo get a little bit disinhibited with their behavior they
get a little bit less restrained there are now separate publications independent
replication the thing you look for in a study showing that people infected with
toxo are something like three to four times more likely to get themselves
killed in car accidents involving reckless speeding that could be because
it is producing perhaps a fatal attraction for driving quickly alternative
it could just be messing with coordination and there's evidence for
that here's an additional literature emerging suggesting it's affecting the
behavior toxoplasma infected humans as reported in independently replicated
studies increases for the same severity of depression the likelihood of
impulsively committing suicide this is utterly wild stuff that we barely
understand at this stage so what are some of the lessons to be taken from here
what is obvious to anyone once they think about it is there's got to be a
gazillion more examples out there of parasites manipulating our behavior the
mind reels at the possibilities there but what it also does is teach us a little
bit of evolutionary humility now we humans we mammals we vertebrates we are
very proud of ourselves we humans we have opposable thumbs and we can work
iPads and we've got big brains and we can lactate and all not personally but we
can lactate as a species all this fancy mammalian stuff what this toxo story
teaches you is we are not necessarily the most evolved or the most clever
species out there
