You find yourself at a dinner party, realize you're feeling very disaffected.
Everybody else there is speaking a foreign language.
You feel pressure on your foot. You feel somebody else's foot on your foot.
You glance up and you have eye contact with the attractive stranger sitting opposite you.
You suddenly realize you must come up with the one word that will captivate them and you know
that one word. The word is, you say it. They leap up. Suddenly all the guests are gone.
The table is gone. The food, the plates. The two of you are floating up in the air.
The sensuality of the moment made even more heightened by the clouds brushing against you.
But then, then you suddenly begin to sob. Because all of your grandparents, deceased,
have been watching you. They're disappointed in you. And you realize the very severe looking man
in a black frock coat standing next to your maternal grandmother is William Seward.
And then suddenly with a voice of great clarity and nostalgia, you say William Henry Seward,
U.S. Secretary of State Andrew Johnson Administration. You know, one of those dreams.
That's a basic tautology that insofar as kidneys are kidney-shaped organs, dreams are dreamlike.
And what you immediately want to know is why do we dream? Why do we dream?
Why do our brains work that way that we should do that? Now, the thing about dreams is the
rapidity, rapidity, the emotional content seconds after meeting somebody in your dream,
you are doing some activity thoroughly unlikely. Because in real life, it wouldn't work that way.
If you were at that dinner table and the foot was being pressed on yours and you glanced up and
things were about to take off, maybe they wouldn't because you realize this person actually is
totally neurotic or they've got a piece of broccoli stuck between their teeth and that
has sort of taken the ardor out of things or you suddenly realize you left the car lights on.
In dreams, though, all this sort of stuff can occur. Rapid transitions, heightened emotions,
disinhibition of emotions. And not only are dreams representing things we wouldn't do in waking life,
but if you managed to reflect for two seconds, these are things you wouldn't possibly want to do
in real life. So the question becomes, of course, why do we dream? Now, some of the time it serves
absolutely concrete purposes. For example, it could be a very good way to let you know that
like you need to wake up and urinate. Suddenly you have a dream completely built around that or
it could tell you about other sort of bodily states. I remember I had a dream once, this was
way back during the time of the Ayatollah Khomeini, and I dreamt that I was some sort of resistance
fighter, was captured by Ayatollah, and this was clearly a night when I had a mosquito bite just
before going to sleep, captured by the Ayatollah, brought out and saying, infidel is going to be
executed in the town square, but Allah and His great, great beneficence and pity allows the
infidel one last wish. What is it? Speak. And I say, can you scratch me on the shoulder just
over here? It's very itchy. Some of the time dreams are just giving us concrete information.
Some of the time maybe dreams are letting the God speak to us, or it's a chance to work out
some of your mother issues without all that repression getting in the way. Or maybe it's
a chance to problem solve. There is evidence that dreams sort of foster creative problem
solving. Then there's a whole view that what dreams are about is taking underused circuitry
in your brain, ones that haven't gotten enough activity during the day, and here's a way to get
them sort of warmed up again, these gibberish pathways. And then of course, there's the scenario
of having the sex dream with some completely unlikely person. So the next day at work,
when you encounter them in the hall, you're acting all weird and uncomfortable, or maybe it's just to
keep the surrealists in business. But in order to get a sense of why we have dreams, we've got to
start off with why we sleep. Now sleep is this very ancient phylogenetic phenomenon. What that's
a fancy way of saying is you see stuff that looks like sleep in all sorts of unlikely species.
In drosophila, fruit flies, in worms, like you don't even feel convinced that they're awake.
How do you know that they're dreaming? And what you notice is they can have periods where they are
inactive, they are resistant to stimuli. That's a fly speaking, sleeping. And you can show more
evidence for it. You can induce what's called sleep debt. If you keep the fly awake, keep nudging it
so it can't sleep, and then let it do its own thing, it will go into that torporous state
for a longer period than if you didn't keep it awake. Or you can show that if you deprive flies
of their sleep state, you impair their function, presumably they don't buzz as well. Or you can
show that if you take a fly and put it in a more complex environment, it will do more of that sleep
stuff, just like us. Sleep in all sorts of other species as well. One of the things you see is
that carnivores sleep a whole lot more than prey species, which makes a lot of sense. If you are a
wildebeest, you're spending an awful lot of time being unrestful, keeping an eye out for the lions who,
if they ever get a meal and scarf down a whole bunch of meat, can then go 20 hours a day of sleeping
without getting in need of some food. Carnivores really specialize in sleep. Now what other sorts
of creatures? You then find weird oddities in the sleep world. You find fish that can sleep
with half of a brain at a time. You find birds, migrating birds that are able to sleep while
they're flying. Again, this trick of half of a brain at a time, you begin to realize sleep is
this very widespread phenomenon. What you begin to look at when you look closer is it's not just
this unmodified, undifferentiated state of sleeping being asleep. Instead, there's a whole
architecture to sleep. There's slow wave sleep. There's deep sleep. There's REM sleep, rapid
eye movement sleep. There's all these different stages of sleep. And very interestingly, there's
a number of different psychiatric disorders where you see that the architecture, the structure of
sleep has been changed. For example, you could see this in depression. In major clinical depression,
there is this change in that structure. Most of us go through approximately 90-minute cycles of
going through different sleep stages, and that pattern is altered in major depression. And this
is one of the most striking ways of showing depression, oh, people are just kind of indulging
themselves and not really pushing themselves to go out and perk up. It's a biological disorder.
It's a biochemical disorder. And some of the greatest evidence you can get is while someone
with major depression is asleep, their brain is working differently. The structure of their sleep
has changed. Now, people have been trying to study sleep for quite some time, and there's a time
honored ancient technology for looking at it, which is to look at the electrical activity of
large parts of the brain all at once, doing EEGs, electroencephalography, which will tell you
something about the degree of alertness of different brain regions. And what you see is
that there is a whole structured pattern of what the EEG does at different points of sleep.
And EEG's patterns like that are fairly restricted to mammals. Reptiles don't have
sort of waves of electrical excitation during sleep, but we do. And traditionally,
people have been able to get a lot of information by knowing when someone is in a particular sleep
stage. Now, one of the things this EEG technique can show you is that when you go into slow wave
sleep, the deepest stage of sleep, overall electrical activity decreases in the brain.
And this begins to give you some insight as to one of the things sleep is about, particularly
the slow wave sleep state, which is it's a time that your brain restores energy. Lots of sleep
deprivation, you induce what would be called a sleep debt, and you sleep more afterward. And
what will be shown is a greater percentage of the sleep period afterward is spent in this
restorative slow wave sleep stage. Now, it turns out stress does some really interesting things
in here, which is stress, as we all know, has adverse effects on sleep. Stress makes it
more difficult to fall asleep. And as we know, lack of sleep is stressful. And suddenly you're
in this vicious cycle where stress impairs sleep, which causes more stress. And all you go around
in is a loop in there. And one of the things that's known is showing that stress itself has an effect
on some of the energy stores in the brain, this compound called glycogen. And glycogen is a storage
form of energy in the brain and stress decreases the extent to which glycogen is built back up again
during sleep. Stress is not only making it harder to fall asleep, but once you are asleep,
it's reducing the quality, the efficiency, the restorative energetic effects of sleep.
And if you really want to see an impact between stress and sleep quality, not only have less sleep,
but have fragmented sleep, and especially sleep fragmented at unpredictable times,
that just wreaks havoc with the ability of your brain to restore energy stores during the slow wave
of sleep. Now in more recent years, EEG approaches have been made considerably more fancy by coupling
it to modern brain imaging techniques, techniques like PET scans, MRIs, magnetic resonance imaging.
All of these techniques allow you to suddenly look at not the brain as a whole, but particular
subregions of the brain. And which now allows you to do these really cool studies, which is you
look at somebody sleeping and you use standard old EEGs to tell you what sleep stage they're in.
And then meanwhile, what the brain imaging techniques tell you is which parts of the brain
have become more active, have become less active, really cool stuff you can do with this.
And one of the most interesting studies was done by Alan Braun and his colleagues working
at the National Institutes of Health. And here's what they did. Somehow or other, they bullied
some volunteers into going a god-awful 24 to 53 hours without sleep. And it's hard to imagine
what the enticement was to do that, but they got people to do that. And eventually, they dragged
them in these sort of jello leftovers of these once intact people, brought them into the lab,
and no, they still couldn't go to sleep. They were stuck in a brain scanner in order to get
baseline measures, just people lying there, exhausted with their sleep deprivation, run
them through the MRI, get some sense of what their brain is doing at that point. And finally,
finally, they are allowed to fall asleep and they are snug as a bug inside the scanner there.
And you could now begin to see what changes occur in particular brain regions as someone
transitions from being awake into going into their sleep state. Now, no surprise in agreement
with the overall picture of what you saw from EEGs. And remember, EEGs are telling you about
electrical activity across large swaths of the brain. But now with the MRI, you're looking at
particular subregions. And what you see makes perfect sense given the EEGs. Overall, there's a
decrease in activity in most brain regions with the onset of slow wave sleep. In some areas,
particularly stand out, there's a system in the brain called the reticular activating system.
And what it has tons to do with is alertness, arousal, poke your finger on a pin and your
reticular system leaps into action, be really awake and alert during a lecture, perhaps you are,
it is going gangbusters and perfectly logically, its level of activity is picked up by these
scanners goes way down with the onset of slow wave sleep. In addition, you decrease the activity
of all sorts of parts of the brain that have motoric functions. Motoric, they give commands to
your muscles to do that. Yeah, you're just lying there. You're not moving a whole lot.
That part of the brain has become quiescent. Also, some parts of the brain that are centrally
involved in memory become very quiet as well. So, okay, the person's there fine, finally sleeping
in the scanner and 90 minutes or so into it, they hit their first REM stage, their first stage of
rapid eye movement. And here, the picture changes in a very interesting way. First off, this slow
wave sleep picture of uniform decrease in activity throughout the brain, suddenly some regions become
active. Amazingly, some regions become even more active than when you were awake. Some of these
regions, first are parts of the brain that are involved in autonomic function, autonomic function.
This is your brain controlling stuff in your body that you normally are not terribly regulating
of consciously your heart rate, your breathing rate, contraction in your stomach walls, all sorts
of stuff like that. What happens with the onset of REM sleep, rapid eye movement sleep, the sleep
stage associated with dreaming, your heart rate has increased, your breathing rate, you are turning
on aspects of this autonomic nervous system, and perhaps even more so than when you were awake.
And this is suddenly the world of you fluttering if you happen to be a puppy and everybody is
looking at you and cooing over all the cute stuff you're doing while you're asleep, as your autonomic
nervous system is just going like mad. Another region of the brain which gets activated, perhaps
even more than when awake, with the onset of dreaming REM stage, part of the brain called the
limbic system. Limbic system, and this is a loose association of a bunch of brain structures,
what is the limbic system about? It's about emotion. It's about aggression and sexual arousal
and anxiety and fear and predator avoidance and attraction and all that stuff. The limbic system
gets highly active. Coming out of lying on the floor during slow wave sleep, the structures of
the limbic system suddenly become very active. And that makes perfect sense as well as we are
hurtling towards understanding what dreams are about. Dreams are just marinated in functioning
of the limbic system. Another cluster of brain regions become more active, a region called the
hippocampus. Hippocampus which has lots to do with memory formation, parts of the cortex that are
involved in memory formation, memory retrieval as well. What's going on here? This is, as we will
see, the ability of dreams to be dredging up memories. Perhaps it has something to do with
reviewing some of the information, some of the memories that came through during the day,
and then influencing dreams, all of that. Then there's a really interesting area of the brain
that becomes highly active when you go into REM sleep. And this is an area of the cortex
called associative sensory cortex. Okay, what's this about? Let's look at one domain of it,
associative visual cortex. How does your brain normally process vision? You see something,
visual information comes in through your eyes, gets sent up to the brain to a particular region,
primary visual cortex. And what those neurons there do is just the, you know,
joe blow workmanship of decoding what you're seeing, a bunch of the neurons there specialize in
detecting dots, and they pass information onto a next layer that turned the dots into lines,
and then another layer of moving lines and curves and all of that. All this processing,
extracting of sensory features, and eventually all of this stuff gets shuttled upstairs to the more
advanced, the more complex, associative visual cortex. That's not the part of the brain that's
telling you whether this pixel or that pixel has a certain degree of brightness. This is the part of
the brain that's generating complex visual stimuli. That's telling you you're looking at a whatever
you're looking at this individual, you're looking at a tree, you're looking at a complex visual image.
So what happens during REM sleep? This associative visual cortex suddenly gets really active.
Weirdly though, the primary visual cortex, those layers doing those first steps of processing,
turning dots into lines, and lines into moving lines, and curves are absolutely silent. What is
this? This is dreaming. This is dreaming. You are dreaming visual imagery that's not for real,
that's not really coming into your head because your sound asleep. It is generating all on its own.
And this is a property of a bunch of these sensory systems suddenly amid your primary
auditory cortex being very quiet. That would be turning a single note into a chord, into a cluster
of sounds. It's but the more complex associative auditory cortex is going away and whatever is
highly active and whatever sort of you are seeing in your dream, you're hearing complex sounds as well
and more insight into what dreams are about. So what we see here is this theme, slow wave sleep,
tremendous decrease in activity of lots of areas throughout the brain, transition to REM sleep,
rapid eye movement sleep, the sleep stage where you are most likely to be dreaming,
and all sorts of interesting parts of the brain becoming highly active at this point,
and here's where we get to the really interesting exception. And it's got to do with a part of
the brain called the prefrontal cortex. In the prefrontal cortex activity hits the floor,
it goes down dramatically with the onset of REM sleep. Now why is this interesting?
Prefrontal cortex is arguably the most interesting part of the brain. It's the part of the brain that
most completely sort of defines who we are as humans. We've got more of it than virtually any
other species out there as a percentage of total brain weight. You don't see very fancy frontal
courtesies and lots of other species. And what we will see in the next lecture is your frontal
cortex has a whole lot to do with regulating behavior. Regulating behavior, if you want to
summarize what it does, the frontal cortex makes you do the harder thing if it's the right thing
to do. It resists the easy solution. The frontal cortex is the thing that keeps you from belching
during the silent point of a wedding ceremony, or you've just eaten the most horrendous meal in
your life, but you have to enthusiastically ask the host what the recipe is. It's your frontal
cortex that keeps you from being a serial murderer. It is putting all the restraints on behavior.
It is doing gratification postponement, long-term planning, self-discipline. The frontal cortex
is critical to that. Interestingly, if you could damage to the frontal cortex, all sorts of aspects
of behavior are impaired, your ability to regulate, appropriately regulate behavior.
And you will see circumstances where somebody with frontal damage, perhaps after a stroke,
absolutely understands the rules of some situation, whether it is a formal game that you are playing
some such thing. They understand the rules. They can even state them, but they can't keep themselves
from doing the easier, less prudent thing. There's loss of volitional control over behavior.
And you better bet there's all sorts of interesting legal implications of that.
A whole world of people who, thanks to frontal damage, may know the difference between right
and wrong, but nonetheless cannot regulate their behavior. Another interesting feature of the
frontal cortex, which is it's the last part of the brain to fully develop. Kids do not have much
in the way of a functioning frontal cortex, as any of us who have kids, or any of us who were kids
and are capable of some honest reflection, will attest to amazingly, the frontal cortex is not
fully matured until you're about 25 years old. And this was the basis a number of years ago
of the Supreme Court saying the brain of a 17-year-old committing some appalling violent crime
has to be considered differently than the brain of an adult, because it is still neurologically
immature. You can't execute somebody who did some crime when they were 17. More features of frontal
cortex, you will find it has lower than normal levels of activity in people with sociopathic
personalities, people with repressive personalities, have overactive frontal courtesies, people with
a neurological disease called PICS disease, or frontal temporal dementia can damage in the frontal
cortex, and how do you begin to pick it up? Memory problems know the person starts doing
all sorts of disinhibited inappropriate things. And that's the insight that suddenly comes roaring
in there. That's why dreams are dream-like, because your frontal cortex is taken out of action.
You are having all the autonomic stuff going, this aroused state of breathing faster in your
REM state, and you're generating all this visual auditory olfactory imagery that's not based on
anything really coming in there. Your limbic system is roaring along. And why is the limbic system
roaring along? Because an awful lot of what the frontal cortex does is send inhibitory projections
into the limbic system, and it's working like mad during normal days saying to the limbic system,
yeah, yeah, you actually want to strangle this person who cut in front of your line, but don't do
it, don't do it, you're going to regret it. The frontal cortex is raining in the limbic system's
emotionality. And then during dreams, the frontal cortex's metabolic rate drops down to the floor,
and the limbic system runs wild. And that's why dreams are dream-like. And suddenly,
you're dreaming that you can fly, or you could breathe underwater, or you're the president of
the world, or you're in some grandmaster chess tournament against Lady Gaga. It just goes out
of control at that point, because this part of the brain that imposes linear, rational regulation
of your emotional brain is out to lunch when you go into REM stage. Now, of course, this on first
pass seems to describe the solution to everything. Why is it that dreams are dream-like? It's because
during REM sleep, your prefrontal cortex goes very much offline, metabolic rate goes down,
and as a result, the limbic system disinhibited, runs wild, and you have dream-like content to
your dream. Notice this really hasn't gotten us very far, because all we've done is redefine
the question, why are dreams dream-like? It's because the frontal cortex goes way down during
REM sleep, which of course brings up the question, why does the frontal cortex go offline during REM
sleep? People are still trying to understand that. Now, what people don't have a handle on yet is,
is there a relationship, for example, between how much the frontal cortex silences during REM sleep
and just how vivid your dreams are? Nobody knows that. Also, what's not known is,
is there an inverse relationship between how active your frontal cortex is during the day,
what its metabolic rate is like, and how much it then goes offline during REM sleep? A suggestion
of that. Remember just mentioning people with tight repressive personalities, something spoken
about in an earlier lecture. People with repressive personalities, highly emotionally
regimented, they have normal levels of frontal cortical function that are higher than most other
peoples. Could it be because their frontal cortices are working so hard during the day
that those go really, really offline during dream stages, and dreams of people with repressive
personalities put everybody else's to shame in terms of vividness and nuttiness? Maybe.
Nobody knows about that one. More questions that remain. One is, try to understand with the
prefrontal cortex individual differences beyond simply extremes, like these repressive personalities,
individual differences with things like content. And content still is not understood in the slightest.
What remains sort of unknown in sleep science really are two things. The first is, as we saw
this big mechanistic question, why is it that the frontal cortex goes so offline with the onset of
REM sleep and then everything else cascading from there, more research is needed? And where do
individual differences come from? What is the explanation for the content of dreams? Essentially
what we're asking is, what is the neurobiological basis for why some of us are spending our REM
stages in chess grandmaster tournaments against Lady Gaga? And for others, that's not quite what
comes up on a regular basis. What we have here is one of the remaining mysteries of science,
one of the things to be explained to understand the nature of life, as every scientist is required
to say at this point, more research is needed.
