In the year 2000, I got a phone call that I had been waiting for for 27 years.
And it had something to do with an event that occurred back when I was in high school.
In the early 70s, in the aftermath of the 60s, I was at this progressive hippie high
school in New York City filled with all of us wannabe hippies and one of the things that
happened during that time was there was an enormous rock festival in Watkins Glen, New
York.
600,000 people showed up there.
It was apparently the biggest rock concert of its time.
They put Woodstock to shame and amid the 600,000 people who went to it were two of our friends.
Bonnie with her peasant blouses and bandana, Mitch with his ponytail.
These were two friends of ours.
Bonnie was working in a summer camp just outside New York City.
Mitch hitched a ride up there.
The two of them from there left.
They hitched a ride off to Watkins Glen and nobody ever saw them again.
We knew they could not possibly have run away people and our crowd didn't do that.
Mitch had money in his bank account, so did Bonnie.
They hadn't touched it.
They hadn't run away.
Something had happened to them.
We wound up as a group running around the village in New York, putting up posters about
them missing, talking to grizzled sheriffs in upstate New York, hearing about cults that
kidnapped kids at the end of each day of searching, coming back and having our nightmares
about rape and torture and murder.
This was one of the central events of my adolescence.
It eventually became the longest unsolved mystery about a disappearance of adolescence.
And then the phone call came.
We had had our 25th reunion, high school, and there was a ceremony that sort of was
in memory of Bonnie and Mitch.
There was some media coverage.
Remember that case back when those two kids who would now be middle-aged still missing?
And the right stranger happened to see the right article and called up the authorities.
And suddenly there was an explanation.
And suddenly those of us who barely knew each other from 25 years before strangers
rocketing emails, phone calls all across the country saying, finally we had an explanation
to what happened to Bonnie and Mitch.
And it was a logical explanation, but despite that, there was always this itch that all
of us felt in the aftermath, if this is what happened, I'll really believe it if you could
show me the bodies.
And what this lecture is about is this strange need that we have in so many different cultures
to be shown the bodies, to retrieve the bodies.
And of course the question is, why do we want to get the bodies back?
Why is that so important?
And it turns out there's all sorts of reasons why that occurs.
Some of the time it is utterly, tragically, painfully obvious that the individual is dead,
but you still want the body back for some affirmation of that event.
And we all know an example of this, and this was the nearest thing we had to a holy national
right in a long time in the aftermath of 9-11, the workers there doing the virtually sacred
task of trying to find the bodies of the victims there.
Give us back the bodies.
Another case, 2000, a Russian submarine, the Kursk, sank and clearly nobody survived it,
and deep sea divers in the aftermath risked their lives in incredibly dangerous salvage
operations to try to bring back the bodies.
And Chile, after the murderous regime of Augusto Pinochet, way back when, and all the people
who disappeared, the young protesters, the opposition, and now decades later, the now
elderly mothers of those kids still gather in the plaza saying, give us back even a
single bone of our children so we know what happened.
And this is a theme over and over.
We have European museums finally repatriating mummies of people from ex-colonial societies.
You can see this in another realm of fighting over the reverence of bodies, an array of
lawsuits that have occurred between Native American groups and physical anthropologists.
Over the propensity of physical anthropologists wanting to study the bones of interesting
deceased individuals, and in these cases, lots of Native American groups speaking to
American paleontologists saying, those are the bones of our ancestors.
Our ancestors' bones are not supposed to be winding up museum showcases.
They're not supposed to be studied by graduate students for our theses.
They're supposed to be buried.
They're supposed to be treated as we would in our sacred ceremonies.
And this has been a fight that has gone on for years in a lot of cases over certain specimens.
The scientists on one end saying, knowledge depends on this, scientific advances.
You are going to impair all the progress in this field.
The Native American group saying, tough luck, these are our ancestors.
These are sacred relics to us.
The physical anthropologists often coming back at that point saying, well, actually these
are probably not your ancestors because given the age of this, this was a migration of people
who eventually wound up in South America.
Your ancestors didn't come over the burying streets for long after that.
The Native American response being, tough luck, nonetheless, these are people who you
folks are willing to put in museum cases, golden rule, you wouldn't do it to people
who maybe your ancestors don't do it to ours.
This is a theme that comes up over and over again.
And all of this in 1597, Japan invaded Korea and some war going on then and defeated the
Koreans.
And as some bizarre display of them having defeated them, the Japanese forces cut off
the noses of the 20,000 dead Korean soldiers and brought them back triumphantly to Japan.
And a few years ago in a ceremony, Japan returned them back to Korea.
If we can't get the bodies back, at least give us the noses back.
What is this about?
20,000 noses being shuttled around, lawsuits over bones.
What we see is this bizarreity of the living being willing to risk their lives to retrieve
the dead.
So what is this about?
Obviously, we revere the dead.
We revere the bodies of the dead.
And this is so basic in our hominid roots that even the Neanderthals is tremendously
moving bits of evidence of Neanderthals burying their dead.
The flowers put around it, elephants, elephants revering the dead of their species, the elephant
graveyards.
This is intensely moving stuff.
Naturally, it turns out those last two examples probably aren't accurate.
There's lots of reasons to believe that the supposed Neanderthal burial site were not
really that misinterpretations.
Elephants do not have elephant graveyards.
They do eerie moving things like carry the bones of elephants for miles.
But there is no elephant graveyard.
And what we also see is it's not even universal amongst humans to revere the dead, to have
funerary rituals, to bury, to ritualistically cremate.
Amongst the Messiah of East Africa, somebody dies and you toss the body out for the scavengers.
In 19th century Europe, our modern notion of a cemetery didn't really exist yet.
People got cemetery plots temporarily.
They leased them.
And after a certain number of decades, the landlord got the body dug up and leased it
out to somebody else, a turnover rate, and all sorts of cultures.
Things are different from westernized funerals where you speak and whispered reverence for
the dead.
Among a group called the Nyakusa of Malawi, what's done at a funeral is you ritualistically
mock the person who's died.
So it's not just this reverence.
So why is it that in culture after culture, we have this need to get the bodies back?
Despite the fact that there are differing attitudes towards the dead, there's even differing
attitudes as to when people are dead.
In Haiti, in traditional Haitian society, if you are a total miserable human and you
have isolated yourself from everyone else in your village, from the awful stuff you've
been doing, they will get together and pool their funds and get a shaman there to do a
treatment, which is now surprisingly well understood, and zombifies somebody.
This is not just a movie plot.
This is a real subject involving a neurochemical derived from puffer fish.
That's a whole story by itself.
But you have people who are alive but who, thanks to having been zombified, are dead
to their community.
Or you can have dead people who are considered alive in traditional Singaporean Chinese.
There's this ritual where if an older sibling happens to die unmarried, younger siblings
can't get married until the older sibling is, and you have to arrange a ghost wedding
for the dead sibling, a appropriate spouse for that person, also dead, and this is like
a robust ongoing social relationship having with the dead there.
So not only do societies differ in their attitudes towards the dead, they differ as to what even
counts as someone who is being irreparably dead, and there's also differences in viewing
this need to get the body back.
So some of the time, the reason why people will go to such extremes to get the body back
is to be assured that there really is a body, and that there really was a death.
This is the, but I thought you were dead scenario, which stretches from Ulysses showing up there
and his old dog wrecking, and everyone else saying, but we thought you were dead too.
What was that movie cast away with Tom Hanks and him as a volleyball, and he shows up to
his inconveniently now married ex-feon, but I thought you were dead.
This reflecting the fact that historically people even had some trouble telling when
somebody was dead.
Before the stethoscope was invented, it was very tough to be certain of that as opposed
to a person being in a coma, and this was even accommodated in a ritual.
What would happen when somebody died?
You would have their body kept in state, their body there for a number of days with mourners
with family members next to them, just in case, just in case the person woke up.
You would have awake.
You would have people checking to make sure the person really was dead.
This was a period where bizarreities, of bizarreities, but reflecting this as well, there were fancy
expensive coffins that came with little bells inside.
So in case they messed up and pronounced somebody dead who really wasn't, and they wake up inside
the coffin there, they had the bell ring, and this actually happened now and then.
So given that a decaying corpse can be quite useful in actually showing that they really
are dead.
Now, some of the time getting back the body also helps you to overcome the denial that
is just a feature of our westernized modern approach to death, and this is the world of
when you were a kid and the bird died, and you were told by your parents, oh, it's only
sleeping, or grandpa has gone away and isn't going to come back.
The need to be an eyewitness to actually see it is part of this bracing dealing with the
reality of it, and we all felt a weird version of that not that long ago.
This is being taped one season or so after the death of Osama bin Laden, killed by US
Navy SEALs, and this was obviously presented as a fact, and we were told that he was buried
at sea, and nonetheless there was this widespread desire to show us the body, convince us that
he really is dead.
So some of the time this give us the body back is built around having to confirm that the
person really is dead.
Some of the time, the reason why there is this obsession is because you want to know
how the person died, and this could be a realm of great solace, this could also be a realm
of great pain.
This is the world of being able to be assured something like he never knew what was happening.
He was dead before he could possibly have known that.
This is the world of ghastly forensic science saying things like she was dead before that
happened rather than after.
This is the world where we get comfort from knowing that people died one way and not another.
People of it, this very stirring, moving fact of that, 9-11, the people on United Flight
93 apparently went down fighting, and we take great comfort from the evidence of that.
Norman McLean and his wonderful collection of stories, River Runs Through It, had one
talking about his brother, a hell-raising brother who was full of life but constantly
his brother who, back when they were young men, was beaten to death by having crossed
the wrong person, and what they discovered was when they got his body back, was that
all the bones in his hand were broken, in his right hand, and as McLean describes it,
his father, his elderly father dealing with his death, had to seek solace in the fact
like so many Scottish fathers before him that at least his son had died fighting back.
Sometimes people want the body to find out about how the death occurred.
Now in very many cultures, there is a belief that you want the body back for the well-being
of the dead, a notion that the proper transition into the afterlife requires the body being
back among the Nuba people of Sudan, for example.
There is a ritualistic circumcision of men after they die, and you need the body back
for that to happen, for the ideal afterlife.
People from the Tlinglets of Alaska to high ultra-orthodox Jews in Israel have a need
to get the bodies back for appropriate passage of the individual to the afterlife, and that
is produced ghastly scenes like in Israel, for example, after some suicide bombings of
these ultra-orthodox out there trying to scrape the bits of flesh scattered all over
the place, get the parts of the body back.
Now some of the time, you want the body back not because of the well-being of the deceased,
but you want it for the well-being of the living around it.
And in a weirdly fun, entertaining book by the anthropologist Nigel Barley, there is
a book that he wrote which is a review of cross-cultural features of the dead, and he
makes a point in there over and over which is, the dead do not own their corpses.
As soon as you are dead, you are in the grips of whatever people are trying to do something
with your body.
What is a funeral about?
It is very often a domain of politics where people gather to share their values, affirm
them, inculcate new people, where it's a realm for politics, for alliances, for threats,
for courtship.
It's a setting for conspicuous display, conspicuous grief, conspicuous consumption of, can you
throw the fanciest funeral out there, piety displayed, and this certainly is relevant
to the mighty and the notable.
One example of this, another one of those weird ones, which is throughout the history
of the Soviet Union, the body of Lenin was mummified, was on display under glass and
Moscow at the Kremlin.
This was somebody who was mummified and displayed like some Slavic saint.
What was this about?
He was an atheist.
Soviet society was atheistic.
What were they saying?
It was a very clear point being said to the peasants, which was, we have crushed and replaced
the system of belief that produces these Slavic saints.
We have crushed and replaced the church.
Don't screw with us.
Another realm of this, where you have the symbols of funerals and the symbols of death
for the benefit of the living, concerns people where maybe not powerful, but at least notable.
This is the strange world of body part relics of the saintly.
This is a theme that has run through Catholicism for centuries.
Here's a great example.
In the 13th century, Elizabeth of Thuringia, who was apparently by everyone's estimation
barreling into sainthood, it was perfectly obvious, and upon her death, a crowd promptly
descended on her corpse and ripped it to pieces and dismembered it so that everybody could
have a piece of the saint and display it forever after.
How's that for weird?
Even stranger circumstance.
11th century, a man who eventually became known as Saint Romual of Umbria in Italy.
This was someone who was so saintly and so everybody knowing this guy is going to become
a saint at somewhere after he's dead, and he made the mistake of letting it be known
that he was thinking of moving and moving in with his kids in the next town over.
Oh no, the town was going to lose its chance to get his holy body part relics afterward.
What happened?
The town elders got together and promptly conspired to kill the guy before he moved.
What you see here is the use of a body for the well-being of a living is quite frequent,
and this is not just about the powerful and the notable.
This is what everyday funerals are about in the West, even for the non-mighty.
It is the setting to reaffirm the values of those survivors.
It is a setting where you eulogize very selectively the memories of that individual, where you
exaggerate, where you gloss over, and what's always a funerals are proclaiming some of
the values of our westernized society, which is a robust work ethic, taking care of parents,
taking care of kids, having a good sense of humor, humor, God and country being good at
barbecuing.
What you see in all these cases is this is a setting to bring about a critical thought
in everyone's head, sitting there at the funeral, that whisper, that super ego of social
conformity, that voice whispering in your head, how do I want to be remembered?
What are the rules of society that I better value if I want to be viewed this way eventually?
Now, some of the time it's also a way not just of showing respect and reaffirming values
within your culture, but it's a way of showing respect values for a different culture.
An example of this in 2001, a US Navy ship accidentally struck and sunk a small Japanese
fishing ship and, in the aftermath, the US taking full blame for it, sent out deep sea
divers a whole rescue operation for bringing up the bodies of these Japanese fishermen
who were killed and put enormous efforts into bringing them up and treating the bodies
in a ritualistically correct way for traditional Japanese society, got all sorts of consultants
on this, trying to show as much respect as possible as to how to handle the bodies appropriately.
Now, some of the time what this is about also is wanting the body back, not out of some
respect for another culture, but from keeping some other culture showing their disrespect
for your own.
And lots of us will remember a traumatic example of that, which is back then the US was having
a police operation in Somalia, back when Somalia was turning into a stateless country, a completely
chaotic place, and that was that incident with the chopper that came down, where it
was over with the bodies of American soldiers being dragged through the street.
Similarly in Iraq, during the height of the US war there, there were some consultants
there, American, whose bodies wound up being hung and burned.
These had indelible impressions on the American consciousness.
We do not want the bodies of our own treated that way.
And it's a similar thing.
There's a legend among the Maori of New Zealand, and it's of a man, a warrior, and this was
a very militaristic society, a warrior who was grievously injured in battle.
He was obviously going to die, and he begged his comrades, his brothers at arms, to do the
right thing, which was to promptly decapitate him.
Because what he despaired out was the possibility that his body would wind up in the hands of
his enemies who would decapitate him then and turn his head into a shrunken skull there.
How demeaning can that get?
Have your enemies do that to you?
Cut my head off and take it back with you to make sure they don't do that stuff to me.
Joseph Mabuto, who was the kleptocratic dictator of Zaire for years and years, finally was toppled,
and apparently in the last gasps of his dictatorship, when obviously time was running out for him,
what did he do?
He went back to his hometown, his place of birth, went back and had his totes dig up
the remains of Mabuto's family members so that they could be spirited away and not desecrated.
Even a bizarre example of this with the United States, when we gave up the canal zone to
Panama, these were not people we were at war with.
We were all supposedly getting on just great, and as the Americans moved out of the canal
zone to return to the United States, what did they do?
They packed up their VCRs, their microwaves.
What else did they pack up?
They disinterred Americans in the cemetery there to take them back home, just in case
someday some hostilities would increase the chance that maybe American corpses would be
desecrated there.
So all of this is a whole weird domain where we want the bodies back not just for the good
of the dead, but also for the good of the living as well.
You want to do it to be assured that the person is actually dead, to find out how they died,
to be assured that your cultural values are affirmed by this, but it also strikes me there's
an additional reason why we want the bodies back.
And this goes back to the story of Bonnie and Mitch, my friends from high school, and
what emerged 27 years later.
A man named Alan Smith had been watching the media coverage of this reunion and the ceremony
for remember those kids way back when disappeared, they're still missing what a mystery, what
a sort of sustained one, the longest one in American history, and this guy watching it
was the right person to have seen it, because he knew what happened, and he called up the
authorities.
Here is the story that he had.
He had also gone to this Watkins Glen Rock Festival.
He had hitchhiked up there, it was over, he was hitchhiking back, he caught a ride with
some guy with a VW bus and got in there, and there were these two kids, this young couple
sitting in the back, and he was able to describe their clothing, their appearance, he never
got their names, but one of them mentioning she had been working in a summer camp was
on her way back there, it was Bonnie and Mitch.
Clearly that's what was going on, that was them.
Okay, so here's what they described.
They're driving back, this was during the summer, it was a hot day, they were driving
alongside a river and it was decided they would stop, they would go off by the river,
maybe cool off there, the river seemed to be fast moving, standing there, hesitating,
should we go in or not, and suddenly this Alan Smith notes the girl, Bonnie, had fallen
into the water, was being swept away and Mitch promptly jumped in after to try to save her,
and they were swept away and never seen again.
So of course the question is why didn't anybody do about it?
Why didn't anybody do anything?
This Alan Smith was a Navy veteran, quite skilled at swimming, what was going on there?
And as he told the authorities, quote, there was no way I was jumping in after them given
how strong the water was.
And when asked why didn't you call, why didn't you do something, and this I was told by the
sheriff who actually interviewed him, what became clear was he and the guy driving the
VW van were obviously quite high at the time on drugs and they sure were not going to call
up the police to say these two kids are in the river, what they decided to do instead
was continue on their drive down the road, and at the point where he was getting out
and going his own way, what they both promised was they were going to go make phone calls
anonymously to report this in.
And as far as anybody knows, the other guy, this mysterious other guy, the driver, never
made the phone call, and this guy made the phone call, but he waited 27 years before
doing it.
And when the sheriff asked him why didn't you call, why did you wait so long, why did
you allow this to happen, what the sheriff said was this guy just shrugged, he doesn't
know.
27 years of mystery, one of the fathers of these kids going to his grave never knowing
what occurred, this is what happened.
Okay, so what are the lessons of this?
There are some subtle and kind of painful ones having to do with the aging process.
Once we were kids and we flaunted our immortality by getting into cars with strangers hitching
because nothing could ever happen to us.
Now in our middle age, we flaunt our mortality and say we could never possibly die by cheating
on our low fat diets.
Once we were young and we had to learn that there were tragedies that can occur in life
that are beyond control, and now in our middle age, all we try to do is delay our kids having
to learn it.
And once long ago, we lost two friends and all we could do was imagine violent, floored
nightmarish sins of commission, and now in our doughy middle age, what we've learned
is the consequence of omission, the quiet sins of indifference, and sometimes you want
the body's back to learn something about those who knew about it all along.
