Do you remember that game, Shoots and Ladders?
I know the thought of it probably hasn't crossed your mind in years, but I bring it
up for a very special reason.
When I was a kid, I hated that game.
If there was an even of whisper of it happening, I was just filled with dread.
My stomach would be in knots.
The reason was that I never actually really understood the rules of the game.
I was like a deer in the headlights.
Well, I was a shallow kid, and I'd pretend to relish the game.
Oh, I'd march in bootstep with my friends who were over the moon about it.
I'd just fall in line with those little Shoots and Ladders fascists.
Pretend that that devilish game brought a smile to my face, gave me this warm glow.
Oh, I'd go overboard, as I would never have, as if I would have given my eye teeth to play
that game.
Lame figure or speech, I probably didn't even have eye teeth at that age.
But as the years pass, you get some weathering, some seasoning.
I recently revisited the game, and my eyes have opened to it.
I fall in love with that game, and I tell it to the world.
For the first time, I not only grasp the rules, I embrace the philosophy, how life is made
up of Shoots and Ladders.
And it's also great to know that I'm no longer living a life as underground life of dissonance,
where you're split in two between who you are at the core and who people take you to
be.
I've regained my pride.
Grown as a person since kindergarten.
Life is good.
So let's analyze this confessional monologue I just had here.
Okay, do you remember that game Shoots and Ladders?
I know it hasn't crossed your mind, but I bring it up.
It doesn't actually cross your mind.
I didn't actually bring up Shoots and Ladders.
A metaphor, even a whisper of the game filled with dreads, stomach and knots, all metaphors.
I never understood the rules.
You don't really stand underneath the rules.
I was like a deer in the headlights.
I was a shallow kid.
I would relish the, you relish some foods, you don't relish the game.
Oh, I would march in bootstep, not really, or be over the moon, not really, fall in line,
not really.
And of course, that endlessly overused cliche of Shoots and Ladders fascists.
It really wasn't a devilish game, a game played by the metaphor himself, the devil.
It would not really bring a smile to my face, give me a warm glow, bring a smile, give me
a warm glow.
I would not go overboard.
I would not have given my eye teeth.
It wasn't really a figure of speech, let alone a lame figure of speech.
Years don't pass literally.
You don't even literally pass gas.
You pass things to people, hopefully not gas.
You get some weathering, metaphor again, seasoning, metaphor again to revisit.
Your eyes don't literally open.
You don't literally fall in love.
Tell the world.
You don't grasp rules.
You're not embracing a philosophy.
Life really isn't made up of, you are not a living lie.
You don't literally have an underground life of dissonance.
You're not split in two.
Who you are is not really at your core, not what people take you to be.
You don't regain your pride, grow as a person.
Longbones grow, strawberries grow, nasal hair grows, and of course the greatest metaphor
of all, when we were five, we did not go to the German Garden of Children.
That's not what kindergarten is.
Now in a wonderful book by the author James Geary called I as an Other, he explores things
like these paragraphs like these that are just full of metaphors, full of imagery, and
ones that are hard to discern.
To understand something, we really don't grasp that once this was literally saying
to stand underneath something, kindergarten, the Garden of Children, all of this at some
point back when was poetry.
And his great point in there is that everyday language possesses the fossils of what was
once poetry.
Now a lot of what this course has been about so far, starting with the first lecture, has
been the end of human exceptionalism, we're not the only species that uses tools, we're
not the only species that has organized violence, that shows evidence of theory of mind, we're
not the species that shows empathy solely, we're not the only ones with elements of altruism.
But something that I think very much remains a realm of human exceptionalism is this business
about symbols and metaphors and analogies and parables, and I hesitate to say this word
because I don't think it's possible to pronounce it correctly, synecdoche, you remember a thousand
sales set to see figures of speech, all of these are profoundly, definedly human.
Ruth Gendler wrote a wonderful book called The Book of Qualities, and in it she has characterizations,
character sketches of different qualities, emotions, attributes, listen to one of these.
Anxiety is secretive, he, anxiety, he does not trust anyone, not even his friends, worry,
terror, doubt, and panic.
He likes to visit me late at night when I'm alone and exhausted.
I've never slept with him, but he kissed me once on the far head, and I've had a headache
for two years.
Or how about this, about compassion, compassion speaks with a slight accent, she was a vulnerable
child, miserable in school, cold, shy, in ninth grade she was befriended by courage.
Courage lent compassion bright sweaters, explained the slang, showed her how to play volleyball.
These are beautiful, these are, these unlikely juxtapositions, and we understand them, we
understand her image of despair has stopped listening to music, anger sharpens knives
at the local supermarket, beauty wears a gold shawl and sells seven different kinds
of honey at the flea market, longing studies, archeology.
We understand all of these, we were able to grasp their meanings because they are doing
subtle metaphorical things and we as humans can get it.
We understand that a captain wants more than just hands when he asks for them to be on
deck.
We understand that Kafka's metamorphosis wasn't really about a cockroach, it's never been
entirely clearing me what it was really about, but sure not about entomology.
We understand that a piece of cloth with the correct coloration patterns on it can constitute
a flag, a nation, an ideology, an identity, a highly charged thing that people are willing
to die over.
We understand that when Tchaikovsky threw a whole bunch of notes together and called it
the 1812 overture, what that actually stood for was Napoleon getting his ass kicked outside
of Moscow and we know that the phrase Napoleon getting his ass kicked outside of Moscow,
what that really means was thousands and thousands of men dying hungry, cold, far from home.
What we see here is an enormous power of metaphor, metaphor, intermixed, confusing, literal symbolic.
What this lecture is about is seeing how the brain handles metaphor, how the brain handles
symbolism of this sort and what we will see is it gains an enormous power at a very simple
neurobiological fact, a fascinating one, which is your brain processes metaphor in very literal
concrete ways and sometimes falls for the literality of it.
Now this ability for metaphor to modulate our thinking, our emotions, our opinions can
even take the form of physical metaphors.
That's a great study done a few years ago, scientist Mark Landau, Daniel Sullivan, Jeff
Greenberg, here's what they did.
They had volunteers sit around and read a passage about U.S. history and in particular
this passage was written in a personifying way as if the United States was a real organism.
It was after the Civil War that the United States underwent a growth spurt, truly matured.
We know already countries do not undergo growth spurts, we're back to that same metaphorical
stuff.
We understand that but nonetheless reading this passage, placing American history in
this very personified kind of way.
Now here's what they did in the study.
Before reading that bit about American history, people either read a short piece about the
menace of bacteria, how bacteria can menace your health, the dangers of invasive pathogens
or people read a controlled neutral passage about, I don't know, acoustic tiling and architecture.
And what they showed was, if right before you were thinking about the United States
as an organism, if right before that you've just been reading about how invasive pathogens
are so dangerous to your health, you're more likely to have a negative view about immigration.
Whoa, think about that, merely tapping into our brain's confusion between bacteria can
menace the body.
You could think of the United States as being a body and organism and this power of metaphor,
this confusing of the symbolic with the real, and you've just changed your opinion about
a very important potentially inflammatory subject.
More examples where the physicality of some metaphors, our ability to confuse them with
reality can change our opinions, change our assessments.
Now this was some wonderful work done by John Barg and colleagues at Yale.
So here's what you would do.
You would have some volunteers and what they were supposedly doing was evaluating a candidate
for a job.
And the volunteers, the actual test subjects, would be going through a clipboard containing
the person's resume, background, and they'd be assessing them.
Here's where the experiment was.
The volunteers going through the resume, two different conditions.
One is they were holding a regular old clipboard and in the other circumstance they were holding
a clipboard that was much thicker, much heavier.
Heavy clipboard versus lighter clipboard.
And what they showed was people who were evaluating the resume of the supposed candidate
with the heavy clipboard were more likely to perceive the candidate as being serious,
having a more consequential person as having more gravity to them, a weighty situation.
And as a great control, holding a heavy clipboard when looking at the resume didn't show the
assessment of the person's congeniality, things of that sort.
It just made you view this weighty situation with more gravity, just this physical heaviness
there, translating into our metaphorical version of weighty situations, more gravity
in a situation, a more serious personality.
Another version that they did in this study, and this one I love, what they had now was
people once again assessing job candidates, imaginary job candidates, and the volunteers
doing the assessment were sitting in a chair.
One of two types of chairs.
In one case, it was a big old comfy couch chair, and you're kind of lost in it there.
And in the second case, it was this hard little wooden chair.
In other words, in the first case, you're sitting there enveloped in volourish comfort
and swimming around in the couch.
And the second, you were sitting there and then evaluating people.
And if you sit in the hard, upright chair, you're more likely to assess this job candidate
as having an inflexible personality, as being more rigid in their approach to things, in
being, dare I use this term, in being more of a hard ass, sit there in a chair where
that's what you're feeling subliminally about your own rear end, and this physicality of
metaphor is going to affect the way you have an assessment, a judgment.
Another study by Barak and colleagues.
This one, extremely interesting again, showing how you can affect people's opinions by tapping
into our confusion between physical reality and metaphorical versions of.
Okay, so once again, you get your volunteers, your inevitable college psychology majors volunteering
coming in.
And they're coming into the building and they're going up to whatever floor where it's supposed
to be.
And they get into an elevator and there's somebody else getting in there, holding a whole bundle
of books and folders and a person working with the experimenters, a confederate of them.
This person, the experimenter, and they're getting in with this whole pile of books and
barely holding on to this cup of coffee and asking the person, can you do me a favor?
Can you just hold my coffee for a second while I organize this?
The subject, unknowingly, of course, to help out holds it.
In one case, it's a cup of hot coffee.
In the other case, it's a cup of iced coffee.
Go up the elevator, get out, hand it back to them.
Your hand either cold from the iced or warm from the warm coffee and shortly afterward
in the study, when you were asked to assess some hypothetical personality, if you've been
holding the cup of warm coffee throughout, you were more likely to assess that person
as having a warm personality.
Once again, the brain confusing, warm.
What does the word warm mean?
Warm tells you something about like your temperature receptors in your hands there.
What does warm mean?
It tells you about the emotional expressivity.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that one's just a metaphor.
That's not for real, showing here that your brain has had some problems distinguishing
between the two.
Now most remarkably, this confusion on the part of your brain comes through in another
study where it shows not only can it change your opinions, your assessments, but even
your action.
And this was a really, really interesting two-part study carried out by Chen Bo-Zhong
and Katie Louenquist.
Here's what you do.
Now you've got your psych major volunteers and they come in and you sit them down and
you ask them to do one of two things.
You ask them to recall some circumstance in their past where they had a dreadful moral
failing where they did something awful to somebody.
You ask them to recount it in detail just to wallow in their memories of it.
Or the control group being asked to recount the time in their youth that they were in
another psych experiment and had to read a passage about acoustic tiling and architecture.
Who knows what a non-emotive circumstance versus the person here being asked to recall
a circumstance of moral failure.
That being completed, the experiment supposedly being done, you then turn gratefully to your
volunteer and say, well, obviously we're not allowed to pay you, but we'd like to give
you a little giga or something here to show our appreciation.
You can either have a gift pencil or you can have this little package of antiseptic wipes
and what they showed was if you've just spent your time there wallowing in your own moral
degradations in the past there, your moral depravity, you're more likely to pick the
antiseptic wipes than if you were recounting some neutral event in your past.
You feel soiled.
You need to wash your hands.
You need to get out that damn spot.
So that's changing actually the thing you're requesting your choice.
They then did the second part of the experiment which was even more interesting.
So now the next set of subjects, they're there and now all of them are having to wallow in
their history of moral failings and deprivations and turpitude and now afterward either they
just finished the study or you give them an opportunity to go wash up their hands to cleanse
away their sins.
They come back in the room and what happens then is another researcher passing through
a confederate of the experiment happens to drop some papers, a box full of pencils, everything
goes flying and of course most people would leap up at that point and help them to get
the pencils.
If you've just been wallowing and in your moral failures and got to wash your hands
of it afterward you're less likely to get up and help.
Like Pontius Pilate, like Lady Macbeth, you have washed your hands and even if you can't
get out the damn spot at least it makes you less driven by your own moral failings in
the past to leap up and try to help someone.
This is totally amazing stuff.
What we have here is this intermixing of the power of metaphor, the intermixing of it between
metaphor and the literal confusing bodily states with moral states as we've seen here
it can change opinions, it can change assessments, it can even change actions whether you want
to wash your hands or not afterward and whether once washing your hands you feel less of a
moral imperative to help out someone because you've gotten out some of that soiled stuff
you've dredged up.
Now remarkably people are actually beginning to understand what's going on in the brain
when this is happening and the level at which I've been describing it here, oh you're
brain has trouble distinguishing between literal somatic physical versions of things
and metaphorical versions that happen to use some of the same concepts can't tell them
apart remarkably that does seem to be what's going on in the brain.
Example, fascinating region of the brain called the insula, the insula cortex.
Now here's what it does in most species on earth, you're a rat, you're a monkey, you're
a human as well and you take a bite into something, it turns out to be totally rotten
feted food and totally disgusting smell and what happens your insula cortex activates.
It's telling you something about gustatory disgust or olfactory disgust, it's a really
good thing to have if you're an animal going about its business trying to figure out if
it's perhaps eating something, some rotten food that this part of the brain is really
good at detecting disgusting, gustatorily disgusting things.
It can do something more subtle in a human but in that same realm, now instead of eating
something disgusting just sit and think about the following, think about grabbing a big
old cockroach, cockroach is now making their second appearance in this course, grab a cockroach
and while it is struggling to be free its little body parts whipping around you put
it in your mouth and bite its head off and the odds are if you are like most of us if
you're really contemplating it your insula will have just activated.
In other words by the time you get to humans it's not only about sensory disgust, it's
about thinking about sensory disgust, okay so that's a slightly fancier version of the
insula than other species.
Now what you do is you sit down a person and instead of thinking about cockroaches have
been thinking about that miserable sleazy thing that happened you read them a scenario
about this saintly old woman where this just villainous mortgage company has just stolen
her house from her and her health insurance was cancelled and she's gotten a lousy offer
from the pawn shop dealer for her kidney dialysis machine and you're sitting there and you're
disgusted to hear what people are doing to her.
You are saying my god those people are just filth they make me want to puke your insula
has just activated.
Hearing about people who are acting in a way that makes you feel sick to your stomach with
such extreme moral failures the same part of the brain activates.
The insula not only does it do sensory disgust it does moral disgust as well and as we see
sometimes it gets confused distinguishing between the two.
Absolutely remarkable.
Now Barg and colleagues have done some follow up studies with this as well.
You get people in some sort of formal economic game prisoners dilemma is the most famous
version of it and you're constantly having to choose between whether you are being cooperative
whether you're being competitive whether that's the thing and what he showed in the study
was if before playing the game people held something warm in their hands or something
cold in their hands and it influenced your play style.
Hold something cold and you had more activation of the insula playing against this person
and you were playing in a colder more pragmatic selfish way.
So what's this telling us about the insula telling us about how the brain handles this
metaphor when we humans transition from merely being a species that could do sensory disgust
to doing moral disgust you didn't come up with a new brain region you didn't have to
invent a new part of the brain to do moral disgust which as we know isn't really disgust
because it's just a metaphor you had to shoehorn it at some place squeeze it into the insula
the insula is just expanded its portfolio and it now does very literal and very metaphorical
versions of something and it's got trouble distinguishing between them at times.
Another region of the brain that shows a similar problem actually quite near the insula cortex
an area called the anterior cingulate cortex what does it do it's got something to do with
pain perception take someone and poke their finger with a pin and pain pathways in their
spine activate you can tell this with a person in a brain scanner as usual parts of the brain
activate that tell you is it my finger is it my toe is it a poke is it a burn is it a scrape
what you could think of this sort of painometer parts of the brain just telling you about the
nuts and bolts literal features of the pain. Meanwhile the anterior cingulate activates
as well and that's the part of the brain that's trying to assess the meaning of the pain something
hurts is this because the shoes that I just bought are too small bummer life is awful I've
got to go return them do I still have the receipt how painful can that bummer your feet are hurting
because piranhas are ripping at their flesh that means something different from that your anterior
cingulate is the brain region there that's not telling you oh is it my finger or is it my toe
that's in pain it's giving you the assessment of what it means. Now instead of taking this
volunteer in the brain scanner and poking their finger what they do is they got to watch their
loved one their beloved being poked with a pin and what happens is the part of the brain that's
telling you is it your finger or your toe that doesn't get activated the part of your brain
that's saying is it a cut is it a burn that doesn't get activated what the anterior cingulate does
assessing what is the anterior cingulate doing there metaphorically it is feeling somebody
else's pain it is feeling empathy there that's just a metaphor feeling somebody else's pain what
is the anterior cingulate do it's telling you is my foot on fire because of the good reason because
that wins me the lottery is that a bad reason is just telling you how to assess the literality of
your pain and here instead you're reading the end of of mice and men and your anterior cingulate
is going like mad and it's telling you that your brain has trouble distinguishing between
a metaphorical version of feeling pain and the literal version another great example of this
there's a neurotransmitter a chemical messenger called substance p substance p and it's been known
for decades that it has something to do with pain pathways it helps to mediate pain pain in the
very literal pain shooting up your spine kind of notion and you can get drugs that will block
substance p signaling and pain pathways don't work as well and what's being discovered is some of
those drugs that block substance p signaling can have antidepressant effects in other words
depression the disease that on a certain metaphorical level involves feeling the pains of the world
is in some literal way tapping into some of the pain neurobiology of a real painful stimulus
there is something very similar and not just metaphorical similar between somatic pain and
psychic pain so what do we see here over and over when we humans have evolved the capacity to feel
somebody else's pain to have psychic pain to feel moral disgust we didn't invent new brain
regions we just stuck this new function into the nearest match we had in there cramped it in there
duct taped it in and suddenly you have a brain that can occasionally have trouble telling the
difference between the metaphorical and the real version of things now the political sciences
george leikhoff at berkeley has written a lot about the power of symbolism the power of all of
this in the realm of politics and the political consequences of this and this suddenly begins
to explain the power of some of these domains when you see what the brain is doing with it consider
one of the most catastrophic events in sort of history in recent decades which was the genocide
in rwanda in the 1990s the hutu ethnic group turning on the tutsi ethnic group in a blood bath
a genocide were over the course of six months or so 70 80 percent of tutsis were slaughtered were
beaten to death were clubbed to death this was an outburst of long-standing interethnic
animosities and this had been brewing and being planned by hutu leadership for a long time beforehand
and part of what was going on was a propagandistic machine hutu radio stations railing against the
tutsis and something was done very intentionally very neurobiologically insightfully which was
the tutsis were always referred to as cockroaches those cockroaches we need to clean our nation we
need to get rid of them we need to and what you see is if you can propagandize somebody to the point
that if you say the name of this other ethnic group and their insula cortex activates in response
they are ready to leap into the blood bath another example of where this plays out in politics
and a much pleasing more pleasing example nelson mandela when mandela came out of his imprisonment
part of what was happening was he was going to have to negotiate the transition to the new free
south africa and he was going to have to negotiate with an awful lot of hardline africaners and one
of the remarkable things he had done while in prison was make a point of learning africans from his
jailers learning the language eventually become influent in it and he would have these tense
negotiations with these people with like death squad blood all over their hands and they would come
in and he would greet them in the most slang filled informal warm africans and it just undid
the resistance if somebody is speaking to me in the same language that my grandmother used to sing
to me in on some level the familiarity is sinking in there another example of this where this plays
out in terms of politics because at the end it's remarkably practically loved him with this the
power of his reaching out and expressing the symbol of respect for them speaking their own
language another realm and with this in which this can be seen reflects the work of the political
scientist robert axelrod and what he's focused on is the peacemaking process how peace may come
in some circumstances built around figuring out economic differences and but where peace truly
will come is when you give signals that you are respecting the cultural symbols of the other group
and remarkable studies where he interviews hard liners in the palestinian israeli conflict
hard liners and remarkable statements he will be interviewing hamas leaders and these are some of
the most diehard resistors to the notion of israel's right to exist and they will say stuff like if
those israelis could ever once acknowledge we got screwed in 1948 and lost our land that would do
wonders for us being willing to negotiate with them and then he would go talk to some of the most
hard line right wing israeli military folks and they would say stuff like if they would only get
that anti-semitic crap out of their textbooks they're not arguing about water rights or demilitarization
of the western bank they're just saying if they would only respect our cultural symbols if they
would only respect our cultural traumas that's going to make things a whole lot easier and what
we see here is a tremendous capacity for perhaps recovery perhaps from healing where you see the
peace between israel and jordan that is held for decades sure it has something to do with economic
cooperation but the real power of it came for example when king hussein of jordan came to the
funeral of the martin yitzhak rabbin they really mean it this peace process or in northern ireland
after the recent peace ex-unionist x ira gunman having really tough jobs being in government
with each other this one incident one of these leaders his wife cheated on him and it became a
very public scandal and the other guy from the other side who he always had chilly relationships
with came over and shook his hand and commiserated and that broke all sorts of ice or of course the
most famous example of this in south africa nelson mandela being willing to embrace the symbol of
the africans opposition wearing the cap of the springbok africans rugby team while that team of
africans jocks sang the a n c national anthem nelson mandela once said the way to bring about change
don't go to further minds don't try to try to change their minds change their hearts i think
what he actually means is change their hearts but also if you focus on their minds try to change
their insular cortex and their interior cingulate and this might actually be a way of getting to be
a neurobiologically happier planet
