Welcome to The Basin Conspiracy, I'm Miny Ashbrotsky, I'm Stephen Zipper, and we have a guest with us today.
Hey guys, I'm Naveen Mishra.
Welcome to the show, Naveen.
Thank you.
You are here because you expressed an interest in talking about post-scarcity societies with us.
Yes.
Before we get too deep into that, can you tell us what a post-scarcity society is for those people who don't know yet?
Star Trek.
Okay, that is a very good example, but you've got to define it more than that because there's a lot of things in Star Trek.
I know.
I would say societies and economic incentives in general are defined by scarcity and therefore distribution mechanisms for assets of whatever kind or consumables.
Star-scarcity societies would imply that there's either an infinitely efficient distribution mechanism or an infinitely scalable asset, and then economics and incentives offer those kinds of incentive mechanisms basically.
You said an infinitely scalable asset, would a single infinitely scalable asset do it?
It depends, right?
If there's reproducibility, if there's transformation capabilities, then sure, but if there's infinite gold, you can't really eat gold.
Right.
So we technically have infinite atoms, or at least as many as we can reasonably reach.
There you go, yeah.
But we can't use them for everything.
Exactly.
I think, sorry to barge in, but there's this dichotomy between math and physics where math is very comfortable with infinities and physics is not.
So any of this discussion about scarcity and stuff leads right into pseudo-randomness and pseudo-infinities.
If we are technically rigorous, we should be on the math side of things and use infinities, but because we are not and we're having fun here, I would say we'd stick to the physical part of things and stick to pseudo-infinities.
Okay.
What's a pseudo-infinity?
Things that I can't reach.
Okay.
Things that I can't end by the lifetime of the universe or the heat death of the universe, you know.
Okay, cool.
So for all practical purposes.
For all practical purposes.
All right, cool.
And that is the way we will be using the term today.
So why are you so interested in post-scarcity societies?
I want to build one.
Ooh, build one.
Yes.
Well, I want to get to as close to that as possible.
So most of my work currently, whether that be through the companies that I'm working with or some of the things that I'm doing on the side, want to help create a efficient marketplace tending towards that infinite or for all practical purposes, infinitely efficient distribution mechanism.
Okay.
Real quick, why wouldn't infinitely efficient distribution mechanism be enough if we don't have enough food or whatever other asset we need?
The way I think of these things is to have a mental model of betting on things that don't change.
I think this is what I stole from Jeff Bezos.
He likes to bet on things that don't change and it kind of makes sense to me.
So humans are always going to be greedy.
There's always going to be finite resources.
I don't think we're going to get infinite resources.
So a pseudo way or an easier way to hack post scarcity is to make a distribution model that's scalable and efficient.
Okay.
But we still wouldn't have an infinite number of, I don't know, slippers.
Exactly.
We wouldn't have an infinite number of slippers, but maybe they are infinitely reusable.
Maybe they can be transformed into belts.
All right.
So like a smart matter sort of thing?
Yes.
So is it that you are doing to help usher in this future?
Since you kind of led with, I'm working on this and now I'm curious what you're doing.
So we're not into the smart matter evolution just yet.
We're just based on the distribution mechanism.
So everybody wants money and it's a proxy for a lot of other things.
So I'm working on a way to distribute money based on effort, which effort is, we're trying to get to as close to a meritocracy as possible.
So things that I'm working on right now, v zero point one, if you could call it would be collective action platforms and collective incentive platforms where people come together, work on an idea or a product.
Right.
Get that out the door.
It provides some value to some set of people and they capture that value and distribute it efficiently.
I want to stop you when you said distributes money based on amount of effort.
Doesn't that incentivize people to be really bad at things because I know that like a small child is going to put a lot more effort into lifting a heavy object than I will.
Right, right, right.
So when I say effort, I meant value creation effort.
Okay.
Right.
So I can be a Sisyphus and earn infinity, but that's not what we're going for because that's not going to be valuable to anybody else in that network.
So effort is linked to value provided.
Okay.
What's the incentive to be more efficient at providing the value though, if it is effort based rather than results based?
No, it is results based.
It is.
Right.
So I said effort.
Well, effort to value would imply results.
Okay.
I just try to keep it generalized.
Okay.
I don't know.
It's a character fly.
I guess.
All right.
It gets complicated.
It gets complicated.
Sorry.
I got completely sidetracked with that effort thing.
Stephen, did you want to jump in with anything?
Just to say that I appreciate the virtue of general explanations, but if there are specific examples or any particular ways to bring it home, those are good too.
But I wouldn't think it's flawed to be generalizable.
So how close do you think we are to post scarcity?
Not that close, but there's, I like a lot of idioms, so there's another idiom that says the future is already here.
It's not distributed evenly.
I think it was Gibson.
There you go.
So I think if you give the right parameters to that question of how close we are to scarcity in some sections of humanity, we're already there.
But in most sections, we're not.
And in those sections, we are post scarce for only some types of goods and not others.
Can you give examples or an example?
Because I am surprised to hear that there is anywhere in the world that is post scarce right now.
It's not post scarce, but it's close to it, I would say.
But an example would be electricity for the ultra wealthy.
Thanks.
That's the example I was going to throw out because like you can leave your lights on all the lights on and all your electronics on all the time.
And you're not going to run out of power here in your apartment in the States.
Exactly.
So, you know, if you're in Puerto Rico, that's a different matter because until your generator runs out of gas, then you're burning your power, right?
Although I might run out of money if I spent a lot of electricity.
I realize it would be very hard.
Ultra wealthy caveat from him.
So he actually, his example is better.
I think even medium wealthy in the first world would get you basically limited electricity.
I've heard that the information economy is basically post scarcity because once something has been digitized, it is infinitely reproducible and you don't take away that wealth from anyone else when you copy it.
That's a great, that brings up the same dichotomy that we just talked about, right?
So when you give the information economy example, I think it's an example of the infinitely distributed good, right?
It's artificially scarce in that it was my thought.
It is a flaw or a negative on my part that I cannot impose intellectual property rights on this information economy, right?
So it's an artificially scarce good that's infinitely reproducible.
Yeah.
How do you feel about the fact that there are all these artificial restrictions on information so that it is not a completely post scarce environment?
It's a good needle to thread and I think it's a good intellectual exercise to figure out where you lie on many issues.
So you could approach it in the access way of saying it is infinitely distributable with infinitesimally expensive, right?
It's cheap to distribute, which means access should be free and any restriction you put on it is arbitrary.
You can then come to it from the creator's perspective to say the creator put some effort into it, whether that's an original thought, which is just, you know, brain voltage,
but or it's some art or something that the creator created and that there's some cost to that, right?
Right.
And Steven's programming something right now.
Exactly.
He wants to get paid something for it eventually.
Exactly.
And maybe Steven wants to get recurring revenue for it because he has to live another day and he doesn't want to program the second day.
So when you look at it as an ecosystem perspective, then I think setting value gets to be very, very difficult.
And if there's dynamic pricing, so if I can contribute in any way to that IP to that information asset, then I think that dynamic pricing model makes a lot of sense to information assets.
Okay.
Do you do you think the pricing part is important?
I ask because we are recording a podcast right now.
Yes.
And podcasts are basically like free labor.
We take our thing, we put out in the world, it gets reproduced forever.
We never see any money from it really.
Aside from, you know, from now and then people give us money on Patreon, which is really nice.
And we thank them for it.
But I, I get a lot of things for free off the internet as well.
I listen to many podcasts that I don't pay any money for.
And I watch videos on YouTube and listen to music on Spotify and stuff without paying for it.
And I sort of feel in a way that making these podcasts is a way to help pay back to the system.
I don't feel as bad taking all this stuff from the system without paying for it.
If I am putting things into the system as well, which I know at least some people listen to.
And is, is that a workable model for other things as well?
Or is that even a workable model for the internet?
I mean, people do complain a lot about, yeah, I'm a YouTube celebrity.
Millions of people know me.
I can't fucking pay my electricity bill.
That's a great point.
And I think your first exact, your first way of saying it was better when you said, I, I pay for this,
but I don't pay money for this or I don't get money for this, right?
So when I say price, it doesn't have to be cash or fiat currency.
When you say YouTube, you don't pay for YouTube, you do pay.
You do pay by your attention.
They get to sell you stuff.
They get to put ads in front of it.
So you're paying something.
So there's a asset.
I know, but even then, right?
There's a monetization model where we don't know the value of things.
If there is such a thing as an implicit value to a YouTube video, right?
We, we are so abstracted from it that that value is invisible to us and we expect things for free now.
So I think there's always value there.
How to price it and how to extract that value is a conversation to be had.
And that, I think is where an exchange model or a dynamic pricing model makes sense.
And that's where you have to talk about price.
Okay. Is that, does that interface with what you're doing with your distribution efforts?
Yes, it does.
Okay.
So the company that I am a part of a call crowd raising is a platform where people can get together to create an asset for right now.
It is a digital asset.
So there is IP being created and you can get paid or you can get, you can extract value from, from that asset either by network usage or by payment in kind.
Oh, so.
Wow.
That's kind of cool.
Well, thank you.
No, these types, these types of things have been around longer than, this is obviously not the first try, but this is the, the first try to do this at scale.
How do you get it to catch on though if people can get their stuff for free without having to pay back into the system if they don't want to?
They're not, well, they're not doing it in our system.
In our system, there's a, there's a price point attached to it.
I see.
So either that's through in kind services, through donation, through fiat currency.
It is what it is.
It's just that you have to select how you want to participate in this economy.
Okay.
So how do you expect that we will get to a post scarcity world eventually by having similar conversations to the one we're having right now.
So by studying these information asset marketplaces or by studying these information economies, electricity economies and figuring out what incentives got us there.
And maybe how we can modify those structures to, to not have a ad funded or a third party funded model where the value is not monopoly extra extracted.
I kind of see what you're saying, but don't we also need to have some major innovation in how we produce material goods as well?
Yes.
Hence replicator.
Okay.
So going back to the distribution model or the infinite assets, we can either create infinite assets or reuse of infinite.
I'm, I'm think my point is taking an asset and reusing it requires some inputs though.
Yes, it does.
My point is we're never going to get to whatever that end state is.
It's always going to be a tending towards kind of a function.
Right.
I think there's a whole bunch of gain to be had orders of magnitude difference in scarcity or in access to resources that could be had just by flattening the distribution model or making it more efficient orders of magnitude.
Yes.
Holy crap.
Okay.
Take any, give me an asset that's incredibly scarce food in some parts of the world.
There you go.
Sure.
Food's a good one since we all need that.
So there's, we could, there have been multiple times to solve this, but you could either go two ways.
You could say Soilent.
Right.
Or Soilent like examples where it's minimally expensive to produce and distribute.
Or you could say we create this marketplace of distributed for lack of a better word distributed distribution where it says it's as easy to distribute food to Puerto Rico, the third world.
As it is to a Walmart somewhere here.
Right.
So there's something blocking us in creating a generalized, you know, white space Walmart across the planet.
Yeah.
I briefly wanted to say also, I don't think Soilent is the best example.
Soilent still costs a lot more than rice does.
It does.
It does.
No, that was just a product wise example.
Right.
Okay.
It is what it is.
Soilent is Soilent wherever you make it.
Yeah.
So is the problem, I guess, best solved by either making things easier to make or making them as hard as they are to make now but having an easier time getting them to places that need them.
Both.
But I think the most gains will be gotten by making them easy to get wherever the person is where the usage is.
I can.
Okay, so I sort of agree with you a bunch on that because the world has been enriched greatly by how much cheaper it has become to just ship things nowadays.
Yeah.
And, and obviously there is a lot of inefficiencies and getting things to where they need to be, which causes famines and such.
But when people think of post scarcity worlds, they usually think of worlds where you don't have to work if you don't want to like Star Trek, you can work if you like, or you could not work for the entire rest of your life.
And we're not going to get there as long as you still need humans working in the fields to make the food, right?
Right.
Do you have a different conception?
No, no, no, nothing we talked about required humans to be working there.
We're just saying, so on the order of magnitude increase in efficiency, there could be indoor farms, factory farms somewhere else.
There could be hydroponics, aeroponics that are done.
I don't know if you guys have heard, but in New Jersey, right off the turnpike, there's a giant aeroponics building that's building cabbage in what's aeroponics?
Aquaponics is a waterbed aeroponics is a mist based.
So there's plants that are grown in mist.
No way.
Yes.
Indeed.
Yeah.
So see, and they have pink LEDs because plants absorb pink light better than regular light.
So it's a totally controlled, hermetically sealed system to grow cabbage or whatever high cash crop they want to grow, which could be marijuana in the next year.
But systems like that, where you take human involvement out, that's, I think, is where the efficiency is going to come.
So are we aiming for a world where basically humans don't have to work at all in robots or something else?
Does all the work for us?
Don't have to work.
Yes.
But again, betting on things that don't change.
People want to work.
Okay.
For right now, Max Tegmark has this new book Life 3.0.
I just heard about it a couple of weeks ago.
I haven't read it yet.
Exactly.
So he gives this great definition of there's this subset of people who don't have jobs are happy as fuck about it.
And their children.
Ah, okay.
Okay.
Well, happy as fuck is an interesting term, though, because I was, I was extremely happy while I was writing my novel.
Right.
And I mean, that's that's sort of a job, though.
It wasn't a job I was getting paid for.
And I could work whenever I wanted.
But once I was done with that, I kind of just started started floating.
And I swear my last two months of unemployment, I was doing basically nothing at all.
I was sitting around wasting my day and starting to feel really shitty about myself.
And it was weird as soon as I got an offer for for a job.
Oh, by the way, to any listener who cares, I just got a new job started four days ago.
But as soon as I got an offer, like immediately, I felt better.
I was like, Oh, my time is worth something again.
Exactly.
It is worth exactly this dollar amount.
Whereas before it was worthless and I was worthless.
Well, that hits the point that I wanted to bring up and I'm glad you brought up Tegmark's new book, which I haven't read, but I've also heard of.
Because, yeah, there are people, there are children who like not working, but kids don't, you know, they don't have the, they don't have the power.
Why is their work?
Because that's how they learn.
Yeah.
I mean, maybe I think, yeah, I mean, they would be bored sitting around all the time too.
Probably worse than us, but.
They don't have alcohol.
Yeah.
Or accessed alcohol anyway.
But yeah, because I when I was looking for a job a year ago for like five months and that sucked.
Because I'm not the kind of person who can sit at home and write a book and feel good about myself.
I just sat at home, not writing a book and hating myself.
So there, there's the question of like, how do people find meaning when they don't, you know, have.
It's tough because on the one hand, I don't like assigned my life's meaning to having a job, but it gets me out of bed and gives me something to do and gives me the resources to get the stuff I want.
I suppose if I had all the stuff I wanted, I imagine that would still be bored.
So like just having something that I, I guess, have to do gives me some, you know, I think meaning is having a lot of double meanings here, pun intended.
But yeah, is my question generally understandable?
Yes.
So where do we go from there?
No, that's a great point.
And I like and thank you for making the distinction between meaning and job.
Right.
So there's this good framework for analyzing things called the jobs to be done framework.
So apply that to a job.
So what, for lack of a better word, jobs does the product or thing that is called a job do for a human.
It gives you income, which asks us to like buy things and stuff.
Social structure, right?
We have work friends.
Mostly if you're spending eight hours in a day, you might hate the guy, but you know, you get to talk to him or her about whatever you want to talk to about.
And then there's that ephemeral meaning of long of just work basically just exercise for the intellect or just solving problems.
And like time structure, I think is a fourth thing.
So there's the social structure that you get from from having a network of people that you have to interact with.
But also just like, well, I've got to be there at eight or eight 30 or whatever time your job starts or seven, if you know, whatever.
But what if nobody was there?
What if that time structure was imposed solely on you?
Yeah, I for myself, I wasn't great at setting my own time structure to it.
I guess because I had nothing to do.
No, no, no, I'm saying in a job.
Oh, I'm saying the social structure is the underlying reason for the time structure.
Oh, sure.
Sure.
Yeah.
Well, and also like, I guess even if you work by yourself and all you did was talk to your boss once a month, like they would still, you know, they cared when you clocked in.
Or out or something.
But you're right.
That's a pretty contrived example.
So yeah, that's true.
It's the social.
Right.
No, but your point plays a good amount in the remote work economy, right?
There's a lot of people working from Fiji doing low end code work here.
And you can't impose my roommate and best friend works from home.
There you go.
Great.
See, so and you can't impose a time structure on them because they're doing whatever they're doing.
So if we're unbundling the job, I think the hardest one to replace would be that.
Social structure or that or that drive, meaning, whatever you want to call it, that would all everything else we can automate or, you know, abstract.
And if there's, if there are other things that you could do to get that, like community involvement, like intellectual pursuits, like writing a book.
So if that access is there, then I think we shouldn't have a problem.
I think just once we abstract away the individual bits that the meaning part of things is the hardest part, but everything else we can take away.
I just, I hate how I hate how I get this weird feeling of meaning sort of from my job because it's really there's very few things as meaningless as accounting.
No, it's it's basically playing a video game that's that's just juggling numbers all the time over and over.
And there's it's it is not a fulfilling job necessarily, but I still feel like like the mouse in the maze or the cog in the machine.
I'm like, yeah, I'm doing this and it's useful and I don't know.
It's it's weird that I get meaning out of that and I don't like it.
No, well, I don't know what Stephen wants to say, but accounting is great.
Accounting is great. Accounting is the basis for our for a marketplace, right?
For if I want to build a distribution structure, I have to account for it somewhere.
So I love accounting.
No, I'm even though I'm terrible at it.
Okay, okay.
So but I love it.
So meaning is meaning.
You could there are people who find meaning in cutting crops.
There are feeding.
So I think I think the struggle is more to find meaning nowadays.
Like we solved the whole can you survive question quite a while ago, at least in the first world.
And now it's the trying to find meaning question.
That's really hard.
Exactly.
And that is an issue.
Exactly.
Well, you could hack this in a way of saying go after big hairy audacious goals.
So if there are there are civilization level goals, then there's plenty of work to be done.
And if your basic living is taken care of, then those big hairy audacious goals would give you meaning would give you you people will be obsessed.
And they will do that to failure almost.
How many people do you think that actually encompasses very few.
But when I say big hairy audacious goal, that just doesn't mean terraforming Mars.
That could also mean making sure everybody on nobody on the planet is depressed.
Like Councilor Troy is also a valid option here.
No, but I guess what I meant was how many people do you think would actually want to pursue something like that?
Like when you're not doing anything else, it's often hard to get motivated to do anything.
Like, I guess, right, I had a number of months and Steven had a number of months where we weren't really doing anything and we didn't do much either with all that time that we had.
And I know at least a few people that I'm sure if they didn't have to ever work again would really not do much of anything with their time.
Right. It's not it is not person dependent and it's not time dependent as well.
Like I could be I could be running after some terraforming Mars goal if we want to take with that example for four months and then decide it's not built for me and go try something else.
Right. The issue is getting that initial, as you say, inertia out of the way of saying, okay, my needs are taken care of.
Right. I have to do something. I think at the very least people would do it just out of boredom.
Like one point beyond suicide, you could get somebody to do this stuff.
So I have we have people up to that point to bring on to this.
I'm kind of going through an update in my head right now.
So like one of the the classic things that like comebacks to, you know, something like universal basic income is like people get bored.
They all have no meaning because they don't have jobs, that sort of thing.
And I'm wondering if that's actually a hard problem because it just occurred to me that there's children who are fine, but there's there's the opposite class of people, the retired people.
Like my girl has been retired for 20 years and I get the feeling that even if her, you know, her retirement pension was five times what it was, she'd probably live a life much like she lives.
She gardens a lot. She, you know, socializes with her friends.
My partner's dad just retired last summer and he's got this.
He's at least one or two old cars that he's rebuilding.
And like, you know, so I mean, there's probably projects that he's had on his mind for years and he's like, all right, I'm going to finally do this.
So maybe this isn't a hard problem.
People maybe get overboard once they like, I think part of what stressed me out when I was looking for jobs that I had no resources.
And like every time that I like, all right, I'm going to go get a cup of coffee so I can get the energy to do this.
I'm like, oh wait, that's literally 6% of my month's income or of my bank account balance right now.
Right. So if the resources where I were taking care of, then yeah, you'd find things to do.
Maybe this isn't a hard problem.
Yes, I totally agree with you.
No, no, no, I totally agree with you.
Huh. Okay. Yeah, so this, maybe I've been looking at it the wrong way this whole time.
I'm still thinking on this, but I'm still, I guess, perpetuating that change of mind through the rest of my beliefs.
It's going to be a few minutes, but that's interesting.
I don't know if I have much to add to it, but I am now strongly suspecting that the boredom problem is solvable.
Unless what do you think?
No, I think it's solvable.
I think, I mean, I was never bored when I was at Burning Man, but you read, I know you read this because you are the one who suggested it to me.
I recently read Friendship is Optimal, Heaven is Terrifying.
The fanfic from Friendship is Optimal, which is advertised as, as terrified Jadkowski.
That's awesome. How did they start advertising it that way?
Yeah, but it's, it makes a neat argument that in a post-scarcity society with a nearly infinite lifespan, everyone would eventually...
Wait, wait, those are two different, let's double crux that.
I know, they are two different things.
They're two very different things, but eventually everyone would turn into either a loop intelligence or a post-human intelligence.
And the loop intelligence thing was kind of how, looking back on it, I think I was maybe getting into at Burning Man, but where basically you kind of just end up doing the same thing over and over.
And maybe the loop lasts for thousands of years before you start repeating stuff, but there gets to a point where there's only so many things that you really enjoy doing.
There's these people you like hanging out with, there's these things you like doing, and you will eventually just keep going back to them and doing them over and over for all eternity and becoming like a loop instead of a person.
And I don't know.
We're kind of loops now. We have jobs, we get up and do stuff.
You could change the definition a slight bit to say, instead of saying loop, you could say mastery.
It's the same thing.
If I'm, I don't know, sharpening a blade, that's still a loop, but I get maybe a pretty nice katana at the end of that, right?
So it's just changing that conversation from, it may be a loop, it may be post-human.
But it's the perception, I think when we're speaking of in these scales, perception matters a whole lot.
And that could be an accelerating perception like a mastery over a skill versus a loop, which you have to get bored of after whatever number of tries.
Well, I think you just don't notice after a while, if it's thousands of years, you kind of lose track of your earlier memories and you just keep hanging out with the same people and doing the same stuff.
Again, this is the third thing we're introducing here.
Scarcity doesn't say we have to be immortal.
That's true.
Being immortal doesn't have to say we have to lose our memory.
That's a good point.
Yeah.
Right?
Yeah, yeah.
I think the vampire fanfic works a lot here.
Like the older the vampire is, the more powerful they become, yet they are more reticent, right?
So if we all turn into vampires who don't drink blood, maybe that's a good thing.
I think that's also the fact.
I guess there's loop and mastery are two really different framings of the same kind of thing.
Same thing, exactly.
You know, Sisyphus pushing that rock up a hill for eternity is a loop.
But he's, well, the question is, is he having fun?
Or can his life be meaningful?
But throw that out and just say, is his life, well, I guess, putting it another way, that sounds super boring, but that fits the bill of being a loop.
But so does like, I don't know, taking on some huge projects, having a great time doing it.
And then, cool, did that.
It's all awesome.
I'm going to start this next new thing.
Or, you know, I'm going to make a 2.0 of the first thing I did.
So, yeah, I think that I like the mastery phrasing a lot better, not just because it's more cheerful, but I think it fits better.
Because you're not, I mean, Sisyphus can get as good as he wants us pushing that rock up the hill, but he's still not, without digging into it, I don't think he's having fun, right?
We don't know that.
That's my point.
That's great.
But pick something more boring than pushing a rock up the hill, but yeah.
No, let's stick with that.
My point is, and I want to improve on this mastery point because I haven't thought of it yet.
Let's say Sisyphus has memory and is optimizing for something.
We don't know at the end of a thousand years that he will not be superluminal, right?
But even at superluminal, he just might be pushing a rock to eternity.
But the issue is there's something to be optimized.
I think having, and I was self-employed and therefore fun-employed for a very long time as well.
So, and I faced the same problem.
I started writing blogs.
I went deep into like rationalist theory and, you know, the type of stuff people do with an internet connection.
So, I think non-isolation and optimization for whatever value that is, positive, negative, you know, something.
If I want to kill people, I would want to optimize to be the best killer on the planet or something, right?
I don't care.
Positive, negative either way.
So, I think the solution to boredom would be non-isolation and mechanisms that push you to have these conversations of,
you're not doing anything, but guess what?
Going back to that time structure, at 6.30 in the evening, you're going to be at the Commons and there's going to be some dude playing a flute, right?
And your body would kick in to say, I want to beat that guy.
So, I will go learn the flute.
So, how do we, do you have any ideas of how we get to this place?
How humans and the species get to this place?
The place of posterity.
Okay, here's an interesting little tidbit.
Me and my wife have a bet about humanity producing the replicator.
It's a 50-year bet.
It's on our shared Google Calendar.
So, I'm hoping that we get to a matter replication machine, or at least a matter recombinant machine.
And we're taking like 0.1 steps there, if we're talking about the physical world, because in the information world, we're already there, right?
Data, information, money, whatever you want to call this, we're already there.
It's just an arbitrary restriction problem that's going to solve itself in two, three generations of max, right?
So, on the physical side of things, we have to get to atom level manipulation and recombinatory stuff, where I think we need a whole lot of energy.
So, there's the energy creation problem, and then there's the matter arrangement problem that we have to solve.
Do you think it has to be atom level?
Like, 3D printers don't work at the atom level, but they're pretty damn cool.
Right, but I'm saying it would be, first principle's basis, it would be more efficient to build something.
Like, if I had carbon atoms, I could go from building coal to diamond within the same set of carbon atoms.
Right?
And if I was doing molecule level, maybe protein and stuff like that, I could work with proteins.
Yeah, I was thinking just optimally.
I think we have to get to that atomic level manipulation.
Okay.
I almost feel like that's overkill.
There's a lot of times I want to move a whole lot of atoms from one place to another, and it's much easier to do that on a mass scale than individual.
No, no, I totally agree.
I'm just saying, just because there's a 3,000 horsepower Bugatti on the road doesn't mean that there's fiat's also not on the road.
Okay.
Right?
I'm just saying the know-how has to be there.
And do you think we'll get there in 50 years?
My wife might win that bet.
All right.
Is there money on this?
No, it's just ragged, right?
So it wouldn't matter if there's money on it, because once you got post-scarcity, what do you need money for?
That's perfect.
If I was you, I would have bet that there wouldn't be a post-scarcity thing in 50 years, because then if you lose the bet, post-scarcity, everything's awesome, right?
If you win the bet, you got a lot more money.
Yeah, you guys are saying my wife's smarter than me.
I may be a little bit.
Well, unless, only in this context, and only if she actually thinks that it'll happen in the next 50 years, but she wanted to bet against it, because then that way, if in 50 years we don't have master, or we don't have the recombinator, at least she won the bet.
Right.
And also, no, because you didn't bet money.
Maybe we could change that.
But what do you guys think?
Do you guys think that we can't do this in, let's say, 100 years?
We can't get to a post-scarcity world?
I go back to, there's a number of, God, it was just, I think it was just recently, Eliezer wrote no fire alarm for AI, really interesting essay, but he mentioned in there that there's a lot of AI researchers who, when they're asked, how long do you think it'll be until-
It's always 50 years, right?
No, no, no, how long do you think it'll be until machines can do every profession that humans do right now, without needing human input?
They say something, I don't remember the exact number, it was more than a century, I think less than two centuries, but something in like 120, 150 range.
But when the question is phrased, how long until you think any task that a human can do can be done as well by a machine, the number is like a quarter of that?
Yeah.
It's like 40 years or something?
Yeah.
And once you can do any task a human can do with a machine instead, that's basically where you don't need humans to work anymore, right?
Well, we have car assembly robots, humans still build cars.
They do, that's true, because-
But need to and can are different.
Yeah, yeah.
And once it's, I don't know, I guess once it's cheap enough to have the-
Because you need machines to make robots right now, to make some robots.
Okay.
I mean, not machines, obviously machines, but you need humans to design the robots.
Right.
And once you're at a point where you don't need humans in the loop anywhere at all, all you got to do is feed them energy and they'll do their thing, right?
I'm totally against this AI apocalypse thing.
I don't know if I want an apocalypse at all, but I think if any task that a human can do can be done by a machine within 40 years, that's basically where you don't need humans anymore for anything.
No need, yes.
But that doesn't mean that we will come up with different needs, right?
Right.
And also, I guess it doesn't mean that the humans won't be cheaper, but-
No, but that's just an arbitrary scale.
If 10 robots can do it for X, 10,000 robots can do it for 0.001X, so humans can get out of the loop.
I think if it is just offloading effort, I think that is just part one of getting to poor scarcity.
There's a whole lot of social changes, there's a whole lot of incentive changes that need to happen, because even with this outsourcing effort to robots, the output is the same, the control mechanism is the same for the economy, right?
You're saying, I'm building widgets, I get to build 10,000 widgets for one tet the price, but I'm still building widgets.
So that, I think, has to change at least a tiny bit.
I think the economy would have to change drastically, because as more and more robots do things, the people who own the robots and control the robots would get all the income, and the people who don't own any robots would die of starvation.
How is that different from anywhere else?
So this is the voice exit economy, right?
Do you get to then buy again and go start a robot killing spree?
Right.
No, I'm just saying that's why our economy would have to change, because once you don't need humans to do work anymore, what are the humans going to do if they don't have an income through some other means?
So we have to get income through other means.
Or have put in place some sort of distribution system.
There we go.
Now I got you.
The wealth is distributed.
Or put people in substrates that don't require food and shelter and that sort of thing.
That's a major example.
Yeah.
Or the robot body answer.
Yeah, but they would still require energy inputs of some kind.
Yeah, sure.
But you know, energy is cheap.
I mean, yeah.
And then it starts becoming, it's always a percentage of your income though, right?
If you can live off two cents a day, that's great, but you still have to make two and a half cents a day or however much and wages would just fall to 2.01 cents per day at that point.
No, I think going back to betting on things that don't change, if we preserve the four F's, right?
Feed, fight, flight and mate.
If we preserve them and abstract everything else, that all of these solutions are viable.
The matrix answer is viable.
The brain and a VAT, which I think again is a matrix or the Isaac Asimov type, we're going to get into some sort of shared consciousness model.
All of these are viable if we keep those optimization functions for lack of a better word, which we call biological needs or something like that.
If we keep those open, we can fight our way or do one of those F's our way into whatever future we want.
And I think anything that any solution that purports to change one of these F's, I am very, very skeptical of, right?
People are not going to be suddenly, I don't know, peaceful or something like that.
How do you feel about the universal basic income then?
I like the concept in theory, but implementation is always weird and it was always implemented the wrong way.
Maybe it has to come by negative taxation or something like that, where the implementation is transparent enough and the process is transparent enough for people to still preserve the four F's if we want to be still human.
If we're talking post-human, then that's going to be the different, but preserving humans, I would say preserve the four F's and any model that gets to UBI by preserving these four F's, great, all for it.
Wait, so how does the distribution approach?
I sort of always assumed you meant something like universal basic income for it to work because, I mean, what's my incentive as Walmart 3.0 to ship stuff over the third world if they can't afford what I'm shipping them?
If it was crazy, crazy cheap to ship, sure.
Oh, I guess, okay, hold on, I just answered my own question.
If it was ridiculously cheap to get there and they could barely afford to pay for it while I'm still making a profit because it costs me like nothing to get it there, is that the answer?
Right, and why are they not just going there?
That too, yeah.
There you go.
Okay, yeah, problem solved.
I'm going to give myself half credit for that one.
I don't worry that if we had some sort of negative income or universal basic incomes, that sort of thing that basically just cost of living, the cost of housing and food wouldn't increase enough to eat that all up.
And so people would be back where they were before.
Wait, wait, wait, say that again.
Why would cost of housing increase?
It just rents increase.
Everybody has an extra thousand dollars a month now and so rents.
So everybody gets an extra, the renters say change my rent?
Yeah.
So that's why it's a keeping the four F's together kind of thing.
That is a true worry.
But if you say that there has to be rent control or if you say that.
Now rent control never works.
Never works.
No, but I'm just saying if you used to be able to live off making $2 a day, right?
And you cannot live off $2 a day in the US.
But it's not inflation adjusted $2.
If you still made inflation adjusted to whenever that was.
Not sure.
You couldn't, but I'm just saying the disparity is vitally reduced.
Okay.
Right.
So, so I think any model of UBI has to take into account the rent increases that you're
talking about.
So that's again, going back to preserving the four F's.
I have no idea how to solve that.
That's why I'm only sticking to the information assets, which are much, much cheaper.
So this seems like a race if it's 50 years for, you know, optimal distribution across
the globe and only 40 years for full automation.
We're going to have this horrible 10 year window where the trillionaires are living in
their compounds started by razor wire and the rest of us are like scrambling to get through
it to take their food before, you know, they can easily distribute it and still make a profit
off of it.
Maybe the, maybe the, I'm torturing this analogy, but I can see where in one scenario where
say, imagine if one company or, you know, one company of like.
Evil Corp.
Yeah.
Evil Corp.
Equalization rights to like every self driving car, every fast food restaurant and every
farming piece of equipment.
And suddenly they own what 35% of jobs in the US.
So then 35% of people don't have jobs anymore because all these robots are doing it and
there's not enough of anything to keep these 35 people, 35% of people afloat.
Well, they're going to go after people who have all the stuff, right?
Evil Corp.
So then they've got to basically barricade themselves and hide from the people that they've
heard, uh, saw the rest of us, right?
Um, probably.
I, I imagine that those people would try to find jobs other ways and would, that's a
lot of jobs.
That's a lot of jobs.
I think one thing that we missed is why does, why is there only one evil Corp?
Right?
Why is there only one thing?
Name any IP, any technology that has been monopolized to the unitary level, name one
company that has monopoly globally over anything, it just doesn't exist.
People will steal.
Right?
That's why we have governments.
So what, I think, uh, that was a good segue into talking about governance models and what
you were talking about as well with the rent control.
It was a good segue.
That's what I was going for.
There we go.
There we go.
Yeah.
You got to give me some time.
Okay.
I'm just, just waking up here.
No, you're good.
I'm just teasing.
I was posing that bad thought experiment, but I'm glad something useful.
Governance models, uh, also come into play.
And I think the recent, uh, I know that you guys had Rhys Lindmark on and he was talking
about Crypto Conjures and stuff, and that world is, uh, it's just, just fascinating
to watch from a governance perspective because they're grappling through the same issues
that Wall Street grappled through 40 years ago and it's all incredibly open.
So we get to just open and just beat those governance models to death.
Right?
And everybody gets to stress test them.
And I think any solution of these distribution models would also have to come with a governance
model attached to it.
So I know you're really into crypto too.
And is that because of the, this ability to try out new governance models?
Exactly.
Okay.
Exactly.
And, uh, I don't know how into crypto you guys are, but, uh, the, the people that who
stated goal stated goal was to build, uh, on chain, which is a trustless way of doing
things governance model, right?
So the thing that they set out to build was on chain governance models suffered from bad
governance in the real world.
And now we're being sued.
So that cognitive dissonance is something that when we're building these kinds of distribution
systems, we should not allow, what are they being sued for?
So the, okay, all of this is alleged and nobody can sue me because I am a dumb idiot
and nobody listened to whatever I have to say given that caveat, allegedly what's going
on.
There we go.
Uh, so it's company called Tezos where they raised $230 million to build an on chain governance
platform.
Okay.
But they still have to live in the real world.
So the founders created a nonprofit foundation and I'm doing air quotes for the people listening
in Switzerland, which, uh, because it has to be independent is being run by other people.
The other people that are running it, three guys, Swiss guys, uh, say that they want to
cut because on the books or on Fiat books, they're in control and they want to exercise
that control and the founders, the technical, the founders that are running the actual build
process also want control.
So on the books, the Swiss people have control and they're doing things that these guys don't
want in a way that they're acquiring value to themselves.
So my point is if you're doing these things, it's a good idea to stress test them by using
it on yourself or even better, give it to your worst enemy, right?
Just give it to them.
See, we'll see what happens.
And if you don't like the, uh, what's happening to you, stop the project.
I'm assuming the governance model is at least, uh, somewhat of a metaphor because how is
a, uh, cryptocurrency going to enforce things like border control or...
It's not.
Right.
And people who say that we're going to have land titles and this and that, land titles
are enforced here because if you don't follow the written code, a guy with a gun is going
to come and shoot you.
Right.
Well, hopefully he'll try to arrest you first and only shoot you if you resist.
No, but that's the fear, right?
That's the stick.
So where's the stick on crypto?
There's not.
So you would need a crypto equivalent of NATO basically that are crypto enforcers, which
has the ability to turn into the arm of the Lord type, uh, vigilante effort.
So, uh, without that enforcement, nothing, it's not going to change.
So back to your accounting point, it's just an accounting system.
So this is like saying SAP, because SAP is being run by vault, say that, I'm sorry, say
that again, because Volvo uses SAP as their accounting system, somehow SAP has control
of my Volvo.
That's not right.
It's just an accounting system.
So I think governance models would be notionally, notionally enforceable, but true enforceability
would have to come with force.
And I think the people in crypto's point of view is that we are evolving to a mental
state where force would not be necessary or they're continuing the archive technology
that reduces the application of force.
Okay.
Wouldn't we need in any sort of post scarcity society, some, uh, Leviathan law enforcement
entity?
Again, yeah.
Yeah.
Uh, see, what are the jobs to be done for that Leviathan enforcement entity?
You could say implement, enforce the law.
You could say preserve status quo.
What else?
You could say maybe two other things, but we only want the enforced law part of it without
the preserve status quo and without the, you know, jail, dissidents and that kind of thing.
Well, I mean, that depends.
Maybe you really like the status quo.
How is that different from now?
I'm saying for a poor, for a post scarcity world where the person or the entity in charge
of creating laws also doesn't have consequences, negative consequences of losing assets.
Right.
If, if Naveen, Inyash and Steven are in a post scarcity world, then the entity that's governing
them is also in that same world.
You cannot be like girdle in completeness to say this is somehow above it.
That's why I have to rule it.
Right.
So that's why I say there's a whole flattening happening where, where, where once we are
post scarce, then governance will be just governance and just for rule enforcement.
Well, it seems once we are post scarce, then whoever is ultimately in control of the things
that make everything is the real power.
Right.
There you go.
So that's a great point that you're leading with.
You're saying there, there can be a flat government or a holocracy is not a, a requirement
for poor scarcity, but for extended post scarcity, i.e. people don't nuke themselves to death.
For that to happen, then I think we are tending towards holoca, holocratic models.
Can you define holocratic?
No, no management.
Okay.
Um, then who manages everybody.
Okay.
It's a collective management.
That's why I think crypto is important because it's a distributed accounting system where
that account could just as well be votes.
Okay.
So we would in that case return to a system where the, the coalition was able to amass
the most votes as the power.
Right.
But why would you coalesce?
I don't know.
You want to go explore Mars and other people don't.
And you need a whole bunch of resources to go to Mars again.
So it's not really post scarce.
If you need to impinge on my resources to do your thing, we're not really post scarce.
Okay.
What if you really want that girl in high school to be your girlfriend and she doesn't
want to?
That has nothing to do with resources.
Her attention is a resource.
If you were like the son of someone who was extremely powerful, you could use that to.
Right.
But wait, wait, wait, wait.
Okay.
I'm saying when we say post scarce and when we're shortening that or putting restrictions
on that, we're saying material goods, we're saying information.
That's true.
I moved the goalposts unfairly and without, without announcing that I was doing so.
So you're right.
Attention will always be scarce and we should not be talking about that in a post scarcity
podcast episode.
Because we're talking about material scarcity.
No, no, no, wait, we, there's no should or should not.
We just have to declare it.
Okay.
There's no post scarcity attention.
Right.
Yeah.
I have, I'm going to live whatever I'm going to live unless I'm living immortally, which
is the same distinction we made, I don't know, half an hour ago or whatever that was.
So if we are immortal, then again, why are you attracted to this girl?
Even if you're not, maybe whatever happens happens and we're still immortal.
So great.
So I think resource, poor scarcity or asset, poor scarcity is very, very viable and very
achievable.
The hindrances are arbitrary and power mismatches for now.
Once we get into ephemeral stuff like attention and information, we, that's a whole other
ballgame.
I guess I, I think there's always going to be some certain subset of people that want
power just for that hell of having it.
And I don't think they're going to necessarily use it to kill all the rest of humanity and
just have, you know, their six people in a walled compound while everyone else starves.
I imagine they'd be more than happy to give everyone all the food and everything because
why not?
But if there's someone that like pisses them off or like, ah, this guy is a little too sexist
or that girl is a little bit too much of a bitch and then just cut off the resources
to that person.
And, you know, that's one person out of billions that's going to starve to death.
And what's the world going to do against this, this powerful coalition that can, can, can
do that sort of.
With the answers in the question, you just said there will always be some subset.
And my point is that will never be 51% or that or whatever coalition wouldn't be locally
51%.
Even if that was over time, there'd be self correction mechanisms where you can only
be bad for blank amount of time.
If everybody has the same power, if access to resources equals power, then you have no
more power over me than I have over you than there's nothing really other than playing
mind games.
Yeah.
There's nothing really you can do.
That's kind of like if, if now we were all the same physical strength and like capability,
you can only be a dick for so long for other people to shut you down.
Right.
Exactly.
And just this keeps assuming that the system somehow respects the wishes of the people
like the 51%, right?
There's no respect.
I'm just saying.
Because whoever basically, if the world, if the, the, the governance system is run on
Ethereum or something, some crypto currency, who perhaps I do not understand crypto currencies
enough, but somebody or some group can control that system, right?
No, the point would be it's totally distributed.
Okay.
Right.
So we're talking ground level.
So independent mesh networks, I'm running my own goddamn satellites and I'm doing packet
running on my own satellites, but my own, I mean, community owned, right?
I don't want to bring the word community into this because it has other social political
con con.
So I don't want to say that, but I'm just saying from the ground up, right?
So everybody has their own connection to an accounting system and connection to access
to resources.
The system is just notionally there for record keeping purposes, right?
If we preserve the four Fs, four people that want to do good will subdue one guy that doesn't
want to do good guy or girl, right?
So I think it's just people being people.
Okay.
All right.
I think I'm just kind of flailing around at this point, trying to find problems with
it because I always say the idea because charisma and charm aren't, are scarce.
There's no way I can import your charm on my, on to myself.
So you can say, how come they will not be another Hitler, right?
Who amasses a whole bunch of people to do bad things.
That is a real problem.
But my point is, great, everybody gets together in a bar, drinks, beer, they decide, okay,
we're going to take over now.
But I'm always saying there's going to be more people that will stop them.
So it would be a long process if there is no exit option.
And if you have some super charismatic supervillain, there's no stopping them anyway, even in the
system, right?
No, I'm saying, even if you have Luther Strange or whoever the super charismatic supervillain
is, how many people can you amass?
So why do people come to a supervillain?
They're persuasive and charming.
For right now, I think there's a resource access issue as well.
Well, yeah, sure.
If you're a supervillain can offer to pay you, that helps a lot.
Right.
So let's say I have, so bring that over to the poor scarcity world where we're saying,
I have everything I want, I have access to everything I want, right?
So as a supervillain, you would have to be so persuasive, and you would have to use me
the way nonprofits use me now, where they're using me on my volunteer time.
So I would be doing bad stuff on my off time.
How would that work?
So not to imply that our current president is a supervillain or anything, but he doesn't
pay anyone to vote for him and to carry out his policies for them or to support him publicly.
And yet a lot of people do anyway.
Right.
Yeah.
We'd like that Trump guy.
We'd like what he's saying.
We're on his side.
Can I take a stab at this?
Sure.
So I think running, I want to anticipate something kind of like what your answer would be.
And I imagine that's because people, I'm going to butcher this and I want you to give me
the better version, but people support a hypothetical supervillain because they need stuff, right?
And they see their need of stuff or their access to stuff being threatened.
These people coming in are going to take it, and there's only so much to get around or
whatever, right?
Is that part of the answer?
I would say that's the entire answer.
Okay.
Yeah, that's true.
He is actually offering them a lot of things by changing laws to favor them.
To keep them in what they're still.
Or their power or their resources or whatever.
All right.
Fine.
I can't find many problems with this post scarcity idea.
It's pretty cool, aside from the implementation being ridiculously hard.
Yeah.
We have no problems.
So before we like move on to listener feedback or whatever, what would you guys do?
I guess both of you in turn first, Navin, what would you do with in a post scarcity
world?
Oh, I have.
Well, in a very optimistic answer, I would say go after some of the big, hairy, audacious
goals that I have, right?
So one of the things that I like to just throw out there is somehow invert the Maslow's pyramid
to say, if you had to achieve actualization first, what would you do, right?
Or if so, it's all self actualization because we took care of all the other things.
For me, I would give me your day to day for a while in a post scarcity world.
Yeah.
Oh man.
It's a difficult.
Can Stephen go first?
Stephen, right now someone rich dies bequeaths $100,000 a year on you for the rest of your
life and it adjusts for inflation.
What do you do with the rest of your life?
Luckily, I had some thought on this because I just drove to Boulder yesterday and I passed
one of the billboard signs for the lottery and it was like $91 million.
So I was thinking about this a little bit and I would like to think I would continue
working in some capacity because I like what I do, whether or not I would keep my same
hours or something.
I don't know, but especially if I could buy the company and be like, you know, I'm going
to work five hours a week instead of 40 ish.
Well, I guess with post scarcity, my other thing that I had $91 million, I'd try and
be super big into philanthropy, but people wouldn't need stuff anymore.
So that would cut that back a bit.
But there'd be cool projects to invest in.
You know, we could have all the stuff we need here, but what if we want to stretch out Mars,
Moon, whatever.
So give me an actual thing you'd be doing.
Oh, day to day, I'd probably be playing a lot of like VR Skyrim.
Okay.
Pointless, right?
But like the things that would motivate me that I would be working towards slowly, like
so my day to day looked probably pretty boring, especially for the first few years.
I would pay people to do the fun stuff or the important stuff while I did the fun stuff.
But I would hope if this happened, the first thing I would do would be to spend a considerable
amount of time thinking of what I'm going to do.
Is that a cop out?
That is a super cop out, but it works.
You could say this, there's a pad line that you could use.
Anything you could do, I can do meta.
So say this is a great answer.
But yeah, I think that that's trying to answer it right away is pointless because I don't
think I'd do it right.
But if I literally could spend a month thinking about it and had all my stuff taken care of,
I think I'd probably come up with a decent answer.
So put on the back burner and maybe I could back to you in some weeks and have something
laid out.
Cool.
All right.
All right.
Me on the hotspot again.
Now that I have some chance to think about it, and this is, I'm going to be as honest as
I can be, I want to preserve my 4Fs.
So I would just train, have like a rocking body.
Okay.
Okay.
That would take whatever amount of time.
And then if the materialist, if the, if matter is somehow non scarce, I would work on improving
happiness or improving actualization among other people.
I think that's a vague enough answer to cover a lot of things.
Yeah.
Right?
Yeah.
I don't know.
Maybe I act.
I got nothing.
I'm very selfish.
Yeah.
And very, very vain.
So, yeah.
Just, I would say live.
Well, to make your, make happiness and self actualization available to others isn't really
selfish in vain unless you're doing it just to glorify yourself.
I think I am.
But if, but if the fallout, I'm willing to just say if the fallout is more self-actualized
and happy people, more power to me.
Yeah.
So.
World peace.
You got anything?
You know, lately I've been watching a lot of YouTube videos about the work of director
David Finch and yeah, and I just like watching them going into the stuff that he does.
It's amazing.
I don't know.
I would want to, here's the thing.
I want to say that like I would like to write stories and then act in them and then like
be a director and like work with all these people and put together these beautiful visual
feasts that are just amazing.
God, writing a single book was such a pain in the ass and I can't imagine working like
on an entire movie and I get why it takes hundreds of people just working themselves
to the bone for months to put one of those out, you know, and I don't, I don't.
It's weird because once you're an actor and you're really rich, you don't need to do
it for the money anymore and yet people still do it and like David Finch doesn't need to
keep directing.
He's set for life, but he keeps doing it anyway for the joy of it.
And I don't know how I would ever get that level of passion where I just wanted to keep
doing it forever.
Like there's things that I sometimes get into something, I just work on it for 14 hours
straight and then there's times where I can work on something for months, but I look at
people like that and maybe it's because I'm at such a distance that I don't know what
their day to day is and maybe in real life, they, they like work real crazy hard for like
three days and then for the next four days, they just kind of fucking veg out and be like,
okay, doing nothing now, recharging and then get back into it.
But from a distance, it looks like these people are fucking machines that are nonstop amazing
at everything and, and it is intimidating to want to do that sort of thing.
But I would like to do that sort of thing, like make stuff, entertain the people that
I like and become famous for being good at entertaining people or some shit.
Right on.
Although there's two things.
One, you could get bored of doing something, you know, you said you don't, you could imagine
doing something forever.
I think that that's a trap that's easy to fall into, but you don't have to do the same
thing forever, right?
No, I know.
You could act for a century until you got bored of it and then try something else.
And as long as we speak, maintaining YouTube channels, you mentioned two things that I
think I would do if I had a lot of free time and I'm going to continuously plug two YouTube
channels.
They'll send me a check.
Binging with Babish, he makes food from TV shows and movies.
I think I'd love to get good at cooking.
Cool.
Currently I don't.
And I think that'd be a lot of fun.
There'd be a lot of, you know, fun, I don't know what the right word is, magic, chemistry.
I wonder what would happen if I did this and like, we'll take like enough for, you know,
foreknowledge behind that you could anticipate what that'd be like, that'd be kind of fun
to do, I imagine.
That and there's another tech, there's another YouTube channel sort of in a different direction
called primitive technology where they're like 15 minute videos ish and it takes place
over weeks, but there's no, there's no, there's no talking, there's no music, there's no voice
over.
There's just this guy in his shorts in the woods, you know, whittling sticks and making
fire and making clay bricks and then, you know, making a hut.
And I think if I had all the time money in the world, I could probably spend some summers
doing nothing but that for fun.
I might get bored, but, you know, it's the kind of thing too where the video is only
a few minutes long and it, you know, then you read the long description of what he did
and it took, you know, place over months because a lot of this stuff took, you know, weeks
to dry or something properly, right?
So those are the ones that go back and do things to keep me interested in other stuff.
But yeah, YouTube channels give me some ideas.
Oh yeah.
Is there anything else you wanted to say about post scarcity or what you're doing or
anything along those lines?
No, I think you guys did a great job of getting to governance models and getting to the local
issues that are tangled up with this, but I do want to plug something.
I am.
So I think the listeners should be familiar with a organization called Open Collective.
It's a way for people to contribute.
It's like Patreon, but for open source projects and the thing itself is open sourced.
But I'm also working on something very, very similar.
So as a 0.1 of what we're trying to do here and the things we talked about, this has been
done previously as well.
I'm doing a project to connect every makerspace hacker space by whatever kind of community
lab on there onto one resource.
Have you already reached out to the Denhack people here?
Yes.
I speak with Denhack.
I've spoken to the bio people and there's all the grunt work has been done by.
So if you go to Hacker Spaces of Wiki and if you go to the MIT Fab Lab, their resource
center, all of the information is there, but I just want to have one place with everything
in it and also access rules built on top of it.
So if anybody wants to contribute, just find me on Twitter or just email me or just find
me on the website yet for that idea.
No, okay.
But, uh, yeah, but just find me on Twitter and we can get from there.
What's your Twitter handle?
It's yours truly, Mishra.
My last name is HRA.
So it's yours truly at my HRA.
And we'll link it on the website as well.
Got it.
Uh, you, so you said you heard the cryptocurrency episode with Reese.
Yes.
Did we mess up anything?
Is there anything you wanted to add or correct?
Now, no offense to Reese, but I think, uh, in the initial four or five, well, in the
initial four or five, uh, conversations, you guys were, I think you were trying to hammer
out, well, why is this valuable?
Why the fuck is this?
Well, why do we pay money for something that doesn't exist or something like that?
I think that that was very good.
But something that we didn't talk about was governance model.
So we did that, but only in crypto.
Okay.
Now this is another project that I'm working on.
So another plug, uh, starting, uh, November, I'm going to say 15th, because seventh is
when it actually starts, but 15th is when the public, um, I'm working on somebody with,
um, creating interoperability and transparency platforms for these crypto currency platforms.
So there are, there are projects, uh, that are focusing on interoperability and true
decentralization that is non custodial exchanges and stuff like that, where the
exchange is just an exchange, right?
Uh, and, and there's very, very, very little governance structures or transparency structures
built in.
For example, there's no sec for crypto.
The obvious answer would be sec would have a bunch of guys or people doing branch five
of sec would be sec crypto.
I'm saying that sec is in security and exchange commission.
Yes.
And they're already working on this.
They already are enforcing some stuff.
Wait.
The US sec is already working in crypto.
Yes.
Me, that wasn't, that wouldn't take that long at all.
No, no, they brought two cases last month and they are working to bring other cases
as well.
So, uh, they defined what is, uh, cryptocurrency and what falls into equity and what doesn't
fall into equity.
That was in July, I think.
And, uh, there's a prominent research organization that just put out a document, uh, for a law
that says, uh, it's akin to the 1201 rule that was quite after I was working against
in, uh, DMCA.
So it says, as long as you're working on it for a research purpose and you hold your
own keys and you're not a custodial of other people's keys, you don't have to comply with,
uh, financial regulation disclosure forms.
Ah, so it's not so.
So if I have my own wallet, it's fine, but Coinbase is going to have to start.
Exactly.
Okay.
So, uh, they're just trying to codify that into law.
And one good thing about being in Colorado is, uh, Jared Polis is the chair of, uh, the
congressional crypto site.
The congressional blockchain caucus.
So, and I think he, uh, bolder, bolder, neat.
Cool.
So I didn't know either of those things.
That's really interesting.
Yeah.
We think the SES, I mean, the general, uh, perception is the SEC is bad at New
Tech, but they've government's 10 or our government tends to be shitty at New
Tech, any government.
Yeah.
You guys want to talk about Indian demonization and identity linking.
That's a whole other episode.
If you want to talk to me about identity and you will see my libertarian tendencies
there, but, uh, no, uh, they're, uh, working very, very hard, uh, with the crypto, uh,
industry just to get on point.
And there are, uh, analysis tools built in and there's rules being written as we speak.
So, cool.
Wow.
All right.
So get out if you can.
Yeah.
I, God, I saw yesterday Bitcoin hit almost 6,000.
It's more over six now.
It's over six.
I heard there was like a mini crash or mini crash.
It's already gone.
It's already gone.
Okay.
I was going to buy on the next mini crash.
I saw, I don't know, in the episode I mentioned that I saw, yeah.
Well, I mean, whatever.
I was in for a hundred bucks.
Like it's not like I had my retirement in there and I went ahead and cash tax
that I was going to bust, but you didn't have your retirement in there after you
sold.
Yeah.
Right.
Right.
Well, so next time if it goes down, then I'll buy back in.
I've been thinking about that.
I've been checking back on it every couple days, which is not enough.
I should find a way to automate.
There's a way to automate this.
I just need to get in on that.
So there's futures exchanges where you can put, you can buy put contracts.
And that's where like, if it drops below four, then yeah, but that would be a very
if, because we don't know the timing, right?
So if you have, if you were going to automate this in some way, you can make
a better put contract, but you can have a long-term put contract that says next
three months, if it hits this price by it, if it hits this price sell it.
So is there anything like that currently for our future exchanges?
But there's roundabout ways of financially engineering financial
products that are similar to these contracts.
So yes.
What I'm saying is with Steven's mad programming knowledge, could he create
this tool that he was just speaking of?
Absolutely.
Someone could.
Well, I know someone could.
Had is it already out there?
Would he be the first on this ship?
No, no, okay.
Yeah, I've definitely seen stuff like this already where you can.
But one thing that I do want to, I'm sorry to disturb, but everybody acknowledges
that the user experience side of anything crypto is horrible, right?
It's shit beyond shit.
So if you, so Coinbase is popular because of that reason, you just, it's
just like signing up to anything else.
So if, if Steven or anybody wants to work on this, I would say just work on
the UX side of things, which doesn't mean a snappy node website.
Look at the whole process and just simplify it greatly.
If you can create a tool that'll, that'll track the price of Bitcoin and allow
people to make pit put contracts out there and charge 0.1 percent as a fee
for whatever they end up buying, you could make a lot of money.
Or if you're really like want to do this, you could get a pool together
and be JPMorgan.
You could call our stuff.
You could just say, this is the price I will do.
I don't know, 50 basis points.
Honey, the way give me your stuff.
I've got a long way to go before I could do either of those things.
I'll put it on the list.
Oh, and one more thing I wanted to plug before because you asked me, there's
this researcher out of Stanford law school who's, who's running the legal
design lab at Stanford, Margaret, somebody, I hate myself for forgetting
her last name, but yeah, just look up legal design lab.
And I think they're going through some of the UX problems of law as it is now.
So I think we can adapt those to, I mean, I think this is the good audience
to kind of just look at those models and come up with ideas.
So legal design lab.
Cool.
And, um, we only have two pieces of listener feedback from, from recent
because we're busting these out, you know, fast to catch up.
And they're both from the EA episode.
Would you like to stay for the listener feedback section?
Hell yeah.
All right.
So let, oh crap.
Do we have the music?
We don't.
Uh, Kyle's not on vacation yet, is he?
I don't know.
We'll have to ask him.
I think he said something about November 2nd.
So my plan was to email him and get this.
I also want his specs for what he's been doing to calibrate noise, you know,
like, uh, equalization and stuff.
Cause I'm sure he's doing it better than I did.
Okay.
Uh, so before we continue, we have to think one of our supporters.
Okay.
So, uh, we're thinking Pavel Paltsev and, uh, in case we've thanked him already,
also thinking Cody.
Oh God.
It looks French.
R-I-O-U-X.
Rue.
Rue.
Rue.
Okay.
Cody Rue.
Uh, I hope that's your, the correct pronunciation of your name.
Thank you guys for helping to support the show and making this possible.
I mean, I can't say anything other than what you just said, but yeah,
it's very much appreciated.
You know, we do this because we love it, but we also love not having to
pair on hosting bills and stuff.
So thanks for keeping this podcast alive.
Cause at some point we would dry up and probably quit doing it.
So it's really, uh, you know, on you for making this possible.
And for, for keeping us like, I find it motivating that people like it enough
to throw in like a buck or two.
I'm like, it's just, it's a nice feeling.
Um, okay.
Going on to listener feedback.
Uh, these are both from our EA episode that aired recently.
Pearl geek says, does the concept of immutable contracts written as code
scare anyone else?
Yes.
Me.
I have gray hairs because of that.
I'm sorry.
Yes.
Well, would you like to say?
Well, there's this, uh, I'm sure you guys are familiar with Larry Lessig.
With what?
What?
Lawrence Lessig.
I'm not.
Lawrence Lessig is this, uh, professor from Harvard who ran for president
last time and lost horribly, but he has this idea of, uh, things are built
with code law markets and something else.
This is off the top of my head.
So I can't forget, but Larry Lessig, you find out, uh, the issue with immutable
contracts as humans are writing these contracts, the same reason the DAO hack
happened was even though, so there can be syntactical errors in the writing
of the contract, DAO being decentralized autonomous organization.
Okay.
So it was a place where everybody put money in and voted on how to spend
that money.
Ah, okay.
Right.
And it was based off the Ethereum smart contract.
So I don't think that the tools are there, they're there now with, uh, versions
of, uh, provability.
You said the reason that hat, that hack happened was what?
I interrupted you right in the middle of that sentence.
No, no.
So that DAO hack happened, uh, 2014.
And because of that, uh, the thing forked the chain forked.
And now the latest iteration has a, uh, if people listening are into
provability logic, uh, something called Viper with a program like where you can
design provable programs for lack of a better word.
So there's processes available for immutable contracts to be provable.
Right.
So you can say, given the circumstance, do you mean, uh, what does provable
mean in this case?
I would automated test plus one, right?
You can test a program to be syntactically correct.
Okay.
That's what I think Stephen can talk a bit more about that, but you, but you
also have to prove that this will not have logical loopholes or issues that are
not syntactical, but are runtime errors for lack of a better word, right?
But they are in the damn language.
So you, it's not really a fault, but it's an exploit.
And, uh, that, uh, worries me.
And people are working on solving that issue.
And I think if immutable contracts is that person's question, Pearl geek,
there's this, uh, ribbon farm post called the unforgettable nests or I don't know
what, but he talks about the blockchain having a unforgettable memory or he's
saying, uh, VGR says, uh, there's a, there's a lot of history being written
by the victors happening in the current contract world.
So how do humans realize that?
Oh, if you, if I wrote in a mutable contract and everybody on the blockchain
knows that this deal fell apart because partner X versus partner Y did the bad
thing, partner Y or partner X is going to have negative or positive effects based
on, so it's going to, if it's open and immutable, there are societal level issues.
If it's closed immutable, there are program level issues that are people are
working on and one more plug.
And I, I know I'm talking too much, but this is just a great idea.
No, no, I, I, it's just that I've been looking at this for a very long time.
There's this company in Hong Kong or okay.
The name of the company is legalese.
I think it's out of Singapore.
They are also, so they want to build a Turing complete language for law.
Okay.
Okay.
I know, and they've been working on it for the last two years.
So Pearl Geek, look up legalese and look up all the stuff they're done.
Do you think, do you think that's even possible?
They're trying, man.
I don't know.
I mean, kind of the purpose of law is that when we don't like things, we
hack around it, right?
That's not the purpose.
That's not the stated purpose.
A stated purpose.
Well, yes, the stated purpose is not that, but right.
So back to our implementation issue and the jobs to be done framework, those
guys are making a Turing complete.
So they're going to make explicit what is now implicit, right?
That sounds awesome.
I think that sounds horrible.
No, why is it horrible?
Because I think that there are sometimes consequences of laws that you don't
notice when you first write the law and then someone comes around and hacks the
hell out of it.
And, you know, the judge and or jury says, basically, okay, you're following the
letter, but we all knew what we meant.
And fuck you, you're going to jail anyway.
You don't get to get around.
That's wrong.
I'm just saying, if you, if so, I think that one of the purposes of making a
Turing complete system for a law is to reduce that discrepancy of saying the
difference between letter and spirit should be minimal.
Yeah, but I don't think you'll ever, you'll ever reduce that to zero.
I don't think humans are good enough at writing laws to.
Tending to zero, man.
It's jazz.
Dr. Cornel West had this great line about, I think, happiness when somebody asked
him, he said, are you happy?
He said, no, I'm a jazz like Christian where I have to be working in the flow
always.
So this is everything's tending to, right?
You can get zero.
I like the, I like the human aspect being in there because it does sometimes
make things right for corruption.
But on the other hand, it also means that the system will never have complete
control that humans will have some level of being able to step in and, and say,
no, we are nullifying that particular.
Right.
You can wait, wait, wait, you can always update it.
You can always say based on v 1.3 section four, you're guilty of whatever
crime you just did.
But given that this case brought up whatever new evidence it brought up, we
are amending that.
Oh, okay.
So the contract is immutable, but not the legal system itself.
You know what I mean?
The person who got screwed or got away with it, would have still get
screwed or get away with it though, right?
There'd be no way to reverse that.
Come on, I'm not God.
Stupid trying to find all the loopholes.
I know, I don't know, but that's great.
I think if people just did that in this fashion, someone needs to look into
the darkness to point out the problems.
Otherwise they would just run with this.
So, you know, if you can get us closer to zero by pointing out issues.
Yeah, that's great.
That's the way to do it.
Pearl Geek goes on to say we only got one line into his question.
As a software developer, I know that all non-trivial code contains bugs, so the
ability to patch it and especially apply security patches quickly is critical.
But this is not just a high pathetical problem.
It has happened in the past and has led to a hard fork in order to force
the spirit of the contract.
What you were saying, yeah, exactly.
Which is the exact opposite of what the blockchain fans advertise as the main
benefit of smart contracts, which illustrates the bigger problem, all the
regulation and controls around the financial industry are there for a reason.
It's very tempting as a software developer to think we can do without all this
crap until your Bitcoins are stolen or all your Ethereum coins evaporate due to
a bug in a smart contract.
Or you fall for a fraudulent ICO or a Bitcoin pump and dump scheme.
I like the idea of cryptocurrencies, but I wouldn't want my regular paycheck to
be distributed through them.
I probably can't defend my cryptocurrency assets against organized crime or even
a clever and ethically unrestrained trader.
That's what I want the state to do for me.
And I think he brings up a lot of good points.
On the other hand, a different commenter afterwards pointed out that he was, they
didn't use this word, this is my own wording, that he was showing his having
a functional government privilege that there's places where the government really
sucks and their currency is horrible and they don't protect you from organized
crime or unrestrained traders and that current cryptocurrencies work better than
any other option they have in those places.
That doesn't invalidate ProGeek's point.
So if ProGeek lives in a place with a functional government, then yeah, but if
you don't, then your second best, you know, your new best alternative is cryptocurrency.
I think I just want to say one thing about ProGeek because I don't know who
this person is, but he's bringing up a lot of great points.
He ended that he or she ended the thing with saying this is what was the last sense.
That's what I want the state to do for me.
There you go.
I think that's a good assumption of responsibility of saying this is not me.
I want this, I want an external party to affect me this way, right?
And I think one point that I want ProGeek to know is being an outlaw means exactly
that the definition of an outlaw used to be that you're outside of the law.
That doesn't mean you're wrong.
You're just outside it.
Right.
So outside the law gives you freedom, also no recourse.
Okay.
And also for you, people are working on some transparency platforms.
Do you consider cryptocurrency to be outside the law still?
No, no.
No, because, well, outside the law, how?
I'm saying people with your just jurisdictional power will come to your
home with a gun and make you do things.
So there's nothing outside of law as we know it in the enforceable way.
But do we need a lack of better word legal written script for enforcement?
Yes, it is outside of that boundary.
And then I had one comment from Athator, both these comments are from our
separate, by the way, saying concerning the miners, we mentioned in our podcast
that 10 people hold the majority of the mining power.
That is a bit of an oversimplification, but I understand what they mean.
Essentially, many rigs machines are owned by individual actors.
They could mine on their own, but that means they would very rarely get one
very large reward.
And meanwhile, they're bleeding money from the electricity expenses.
So this is countered by joining large mining pools where they get paid on a
regular basis as a portion of the reward based on how much hashing power they
contributed to the pool.
And the problem is that large mining pools are run by a single mining
operator who then has enormous influence over the mining pool.
But it's important to note that individual miners can always jump ship and
divert their hashing power from one pool to another, or even strike out on their own.
And this is where economic incentives come into play.
If a mining pool operator tries to undermine the network for personal profit
motives, which may risk devaluing Bitcoin as a currency, the individual miners
would lose out on their holdings as their holdings lose value.
This would provide incentive to move to the mining pool, which maintains the status
quo, which I thought was interesting.
And he goes on to say that there's five major forces at play in the Bitcoin
environment, the miners, the developers, the users, the merchants, and the exchanges.
Each have their own interests and constantly push for those.
But the way Bitcoin was designed with this game theoretical economic incentives
is that all will only profit if they can find a consensus.
That's why you see so much political posturing at the moment.
Everyone is fighting for power, but realizing that unless you have everyone
swimming the same way as you, you lose money.
This you, you were like, ah, do you have comments on this?
I do.
And I'm, I don't want to keep ragging on this, but the poster is right.
And for people listening, if they want to get into some math on this, there's
this great medium post by a company called 21.co paying homage to the 20 million
Bitcoin that they will always be.
So they, uh, if the, for the economics geeks listening, there's something
called a genie coefficient, which measures inequality.
So number of participants versus how much they have of a particular asset or
whatever that is.
So, uh, the post is called quantifying decentralization by Balaji Srinivasan,
the CEO of 21.co.
And they go into all the factors that this post poster wrote about and they show
you in some detail, what that looks like.
The one point that I disagree with this person is when they laid out the five
actors, think of, so how are they or not any different from the five
actors in the fiat system, right?
Only difference is the might, the developers are a separate group unto
themselves with zero or minimal incentive to, to maintain status quo.
They will do whatever they want to do.
The point is, if nobody's writing the code, what, what are we doing here?
I mean, what are we running?
We're running code that somebody else wrote, right?
So if, if we adopt code as the consensus mechanism, then I don't know what
Bitcoin core or Ethereum core has to do with anything.
It's just get to popularity first, right?
So all of the crypto economic headbanging is great and the philosophizing
is great, but if it was worth four cents, none of this would happen.
All of these discussions are happening because there's a profit motive and people
want to hold on to their profits.
So it's not really to the betterment of the system.
It is to the betterment of people holding most in that system.
And it sounds like you are upset by this too.
Yes.
Because there's a whole bunch of politicizing and grand setting happening
about weird technical details about how big a block should be or what the
consensus more, how data is transferred.
And like the average user does not care.
This is a, I think one of the problem with security, computer security people is
they're always the smartest people in the room and always have the, not always,
but our most are have sharp elbows.
And I don't care that I have 15 factor authentication on my phone.
I don't get me the money.
Like they make me do stuff.
I don't care.
Alrighty.
After Tor's comment went on for a while, it was really interesting.
And they end by saying it's a new world of governance and we don't know how it'll
work out, but so far eight years running and growing.
That is all I have.
Did you have anything?
Nope.
Great.
Well, we have been going for about an hour and a half.
So wrap it up.
I think so.
Okay.
Great.
Thank you for joining us.
Thank you guys for having me.
And I would love to do this again.
Thank you for doing the podcast.
Likewise.
I would love to have you back on.
And thanks for thanking us.
That's nice.
But yeah, no, for sure.
I can only think of three more things that I want to talk to you about.
So I think we can have an excuse to go on.
Sure.
Another time if that works.
Absolutely.
Cool.
All right.
Thanks for listening.
Bye.
Bye.
