Let's do something a little against the grain.
I'd like to kick this video off with a quick little visual experiment.
So sit back, relax, close your eyes if you want to, and I want you to think of an apple.
So you're thinking of this apple in your mind. Where is this apple?
Is it floating in space? Is it suspended on a tree? Is it in your hand? Is it in a fruit bowl?
Are you seeing it in first person? Does it look like it has a stalk or a leaf attached?
Now imagine changing colour of that apple. How does it feel? Can you imagine that? How shiny is it?
Can you rotate it 180 degrees in your mind?
Can you put it, say, in different lighting settings, like if it was in daytime, put it in a dark nighttime setting?
What would it look like if you took a bite out of it?
Try to make these images in your head as bright and vivid as you can, and hold it there. Really see it.
Okay, if you did close your eyes you can open them now, although you may have missed out on some sick animation.
No, you didn't, don't worry, you didn't miss much.
Okay, so on a scale of 0 to 10, 0 representing seeing absolutely no image in your head, and 10 being absolutely vivid, almost like it were real.
So, where do you personally fall on this scale?
Giving you time to think or an answer.
Alright, if you survived that.
I ran this experiment with friends and colleagues. Admittedly, most of them are creative people as I work in the creative industry, and they all fell around the 8 to 10 mark.
So, that's pretty vivid.
Many of them stating that the image in their head was so clear, it could be real. Even superimposed into reality if they wanted to.
Oh boy, here come the top of comments.
I was chatting to an old colleague and friend of mine.
He's now living in Vancouver and working for a super cool company, often associated with dinosaurs and space.
Very jealous.
And even though his strengths are in the technical side rather than artistic, he said he can even create detailed 3D blueprints in his mind.
Also, hi Dave, you big nerd.
Alright, so you'd think the average person would be around, you know, 4 to 6 give or take on the visual clarity spectrum.
Four shadowing aside, I'm showing you a little intrigue to know where I fall on the scale as a highly artistic and creative individual.
You know, I mean, it's clearly a 9 to 10 for me, right?
Oh, congratulations, you solved my visualization puzzle.
Not.
If only mine was a 9, heck, I'd even take a 1 because I don't see anything.
My mind is blank.
I'm at zero.
And I only found out that this wasn't normal a few weeks ago.
Imagine that.
It's not funny because it's actually quite traumatizing.
It's called aphantasia, and it was first described by Francis Galton in back, well, not too long ago actually, in 1880.
And it's been pretty much unstudied up until 2005.
This is really recent, folks.
I'm not sure if I was born with it or whether it's been due to trauma or induced growing up or, but for whatever reason, I can't see images in my mind.
And knowing this now, it's kind of flipped my view on the world.
All right, to quell those crying out fake news, you can draw from memory.
Well, yeah, I have memories.
I identify images.
How else would I recognize the people I know and love?
How would I know the way home from work?
How would I know how to recognize raisins instead of mistaking them for chocolate chips?
What?
That is crucial knowledge, and you can't convince me otherwise.
Raisins are obviously a construct from the depths of the underworld, sent to torture us.
Okay, maybe that's just me.
I really don't like raisins.
But it's so bizarre how a mind like mine can function compared to someone that can actually generate images in their head.
I literally can't imagine what it's like.
Literally.
To put what this is like in perspective for those of you that can visualize in your mind, let's return to the Apple example.
Based on strong visualizers I've spoken to, the image seems to be there in your mind
and you can probably add to the level of detail by focusing more now, you know, concentrating.
For me, being unable to actually picture the Apple in my head, I have to rely on factual details alone
and the connections I've made to the object in the first place.
I know what the color green is, but I can't see it in my head.
So you can see kind of how my mind compensates for the lack of imagery
by relying on relationships, experiences, correlations and contrasts with the visuals or object in question.
To put it simply, if the brain is like a computer that can store and access data,
mind seemingly runs perfectly fine except for the fact that the screen is switched off.
Which, although I seem to have led a relatively unencumbered life without my screen,
at the end of the day it has gone unnoticed until now.
The realization of what I'm missing out on has left me feeling a little empty, to be honest.
Especially as a creative person.
Whenever I'd read self-help books that required you to visualize your ideal self
or even guided meditations that are asked to imagine sitting on a private beach at sunset,
I could understand the concept, but I couldn't believe that anybody could actually see a beach in their head.
It's just fantasy talk, right?
Speaking of fantasy, same goes for fiction novels.
Okay, admittedly I am dyslexic as well, but I tended to avoid them because
I couldn't see the appeal of reading without being able to visualize the story of the characters.
Avid fiction readers quite simply baffled me until now.
I always wanted to be one of those people that could curl up on a cozy windowsill while it was raining
and get lost in a good book over a good cup of coffee.
But now I understand why it seemed like such a fantasy to me.
But um...
Okay, I'm going. I'm out of here.
The only reason I finally realized that this wasn't normal was because, drumroll, I'd be going to hypnotherapy.
Oh no, shock horror, I have anxiety issues, just like every other YouTuber, am I right?
But honestly, without going into too many details, it's a lot to do with my mummy issues.
And that's for another video, folks.
Anyway, without going into too many details, the hypnotherapist was asking me to build my own room in my head.
A safe space, if you will.
But instead of relaxing me, it unsurprisingly stressed me out because I couldn't for the life of me picture this room.
I know elements that I'd like to see in my ideal room, like lots of plants, creative flair,
wooden earthy features combined with clean minimalism and a little bit of an industrial look.
I can list those individual elements, and I know factually what they would look like alone.
But I can't construct them in a scene.
And so you in the audience would say,
Okay, well that's well and dandy, but it doesn't explain why you're able to sustain a career focused on creative visuals
when you can't even imagine the images in your head.
Ha ha, got you now.
Yeah, I've spent the last few weeks being boggled by this too, but I have gathered some explanations.
First of all, it can be incredibly frustrating for me to draw.
Because I can't plan out what I want to draw in my head, and up until now I thought nobody could,
I have to rely solely on what I put down through sketching.
I have to do immense amounts of lines and assess what looks right or wrong and filter out the good from the bad by process of elimination.
It just takes a long time and it looks messy before it looks good.
If I'm trying to create something new and imaginative, I have to look at copious amounts of reference,
which you know, you should do as an artist anyway, but I can't retain any of the images in my head,
which can make being visually creative an absolute chore.
Characters are a little easier because I mainly rely on emotion and expression, which I contangibly feel,
but landscapes I find pretty difficult.
Another suggestion from a creative friend of mine is that maybe my artistic ability developed as a result of having the lack of images in my head.
Maybe translating from hand to canvas is my way to channel ideas that otherwise I wouldn't have been able to construct in my head.
I don't know. It's still a bit of a mystery.
Instead of leaving this video on a rather defeated note, especially for any of you watching this that may have only just realized that you also suffer from aphantasia
and are missing out on this rich, vibrant mind's eye world, I am working on a technique that may help me visualize and may help you too.
And it's called image streaming.
And it kind of involves you closing your eyes and rapidly describing whatever pops into your head,
which is pretty straightforward for those of you that can see images in your head, no matter what the level of clarity.
But for those of you that are completely blind in the mind's eye, like me,
you have to kind of concentrate on your closed eyelids and try to see or invent shapes from the blackness.
If you notice when you close your eyes, the darkness isn't completely uniform.
You'll see blotches or speckles and you've just got to concentrate on these.
And over time, you may start to be able to imagine actual shapes within these blotches.
And these have the potential to come images that you imagine.
I've included a link in the description to a blog post from a photographer that managed to cure his aphantasia,
and he tells it better than me.
But it's not all doom and gloom.
Learning that I have aphantasia has also been pretty liberating for me.
Because now, rather than sitting there for hours trying to visualize a landscape I'm trying to draw and failing miserably,
and as a result beating myself up for being an incapable artist, I can now take alternative approaches.
I could quickly mock up the depth of a scene with 3D software,
so that I'm not straining my brain to generate an idea that simply won't appear visually.
You know, I can help my mind with external cues.
Another interesting aspect is that I do dream vividly,
and I know I'm seeing images because I can recall them in the same way that I do with memories,
which are both curiously always in third person, which is kind of weird.
But once I'm out of the dream, I just can't replay the visuals.
Only the experience remains and the memories of the specific details, but I know it happened in my dream.
Actually, it's interesting that despite my imagery being close to non-existent while I'm conscious,
my senses of replicating sound, touch, smell, and taste in my mind is actually pretty vivid.
So I may not actually have full aphantasia.
Maybe this means I can fix it.
It does give me hope that one day I will be able to visualize again.
I've got to make part two, right? We all want a happy ending for me.
I'm hoping that this video has not only been enlightening for those of you that can visualize already,
you know, to not take it for granted, but also for those that can't imagine pictures
or even see in black and white or can't just struggle with this on a daily basis like I have,
you are not alone and you can work around it.
Somehow, against many odds, I've managed to make a successful career out of my artistic ability,
despite a lack of a conscious mind's eye.
So let this be a lesson to any of you trying to make it in the creative world, thinking you can't do it.
You know, sometimes it is just down to absolute persistence and hard work,
even in the face of huge difficulty and multiple failures.
I now know I can support myself and work with what I have rather than fighting against myself constantly
if I'm never able to cure it, that is.
Not being able to visualize is a massive bummer, but it's not necessarily held me back.
Regardless of whether I'm able to fix it, and you know, I really hope I will,
but I know that I can still pursue my artistic goals,
but I'm just going to have to give my mind that extra helping hand along with a lot of patience.
So look out for future opportunities because I'm armed with inner insight now and not of the visual kind.
Thank you for watching and thank you for supporting me.
I'm really enjoying putting out my YouTube content as hard as it is around work,
but look forward to some more videos coming soon.
And also, live streaming on Twitch, that's going to be a thing soon.
So thanks a lot and I'll speak to you later.
