It is a great honor to be introducing, albeit virtually, the holder of the Vannevar Busch
endow chair and a distinguished professor in the biology department at Tufts, Professor
Michael Levin.
Director of the Island Discovery Center at Tufts, as well as the Tufts Center for Regenerative
and Developmental Biology, Michael studies the bioelectrical codes that cells use during
the development, injury or regeneration of an organism, and deciphering these codes,
cellular language gives you access to the messages these cells exchange with each other.
So if you can start speaking it, you can make repurposing suggestions, you can instruct
the cellular decisions.
It is probably impossible to summarize neatly the work that Michael Levin has done.
He's working at the, like his work actually is the epitome between computer science and
biology, and I will just mention two of his projects, Xenobots, and distinguishing left
from right, and I will leave the stage to him for his talk from physics to mind, the
journey of cognition seen through the lens of embryonic development.
Thank you so much, let's see, here we go, hopefully you can see my slides.
Thank you for, let's start from the beginning.
Thank you so much for giving me the opportunity to share some ideas with you at this amazing
workshop.
Anyone who's interested can contact me or get any of the primary data sets, the software,
all the details, all the protocols, everything else you can get here.
What I thought I would try to do is give you an overview of some of the ideas that we've
been working on and some of their practical implications.
So one of the kind of key things to think about is that many people, when they think
about a cognition, they think about a human, and we all think we know what a human is.
But as Cyril says, sometimes we have to look a little closer at these ideas.
And the fact is that all of us began life as just physics, that is, we were all a quiescent
oocyte at one point, a little blob of chemicals, and that one might look and might say, well,
that's just chemistry, there's no cognition or decision making there.
But eventually this becomes, through an extremely slow and gradual process, step by step, this
becomes one of these complex creatures, including perhaps one with metacognition that makes
claims about anthropomorphisms and being different from other types of physical objects
and so on.
And so it's really important to ask ourselves, how is it that we make this journey across
the Cartesian cut?
How do we get from here to here?
Now, Alan Turing needs no introduction, and he was very interested in unconventional
embodiments of mind, he wanted to know what intelligence was as abstracted from current
implementations in the natural world.
But interestingly enough, he also wrote a paper on morphogenesis, on the creation of
shape in chemical systems.
And you might wonder, why would somebody who's interested in intelligence and computation
be interested in developmental biology in that way?
And I think that this is yet another facet of his brilliance in that he saw, I think,
a deep truth, which is that these two questions are fundamentally the same question, the question
of intelligence, unified intelligence in the mind and the self-assembly of the body are
fundamentally the same question.
And this is a perspective from which we do a lot of our work.
So one thing that people will often say is that things like ant colonies and flocks of
birds and so on, our collective intelligence is maybe, and we can sort of argue about whether
it makes sense for any given collective to call it a collective intelligence.
But then we think, well, we are not like that.
We are not like a flock of birds or a collection of ants.
We have our true unified intelligence.
But I think we need to be very clear that this is just a matter of scale and a particular
lens that we use to view ourselves.
If you actually dig in, what you find out that we are all made of parts, in fact, I
would say that all intelligences are collective intelligences.
We are all made of parts.
So inside of our supposedly unified brain and inside the pineal gland that Descartes
thought was very important because there was just one of them.
Sure, there's just one of them.
But if you look in, what do you see?
You see cells.
And inside of these cells, you see this unbelievably rich mosaic of functional systems that are
doing all kinds of stuff.
This is what's inside every single cell of your body.
So we are all collective intelligences and we are made of something that looks a little
bit like this.
This is a free living organism known as the lacrimaria.
There is no brain.
There's no nervous system.
But you can see what's going on here.
This creature is incredibly competent in handling its small scale goals, so single cell level
goals, such as physiological goals, anatomical goals and metabolic goals.
And if you're into soft robotics or something like that, you'd be very jealous of this.
We don't really have anything that has this incredible level of control.
And we are, in fact, made of diverse cells with all kinds of competencies such as these
that work together on very large projects, whereas individual cells work on single level
cell goals, such as proliferation and metabolic states.
What I'm going to show you is that collections of cells can work on very large goals, such
as making things like this.
So let's think about what this kind of architecture, this is a very unique architecture, what does
allow us to do?
Well, for example, it raises some profound questions.
So here's a caterpillar.
This is a soft-bodied creature.
It has a brain suitable for crawling around on leaves and eating leaves.
So it sort of lives in a two-dimensional world.
It has to turn into this, which is a butterfly, which lives in a three-dimensional world.
It's a hard-bodied kind of creature, completely different controller needed to drive this than
to drive this.
It has a different brain.
During this process, the brain is largely taken apart.
Many of the cells die, most of the connections are taken apart.
But one of the amazing things is that there are data that show that memories persist.
So if you teach something to a caterpillar, the moth or a butterfly actually retains the
information despite this incredible rearrangement of the cognitive medium here.
So you can ask some very basic questions.
We've thought about this issue of what's it like to be a butterfly, but moreover, what's
it like to be a caterpillar changing into a butterfly?
You are an agent and during your lifetime, your mind, your body completely rearranged,
but some of the memories remain.
This is even taken even further by this model system.
These are planaria.
These are flatworms.
And the thing about flatworms is that they are incredibly regenerative.
So every part of the body can be regenerated.
So pieces regrow a whole new head with a brain and everything.
And what McConnell found in the 1960s, and we have since replicated using modern automated
equipment that we've made, is this amazing fact that if you take a planarian and you
train them on a specific task, so to look for food in these little bumpy kinds of regions,
then what you can do is you can amputate the entire head.
The tail will sit there doing nothing for about eight to 10 days.
Then eventually they regrow a new brain, behavior begins.
And then you find out that actually during this time, what had happened was information
that was stored in the rest of the body was somehow imprinted onto this new brain.
Not only is information stored outside the brain, and they have a true centralized brain
that would just like we do, they're not like a distributed starfish or anything.
Not only can information be stored outside of the brain, but actually can be moved through
the body and can be imprinted onto a brand new fresh brain.
And so then you can sort of ask philosophical questions like that, the malfunctioning transporter
experiment.
What happens if somebody makes a copy of you and forgets to destroy the original?
This actually happens in planaria.
You can cut this thing into pieces, and every piece is in an important way, both in physical
and somatic and cognitive continuity with the original.
So you can see there's this biology has this amazing plasticity and also this relationship
between behavioral memories and anatomical memories.
And when we'll talk more about this, that plasticity extends to vertebrates.
So what we've done here is, this is the work of Doug Blackistan in our group.
This is a tappel of the frog Xenopus lavas.
Here are the nostrils.
Here's the mouth.
Here's the brain.
And you'll notice there are no eyes up here.
We prevented these eyes from forming, but we did put an eye on the tail.
And I'll show you in a few minutes how we do that.
What we find out is that when you make animals like this and you test them using this behavior
testing apparatus that we built, it's an automated training and testing device, what
you find is that these animals can see quite well.
And in fact, these eyes form, even though they're sitting in the middle of muscle instead
of in their normal position in the brain, they make an optic nerve.
The optic nerve does not connect to the brain, at best it connects to the spinal cord right
here.
And without eons of evolutionary adaptation, without any of that, immediately out of the
box, these animals can see with this radically different sensory architecture.
So as we think about what does life perceive and how does it handle novelty, we can do
these kinds of experiments and find out that it's really much broader than the standard
reliability of development would lead us to believe.
So biology uses this multi-scale competency architecture where not only are we structurally
a nested set of nested dolls, but actually each of these layers solves problems in their
own spaces.
So these are transcriptional spaces, physiological spaces, and anatomical morpho space.
And when you're traversing, when you're some sort of a system that traverses these problem
spaces, we can ask with what level of competency.
And so we study different kinds of intelligence.
I like this due to William James, which is the ability to reach the same goal by different
means.
And then simply some sort of feed forward emergence where local rules give rise to some kind of
complexity.
There's potentially a whole other factor here.
And Wiener and colleagues produce this kind of cybernetic scale to express the different
kinds of competencies that you might have in navigating these sorts of spaces.
So we are all very good at, as most animals are, very good at noticing agency and intelligence
in the three-dimensional world.
All of our senses are primed for that to recognize medium-sized objects moving at medium speeds
and doing intelligent things.
But there are also some other spaces where we're really just beginning to understand
what intelligence looks like in these spaces.
And I only have time to talk about one, and this is my favorite one, anatomical morpho
space, which is the space of possible shapes that you can make out of cells.
So let's just ask a very basic question.
Where do anatomies come from?
This is a section through a human torso.
You can see the amazing order, the amazing invariant order of all this structure.
So where is it?
And you might be tempted to think it's in the DNA, but of course, we can read genomes
now and we know what's in the DNA, which is the instructions for micro-level hardware
of every cell, so the proteins.
We still need to understand how does the behavior of these cells give rise to something
like this?
How, if something is missing, we could cause these cells to rebuild?
So regenerative medicine in its engineers, and I'll show you at the end a synthetic organism.
What else can we make the exact same cells do?
So what is the plasticity here?
So one example of this kind of problem solving is something that we discovered a few years
ago, which is that when tadpoles turn into frogs, they have to rearrange their face.
So the eyes, the jaws, the nostrils, the mouth, everything has to move and you get from this
state to this state.
This was thought to be a hard-wired process.
Every organ just moves the right distance in the right direction and you get your frog.
We decided to test that hypothesis and ask actually how much competency is in this scheme.
And so we created so-called Picasso tadpoles.
Everything here is in the wrong place.
The eyes off to the side, the mouth is maybe on top of the head, everything is shifted.
And what you find is that remarkably, these animals tend to make pretty normal frogs because
all of this stuff will move around through abnormal paths and sometimes go too far and
actually have to come back until it gets to a correct frog face and then it stops.
So what the genetics actually gives you is a system that can do an error minimization
scheme and it can navigate this morpho space and reach the correct goal from different
starting positions.
It doesn't just do the same thing every single time.
It actually is able to get around, for example, local maxima and things like that and get
to where it's going in morpho space.
Mammals do this too.
If you cut an early embryo in half, you don't get two half embryos.
You get two perfectly normal monosygotic twins.
My favorite example of this kind of thing is this.
This is very old work now.
This is a cross section through a kidney tubule in a salamander and you can see that basically
eight to 10 cells normally work together, cell to cell signaling, they make this lumen.
If you force the cells to be a larger size and you can do these tricks in this model,
then fewer cells will get together to give you the exact same size lumen.
That's pretty cool already, but the best part is, if you make the cells truly gigantic,
then one single cell will bend around itself and give you the exact same lumen.
Now, what's cool about that is this is a great example of top-down causation because this
is a completely different molecular mechanism.
This is cell-to-cell communication.
This is cytoskeletal bending.
In the service of a large-scale anatomical structure, meaning a particular location with
an anatomical morphospace, different molecular mechanisms get called up to enable the behavior
that gets you to the right place.
The microstates and the mechanisms are called up as needed to serve a large-scale sort of
executive kind of navigation policy in this space.
How could this possibly work?
Well, we have a precedent, of course.
The precedent is the brain and nervous system.
That's exactly what happens in neuroscience, which is that we have large-scale cognitive
goals, in that case in three-dimensional space, which what the nervous system does is transduce
that level of information processing down into the molecular steps that activate your
muscles and your glands and everything else.
You've got this hardware-software scheme where the output of these electrical networks drives
the movement of your body through three-dimensional space, and then you can do this neural decoding
kind of thing where, well, can we learn to read this information and make predictions
and so on?
But the super interesting thing is that actually this scheme is incredibly old.
It's way older than neurons and brains, evolutionarily.
Evolution discovered the benefits of electrical networks somewhere around the time of bacterial
biofilms.
Actually, it's very isomorphic to this system where prior to neurons and the nervous systems
and brains, what bioelectric networks through the rest of the body did was that they controlled
the movement of your body configuration through morpho space.
Very similar thing, except that what evolution did was pivot from one space into another,
and actually in many ways pivoted from control of spatial patterns to control of temporal
patterns in neural processing, but otherwise all the same tricks are usable and all the
same techniques are usable.
We developed some of the first tools to read and write electrical pattern memories in tissues
that were not neurons, but basically we took a lot from neuroscience, both conceptually
and practically.
We use optogenetics and active inference frameworks and all the same stuff.
This allows us to do things like this, to specifically try to learn to communicate different
morphological paths to groups of cells.
So frogs, unlike salamanders, do not regenerate their legs, and through asking what kind of
a signal would convince these cells to go down, build a leg trajectory versus the scar
and stop trajectory, we were able to come up with a very simple trigger, literally lasts
just one day, and what it does is it induces leg regeneration for over a year and a half.
We're not there 3D printing it, we're not there managing stem cells.
Our job is right at the beginning to convince this group of cells that what they're going
to be doing is embarking on this particular path through morpho space.
And so what happens is within 45 days you've got your regenerative genes, you've got your
toes, you've got a toenail, and eventually you get a pretty respectable looking leg that's
both touch sensitive and motile.
So and this, of course, we're now pushing this into rodents, I have to do a disclosure
here because Dave Kaplan and I are co-founders of this company that's going to try to move
this towards patients, but the idea here is to learn to communicate with this cellular
collective to understand what does it measure, what can it sense in morpho space, and what
are the efficient stimuli, the trigger points that can get it to make the decisions we want
to make.
So let me give you one particular example.
What you're seeing here is this is our method of visualizing bioelectrical gradients in
vivo.
So we call this the electric face.
This was first made by my colleague Danny Adams in our group.
And what you can see here is that before the genes come on to pattern the face and before
the anatomy, already you can see where everything is going to be.
Here's where the mouth is going to be, here's the eye, here are the placodes.
This is what you're seeing is resting potential.
This is a dye that reports resting potential.
Even before we had seen this pattern, we had asked this simple question, could we reproduce
these kinds of patterns elsewhere in the body and convince cells to build a completely
different organ?
So here, this is an early experiment by my grad student, Sherry Owl.
And what she did was inject potassium channel RNA into specific cells to induce this kind
of bioelectrical state.
And sure enough, you can make an eye anywhere.
In fact, outside of the region that's normally thought to be the only one competent to make
eyes, you can do this anywhere.
You can do it on the tail and the gut, anywhere you want.
And of course, we're not providing enough information to specify an eye.
These eyes have lens and retina and optic nerve and all that kind of stuff.
We don't have to specify any of that.
What we have to do is give the collective here a pattern that basically, it's a subroutine
call.
It's a pattern that says build an eye here.
And there are other patterns for hearts and legs and brains and various other things.
And one of the cool, so that's kind of neat, but one of the cool competencies here is this.
This is a lens sitting out in the flank of a tail somewhere.
What you'll notice is that the blue cells, so these are marked by a genetic tracer.
The blue cells are the ones that have our ion channel.
These are all wild type cells.
What happens here is two levels of instruction.
We instruct these cells, you need to make an eye.
They can somehow perceive that there's not enough of them to do the job and they end
up communicating and recruiting their neighbors.
So these are the perfectly normal wild type neighbors that get pulled away from their
task of making skin and muscle and various other things and induce now into this eye
building project of exactly the right shape and size.
It's possibly parallels with recruitment in insect swarms and ants and termites and things
like that.
So there's some really interesting dynamics and decision making here that's multi-level.
The other example that I just wanted to show you was planaria.
So these are our flatworms.
I told you they're extremely reliable, but one thing that we want to do if we believe
that the morphogenetic process involves a collective intelligence of these cells building
things, we want to be able to read and write the memories of this collective intelligence.
And so we characterized the electric circuit that determines head number because once you
cut off the head and the tail, this middle fragment has to decide how many heads should
a proper planarian have, one, two, zero, maybe more.
And so what we were able to do is this, by reading the electrical pattern, this is the
electrical pattern that says one head, one tail, we can change that pattern.
This is done with ion channel drugs, no electric fields, no electrodes.
This is manipulating the native interface that these cells are exposing.
And so what you get is you can say two heads here if it's kind of messy, still the technology
is being worked out.
And what this fragment will then do is build a two-headed animal.
This is not Photoshop, these are real two-headed animals.
And here's the most important part.
This electrical map is not a map of this creature down here.
This electrical map is a map of this guy who will not do anything different, still one
head, one tail, normal gene expression.
But if you injure him, if you cut the head and tail, this is the memory that these cells
will use to determine what a correct planarian looks like and then they will build.
It's a counterfactual memory.
It's a representation of something that might be true later.
It's definitely not true now.
And it's a kind of a latent memory.
And so the planarian body can hold one of two different, probably a lot more, but we
found two different representations of what a normal planarian looks like and we can rewrite
it at will.
Here they are, these two-headed worms.
The reason I call this a memory is because if you take these two-headed worms and cut
them again in plain water, no more manipulation, they continue to regenerate to the new shape.
So it's got all the properties of memory.
It's long-term stable, but it's rewriteable.
It has conditional recall, which I just showed you, and there are discrete possible behaviors.
So the question of how many heads should a planarian have is actually, it's a subtle,
where is that information?
Well, it's not in the genome.
What the genome gives you is a piece of electrical hardware that, by default, reliably generates
the memory for one head, but it doesn't have to be that way.
And the very last thing I want to show you, and then I'll stop, is this synthetic kind
of project, where we really want to understand where do these morphogenetic goals come from?
The standard answer is evolution, but we want to see, and again, this is work with Joshua
Bongard, Doug Blackiston did all the biology, Sam Kriegman did the programming, and this
is in our ICDO Institute.
So what we wanted to do was to ask a question about plasticity of these cells.
So we took a frog embryo, Xenopus lavis, Doug collected some of these skin cells from
the animal cap, dissociated them, let them re-associate in a little pile here.
What could they do?
Well, they could die.
They could spread out and go away from each other.
They could form a two-dimensional monolayer.
Instead, what they do is, overnight, they coalesce like this, and they make this little
thing we call a Xenobot for Xenopus lavis and Biobot.
So you can see what it's doing, it moves, because it has little cilia, normally these
are used to redistribute mucus on the surface of the frog, but this thing can use them to
move around.
They can go in circles.
They can patrol back and forth.
They can have collective behaviors, all sorts of different behaviors.
Here's what they look like navigating a maze.
So here it is.
It's going to take this turn here without actually bumping into the opposite wall, so
he takes the turn.
And then at this point, for some reason, we don't know why it decides to turn around
and go back where it came from.
They have a wide variety of behaviors.
You can do calcium imaging.
They have a very rich set of signals, and we can start to use all the tools from behavioral
neuroscience to ask what kind of information integration is happening.
Are they actually communicating?
Is there mutual information?
Stay tuned for that.
But remember, there are no neurons here.
This is just skin.
And so this is what skin does when left to its own devices.
Here's one last thing that it does.
If you give these guys loose materials, so these are just loose skin cells sitting out.
We'll just sprinkle them.
What we find is that these xenobots, their motion is able to corral these cells into
little piles, and then they continue to polish these little piles and sort of push them together.
And because they're working with an agential material, these are not passive particles.
These are cells.
And so we as engineers, evolution, and xenobots are all working in this agential material.
So what they do is they make these little piles, the little piles mature, and become
the next generation of xenobots.
Well, what do they do?
They run around and do exactly the same thing, and now you've got the next generation and
the one after that.
It's sort of von Neumann's dream of a robot making copies of itself from materials at
fine.
So we call this kinematic replication.
And so the last thing I just want to point out is this.
This is the genome of Xenopus lavas.
That's what's in these cells.
We didn't add any genes.
There are no synthetic circuits.
There are no nanomaterials.
So now the question is, what does the genome actually specify?
Well, under default conditions, it specifies this developmental sequence and some tadpole
behavior.
But actually, if you engineer by subtraction, if you take away the influence of a whole
bunch of cells, you get to find out what the skin cell really wants to be doing.
The normal sort of boring two-dimensional life that it has on the outside of the organism
is what it does when it's behavior-shaped by the other cells.
Move that, and you find out what the default behavior is.
The default behavior is this.
Xenobot, a weird developmental sequence, a few weeks later, it turns into this.
We have no idea what this is, completely new.
And then they have this kinematic cell for application behavior.
So unlike all the other creatures we all study, they have no straightforward evolutionary
backstory.
There's never been selection to be a good Xenobot.
Of course, the frog cells were selected.
But they have novel morphological and behavioral outcomes that don't have a straightforward
story.
And we're still working to understand what the cognitive capacities are.
So I'll just end by saying that because biology, as I showed you in the kidney tubule example
and others, the embryo really doesn't have firm expectations or assumptions about what's
going to happen.
You don't know how many cells you're going to have.
You don't know what size your cells are going to be.
You don't know what your genetics are going to be like.
And evolution makes these amazing problem-solving machines that will do something adaptive in
a wide range of circumstances.
And that means that almost any combination of evolved material, designed material, and
software is some kind of agent.
So you've got cyborgs and hybrids and all kinds of synthetic beings.
Everything that Darwin was talking about when he said endless forms most beautiful is a
tiny corner of this enormous option space of beings.
And what that means is that in the future, when we're surrounded by these things, and
I firmly believe that we will be, the old criteria by which we decided how we relate
to something, which is what are you made of and how did you get here, meaning evolved
or designed, those criteria are not going to survive the next decade or two.
We need a completely different basis for ethics to learn to relate to organisms that are very
different from us.
So I will just end here, because I'm already running out of time, just to thank all the
post-docs and students who did this work, our funders, the animals who do all the heavy
lifting in this kind of work, and the two disclosures for commercial relationships.
So thank you very much.
Thank you very much for this very interesting talk, Michael, can you hear me?
Yep.
Great.
So I will be conveying the questions that the audience has, and I would like to ask
the audience to keep them short and simple, we have time maybe for two questions, and
I cannot see hands.
Are there two hands maybe there?
Hello, thank you very much for a very interesting talk.
I just have one little point to make, and that is to do with your very first slide.
You said that to begin with, it's all physics, and thereafter processes take place, biological
processes.
The point is that life comes from life.
There were two living organisms, certainly in terms of sperm and egg.
So it's not a case of just physics.
I wonder what you have to say about that.
So can you hear the questions?
No, I apologize, I couldn't hear any of them.
So it goes back to your first slide that you said the first there was physics, and then
biology kind of kicks in, and the comment is like everything in life starts from life,
so from the egg, and what do you think the role, like would you like to comment on that?
What do you mean by everything starts with physics?
Yeah.
So, of course, the line between living and non-living is not a sharp line.
There are many people doing some very interesting work on really minimal systems that have important
aspects of self-organization and problem solving that you probably wouldn't call alive.
Honestly, I don't spend very much time trying to get a definition of life.
I know other people do, and I'm not an expert on that.
To me, the spectrum of intelligence, including very, very basal examples that you wouldn't
call alive, I think that spectrum is more interesting than the live-not-live kind of
a distinction.
And I think that there are many things that are going to have degrees, including very
basic things, but also more complex things, that we should be considering as important
intelligent agents that do not overlap with the set of living agents, and I think that's
the more important criterion.
Thank you.
Is there a second one?
Short, please.
There are a couple of hands here.
Just a question about the idea of self-replication.
In this example, it seemed that the cells needed to be provided to create what could
be otherwise interpreted as maybe an incidental self-replication, whereas I imagine in most
other systems that are considered self-replicating, the materials for that replication must also
be acquired.
So I just wonder if you can comment on this distinction between materials being provided
and materials being acquired.
So the question is about self-replication in the examples that you showed, and whether
the materials need to be provided or acquired, and what do we actually mean in the end by
self-replication?
Yeah, well, great question.
I think like with everything else that I've been talking about, self-replication is a
continuum.
So this is an extremely minimal self-replicating system.
It is not a full kind of, you wouldn't call this a full replicating organism, for example.
It does not have strong heredity, so all of the bots that are made don't bear more resemblance
to their parents than they do to random members of the population.
So there's not that element of strong heredity here.
You're absolutely right.
The cells, the material must be provided by us, so these bots will not go out and bite
little cells off of some other source to release them, although they could be made to do so,
and if they were evolvable, maybe at some point they would do that.
As far as I know, no other creature on Earth does this kind of kinematic replication.
So we see this as a very minimal kind of example along the continuum of self-replication that
starts with nothing and ends with a full kind of completely autonomous replication cycle
that some advanced life forms are able to do.
So this is somewhere in between, and for sure they must be provided with these cells.
They will not acquire these cells by themselves.
Great.
Thank you very much.
Michael, and at this point we can move on to our next speaker, so thank you once again
for being with us.
I'll make virtually.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
