Good evening, everyone. Today, I have the pleasure of introducing you to a very special guest,
all the way from the distant shores of Massachusetts, Dr. Michael Levin,
a distinguished professor in the biology department and Vannevere Bush Chair at Tufts University.
Dr. Levin serves as director of the Tufts University Center for Genitive and Developmental Biology.
His achievements in the field have been honoured with awards, such as the Scientist of Vision and the Distinguished Scholar Award.
He has been seeking novel methods to understand and control complex pattern formation in biological systems.
His work aims to tackle the most fundamental of questions about how life organises itself.
The ability of an axolotl to regrow a divided arm is an unquestionable marvel of nature.
But now take a second to think about how the remaining arm cells know how to do that.
How do they know when to stop growing? How many fingers to have? What length to be?
How does a single egg cell give rise to the millions of individual cells that make up the human body?
If these questions keep you up at night as well, then fear not, for you have come to listen to the right person.
So, sit back, engage those neuronal gap junctions and enjoy tonight's journey through the mind-expanding realms of collective consciousness,
cellular computing and regenerative medicine. Please take it away, Dr. Levin.
If anybody is interested later on, you can find all of the primary work and our software and everything else at these two websites and you can reach me there as well.
So, what we're going to talk about is there's a number of ways to kind of get into this, but I want to start thinking about one particular way, which is the change that's happening in engineering.
You know, for hundreds, probably thousands of years, we've been engineering with largely passive materials.
And more recently, you might have seen some work on active materials and even computational materials or computational matter,
but now we are able to start engineering with a gentle matter.
And I'm going to argue that any kind of engineering with living cells or living materials really takes us into a very interesting, completely new world where we have to start asking ourselves,
what do the parts of the body think about? And so, we can warm up this way.
So, this person needs no introduction, of course. This is Alan Turing, who was very interested in intelligence, mind and ways that this kind of these mental features can exist in the real world.
He was interested in different implementations, what kind of obviously certain biologicals have mind and intelligence, but what else, right?
Could we make out of other substrates? Could we make that? So, he was interested in kind of the general aspects of mentality that's distinct from some particular implementation.
But he also wrote this. He wrote a really interesting paper on morphogenesis and one might wonder, why would the same person be interested in these two things?
What does morphogenesis or pattern formation have to do with intelligence? And I'm going to argue that he was onto something very fundamentally deep because these are really the same problem.
And the answers to both of these, to these fields enrich each other.
So, one thing that sometimes happens is that people will look at things like ant hills and termite colonies and flocks of birds, and we sometimes talk about these as collective intelligences.
And so, people wonder, well, you know, to what extent could we call these real intelligences because I am a centralized true intelligence, and then maybe a collection of ants may be thought of as a collective intelligence.
And the thing to realize is that actually there are no centralized intelligences. We are all collective intelligences. In fact, all intelligences collective intelligence, because we are walking bags of cells.
We are not some kind of indivisible diamond of cognition, but we are actually a structure that's built of lots and lots of cells interacting in some way that allows the collective to have goals and memories and preferences and
thoughts that belong to the emergent self and not to any of the individual cells from which you arise.
So, this scaling of intelligence across collectives is really a fundamental question, and this is not just for these kind of systems, this is for all of us.
So in biology, what we see is that biology uses a multi scale competency architecture, where basically what happens is that at each level of organization from molecules to cells to tissues organs and so on.
We're not just a collection of nested dolls structurally that that much is obvious everybody knew that.
Actually, each of these layers has a particular competency to solve problems in its own space.
So, all of these things have the ability to at every level they have the ability to solve problems in different kinds of spaces transcriptional spaces physiological spaces of course the familiar 3D behavioral space of classic behavior and so on.
And so, so all of these things have competencies and this has really important implications because we're not used to in the in the in the engineering world we're not used to dealing with systems that have competencies and multiple scales.
You know, sometimes I give a talk called the why robots don't get cancer. And the reason is because they're largely made of very passive parts right the collective has some sort of the goal directed behavior but the parts generally are pretty dumb.
So, biology is not like that and so let's think about what are we made of this. This is the sort of thing that we're made of this is a.
This is a lacrimarium. So this is a single cell. It has no brain. It has no nervous system. It has no stem cells or cell to cell communication or anything like that. It's one cell.
You can see the incredible competency with which it handles its local physiological behavioral anatomical all all of its various kinds of needs all handled within one cell.
And so, so we are made of single cells and the single cells when they joined together to form our body they don't give up all their IQ, but they do harness it in new ways.
And the important thing to think about is that each of us took this journey this amazing journey from physics to mind what I mean by that is that we all start life as a quiescent oversight.
It's a little it's a little a little blob of chemicals.
You can model it with something like this these little little protein and gene regulatory networks. You look at it and you say okay this is clearly a piece of chemistry there is no magic here there is no high level cognition.
It's just chemistry and physics. And yet, eventually, that oversight will give rise to something like this or perhaps one of us. And then, some nine months and years later after that, you get whatever we are you get a human with complex metacognitive capacity that can
make comments about its own high level cognition and hopes and dreams and everything else.
And the key is that of course this is an extremely smooth and continuous process. There is no magic lightning flash and developmental biology where boom on this particular step that's where cognition enters the picture, everything else was physics.
Now we really have mine that doesn't happen. So, so, so, so this this development from from this kind of system to this kind of system tells us that anything that we want to say about this.
The degree of, of, of intelligence cognition memory goal directedness must have a whole spectrum of continuously reducible and and and the you know sort of sort of reducing different types of those capacities all the way back down to whatever the very minimal
capacities are of chemical and physical systems. So, let's, let's just think about how our anatomy comes to be. So, so here's an early set of embryonic blastomers we start life like this and then eventually this is the cross section through the human torso.
And you can see this amazing three dimensional order all the organs are in the right place in the right shape orientation positioning relative to each other. Where does this order actually come from.
Now, you might be tempted to say DNA that's what everybody thinks right away. But of course now we can read genomes. And when you read the genome, you don't find any of this information when you read the genome what you find is protein sequences.
What we now know is that what the DNA does is it nails down the hardware of every cell. It tells what every cell what hardware gets to have. But after that comes the more the more difficult job for us of asking what does the software look like how does how does that hardware executed in
parallel give rise to a very stereotypical specific thing. And so beyond that, we need to understand how do these collections of cells know what to build and when to stop, where so where does this pattern come from.
As the workers and regenerative medicine we might want to say, well if a piece is missing or damaged, how do we get these cells to rebuild it again. And as engineers we might want to do something even crazier and say, well I'd like them to build something completely different.
And we can do some of that too. So the end game of this kind of research project so this is regenerative medicine is something I call an anatomical compiler.
So someday, you should be able to sit down in front of a computer and draw the animal or plant that you want, anatomically, and then what it would do is it would compile that description into a set of stimuli that would have to be given to cells to get them to build whatever you wanted to build such as for example this 300 flatworm.
And why do we need such a thing. Well, the kind of practical implications are very obvious.
Just about everything except for infectious disease. So birth defects, traumatic injury, cancer, aging, degenerative disease, all of this would go away would be completely solved.
If we understood how to tell cells what to build. If we knew how collections of cells make a swarm type of decisions about this this kind of collective intelligence decisions about what they're going to build.
We could replace or repair any of these things. And so what this is really about is to understand, how do we control the scaling of individual cellular activities towards large scale system level goals, having the right number of eyes the right number of limbs and so on.
And of course this is also very important for understanding genomes evolution and all of those things. Now, we are extremely far away from this. And that's, and that's kind of odd you would think that wow, all the genetics and genomics has been going gangbusters the
biochemistry has been advancing like crazy why do we not have something like this we know how to make any protein we want from from a genetic sequence why can't we make anatomies on demand.
So, just to give you a simple, simple example of the wide ocean of ignorance here.
Let's look at this this is a this is a baby axolotl and baby axolotls have legs. This is a tadpole of the frogs and a mislead us from tadpoles do not have legs.
And so now I ask a simple question, we're going to make it as we have in our lab we're going to make a frog a lot. So it's going to have 50% of frog cells and 50% of axolotl cells.
Now, you've got the frog genome, you've got the axolotl genome they've both been sequenced all the genomic information is there. So I ask you a simple question is the frog a lot of going to have legs or not.
And what you realize very quickly with questions like this which even you know of a 70 year old could ask this question that despite all of the molecular information about the hardware.
We have absolutely no idea how the collective makes anatomical decisions, because we can answer questions like this we know we know everything there is to know about the genomic sequence.
We have no idea how to predict if it's going to have legs or not and if it does with if those legs will be will be will consist of only axolotl cells or it'll recruit some frog cells and we just don't know.
So, the state of the art here is this that we are very good at manipulating molecular pathways, so the cellular hardware were a very long way away from control of form and function, and all of molecular medicine today is basically stuck or focused on this level of approach.
So what computer programming look like in the 40s and 50s you literally physically have to interact with the hardware to get that computer to do something different.
And this is what what molecular medicine is about today everybody's very excited about genomic editing crisper rewiring pathways and so on. And so of course this is this is great you have to understand your hardware and be able to manipulate it.
But the success of computer science and the information technology revolution is telling us is that that it doesn't stop there. Okay, the capacity will only grow once you understand how to manipulate it with software with experiences or stimuli, not by rewiring.
This is why when I say to my students, you get out your laptops switch from Microsoft Word to Photoshop and in order to do that get out your soldering iron and start rewiring right and everybody laughs and now why is that funny because we're used to the fact that that computers allow us to do these incredible changes of function without any rewiring whatsoever and I'm going to argue that biology can let us do that too.
So, I want to talk about a couple of interesting examples.
And we can start thinking about the definition of intelligence by William James, which was this, it was the ability to get to the same outcome by different means that's a very interesting definition because it's substrate agnostic, meaning it doesn't say anything about brains or neurons.
It's extremely functional and sort of cybernetic. And it also requires the observer us or the scientists or the cells themselves to specify the problem space and within within that problem space there will be some degree of competency.
So here's an example of solving problems in anatomical space.
So, here's a salamander of this axolotl they regenerate almost all of their body organs it's an amazing thing. When you amputate that limb, it will grow no matter whether you cut it here or whether you cut it here or anywhere it will grow exactly what's needed until it reaches the perfect salamander limb and then it stops.
Okay, so it stops when the correct target morphology has been reached which suggests very obvious question of how does it know what a correct salamander limb looks like right.
So here is an even more amazing example these are planaria plan area regenerate everything. And so you can cut them into pieces the record is I think 275 pieces or something like that.
So you can cut them into pieces anyway you want every piece will give rise to a perfect little worm. And just to kind of reiterate this theme of going between mind and body.
If you train a planarian on a specific memory, and then you cut off their heads including their brain, you let the tail regenerate a brand new head like this, you find out that okay now they've also regenerated their memories.
So wherever that memory was stored, it becomes imprinted onto this new brain and then they show evidence of remembering it right so so memories are stable to complete regeneration of their brain.
So think about this, this, this amazing degree of plasticity here. This is an example invertebrates. This is a tadpole so here are the nostrils here's the mouth. Here's the spinal cord the brain is here the gut.
You'll notice something very weird they're the normal eyes are gone, but there's an eye on its tail. So we engineered this kind of tadpole putting an eye on its tail.
So we use this machine to train these animals for on visual tasks and we find out that they actually see quite well. And so what you find out is that this brain which for millions of years expected visual input from these two locations.
Now it's got a weird patch of is sort of itchy tissue on its back that's sending some kind of electrical signals. Actually, they synapse on the spinal cord, they don't go directly to the brain, and that's good enough the animal can use that information and see it perfectly well.
So this, these are all examples of getting to the same goal by different means having adaptive functionality even when things are going really wrong right your eyes are in the wrong location your head's been cut off all these things by biology is amazing at doing what it needs to do despite all these
innovations. And just here's a here's a very sort of clean and simple example of this where what what we what what you have here is, this is again a tadpole.
In order to become a frog tadpoles have to rearrange their face. So the jaws have to move the eyes have to move. All this stuff has to move around.
It used to be thought that this was a hardwired set of processes that somehow every organ just moved in the right direction the right amount and then you have your normal frog.
So we decided to test the hypothesis that this process was actually much more intelligent than it seems, because you cannot estimate the intelligence of processes without perturbation if you just observe things, they may be reliable and you have no idea what they're
not reliable until you start poking around. So what we did was we created these Picasso tadpoles. So basically they're scrambled everything is in the wrong place the eyes are on the side or they had the jaws are off to the side you know everything is everything is scrambled.
And what you find is that they still make perfectly normal frogs because all of these organs move around in, in novel abnormal paths sometimes they in fact go too far and they have to sort of come backwards, but they run around and they end up where they're supposed to be for a normal frog face.
So the genetics actually gives you is not a hardwired set of processes what it does, what it gives you is a problem solving system, it gives you an error minimization scheme that is able to keep changing until the delta from the desired target morphology is sufficiently low.
So that raises again this this question, where is the memory how does it know what the correct shape is supposed to be, and can it be rewritten.
And, and so we've been we've been we've been doing this research and for a long time and I'm just going to show you what I'm going to kind of focus on one particular aspect of it will be just for reasons of time to ask where where is this memory how does it know what the right pattern is.
So, we, a long time ago I started thinking about this and I thought okay well for inspiration let's think how what's the best example of gold directed activity we have that's obviously brain driven behavior.
So there we have the same problem we have a collection of cells between your ears that is able to somehow store memories memories of geometric, you know mazes if you're a rat or other kinds of things for a different animal.
It is stored geometric representations and pursue goals and have these kind of behaviors how does it do that. Well, in the brain. It's pretty clear it how it does it, it has, it's a system of these electrically active cells called neurons.
They're able to acquire different voltage states by exchanging charged molecules across their membrane through these ion channels, and because it's a network there sometimes able to propagate that voltage state through these little electrical synapses known as gap junctions.
So that's the hardware and it's basically the commitment of neuroscience that that hardware stores and underlies all of the cognition of the of the brain that basically all of your memories and your goals and then all your capacities are somehow encoded and implemented
into electrical kinds of dynamics. Well, it turns out that this this set of this amazing architecture is not something that is arose when brains showed up on the evolutionary scene.
These are actually incredibly ancient mechanisms they existed even in our unicellular ancestors and evolution figured this out that that that electrical networks were really good to store and process information.
This was a long time ago even around around the time of bacterial biofilms. So basically every cell in your body has ion channels, most of them have gap junctions to their neighbors, and they all make electrical networks and you can see a lot more of this here.
Basically, the idea is that most of the tricks of the brain arose by basically speed optimizing and pivoting into a different problem space.
So basically three dimensional movement instead of morphogenesis. Some of the exact same dynamics that electrical networks have been doing for a really long time.
So what we did was we developed some tools to read and write these electrical states in tissues, exactly how neuroscientists have been doing it for the brain.
So this idea of reading out neural decoding right reading out these brain states.
We developed some false memories we developed some tools to do this, basically stealing all kinds of concepts and tools from neuroscience, because the cells can't tell the difference that's really important.
We set up different departments for body physiology developmental biology and neuroscience, but this is completely artificial cell, the cells can't the tools that we use cannot tell the difference where they're applied.
Here's one one example what you're seeing here is a voltage sensitive fluorescent dye, where the brightness of the of the each pixel is proportional to the voltage state of the cell.
And this is a time lapse movie showing you the early frog embryo putting its face together. So, what happened was that my colleague Danny Adams soak these things in this voltage sensitive fluorescent dye.
And then you can see that long before the anatomy of the face shows up in the genes that are important to pattern the face here this is one frame out of that video.
We call this the electric face because you can already see it looks like a face here's where the right eye goes the animals left eye will come in after the later.
Here's where the mouth goes here the placards you can already see, and I'm showing you this one because it's the easiest one to understand some of the others are quite complex.
But so so this is a normal bio electrical pre pattern. This is what determines what the face of the frog is going to look like. And we know that because if you interfere with this bio electrical pattern, you change the anatomy of the face.
How do we do that. Well, again, we use all the same techniques as neurosciences do so. There are no waves, electromagnetic radiation no magnets, no electrodes, nothing like that this is all playing on the endogenous bio electrical interface that the cells exposed to us.
So these iron channels are exactly how the cells were meant by evolution to control each other's behavior so they could cooperate together. And now we are hijacking that and so we do that by controlling these iron channels.
Think of them as a kind of keyboard onto this computational medium of tissues. And so we can control the iron channels and we can control the gap junctions.
And this is by we can use light we can use drugs we can mutate the different channels, although mostly we use, we use drugs and and then light.
So when you do this so so what happens when you do this can we actually in sep so so the argument I'm making is that much like in the brain, in the rest of your body during interesting events such as embryogenesis regeneration cancer suppression.
Metamorphosis, the electrical grid of the rest of the cells are basically is basically the computational medium by which that collection of cells makes decisions about what it's going to build.
So, so much like we navigate three dimensional space using the electrical circuits of our brain.
The rest of the cells are using that those same kinds of electrical circuits to navigate other spaces, for example, more for space to build and what they want so can we get them to build something else.
So here's a few examples.
I showed you a bio electrical pattern that makes an eye in the face. So what we did was basically impose that same bio electrical pattern on the gut. And if you and you can do that by injecting RNA that encodes specific ion channels.
And when you do that and you can do this anywhere in the animal those those cells read that pattern they say I guess we're supposed to make an eye and they make an eye.
So these eyes can have all the same layers or retina optic nerve all that same stuff. If you only convert a few cells to this to this electrical state.
They're smart enough to grab a bunch of their neighbors so the blue one this is this is a cross section through a lens in the tail of a tadpole somewhere.
And the blue ones are the ones we actually injected with that ion channel, but they realize is not enough of them to make a proper lens. So they've recruited a bunch of their unmanipulated neighbors.
Hey, these guys were not the brown ones were not themselves converted in any way, and yet they all participate together, right, because because there's two levels of induction here we we instruct the cells to make an eye.
And these cells instruct their neighbors to work with them to make this eye right this is this morphological goal directed activity. So doing that you can make ectopic odysses or inner ears you can make extra hearts.
You can make extra brain, you can make extra legs so none of this is Photoshop these are all real real live animals.
You can so here's our six legged frog, you can make fins which is kind of interesting because tackles aren't supposed to have fins that's more of a fish thing and we'll get to that momentarily.
But so so you see here that what I'm showing you is that these bio electrical states are instructive that they control a very simple signal is basically a sub routine call induces the system to to head for specific regions of morpheus space
meaning to make limbs or hearts or whatever else.
Okay, so I want to give you one specific example where this is perhaps one of the places where we work this out in the most detail this is a flatworm these plan area.
And the plan area when you cut off the head in the tail, they regenerate a single headed animals 100% of the time, they always get it right.
So, what you can do is you can take this middle fragment and you can ask, well here the anterior genes are expressed in the head, not in the tail fine. Here's the bio electric state.
The anterior side is the interior side is is depolarized so that's where the head is going to be and you get a one headed animal.
However, what you can do is in this two headed animal, you can induce this kind of bio electrical state by opening and closing some specific ion channels.
And when you do that.
When you injure it it will make a two headed animal because now the memory of what a correct planarian is supposed to look like has changed.
Keep in mind this is very important. This bio electrical map is not a reading of this two headed animal. This is a bio electrical map of a one headed animal.
A one headed nor anatomically normal planarian can store one of two ideas representations of what it's going to do if it gets injured in the future.
This is a counterfactual memory if you're interested in neuroscience and where this kind of mental time travel comes from to be able to envision things that are not going on right now.
I think this is a basal example of it.
This is a pattern for what's going to happen if it gets injured in the future. Okay, and so it sits there like this it's a latent memory it sits there doing nothing until you injure the animal and then the cells build to this pattern as opposed to this pattern and they make a two headed animal.
Remember there's nothing genetically these animals are completely genetically normal none of that has been has been altered.
I'm going to keep calling it a memory because if you take one of these two headed animals, you cut off the primary head, you cut off this this crazy ectopic secondary head and you say well, I have a middle fragment.
There's no extra head there the genetics are have not been touched. Of course it should go back to normal and make a one headed planarian and that's not what it does.
Once you've that circuit that bio electrical circuit stores the information of how many heads, a worm is supposed to have. It's not in the DNA. It's in the bio electric circuit.
It's not in that circuit it keeps state it's kind of like a flip flop, and what if you can keep cutting it and they will stay continuously two headed unless you go back and you actively change it to be one headed.
And if you're wondering what these things look like in behavior here they are here's a little video.
This this has all the properties of memory it's long term stable, but it's rewritable. It has conditional recall, meaning it can sit there doing nothing until you cut them, and it has discrete possible outcomes.
And I've shown you that by electrically we can, by manipulating the memory. This is literally the electrical memory of the tissue of what it's supposed to look like by manipulating it we can ask it to make a second head.
Fine, but we can also ask it to make heads appropriate to other species. So here's a triangular head of planarian we can make them make flat heads like people in is round heads like S Mediterranean is the distance here is about 100 to 150 million years.
Okay, again, nothing wrong with their with their DNA if you sequence the GMO normal these things you're not going to find anything different.
But they have a completely different anatomy, not only their head shape, but the shape of their brain and the shape of in the distribution of the stem cells, just like these other species.
So, so we can access other attractors in this morpho space by, by, by altering how the cells talk to each other electrically after injury.
You can even push it, push the system to very distant attractors that don't belong to planarians at all. So you can make things that look like this the spiky forms or this kind of cylindrical shape or kind of a hybrid hybrid form.
These are all what we're doing here is we're incepting false memories encoded by electrically encoded patterns into the collective intelligence of this set of cells that are going is going to then guide their, their morphogenetic activity.
So in the last just two more minutes or so.
Take this one step further and ask, what are the limits of this you know how much real time plasticity is there.
And how much does standard development really obscure this plasticity and this intelligence. And so to answer this, we asked, what would happen if we took some cells, and we liberated them from their normal environment in the embryo.
So basically, just, just ask them to reboot their multicellularity in the new context the same old cells. What are they going to do, what are they going to build.
So here's an example.
Here's a frog embryo this this in cross section these cells up here are scared they're fated to be skin. So what we do is we take them off.
And we ask what they're going to do. Now, in theory. So, so here they are being these are dissociated skin cells being put in this little depression, and they could have done many things they could die, they could do nothing.
They could crawl away from each other they could form a flat monolayer like cell culture, many things they could do what they do instead is they make something very interesting which we've called a xenobot.
It's a robotics platform made from Xenopus lavas cells. So what they do is overnight they come together like this into this nice round little, little form the flashes or calcium signals.
I'll talk about that in a minute. And then this thing does something very interesting it.
It exploits the fact that skin cells in a frog embryo have little hairs called Celia they move. And so what it what it does is it now uses it for locomotion.
What are those hair cells originally used for they're used to distribute mucus down the side of the animal, but in this case this they the the system is able to use them to move around.
So here's a single one swimming through some particles. Here are some group behaviors so you can see these guys are resting doing nothing this one is going on kind of a long journey.
These two are interacting with each other this one is sort of rolling in place. They can roll in place like this they can patrol back and forth like this.
They can do a maze so here's one so so it takes off. It moves over here it's going to take a turn without bumping into the opposite wall it just takes the turn it knows the turn is there.
And then at this point, for some internal reason we don't understand it decides to turn around and go back where it came from.
Okay, much like any other creature you would observe in the wild and has all kinds of internal dynamics that we don't yet understand. It's fully self motile we are not actuating it there we are not controlling it in any way.
This little proto organism formed from skin cells has a completely novel set of behaviors.
You can see this this this calcium signaling which we're seeing here is just it's very brain like so if you do this in a if you look at calcium signaling in the brain this is the kind of thing you would see.
And of course we're investigating now what are their proto cognitive capacities what do can they learn do they have preferences whatever.
They can heal if you injure them like this they will heal back so so you can cut them like this all the most in half, and they will just fold up back to their new Zen about shape.
And the most amazing thing is this.
We have made it impossible for these guys to reproduce in their normal froggy fashion because all they are our skin now they don't have any other things that would enable them to reproduce.
So within a couple of days they basically figure out a new way to reproduce themselves. So what happens is, if you put them in an environment with a bunch of loose skin cells.
What they will do is they will run around both individually and as collectives, they will run around and they will make these little these little piles they make the little piles and then these are to polish them and polish them and push the cells together.
So one of that is this thing which of course by the next morning becomes the next generation of xenobot. And so what that will do then is mature and start to do exactly the same thing run around and collect the loose cells into the next generation of xenobot.
This is called kinematics self replication this is kind of von Neumann's dream of a robot that goes out and builds copies of itself from parts that it finds in the environment.
And to realize here is that no other animal to our knowledge or no other creature on earth uses this kind of this kind of process.
This only works because cells are an agential material. We are able to make xenobots because the cells have the competency to get together and form this new organism.
And each xenobot is able to make the next generation of xenobot, only because it's dealing with a, a gentle material, it's dealing with cells that are also competent to do that right.
So, so the fact that you're we're not dealing with passive parts gives the whole system amazing capacity so.
And so I'm just finishing up here to say that here's some amazing things about this this is this is the frog genome, these xenobots have a perfectly wild type frog genome.
We haven't added anything we haven't given them new genes we haven't given them time to evolve or mutate, much like all the other things that I showed you the tadpoles with the tails on their eyes don't need periods of adaptation they immediately know how to use that I
that genome can give rise to at least two probably many more things that can give rise to a typical embryo which will have certain shape and behavior, or if we engineer by subtraction, meaning taking away a bunch of cells that are normally inhibiting these skin cells from having
their full potentiality, then they will do this they become a xenobot then the xenobot has its own developmental sequence it becomes something crazy looking like this, and they have a completely different behavior.
Typically, when we ask why does a certain animal or plant have a particular shape or behavior, the answer is evolution long periods of selection right selection to be a good whatever it is.
And you can tell that story about a frog because there have been long periods of selection for a frog to have specific features that match the frog environment.
You cannot tell such a story for xenobots because there's never been any xenobots, there's never been selection to be a good xenobot there's never been selection to be able to do kinematic self replication.
There's a completely different set of concepts that are needed to understand where these capacities are coming from.
And that plasticity, the fact that when you look at skin cells, and it's so reliable and all the embryos are doing the same thing and you say well, that that's obvious of course skin cells become this boring two dimensional layer on the outside of the animal.
Well, what else are they going to do their skin cells, but actually the only reason they do that is because they're basically bullied into it by the rest of the cells that are signaling to them to get them to do it they're being behavior shaped by the other cells,
left to their own devices in the absence of those cells mean that's really all we did as we took away a bunch of cells. Now you get to see what these cells are really capable of.
So this is this is why it's so important by engineering and synthetic morphology so critical to understand the competencies of cells and tissues and organs because just by looking at the standard kind of default path that that evolution took in its phylogenetic tree is not sufficient to see this.
So, now I'm just going to stop here and say that everything, all of the amazing life forms you know Darwin called them the endless forms most beautiful right and there's a lot of amazing animals and so on.
All of that is like this tiny little little little blip on the in the space of all possible agents, because life is incredibly interoperable.
So any combination of evolved material such as cells and tissues design material like nano materials and things and software any combination of those is some coherent agent that's going to have shapes and behaviors and cognitive capacity completely alien for what we're used to all of our
biology knowledge comes from here, and it's a tiny area of the space of possible beings maybe we'll find some of those an exobiology, and maybe we'll, well for sure we'll make a bunch of these.
The important thing is to realize that you can't test your theory on the same data that generated it. And for this reason, we have to go outside the standard forms that the one path of evolution on earth has given us.
With that, I will just say that there are a bunch of papers where I develop all of these things with with various colleagues in different directions. I want to thank the folks who did all the work so so Doug Blackiston and Sam Cregman, and, and Sam's old boss
George bongard we did all the all the xenobot stuff together. Tal Shamrat did the the planarian memory work. Maya Emmons Bell did some of the changing the plan area to different species, and Fallon Durant did all the bio electrical control of, of head number and plan area.
So I want to thank I want to thank them. I want to thank the model systems because they do all the heavy lifting in these experiments.
Of course, our funders and a couple of disclosures so I'm associated with two spin off companies.
More for pseudocals ink and fauna systems. And I thank you very much and I'll take questions.
