I would like to be able to understand why the laws of physics look the way they do,
but as in terms of why the universe exists, I think that will probably just turn out to be
an ill-formed question. I think that there's no such thing as the reason why the universe exists.
Welcome to Closer to Truth. I'm speaking with physicist and philosopher of physics,
Sean Carroll, about his superb, valuable new book, Quanta and Fields, the second in Sean's
acclaimed series, The Biggest Ideas in the Universe. It is the clearest introduction to
quantum mechanics and related topics with the real math that is both comprehensive and accessible,
which sounds like an oxymoron, but for Sean it is not. Sean, good to see you again.
Robert, thanks very much for having me on. Always good to be here.
I love the book. It's what I've been looking for. I learned a lot. I need to learn more,
but before we dive in, let's start with one of the possible implications of quantum theories,
the many-worlds interpretation, which we'll talk about later in depth, but just briefly,
because I read in the April 9th issue of New Scientist Magazine an article that headlines
the multiverse could be much, much bigger than we ever imagined, and it considers innumerable
subsystems of the world. You're quoted quite extensively, quite well, as taking this seriously.
Why do you take that seriously? Well, many worlds in general is a wonderful
and compelling idea. I take it seriously because it's the most straightforward implication of
the equations of quantum mechanics, in particular the Schrodinger equation of quantum mechanics.
Every other version of the foundations of quantum mechanics either changes the Schrodinger equation
sometimes or adds new elements to it or something like that. Let me just be super duper clear for
the listeners. I wrote a whole book about the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics
and why it's good. In these books and the biggest ideas, I don't talk about it that much. I'm much
more focused on what we truly believe that we understand, not speculations that go beyond
our current knowledge. Right. No, that's clear from the book. But in the article, it talks about
the idea of subsystems where any two aspects of the world, what I'm doing here on Earth and
something that just happened in an Alpha Centauri, could be looked upon as a subsystem. Does that in
any way expand the traditional Hugh Everett, traditional interpretation of many worlds?
Because that was the implication of the article. Well, I think that it depends on what you mean
by the interpretation. At its very most basic level, Everett is just saying there is something
called the quantum state, which everyone agrees there is, the vector in Hilbert space, if you
want to be technical about it, but the wave function of the universe, if you want to be poetic.
And it always obeys the Schrodinger equation. That's it. That's the entirety of the
interpretation. Everything else is commentary, including the fact that there are many worlds.
And so there is a long running debate among people who care about the Everett interpretation
about what counts as a world. Where do we draw the dividing line between the different worlds?
And so we're thinking about the possibility that you can be pretty comprehensive in dividing it up
into a very large number of worlds. But the important thing is this doesn't change the
Everett interpretation at all. It's only a question of, is this more a more convenient
way of thinking about it for we limited human beings? Okay, well, there'll be more to come
of many worlds. We'll get into it later in more depth, but it is certainly fascinating.
We'll conduct our discussion in three parts. First, I want to go through each chapter of the
book just to get an overall high level sense of quantum fields. Then I'm going to pick out
several of what I think are interesting issues from the book that we can discuss in some depth.
And then finally, we'll have sort of some speculations about the implications of
quantum mechanics and the nature of reality, all good, close to the true subject. But first,
let me give a serious quick bio. Sean Carroll is the Homewood Professor of Natural Philosophy at
Johns Hopkins University, a joint appointment between physics and philosophy. Sean's research
has focused on cosmology, field theory, and gravitation, shifting to more foundational
questions in quantum mechanics. In addition to the biggest ideas in the universe series,
he is the author of many bestselling books, including Something Deeply Hidden, The Big Picture,
and From Eternity to Now. He is the host of the popular Mindscape podcast. Sean, lots to cover.
Again, we're going to use the chapters of your book as a framework. So let's look for a high-level
discussion in the overview, which is just to give some fundamentals. Just define a quanta and fields
by contrasting it with what we know from classical physics. Yeah, you know, it's a three-volume series
that we're in the middle of here. Volume one was space, time, and motion, classical physics.
Volume two is quantum physics, but that has to include modern ways of thinking about quantum
physics, which are based on quantum field theory. So a lot of the book is about quantum field theory.
Okay, and what is the major contrast between quanta and field? So define each of those terms
briefly. The idea of quanta comes from the fact that we actually, in the formulation of the theory,
quantum mechanics, we don't think about a lattice or discreteness or pixels or anything like that.
Everything is smooth and continuous, but when we observe it, the world appears to us in lumps,
in particles, which we call quanta, and fields are the fact that the thing that we quantize
to get our best picture of nature are fields that fill all of space rather than particles
that have a definite location. Okay, and that's a very significant point. A major part of the book
and we'll get into that. Okay, chapter one is on the wave function, giving the position and
momentum of every constituent, specifies a classical system, and giving the wave function
specifies the quantum state of a system. Yeah, this was a dramatic change because Isaac Newton,
we thought, had laid down the law for classical mechanics. What the world is, is some things
with positions and momenta. Quantum mechanics comes along and says, no, there's something called the
wave function, and we can figure out how to predict things as best we can from it, but it's an utterly
different thing than Newton would have thought. And for the wave function, that is not designed
as a representation of reality. It means it is reality. It's a big difference in science.
We don't agree. No one knows. I think that reality is completely represented by the wave function.
In other words, reality is reality, but the wave function is in a mathematical one-to-one
correspondence with reality. Others think that it's only part of reality or it has nothing to do
with reality. So that's where opinions differ. Okay, sounds like a big difference. So you bring
up the Schrodinger equation very briefly. Describe it. The Schrodinger equation is what replaces
in quantum mechanics f equals ma from classical mechanics, the equation of motion Newton's second
law. It's the thing that says, okay, I've told you what the world is. Newton would have said
positions in momentum. Quantum mechanics says it's a wave function. Now tell me how it evolves,
how it changes over time. That's what the Schrodinger equation does.
Great. And one other point from this chapter, which comes out as important, is when you use the
Hamiltonian, which you discussed in your first book, in quantum mechanics, that becomes an operator.
And so give us just some sense of what an operator is in terms of a mathematical function
that characterizes quantum mechanics versus classical mechanics.
Yeah. So I was happy enough in book one to talk about something called the Hamiltonian,
which is a fancy way of saying the energy of a system as a function of the positions and
momenta of everything. So you have some complicated arrangement of stuff. And the Hamiltonian is
one number. It's the energy of that particular arrangement of stuff. In quantum mechanics,
the Hamiltonian, like many other things, is not a number. It's an operator, which means I start
with a wave function with some quantum mechanical state. And the Hamiltonian operates on that to
give me a different wave function. And then I can do things with it like plug it into the Schrodinger
equation. Good. So that's a very significant difference. Okay. Chapter two is on measurement.
Let's start very quickly is what is the measurement problem?
Well, this is the big thing for the foundations of quantum mechanics, right? Because
if all that had happened when we invented quantum mechanics was to replace positions and momenta
with wave functions, that would be slightly annoying, but we would deal with it waves are
things that physicists know how to deal with very, very well. The problem is that when you look at
a quantum system, it doesn't look like a wave function. It looks like particles or something
like that. So the measurement problem is, what do you mean when you say look at a system? What
exactly happens? What counts as a measurement? What can make it happen? What kind of agents can
make it happen? Why are measurements important at all? Yeah, and many people extrapolate that
significantly to say there has to be a conscious observer. And this has great philosophical
implications about the nature of reality or the nature of consciousness, which I don't think we
agree with. Well, I don't agree with it. I'm not going to put words in anyone else's. Well, I think
we mean you and I. Yeah, right. So, you know, we don't know what the answer to this measurement
problem is, but it's not that we have no good ideas. We have lots of good ideas. And what we
teach our students is not very good, is not very sensible, is not very coherent. It's just that
when you measure something, the wave function suddenly changes, it collapses. But you're not
allowed to ask what it means to do a measurement, to what counts as a measurement. So it's good
enough. That sort of half baked version of quantum mechanics is good enough to win many,
many Nobel Prizes. But it's not quite precise and clear enough to be a well formulated theory of
reality. In this chapter, just give some sense of what Hilbert space is and how that compares
with regular space and why that's important in quantum mechanics. Yeah, it's too bad that the
word space is used here. And I blame the mathematicians for this. They consider any set
with interesting structures on it to be called a space, right? So the space of all possible,
blah, blah, blah, very different than the three dimensional space that you and I live in. So Hilbert
space is the mathematical space where all of the wave functions live. Every possible quantum state
of the universe is an element of Hilbert space. And John von Neumann, the famous physicist and
mathematician, showed that mathematically, Hilbert space is a vector space. That means that
quantum states are vectors. You can add them together. You can, they have a direction, they
have a magnitude. They don't have a direction in physical space in the three dimensional world.
They have a direction in this gigantically dimensioned thing called Hilbert space.
Chapter three entanglement. A very interesting point you make is that when we think classically,
we think particles. And when we think in quantum, we first think of the quantum state, then particles.
Yeah. And importantly, when you have more than one particle in classical mechanics,
it's not a big deal. You just add more particles. You describe each particle individually. The
classical world is separable. You can treat each part of it all by itself and then add in what
its interactions are with the rest of the world. Entanglement in quantum mechanics says the quantum
world is not like that. There are not separate quantum states for different parts of the universe.
There is only one wave function for the whole universe all at once. And that has important
experimental implications. You can measure one part of the universe and that tells you something
about the possible measurement outcomes somewhere else.
Chapter four is on fields, a very important part of the book because quantum field theory,
as you state, is the single best way to describe the universe at its deepest known level. So
quantum field theory really becomes the foundation out of which quantum mechanics and
particles emerge. Yeah. And I want to emphasize there's 12 chapters in the book and only three
of them are about quantum mechanics by itself. We move very quickly onto fields because it's such
a rich, amazingly deep subject. And so in this chapter, chapter four, we just make our lives
very, very simple. We say, what if there was just one field in the universe and it didn't interact
with anything else? It's all by itself. And what we show is that when you apply the rules of
quantum mechanics to that situation, that field acts like a collection of particles or
more specifically, because quantum mechanics lets us consider super positions of different
things like Schrodinger's cat being partly awake and partly asleep. You can have a quantum field
representing zero particles and also one particle and also two particles, etc. all the way up all at
once. And significantly, then particles are really the quantized excitation of fields as opposed to
entities in themselves. This is, I think, one of the most fundamental points.
Absolutely. It surely is. As I say in the book, if you were a physicist working at the end of
the 1800s, you would have been forgiven for thinking we were almost done with physics.
Classical mechanics seemed pretty good. And you could divide the world into particles and fields,
particles like electrons or atoms, fields like the electromagnetic field, the gravitational field,
and so on. And quantum field theory unifies all of that. It's all fields. But when you look at
fields, when you measure them in precisely the right way, they appear to us as particles. So
it's really only one thing going on deep down. So the implication that particles are quantized
excitation of fields answers a fundamental question with all the number of electrons in the
universe or protons 10 to the 80 or whatever the number is. How could they all be exactly the same?
Because it just seems impossible. But when you think of them as not as entities that we have to
explain why they're all the same, but they're all the product of a field, the answer becomes obvious.
You know, you're right. There are about 10 to the 80th electrons in the observable universe. You
got the right number there. I'm very impressed. That was very nice. And you're also right that
the reason why every electron is identical to every other electron is because fundamentally,
the world is not made of electrons or other particles. It's made of fields. And there's
something called the electron field. And when you poke at it and make a little vibration,
that shows up to us as an electron particle. But the underlying field has the same physical
properties no matter when or where you are in the universe. So every electron looks identical
to us. And not only look, but they actually are. They actually are. And quantum mechanics has
a lot to say about that. Yes. Chapter five interactions. Well, of course, this is where
things truly become exciting and mind bending. Because in the previous chapter, we show that
if you had just one field all by itself, not interacting with anything, it would look like
particles. But there's nothing to look at it, right? In order to look at it, you need other
fields interacting with it. And that's where we get to talk about Feynman diagrams. Feynman was
the one who really showed us how to think about interacting quantum fields. Two electrons come
close together. They interact by tossing back and forth some photons or some other particles.
They scatter off to go elsewhere. Sometimes the answer is infinity, which worries you. That'll
be another chapter. But the point is, there's a recipe for going from some specific kind of
interactions that you specify dynamically to all these little pictures of what happens,
which gives you a way of calculating your quantum mechanical probabilities.
On a simple look, Feynman diagrams just seem almost Lego simplistic. Why are they so powerful
when they look so simple? Well, that's a great question. One of the motivations behind writing
this book is to move beyond the idea that Feynman diagrams are just cartoons. Because in a book
like this, my grand ambition is to show people the equations, to unveil the specific quantitative
relationships beneath the metaphors and analogies that we usually get. So in a traditional popular
science treatment, including ones that I've given myself, you will draw a Feynman diagram and you'll
say, this represents this interaction, blah, blah, blah. But you're left a little unsatisfied,
because why do I have to draw that diagram? So here in this book, we explain that every diagram
is a number. Diagrams can be used to calculate quantum mechanical amplitudes, basically to
calculate the wave function for this particular process. And from that, we can get the probability
of observing that process. So they're not just cute little pictures of what happens.
They're fiercely quantitative ways of measuring and characterizing the probability that something
happens. Chapter six, effective field theory. This is my favorite chapter. I don't know if it's
going to be anybody else's favorite chapter, but you know, we alluded to the fact that these
Feynman diagrams, which are supposed to help us calculate things, can easily lead to trouble
because you calculate a number and the number is infinity. And this seems bad. And so Feynman
and Schwinger and Tom and Aga won the Nobel Prize for wrestling with this, showing us that we could
get away with it. But it always seemed a little unsatisfying, the process called renormalization.
Feynman himself was not happy with renormalization throughout his life.
It just sounds like a fudge factor.
It does sound like that. But basically, it was all figured out by Ken Wilson in the 60s and 70s.
And somehow the world doesn't know about this and the world should know about this. What Wilson said
is that the reason why Feynman diagrams give you infinity is because you're including particles
with infinitely big energies. And you don't know what's going on when particles have infinitely
big energies. Maybe space time doesn't exist or something like that. So he showed us how to just
remove those unwanted, ill understood parts from our Feynman diagrams. And we are left with what
is called an effective field theory, because they are very, very effective. Chapter seven,
which is one of my favorite chapters, which you call scale. And you introduce the idea of scale
by saying the number of nucleons of basic Newtonian protons in various orders of magnitude.
Human DNA or bacterium would have 10 to the 12th. A human being would have 10 to the 28th.
The Earth would have 10 to the 51. The Sun would have 10 to the 57. So that's a million times
more. Exponent of 6 is a million. And so the Earth is roughly a millionth the size of the Sun,
which is right. Milky Way Galaxy, 10 to the 70th. I think that looks like 10 trillion suns,
which is more than the number of stars in the galaxy. But there's a lot of gas and other stuff.
So that's order of magnitude, right? And then the whole observable universe, 10 to the 80th,
which is 10 billion galaxies, seems actually low. Because I think that now 10 trillion,
maybe it should be 10 to the 82nd. But you see this beautiful hierarchy. And to me, that's the
best, simplest way to get a sense of the structure of reality. I mean, it's literally breathtaking.
Yeah, you know, this chapter is kind of a reward. It's a little respite. You know,
you've just done the last couple of chapters, you're pretty heavy going.
Yeah, it's a lot. And so we want to like put it together. And as you see, as you say,
reflect on the beautiful structure that comes out of this, because this talk about quantum
mechanics and field theory, sometimes it said, this describes the world of the very small,
but actually describes the whole world, including the very big, he says, you don't need it to describe
most features of galaxies or stars. You need it when you get down to subatomic particles,
but they all fit in to the quantum field theory framework.
An interesting point in this chapter, which is a great way to understand how the world works,
is the fact that we know that that protons and neutrons are made up of quarks, three quarks,
different colors or characteristic strangeness. And they come together in different ways. And
we think that's what composes it. And they're held together with the boson, the force of gluons.
But the point that you make, which is the critical point, is that if you took out all the quarks,
and only had the equivalent masses of the of the of the force, which is the gluons,
the total mass wouldn't get that much less. I mean, that's a that's an astounding idea.
Yeah, you know, this is why it's necessary and useful to think about quantum field theory, because
sometimes when you have an electron going through your bubble chamber or whatever,
you don't need to think about the details of quantum field theory. You can just think of
it as a particle moving in a certain trajectory. But inside a proton or a neutron, the world is
very different from the world of our intuition of particles and so forth. So we're told once again,
in the pop science level, that a proton has three quarks inside. But the mass of the proton is much
bigger than the sum of the masses of those quarks. And also another thing that I go through in the
book is there's something called the Compton wavelength of a particle, which is roughly, you
know, the size you can squeeze its wave function down to. And the Compton wavelength of a quark
is much bigger than the size of the proton that it squeezed into. So what is going on here?
And the answer is that you should read the book because it's all about quantum field theory and
all does make sense. Okay, so now I'm going to go quickly through some of the later chapters.
Eight is symmetry. Symmetry is very important, you know, whenever you hear things like the
standard model is an SU three cross SU two cross you one gauge theory. What do all of those symbols
mean? What do all those words mean? It's all about symmetry and group theory. And that's
why I explained this in the book. Chapter nine is gauge theory, which is a particular kind of field
theory. That's right. So the previous chapter was about the mathematics of symmetry. Gauge theories
are putting that mathematics to work in quantum field theory. It is the existence of certain
kinds of symmetries gauge symmetries that give rise to the forces of nature. The reason why there
are forces is because of a symmetry in the underlying quantum field theory. And this transformation
can be done at every at any point in space time. That's what the word gauge means in gauge symmetry.
It means that I have red, green and blue quarks, for example, that's a three dimensional space,
and I can rotate it. That's a symmetry in SU three symmetry, but I can rotate it separately at every
point in space time. And that means I need a new field to be able to connect them. That field
turns out to be the glue on which holds particles together. One of the points you made out a little
difficulty with is from gauge theory, you can derive the idea that the force carrying particles
are naturally massless like the like the photon, etc. I didn't quite get that. How you how you so
quickly get to that conclusion, which is obviously important. Yeah, it is. So we talk about in earlier
chapters, what it looks like when a field has a mass, it all comes down to the dynamics of the field,
it's a way for the field to interact with itself, so that its particles move slower than the speed
of light and have what we would call a mass, the more force you put on them, the more they accelerate
like F equals MA in Newton's laws. Now gauge symmetries come along, and there's a symmetry there
which very, very tightly restricts the possible terms you can write down in the equations of
motion for these particles. And it turns out that the particular kind of interaction you need
to give those particles a mass is forbidden by the symmetry. It would break the symmetry if you
just naively wrote it down. Well, you can write it down, people did, and they're like, ah, now it's
not gauge invariant anymore. So that symmetry not only gives rise to a new force, but it implies
that the particles carrying that force should be massless, whether they're photons or gravitons
or gluons. Chapter 10 phases. This is a big one because I just told you that gauge symmetries
imply that force carrying particles are massless. But in nature, we have things called the WNZ
bosons, which are force carrying particles which are not massless. What's going on with that?
And the answer is that gauge theories can appear in different phases, very analogous to like the
phases of water being ice or liquid or vapor. There's different ways to apparently break the
symmetry, not really break it, but hide it. And that gives masses to the WNZ bosons, not to mention
particles like the electron and the quarks. I'm very familiar, most people are with the standard
model of particle physics. Stephen Weinberg, particularly, is personifies that you introduced
the idea or explained the idea of core theory as well. So how does the standard model articulate
with core theory? I borrowed that term from Frank Wilczek, who introduced it. And it's basically
a way of reminding you that gravity is less of a bad fit than you might think. We have this thing,
we say, we don't understand quantum gravity, etc., etc. What would be more accurate to say
is that we don't have a full, complete, final theory of quantum gravity. We don't have a theory
of quantum gravity that includes black holes or the big bang or things like that. But as long as
gravity is relatively weak, like all the solar system, including the sun, the earth, etc.,
we're nowhere near making a black hole. Gravity is pretty weak. Under those circumstances,
we understand quantum gravity fine. So the core theory is just the standard model of particle
physics plus gravity in that weak field regime. Okay, so the standard model is a subset of core
theory with the asterisk that this applies to low levels of gravity. Yeah, that's exactly right.
Okay, good. Okay, chapter 11 on matters, bringing things together. Well, matter could mean almost
anything. But what I took it to mean, but I wanted to explain was why when you have certain kinds of
fields, bosons, like the Higgs boson or the photon or whatever, they can pile on top of each other
and give you a classical force field. Whereas other kinds of particles, fermions, like electrons
and neutrinos and quarks, they take up space. They make up matter. The table in front of you or
whatever has a certain solidity, a certain density, because some particles take up space.
I explain why in this chapter. Okay. And that's why my hand don't pass. I can't
indigitate. I can't put my hand through a table. And that's because the difference between the
matter and the forces. The reason why you can punch somebody effectively is ultimately because
electrons do not want to be in the same quantum state. Yes.
Okay, chapter 12, Adams. Yeah. So for the final chapter, we put it all together and we answer
the question, if there's all these particles out there, you know, Higgs bosons and top quarks and
whatever, why are you and I made of so few particles, electrons, protons, neutrons, you know, a couple
of force carrying particles. So we talked about the dynamics of these particles and how they decay
into each other. What are the stable final particles? Why do neutrons become stable inside
a nucleus, but not outside a nucleus? How does it all fit together to make up the periodic table
of the elements? And the big question of a baryon asymmetry, where in the early universe,
I think you say there were 10 billion anti baryon particles versus 10 billion plus one
baryon and therefore all the 10 billion canceled out, but the one left over out of 10 billion
becomes the entire universe. That's exactly right. And we don't know why. And I'm going to be very
honest. I'm not going to tell you why in this book, because I'm sticking to things that we know,
that's when we don't know the answer to. Yeah. And that you said it before, but it's an important
point about the book. We have these very speculative ideas. You've dealt with it in other books. But
this book is really the depth of the understanding of what we do know and what we're sure of and
how that works. Okay, let's go into our second part, which is just taking some of the issues that
are just fascinating and dealing. And let's start with wave particle duality. And in particular,
the celebrated double slit experiment. And why is that so important? Yeah, you know, wave particle
duality is honestly overrated. I think Edward Whitten once said, the battle is over, the waves
have won. The world is clearly made of waves. But it appears like particles under certain
circumstances. That's the magic of quantum measurement. What the world is is very wave,
very field like. But under the right circumstances, when you measure something, it looks like a
particle. The double slit experiment is a famous example of that, where you say a single electron
can pass through two slits and interfere with itself. If you really just accept that electrons
are not particles, they're described by wave functions. That's the least surprising thing in
the world. Waves can interfere with each other. Right. And how deeply do we understand that?
Some would speculate that the double split experiment is evidence for the many world
interpretation. You wouldn't go that far, would you? I would not go that far. I think, again,
all you need to believe in is the reality of wave functions. Now, some people don't. Some people
think that wave functions are just ways to calculate experimental outcomes, and we should
not attribute reality to them. And I think that those people have a very difficult time in explaining
things like the double slit experiment. They can do it, but they kind of have to bend over
backwards to do it. So if you just trust the equations, if you just believe what is sitting
right in front of your face, here's a wave function, here's the equation it obeys,
everything, I think, makes perfect sense. I don't think the double slit is especially mysterious.
The Heisenberg uncertainty principle is almost a household world and is used in many,
in many forms. One of the highlights of the book to me was understanding it in its deeper meaning
and to really appreciate why it is the case. So give me a brief sense of that.
Yeah, you know, it's, again, not a postulate of quantum mechanics. It's something that pops out
of the formalism of quantum mechanics. But it's fascinating to me because Isaac Newton
in his formulation of classical mechanics says very clearly, you need to tell me
the position of something and its momentum, and then I can predict where it will go. The state
of something is its position and its momentum. Quantum mechanics comes along and says my wave
function is psi of x. That is to say, for every possible position of the particle,
I can attach a wave function number and I would square that to get the probability of observing
it. So where did P go? What happened to momentum? P is the letter that we use for momentum. How can
you possibly capture everything there is about the system in terms of just the wave function
as a function of position? So I explain the answer to that. We know what the answer is.
And the answer is, remember, quantum states are vectors in Hilbert space. And basically,
when you have a vector, if you just do have x, y, and z, then you have components of the vector.
You've chosen a basis. You're going to tell me what the vector is by giving you the components.
In quantum mechanics, the relationship between position and momentum is changing bases,
changing the fundamental axes along which you measure your vector. And then if you believe that,
if position is one kind of basis, momentum is a different kind of basis, the uncertainty
principle is automatically true. It's almost trivial. In fact, there are physicists out there
who will say, oh, it's just obvious. You shouldn't be worried about it. Because if you've rotated
your vectors, you can't be completely 100% in a direction in one basis and also complete 100%
along an axis in the different basis because they're rotated with respect to each other. So
that's an example. It's a great example where a little bit of math, I think, makes everything
much, much clearer. And it pops out, as you said. It's a forced realization as opposed to a brilliant
new idea. Yeah. I mean, it was a brilliant new idea when Heisenberg came up with it. But honestly,
we understand quantum mechanics better now than we did in those early days. So it does,
once you understand what quantum mechanics is trying to tell you, the uncertainty principle
just comes along for the ride. You make the statement that entanglement helps us understand
measurement. That was to be one of the most interesting statements in the book. These are two
of the most important aspects of quantum mechanics, obviously, and you link them together. How does
that happen? Yeah, you know, I actually struggled while writing the book with the fact that we
don't agree on the basic language with which to talk about quantum mechanics. We don't agree on
whether wave functions are real or not. And I decided that, you know, rather than on every page
saying, well, if you think this, you would say this thing. And then this, you know, that would
just drag it down. So I said, we're going to talk as if wave functions are real. I happen to think
that they are, I happen to think that is the right way to think about reality. But it certainly
provides a much easier way of talking about what happens in quantum mechanics. And if you accept
that, then we have an answer to the question, what do you mean by doing a measurement? And the
answer is a measurement happens when a quantum mechanical system that again, it can be in a
superposition like spin up and spin down at some fraction of each all by itself. That's fine.
A measurement is when that system becomes entangled with the rest of the world. And that's when
the two parts of the superposition are no longer sort of living by themselves. They're now related
to everything else in the universe. That's what we call a measurement. Okay, you also make the
point we talked about a little bit earlier of the wave function of the universe that and the basic
idea I think is that no matter how you define your system, whether it's, as you said, two particles
or the entire universe, there's still only one wave function of that system. So give me some color
around that. Yeah, you know, this is one of the things that is very, very difficult for people
to wrap their brains around. Because we look at the world around us, we see many separate objects,
that just seems to be pretty obvious. And quantum mechanics, to put it in closer to truth language,
is more of a monist theory. It says there's really only one thing the wave function of the
entire universe. And so people struggle to understand it. But what I would advocate is just
accepting that, accept that there is only one thing and ask the other way, ask, why does this
one thing, the wave function of the universe, appear to us as many things? That's the surprising
thing. Why does it look like apparently the world is made of many separate things? And there,
that's an answerable question. It comes down again to measurement, what we call decoherence,
which is when these quantum systems that are in a superposition become entangled with the rest of
the world. And it all does ultimately make sense, even if it doesn't come close to our everyday
intuitions. What is the hierarchy problem? Well, we mentioned before the core theory, right,
the standard model of particle physics plus gravity. It's a theory that fits essentially
all of the data that we have from laboratory experiments here on earth. It doesn't fit
some things in outer space, which is why we need dark matter and dark energy, etc. But here on
earth, it does a very good job. The problem is, even though it fits the data, there are parameters,
coupling constants, numbers inside the core theory that are very, very surprising, that are not at
all what we would expect if those numbers were just chosen randomly. The hierarchy problem refers
to the fact that there are two parameters. One is the Planck scale, the scale at which gravity
becomes important, okay, 10 to the 18 billion electron volts. And then there is the mass of
the Higgs boson, which tells us the electroweak scale, the scale for particle physics, if you like.
And that's at about 100 billion electron volts. But if you read chapter six on effective field
theory, you will learn that particle physicists see no reason why these two scales should be so
different from each other. You would naturally expect them to be very similar to each other,
and they're different by a factor of 10 to the 16, which is just a little crazy. That's the hierarchy
problem. We still don't know the answer to it. And also, how about the relationship between the
powers of the forces between the electromagnetic and the gravitational power of forces? There's a
huge difference. Once again, if you're just imagining a universe or a world, you wouldn't
think there'd be such a vast difference in scale. Yeah, this is where it becomes very,
very tricky because you have to ask, you know, how do you measure these things? Like, after all,
the electromagnetic force between two neutrons is zero. But the electromagnetic force between
two protons is considerable. Gravity is different because everything is affected by gravity. So
the difference in the strength of the forces is actually not something that physicists spend a lot
of time dwelling on. That's harder to sort of know what your expectations should have been.
There's something called the weak gravity conjecture that conjectures that there are good
reasons why gravity has to be the weakest force. But honestly, that's beyond the scope of the book
here. So we're trying to stick to things in this book that everyone will still agree on 500 years
from now. Good. Well, that's a challenge. But I think that's a very admirable one and that and
very clear in terms of the purpose of the book. In that area of hierarchy, and we have the cosmological
constant, which, as you point out, very strongly is the vacuum energy of empty space, quote, unquote.
But the difference between the calculated theoretical value and the observational value
is, as you say, 10 to the minus 122. So that's 10 to the minus 122 zeros, which is
the largest mismatch in all of physics and all of reality in terms of the relationship between
theory and experimental observation. What does that tell us? Well, we're not sure what it tells
us, to be perfectly honest. Again, this is an open problem. I think that the contribution of a book
like Quantum Fields is that the reader can truly understand the problem in a way that it's harder
to do otherwise. Because once you understand what quantum field theory is, and once you understand
how effective field theory works, now you can follow the argument that says something like
the vacuum energy should be a certain number. Because it's certainly not a clear crisp prediction,
right? We actually don't know what the vacuum energy should be. We have rough back of the
envelope expectations for what it should be. And if it had been off by 10 to the two or 10 to the
three, then we would have dealt with that. We would have rolled with that and said, okay, that's how
the cookie crumbles. But when it's off by 10 to the 122, then we go, you know, I bet there's a reason
why. I bet there's an explanation. I bet this is not just luck, right? And again, I'm not going to
tell you what the answer is in this book, but I'm going to help you appreciate why physicists think
it's a real problem. And the quantum field theory is the foundation of what creates the problem in
a sense. 100%. You know, quantum field theory is super, super, super successful at fitting the
data. Once you put in these incredibly finely tuned, seemingly unnatural parameters for certain
parts of the laws of physics. So it's kind of a weird problem. It's not the usual thing in science
where we have a theory, it makes a prediction, and then the experiment says, no, that's not it.
This is not a place where we have a prediction. We have a feeling, we have vibes, right? And so
the question of how seriously we should take that is a very good one.
Okay, now we go on to part three, which is pure speculation. And so we want to emphasize that
the book gives everyone the the capacity to understand the what is real and what is known
today, and can therefore look at speculative ideas from the found from the unified foundation that
we have of particularly quantum field theory. So what comes now is pure speculation, Sean.
You know, we're just going to just ask your feelings and we'll hold you to them if you want
to change it the next time we talk. So the first one, I've got to go back to the many worlds
interpretation, which you have forcefully and very strongly articulated and advocate.
And I don't want to, obviously, there are differences. There's, you know, pilot wave,
Bohmian mechanical, all sorts of different explanations. But I don't want to put that
aside. I want to say, okay, if the many worlds interpretation is real, if that is the way
reality is, you know, how does it work? I mean, there are 10 to the 80th, the numbers of particles,
maybe 10 to the 90th photons, each one can can be analyzed in terms of the plank time of each one,
and different relationship. How do you deal with the way to even think about the number of worlds?
Is it, you know, 10 to the 80th or 90th factorial in some sense per plank time? I mean,
I just want to get a sense of the, the order of magnitude of how you think about many worlds.
Yeah, I mean, the real answer there is I don't think about all those other worlds that much.
Again, the worlds are a prediction of the theory. They're not what the theory is fundamentally about.
The theory says the world, the total world, the whole universe, what we can see and what we can't
is described by quantum mechanical wave function. And that wave function obeys the Schrodinger
equation. That's the theory. And we're trying to work out the consequences of that theory.
One of the consequences is when you do a quantum mechanical measurement, and again,
measurement can be defined independently of people or consciousness is just about becoming
entangled with the rest of the world. The world branches into multiple somewhat classical looking
parts, the different parts look individually almost classical, but they're separate from each
other because in one the spin was up and the other was the spin was down. I appreciate and
understand all of that. I'm just trying to get a sense of the order of magnitude of the numbers.
If we take, you know, a period of time, one second, could you invite into the plank time,
how many different total worlds emerge from that given the number of the particles in the
observable universe? Right. And I'm trying to convince you to not worry about that. That's the
wrong question to worry about. Let me say two things. Number one, we don't know is the answer
because in order to know that, you would have to know the dimensionality of Hilbert space of the
fundamental theory of everything. And we don't know that right now. Can you give me some boundaries?
I'm trying. I'm trying. It could be infinite, right? For many simple quantum mechanical systems,
the best description is in terms of an infinite dimensional Hilbert space.
And in that case, it would be strictly nonsensical to ask how many worlds are there. It's like
saying how many points are there between zero and one. But what you can do is compare the number of
points between zero and point one to the number of points between zero and one. You can give the
relative amount of worlds with certain qualities and that many worlds is able to do very, very well.
But it's also possible that the magnitude of the dimensionality of Hilbert space is finite.
Indeed, I think that quantum gravity suggests that it probably is finite, at least when you
only consider our observable universe. But the number is very big. The dimensionality of Hilbert
space for observable universe is something like 10 to the power of 10 to the power of 120.
So that's plenty of room for lots of worlds to happen. We're not going to run out of room
anytime soon. So that's a question of the phase space or the capacity, which is obviously 10 to
the 10 to the 120 is enormous. But it doesn't say how many of those occur every period of time.
Can you put a bound on that? If many worlds is correct, within a period of time, one second
take, what is the lower bound and what is the upper bound? Is there any way you can do that?
No, I can't because, again, the theory doesn't talk about worlds. Worlds are things that human
beings invent to talk about the wave function of the universe in a convenient way. Two people
might decide to divide up the wave function of the universe differently. As long as they agree
on what the wave function of the universe is, they're fine. So the question of what is the
number of worlds is just like, what is the number of colors? Okay, let's go on to fine tuning,
which has been extant in physics. It's been extant in science, theology, discussions.
How do you view the fine tuning of the universe, particularly in light of quantum field theory?
Well, I think that the word fine tuning gets bounced around in at least two very, very different
senses. Very often in the popular discourse, it has something to do with life, that the universe
is finely tuned to allow for the existence of life. But physicists will often use the word
fine tuning in a way that has nothing to do with life, just to say that certain parameters,
like the mass of the Higgs boson, for example, in our equations seem to be represented by adding
up many different numbers. And the many different numbers are individually much bigger than the
sum of them that you get for the Higgs boson. And that's not impossible because some of the
numbers are positive and some of the numbers are negative, but somehow they cancel out to give you
a much smaller number than you would expect. And that's fine tuning to a physicist. So I think
that the fine tuning problems of physics are important clues when we're moving forward to try
to understand the laws of physics better. Whether or not they have anything to do with life,
I would not be competent to talk about. And therefore, your feeling is that nobody is competent
to talk about that in a fundamental sense. Well, I'm all in favor of talking about it,
but remaining humble that we don't know the definition of life, the conditions under which
life started, the total set of other possible laws of physics that would allow for life or
anything like that. Yeah, and when we talk about life, that's sort of the end result. I mean,
we're talking about structure to begin with. Why is there any structure at all that seems to be fine
tuned that if various parameters would be off by some argument what it would be, you wouldn't be
able to have any structure at all. Everything would collapse into a black hole or would fly
apart without structure. And why we have this so-called fine tuning. So the question is from
a quantum field theory point of view, is there any color that one can bring to that kind of question?
I don't think that quantum field theory really tells us that much specifically about why and
where and how complex structures can evolve. It gives us the basic ingredients out of which
those complex structures evolve. I will tell you that I have a feeling that a lot of people are
too quick to say that if conditions were different, complex structures would not be able to evolve.
Because guess what? We're very familiar with our conditions. And I don't think that I could hand
most people the standard model of particle physics, and they would successfully predict the
periodic table of the elements, much less life and stars and things like that. So again, I just
want to be humble about the question if things were different, would we even be able to imagine
life coming into existence? I'm just not used to, in our conversations, humility from either one of
us. So it's a little- You've got to grow in your life, right? You've got to try out new things,
put on new hats. I'll take you as a role model and try to follow your humility,
attracting persona. Let's go to some basic, closer-to-truth kinds of questions. We've talked
about it before. We like to ask the question, what exists by which we mean, what are the
fundamental, irreducible categories of reality as few as possible that are irreducible?
Yeah. I mean, of course, I wish I knew the answer to that, but my best guess is a quantum wave
function obeying the Schrödinger equation. I think that people get a little confused because
they will then want to know, well, a wave function of what? When we're taught quantum mechanics,
those of us who went through physics educations, you start with a classical system. Here's a
harmonic oscillator. Here's the electromagnetic field, and then you quantize it, and you get a
quantum theory of that. I think that's a little bit misleading because nature doesn't work that way.
Nature starts quantum mechanical from the beginning. My best guess as the fundamental
thing that exists is some kind of quantum state obeying some kind of Schrödinger equation. Of
course, what exact kind we're still trying to figure out? The other question we ask is, why is
there something rather than nothing? Why anything at all? I can put it in a different way. Is
there are there brute facts beyond which we cannot proceed even in principle? And if so,
what is in that category of brute fact? Yeah, I'm like 99% sure that there are brute facts,
and the existence of the universe itself is one of them. But I don't know exactly which
facts are brute facts and which ones are explicable. I would like to be able to understand why the laws
of physics look the way they do. But in terms of why the universe exists, I think that will
probably just turn out to be an ill-formed question. I think that there's no such thing as
the reason why the universe exists. Okay, that's been great, Sean. I love that again. I recommend
the book for everyone who really wants to understand quantum mechanics and quantum field
theory as the foundation for all these kind of fun questions. So now we have a couple of
short questions, and these are designed for a stream of consciousness. Just give me a
very quick answer, whatever comes to your mind. So the first one is, what do you think the best
theory is to integrate quantum mechanics and general relativity?
Spacetime emerging from entanglement in the wave function.
Question two, roughly, how long do you think it'll be? How many years will it be to get a
general consensus on a theory of everything, whether it's what you just said in terms of
integrating quantum mechanics and general relativity or some other theory? I mean,
do you think this would be what happened in our lifetimes?
I'll say between 50 and 100 years. Okay, here's question three. On a scale of 1 to 10,
your confidence level that the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics is correct
and real? 9.5. And next, on a scale of 1 to 10, your confidence level that the standard model of
cosmology, cosmic inflation, the Big Bang, will certainly be refined, but it will not be overthrown.
Well, I would say 9.9, but I do not include inflation in the standard model. That's a speculation.
Okay, last one on a scale of 1 to 10, your confidence level that the physical world is
all there is, that there is no thing that is not physical? 9.99.
Okay, well, your humility may have increased since we began speaking, but your opinion of the
non-physical has not changed. So we can give you consistency as well as humility.
Once again, I love the book. Everybody can learn a great deal from it. I liked how you actually
concluded that to understand the particles we're made of, the forces that we interact,
is one of humanity's greatest achievements, and you have this very beautiful line at the end.
We can all be a little proud of that. So I love that.
Thanks very much. I mean, technically, I concluded with an appendix where I talk about
Fourier transforms, but you're being very nice to talk about the poetic side of the last chapter.
We want to give a little bit of the soft side. Yeah, good.
Once again, Quanten feels indeed the entire, Sean's entire series, the biggest ideas in the
universe, has my highest recommendation. Viewers can watch Sean's 27 videos and
ATV episodes on Closer to Truth, and over 1,500 videos on cosmology and physics,
especially their meaning and implications, not all of which Sean would agree with.
On the Closer to Truth website and Closer to Truth YouTube channel, thanks everyone for watching.
Thank you for watching. If you like this video, please like and comment below.
You can support Closer to Truth by subscribing.
