As a deadly pandemic continues to ravage the globe, it's natural to reassess the widespread
notion that the world is getting better. New optimism has emerged over the past decade
or so, spearheaded by Harvard psychologist Stephen Pinker. Pinker's 2011 book, The Better
Angels of Our Nature, details how violence has declined over human history. Following
its success, he wrote Enlightenment Now, which extends the argument that things are getting
better to a wider variety of measures including health, wealth, the environment, and human
rights.
As the name suggests, the book attributes this progress to ideas of humanism, science
and reason, which find their origins in the period of 17th and 18th century 4, often referred
to as the Enlightenment. The book is a bestseller and has received many plaudits, for example
Bill Gates called it his new favourite book of all time. Pinker even got a spot on Joe
Rogan to promote the book.
A standout feature of new optimism is its reliance on graphs and figures to prove that
the world is getting better. And this is epitomized by the website Our World in Data, run by Max
Rosa, which aims to document human progress using quantitative measures. Another prominent
new optimist is the late Hans Rosling, whose book Factfulness and Associated Ted Talks used
statistics to wow audiences with how wrong and pessimistic they were about the state
of the world.
There are numerous ways to critique Pinker and the new optimists as their claims are
quite wide ranging. Many have critiqued the data they use, especially those with respect
to violence, the environment, poverty, as well as the various social problems associated
with modernity, like loneliness, stress and mental health. Others have largely accepted
the data but critiqued the conclusions drawn from it, especially the attribution of progress
to the Enlightenment and the implicit or explicit defence of the status quo. Others still have
focused on Pinker's awkward dancing, which many claim single-handedly refutes his argument
that the world is getting better.
In this video I want to critique Pinker's analysis of wealth, poverty and inequality
and present an alternative vision of how these things work and why they matter. These three
issues are intertwined and, as we'll see, Pinker frequently discusses them together.
I'm going to begin with absolute poverty, which Pinker cares about but doesn't understand.
Then move on to distribution more broadly, including relative poverty, which Pinker doesn't
care about and doesn't understand.
I will conclude with some policy recommendations that would ensure a more equal distribution
of wealth across the globe, aiding both absolute and relative poverty.
So I hope you're ready for a nice, long, dry, unlearning economics video. I mean, we're
really going to get into the nitty-gritty of the data. I'm talking 100 page reports,
big quotes, tables, no respite, no fun at all.
Everything's fine.
Hmm, that was weird.
Stephen Pinker's view of poverty is a common one. For most of humanity's history, we
found ourselves in poverty and it was only with the rise of capitalism or the West or
the Enlightenment or whatever you want to call it that we escaped this trap.
You may be familiar with this graph of GDP used widely to illustrate our historically
unprecedented levels of wealth. The hockey stick shape shows GDP as virtually stagnant,
taking off exponentially in the 19th and especially 20th centuries. As Pinker states,
The story of the growth of prosperity in human history depicted in figure 8-1 is close to
nothing, nothing, nothing, repeat for a few thousand years. Boom! I wish this wasn't
a real quote, for a lot of reasons.
Look, I'm not qualified to engage in a debate over whether hunter-gatherer societies were
better than contemporary civilisation and nor would I want to argue that they are. But
by looking further into the data, we can see how crude Pinker's narrative really is.
Pinker also relies heavily on another graph you may have seen, showing that extreme poverty
has declined precipitously in the past few decades. The graph is based on the World Bank's
line of $1.90 worth of consumption per day, under which people are thought to live in
extreme poverty. It shows the proportion of people who are below this line over the past
couple of hundred years. Those living below $1.90 were about 90% of the population at
the beginning of the 19th century, but are about 10% of the population today. In a response
to critiques of his book as overly obsessed with quantitative metrics, Pinker justifies
his stance as humanistic.
Looking at the numbers is the moral, compassionate, sensitive way to deal with human suffering.
It treats every life as equally precious, instead of privileging members of the tribe
or victims that are photogenic or conveniently nearby. Data show us where the suffering is
greatest, help identify the measures that will reduce it, and reassure us that implementing
those measures is not a waste of time.
Such a view is extremely naive about quantitative data, which as we'll see often excludes large
numbers of people. The data from these two graphs weren't special skepticism because
they summarize information across a wide range of contexts and over long periods of time.
People don't fall from nowhere, they have to be gathered and the process is often costly
and biased.
Well established statistical institutions which credibly measure things like income, health
and literacy are largely a privilege of modern rich countries, and in both poorer countries
and in the past, the information is just not available. At a deeper level, modern notions
of GDP, income and poverty may not even be relevant in these times and places.
It's not just that the data are missing though, they are biased in a specific way which overstates
the wealth and prosperity of market economies. I want to warn you that I'm about to dissect
this data and it might sound quite pedantic and academic, but there's a lot at stake
with these numbers, understanding how billions of people are living and designing policies
based on that understanding.
Poverty measures are used explicitly by the World Bank and across the globe, so it makes
sense to subject them to this much scrutiny.
The anthropologist Jason Hickle, who is known as a critic of the new optimist narrative
on global poverty, has critiqued the GDP data, which also turns out to be the basis for the
poverty data before 1981. In other words, the two graphs we've just seen use a common
source, though after 1981, the poverty data is measured directly. For this reason, I'm
going to discuss the two periods separately, first the historical GDP data and then post-1981.
Hickle has highlighted that historical data on GDP simply isn't available for most
poor countries.
The dataset is woefully incomplete, as it focuses almost exclusively on Western countries.
For the entire continent of Asia and Latin America, it includes data for only three countries
each prior to 1900. For Africa, it includes no data at all prior to 1900, and for only
three countries prior to 1950. In other words, for the vast majority of the human population,
and for the vast majority of the time period in question, there isn't any data at all.
It doesn't take a statistician to recognise that this is not an adequate empirical basis
from which to draw meaningful conclusions regarding global trends.
He adds that the data available for the past were mostly gathered by colonists and so reflected
what they were interested in, in this case, grain production for export to the home countries.
As such, the data exclude non-market forms of consumption, which people use to meet their
needs before capitalism.
If you enclose a forest and sell it for timber, GDP goes up. If you burn subsistence farms
and turn the land into cotton plantations, GDP goes up. But this accounting tells us
nothing of what local communities lose in terms of their use of that forest or their
access to food. The cost to their livelihoods and well-being is swept under the statistical
rug. For these reasons, GDP is not a legitimate proxy for measuring poverty, particularly
not during an era characterised by enclosure and dispossession.
Under the case of India, in the 19th century, the British went about enclosing communal
forests which they used to build their ships, privatising communal waterways, destroying
communal granaries and so on.
The goal of these policies was explicit, to put farmers at the mercy of hunger so that
they would have no choice but to intensify agricultural production for export to London
if they wanted to survive. And it worked. Output went up and exports rose. This is reflected
in the national accounts. But during this very period, 30 million Indians died needlessly
of famine as a result of British agricultural policy, a catastrophe recounted in horrifying
detail by the historian Mike Davis in his book, Late Victorian Holocausts. During the
whole period from 1870 to 1920, life expectancy in India dropped by 20%.
The fact that these statistics privilege market consumption over non-market consumption, even
to the extent that measured output may increase while people are being forcibly dispossessed
and facing starvation, should give us a clue that they are missing crucial aspects of poverty.
It's likely this data overstates the extent of poverty in pre-capitalist and pre-colonial
societies and understates it in early capitalism and colonialism. Inequality researcher Branko
Milanovic has agreed with Hickel on this point, though he added that it makes recent decades
look better because the world has largely escaped the horrors of early industrialisation.
However, if one is celebrating the triumph of progress and the West as pinker is, the
gaping hole where poverty increased for a century or so raises some serious questions.
One could probably say something similar for other outcomes, such as life expectancy and
violence, though the improvements related to modern medicine, like vaccines and infant
mortality, are likely to be more credible. More on that later.
The economic historian Robert Allen has tried to improve on these estimates by looking at
the consumption patterns of households in pre-industrial England and pre-colonial India.
None of the historical cases discussed here show poverty levels as high as those found
in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa in the early World Bank data. Our estimates for England
before the Black Death in India in the early 19th century are both on the order of 25%
of the population. Development in England that led to the industrial revolution began
early, well before the Glorious Revolution, for the headcount poverty rate had dropped
to 5-10% by 1688. The real-wage evidence suggests that India may have had less poverty
and higher incomes at the time of AKBAR than in the early years of British rule.
Perhaps circa 1600, India was on a par with the developing parts of Western Europe, as
the California School suggests. India suffered badly under the Raj, however, for the poverty
rate looks to have doubled during the colonial period. In view of the fragility of the evidence,
these observations should be read as provocations for further research, rather than definitive
conclusions. The canonical poverty and GDP graphs basically depict all of mankind as
completely impoverished before capitalism.
Don't be the miracle of consumer capitalism, that means you're not lying in your own shit,
dying at 43 with rotten teeth. But Allen's estimates suggest that this wasn't the case.
Capital and systems before capitalism, whatever undeniable problems they had, were often able
to provide at least enough to keep themselves out of absolute poverty.
I will readily admit that this is more in line with my own expectations and therefore
probably my own biases. But as Allen's final sentence makes clear, we can't just
bandy around estimates used by researchers as if they are settled science, and certainly
not to support wide-ranging historical narratives or a political ideology. That's the way
these graphs are used by Pinker, not to mention by Max Rosa and Bill Gates on social media.
Let's move on to the data after 1981. These measures are actually designed to measure
poverty rather than GDP. It's therefore not surprising that they appear more robust to
different approaches and assumptions than the data before 1981, and I want you to keep
that point in mind. The decline in global poverty since 1981 is a pretty credible finding.
Of course, this doesn't absolve us of investigating the data. The economist Angus Dayton has called
estimating global poverty the statistical problem from hell, and has even stated that
global poverty and inequality measures are arguably of limited interest.
One of the most fraught issues is adjusting for the fact that prices are different across
different countries. Although the line is expressed in dollars, this has to be translated
into the currency of each country to make it comparable. Most things cost less in poorer
countries, so the rupee equivalent of $1.90 is less than if you just converted it at a
currency exchange. These price adjustments typically take a basket of goods supposed
to represent average consumption. As they are usually created for our old enemy GDP,
they reflect total consumption in a country. This matters because the poor within a country
spend a lot of their income on food and other basic needs. If you spend 50% of your money
on food, a rise in its price is going to have a big impact on your budget, but inflation
is measured from total GDP, which includes poor, middle and high income people alike.
So the percentage spent on food for the whole country will be lower than for those in poverty.
A rise in the price of food can have a small impact on measured inflation, but a big impact
on the poor. It's therefore possible this leads to the measure's understating poverty.
Changes in the way this is all accounted for can change the number of people in poverty
by hundreds of millions, even though this statistical exercise obviously doesn't involve
any changes in the lives of poor people. However, the issue is mathematically detailed
and I think is ultimately a bit of a distraction as the measures have genuinely improved over
time, so I won't go into it any further. But check the references if you want to know
more about poverty measures and price adjustments.
Although the coverage of the data after 1981 is leaps and bounds better than the historical
coverage, it's far from perfect. The World Bank aren't all powerful and can't just
magically know everything about global poverty, even if they'd like to think so.
Poverty researcher Morton Gervin summarises the problem as
When it comes to studying economic development, our knowledge based on numbers is doubly
biased. We know little about poor countries and even less about the poor people who live
in these countries. This is true not just of poverty indicators but of one's measuring
progress in health and education too. Almost half the countries in the World Bank's database
either have no data on poverty or have it for only one year. It's difficult to speak
about a reduction in poverty when you don't have a comparison point from the past and
even more difficult when you don't have any data at all. Only a minority of countries
can be said to credibly track poverty over time.
Now, the countries without data are usually smaller, so when you wait for population,
fewer than half the world are unrepresented by the data. China and India have fairly good
poverty data and together they make up a third of the world's population. Additionally,
the measurement problem has been improving over time, though it remains far from solved.
Even in countries with data, the poor may not be properly accounted for. It's natural
to think of the global poor as a class concentrated within the poorest countries in the world
and this isn't completely wrong. But a substantial number of the world's poorest
exist in relatively well-off countries with high inequality. Latin America is the archetypal
example here, with its vast riches and slums side by side.
As the average income level of countries like this rises, the poor can be increasingly
shut out and need more to get by than the poor in poorer countries. Needless to say, there
is generally a racial dimension to this poverty. There are also poor people even within relatively
well-off families. Since standard poverty measures use household income, it's possible
to conclude that high household income means all members of a household are out of poverty,
ignoring inequality within the household. Naturally, there is a gender dimension to
this poverty. A paper by Brown et al. found that most of the undernourished women and
children in a large African dataset were outside households we would think of as poor. Even
in richer households, the income was controlled by the household head, usually a man, who
would take care of himself before everyone else.
Philip Houston points to yet another class of people ignored by the World Bank's poverty
narrative. The success story also airbrushes out the
situation of hundreds of millions who are missing or severely underrepresented in survey
data. They often come from groups disproportionately affected by poverty, including homeless people,
pastoralists, migrant workers, refugees, and displaced persons, people affected by armed
conflict, people residing in households but not considered members such as domestic workers,
and those in informal settlements. I also have my suspicions that we might be facing
the same problem we had with the earlier data, the underestimation of non-market consumption.
If people were doing better than we thought before modern capitalism, then obviously the
gains from transitioning to capitalism will be overstated.
Modern estimates are much better at accounting for this than the GDP ones used for historical
data that we saw earlier. But in some cases, the number of people recorded in extreme poverty
by these measures defies credulity. The chairman of Kenya's National Bureau of Statistics
once said that if the official data were right and 72% of Kenyans lived on a dollar
or two a day, then 72% of my people are dead. Andrew Fisher has argued that the graph implies
the overwhelming majority of Chinese people in the 1970s were only just getting 2000 calories
a day on average, when at the time they were farmers engaged in demanding manual labour
and would have required at least half of that again.
While China in the 1970s was or stare, this would have meant widespread malnutrition and
more in line with China a decade or so earlier during the Great Leap Forward.
In summary, the canonical graphs that show wealth rising and poverty falling are not
credible for understanding wealth or poverty for most of human history, as well as among
contemporary countries and groups which have remained disconnected from the modern economy.
It's hard to escape the conclusion that both the hockey stick and poverty reduction graphs
represent not just a story of progress, but a qualitative transformation of the world into
a capitalist economy. Both measures rise organically as human activity is brought into the market,
even if people are not escaping poverty. None of this is to say that the graphs don't
represent any progress whatsoever, just that we need to be careful when interpreting them.
This is especially true for societies that are the most transitional, richer countries
in the past and poorer countries today. It also throws up questions about whether poverty
is truly the natural state of man or if it is imposed by economic and social systems.
Bearing in mind that the dominant poverty measures tend to exclude those not well integrated into
the global economy, how do they do at mapping poverty among those within the global economy,
which to be clear is the majority of humanity. Poverty is commonly understood as a situation
where people do not have the capacity to meet their basic needs, food, water, shelter, clothing, etc.
It is therefore strange that the link between the World Bank's $1.90 a day poverty cutoff
and basic needs is not concrete and more explicit. The graphs depict extreme poverty as a cutoff
for the money value of each person's consumption currently set at $1.90 per day. The thinking goes
that this permits enough consumption of the basics for people to survive, albeit at a bare minimum.
Originally, the $1.90 line was based on an average of national lines from a very small
sample of the poorest countries, though this was beautifully updated to only a small sample
of the poorest countries later on. These national lines used different methodologies and all
were questionable because of the lack of statistical capacity of the countries they came from.
Jason Hickal argues that this line is just too low to be meaningful. For example, the number of people
who are going hungry is higher than the number of people deemed in extreme poverty by this metric.
Hickal has drawn from research by Peter Edward to formulate a new poverty line. Edward has noted
that if you look at the relationship between life expectancy and consumption, there seems to be
an inflection point before which higher consumption leads to rapid gains in health and after which
higher consumption leads to only modest gains in health. We have here an individual's consumption
on the x-axis and life expectancy on the y-axis. Below the level of income shown by the kink point,
people are unable to satisfy their basic needs. At this level of impoverishment, a gain in consumption
will rapidly increase their life expectancy, hence the steeper line on the left part of the graph.
They will go from eating nothing or only carbohydrates to getting the nutrients they need and from being
exposed to the elements to having at least some protection. The point at which they meet these
basic needs can be represented by the kink and beyond this, the gain in life expectancy from income vanishes.
Know that Edward has made the gains above the kink stop entirely on this graph just to illustrate the point,
which will not be strictly true. Out of absolute poverty, health gains will continue with higher
consumption, though they may be smaller. In Edward's 2006 paper, people across 150 countries
averaged the life expectancy of 74 years at the kink. Edward identified the kink as between
2.7 and 3.9 times the World Bank's poverty line. Hickel has updated this to $7.40, which is based
on 3.9, the upper end of Edward's estimates, times 1.9, the current World Bank poverty line.
You can fairly critique this approach, but at least the measure is actually connected to a concrete
idea of human needs. Even if you go with a lower value, it's clear that the measure gives a multiple
of the most used cutoff, so poverty is higher than indicated by the line used by the World Bank and by Pinker.
The typical response to the admittedly obvious point that a higher poverty line means more poverty
is to say that the $1.90 threshold is only intended to measure extreme poverty, but this misses the point.
A poverty threshold should be grounded in human needs and should mark a turning point for when they are
fulfilled, as Edward's measure at least tries to do. The $1.90 threshold isn't grounded in a clear
idea of human needs, so it shouldn't be the World Bank's target and it shouldn't be the threshold used
for these graphs. People who have tried to ground the poverty line like this but using different methods
have almost universally come up with a higher value, which can change the picture of global poverty.
I suspect that Steven Pinker's grasp of all this is pretty shaky. There was an interview where
Mehdi Hassan challenged Pinker on his understanding of the numbers, and Pinker seemed
under-equipped to address the points.
Well, let's take global poverty. You have a chapter in the book on prosperity. You want to make the
case that the world is more prosperous and less poor than ever before, and you point to data showing
the number of people living on the extreme poverty line, as defined by the World Bank today at $1.90
a day, is down from $2 billion in 1990 to $700 million in 2015. The world is becoming middle class, you say.
But surely you know. I know you know, because you're a very clever, well-qualified guy, that there are
numerous studies and a number of scholars who dispute that poverty measure as arbitrary, as inaccurate,
that in reality, to quote from a recent academic paper by an anthropologist at the LSE, quote,
around 4 billion people remain in poverty today. Around 2 billion remain hungry more than ever before in history.
Completely irrelevant to which way the numbers have gone. Of course, the definition of extreme poverty
is going to be arbitrary. If you make it higher, then more people will be in poverty, make it lower,
fewer people. But no matter what cut-off you set, the direction is downward.
Yes, it is.
Actually, if you look at the work done by Jason Hickel at the LSE, if you take a poverty line of $5,
a billion people have been added to the number of people on that poverty measure since 1981.
The trend shows the exact opposite when you move it to $5 a day.
In terms of the proportion of people in poverty by that criterion?
Look at the sheer number of people. A billion people have been added to the poverty total since 1981.
Yes, but billions of people have been added to the world as a whole. What's relevant is the proportion.
You also used absolute numbers in your book. You said it's gone down from $2 billion to $700 billion.
Well, I note that by at least the most widely accepted definition of extreme poverty is interesting
that the absolute numbers have declined as well. But the main point is the proportion,
because more people have been added, so anything is going to increase.
Fortunately, after watching this video, you'll be much better equipped than Pinker was.
Let's discuss the main points raised by Mehdi in more depth.
I want to clarify three main questions in particular.
One, what happens to the picture of global poverty when we increase the value of the poverty cutoff?
Two, what are the effects of shifting from proportions to absolute numbers of the poor, which is most relevant?
Three, is the result sensitive to the inclusion of countries like China? Should we include them?
Unpacking these will take us to the heart of the New Optimist narrative.
To take the first point about the value of the cutoff, it's undeniable that the proportion of poor in the world
has fallen pretty much whichever line you use, though it's also clear that the decline gets less impressive the higher the line.
According to the World Bank's poverty calculator on their website, between 1981 and 2019,
at $1.90 a day, the proportion under the global poverty line dropped from 43% to 9%.
At $4 a day, the proportion went from 62% to 31%.
At $7.40, it went from 71% to 52%, and at $15 a day, it went from 81% to 72%.
Another way of representing this is this animation from Max Rosa, which shows the change in the global income distribution
with gains at pretty much every level, but fewer at higher levels.
We'll return to the issue of global distribution later.
Alternative measures such as those created by Robert Allen, who we met earlier,
or Martin Revalian, a prominent economist at the World Bank,
try to accommodate disparities in individual countries in their own ways and still find a decline.
See their papers if you're interested.
The story changes slightly if you use the absolute number of people in poverty instead of the proportion,
which brings me to the second point.
The proportion of poor people in poverty is the best measure for looking at changes over time.
Otherwise, you'd have to argue that the state of poverty was better under early industrial capitalism
just because total population was so low.
There were fewer poor people because there were fewer people,
but we don't think of this as a good thing since so many of the population were impoverished.
But absolute values carry some significance too.
One person suffering is one person suffering, and presumably it doesn't matter to them how many other people exist.
Pinker even agrees, stating that at the $1.90 line the absolute number of people in poverty has fallen.
But by another reckoning, absolute numbers matter too.
Every additional long-lived, healthy, well-fed, well-off person is a sentient being capable of happiness,
and the world is a better place for having more of them.
We live in a world not just with a smaller proportion of extremely poor people,
but with a smaller number of them, and with 6.6 billion people who are not extremely poor.
But this part of the narrative falls apart with higher poverty lines.
Since at $7.40 a day, the absolute number of people in poverty has actually gone up.
Turning to the third and final point, should we admit China or other high-performing economies in East Asia?
This would seem to be loading the dice,
because emitting the most successful and populous countries in the world
would obviously have an outsized impact on global trends.
If you're asking the simple question of whether poverty is declining globally,
it makes no sense to exclude China, since it's a fifth of the world's population.
But as you might have suspected, debates over the data hide some fundamental political differences.
Hickel excludes China in some cases because he is arguing against the neoliberal narrative
that decreasing poverty owes to free markets and globalization.
China is a country with a heavy degree of state intervention,
ranging from currency controls to state-owned enterprises to massive public investment.
These went directly against neoliberal recommendations from the World Bank and IMF,
as did other success stories such as South Korea.
By engaging in these policies,
China has made not just progress at the lower poverty lines, but at the higher ones too.
And it's one of the few countries that have achieved this.
Pinker is no free marketeer, having stressed the importance of social spending.
Social spending for the elderly, for children, for the sick, for the unlucky,
that's not incompatible with a free market.
And in fact, some of the countries with the strongest social safety nets
also were the ones with the most economic freedom.
And yet, I'd still characterize him as a soft neoliberal.
His response to Hickel on this point revealed a lot.
The political agenda of Hickel and other far-leftists is obvious.
It's humiliating to their worldview that the data show massive improvements due to markets and globalization,
rather than an overfrag of capitalism and global redistribution.
Pinker also insisted he was siding with the experts and accused Hickel of being a Marxist ideologue.
Whether you agree with Hickel or not, he is an expert on the poverty data,
and ultimately Pinker was unable to engage on the detail.
You say widely accepted, but this is my point, you don't acknowledge in the book,
there's no caveats where you say, for example, Professor Lance Pritchett,
Harvard colleague of yours, a development economist who studies his stuff, says,
the poverty line shouldn't be $1.90, it should be $12, $15 a day.
And when you make that simple statistical change, the entire picture of poverty changes,
and the arguments in your book basically fall apart, do they not?
No, I don't think so. Again, maybe by...
A statistical change, this is the problem of relying on data.
You change the measurement and everything changes.
Well, not everything changes, because there can be...
That's a rather extreme redefinition, that's multiplying by a factor of six.
He's one of the world's experts on the subject, you're not, with respect, this is his field.
You could have included the caveats and said, look, there's a bunch of experts who don't agree
that poverty is not... You declare as fact that poverty is falling.
Plenty of development experts disagree with you, is what I'm asking.
Yeah, some do, but if it's a question of just absolute numbers, it's irrelevant.
If it's a question of whether we should set the poverty level at $2 or $3, that's irrelevant.
Over a wide range of estimates, the picture is the same.
Admitting China doesn't change the trend at lower poverty lines like $1.90,
but as China has made the most promising progress at higher poverty lines,
admitting it means even the proportion of people in poverty at higher lines has been roughly stagnant.
How exactly one would characterize China's economy is a discussion for another video,
but the fact that it has resisted the Western model of globalization certainly doesn't sit easily for Pinker's narrative.
To summarize, using proportions, the World Bank's data show that global poverty is declining at almost any sensible line,
though the most impressive decline is at levels that are probably too low.
Using absolute numbers, poverty has fallen for low lines but increased for high lines.
Admitting China, the proportion of people in poverty has fallen noticeably for low poverty lines, but only slightly for higher poverty lines.
It's useful to know all this, but ultimately these debates obscure the more straightforward question asked by Hickel and others.
Why does poverty still exist?
If you see people as just born into poverty naturally and wealth as the aberration,
you will be more concerned about proportions and declines over time, as humanity gradually escapes the poverty trap.
If you see poverty as an aberration, enforced by capitalism or other systems, you'll naturally view any remaining poverty as morally indefensible.
We have seen that poverty may well not be the natural state of man,
and wealth creation as we know it has often had adverse consequences for poverty, especially in the early stages.
We have seen that the global economy delivers some growth to the poorest, but this may not be enough to meet their basic needs,
and the countries which have done enough have entered the global economy on their own terms.
In order to answer the question of whether poverty should exist at all, I next want to turn to the general question of how wealth is distributed.
Hey everyone, my name is Sam and I run a YouTube channel called We're in Hell.
Now that you're done eating your vegetables with Yui, it's time for some nice wishy-washy theatrical left tube content.
This is an excerpt from my video on Pinker, where I'm going to talk about happiness and why it's bad.
In one of the chapters in Enlightenment Now, Pinker discusses happiness and tries to show that it neatly rises along with GDP.
To do this, he cites quantitative data from happiness researchers, but there's a bit of a problem with this.
First of all, there are studies that contradict the ones Pinker cites that show that citizens of wealthier countries are no happier.
Pinker relies on one study, which does show a correlation between happiness and economic growth,
however, for some reason he doesn't include any of the criticisms that have been made about that study, namely that they use too small a sample size.
But also, as Pinker discusses, data on happiness are collected by just asking people how happy they are.
But as Sarah Ahmed points out in her book The Promise of Happiness, this is a methodological problem with the study of happiness as a whole,
since when we talk about happiness, we don't just mean feeling good, but generally think of being happy as synonymous with a well-lived life.
To ask someone how happy they are is almost akin to asking them how successful they are, which is far from a neutral question.
In addition to hard numbers, Pinker also does a cursory vibe check of the literature from other time periods.
And so, in my video, we're going to look into modern artistic trends too.
And to do this, we're going to be using what is, at least on its face, the most mushy, feels-over-real school of analysis out there, affect theory.
Affect theory is an analytic discipline that studies feelings, how they work, how we think of them, and what they are.
It's sort of the science of vibes.
As Warren Burlant, who actually tragically passed away very recently at the age of 63, notes,
affect theory can be incredibly useful for analyzing the current moment.
Like, for something like the Enlightenment, for example, since we have historical hindsight, it's a lot easier for us to look back and make sense of its causes,
effects, who was involved, or if you're Steven Pinker, just make a bunch of shit up.
But in the present moment, it's a lot harder to do those kinds of things.
For instance, a lot of scholars think that we are now in the period of post-postmodernism.
But since we're currently in the middle of that moment, it's very hard to say anything definite about it, other than that it desperately needs a better name than post-postmodernism.
This is where affect theory can be really useful, because one thing that we can know about the present historical period is how it feels.
And how it feels is...
What Burlant argued is that the affect that defines our current moment is what they called cruel optimism.
And their explanation of this is just the best description of a toxic relationship that I've ever heard.
A relation of cruel optimism exists when something you desire is actually an obstacle to your flourishing.
It might involve food or a kind of love.
It might be a fantasy of the good life or a political project.
It might rest on something simpler too, like a new habit that promises to induce in you an improved way of being.
These kind of optimistic relations are not inherently cruel.
They become cruel only when the object that draws your attachment actively impedes the aim that brought you to it initially.
An example of cruel optimism would be something like smoking.
You might pick it up to fit in, but ultimately it winds up being an obstacle to that goal by causing you to die.
And then no one wants to hang out at a party with the decomposing corpse.
In Gassan Hague's book Against Paranoid Nationalism, he argues that society can be thought of as a mechanism for distributing hope.
An example of how cruel optimism fits into Hague's theories is in a talk Slavoj Žižek gave in London after being caught rifling through the compost in search of dinner,
he discussed how the labour movement was unable to prevent the rise of Margaret Thatcher.
Žižek argued that the left was unable to prevent the working class from voting for Thatcher because while they focused on economic inequalities,
Thatcher was instead able to provide her voters with the fantasy, or as Hague would call it, hope of a better future.
Thatcher, racistly, argued that there was such a thing as a British character and that anyone who had the British character had the potential for upward mobility.
This promise of a better future was so powerful that it overrode the fact that her policies were directly responsible for worsening the lives of the very people who bought into it.
One of the interesting observations Hague makes about this hope distribution system is why countries let in refugees.
In addition to providing cheap labour, accepting refugees serves to legitimize a country by showing that they've produced so much hope that they can afford to give some away to the less fortunate.
Coming back to Pinker now, I think this raises a good question about his book. What and who is Enlightenment now for?
In Jason Hickel, one of Stephen Pinker's biggest critics book, The Divide, he mentions a well that was donated by the US in the West Bank of Palestine.
The well features a big sign that says it's a gift from the American people, but Palestine doesn't need wells. Not really.
Their water shortage comes from the fact that Israel, with the support of the US, takes about 90% of Palestine's water for settlements and won't let Palestinians deepen their wells to get at what water is left.
The well and the sign aren't there to help Palestinians. They're there for Americans to feel good knowing their government has produced so much hope that they can give a little away for free.
Pinker's work serves a very similar purpose, to deliver hope to justify neoliberal capitalism. Not for those most negatively affected by it, but those enjoying its rewards.
Like, giving a copy of Enlightenment now to someone living on $2 a day, expecting them to be cheered up by the fact that crime in America has been decreasing since the 90s is straight up serial killer shit.
And Pinker is explicit about this.
If you're reading this, you're not dead, starving, destitute, moribund, terrified, enslaved, or illiterate, which means that you're in no position to turn your nose up at these values.
Oh my god, he admitted.
Anyway, for more theatrical, even softer science, check out my video about Pinker. Now, back to the rant, Sona.
To put it mildly, Stephen Pinker's chapter on inequality leaves a lot to be desired. It is one-sided and full of strange red herrings that distract the reader.
His view of economics in general seems to be filtered largely through libertarians, including instances where he cites more left-wing sources, but seems to rely largely on right-wing critiques of them.
For example, Pinker's overall view of distribution is summed up nicely by the following passage.
The need to explain the creation of wealth is obscured yet again by political debates within modern societies on how wealth ought to be distributed, which presuppose that wealth worth distributing exists in the first place.
Economists speak of a lump fallacy or physical fallacy, in which a finite amount of wealth has existed since the beginning of time, like a load of gold, and people have been fighting over how to divide it up ever since.
Hmm, that's an interesting claim because I'm an economist and I never hear anyone speak of these fallacies. I wonder what his source is?
Soul. Your time will come.
Put simply, there's no contradiction between wanting growth and wanting to redistribute its proceeds. Pinker is presenting a false choice.
Yeah, that's right, I can name fallacies too, and this one's actually real.
If discussions about distribution presuppose that wealth exists, then it's a good thing wealth does exist. Now we can discuss redistributing it.
This was the approach of Thomas Piketty, who Pinker decides to include in his critique.
Even experts repeat the lump fallacy, presumably out of rhetorical zeal rather than conceptual confusion.
Thomas Piketty, whose 2014 bestseller Capital in the 21st Century became a talisman in the uproar over inequality, wrote,
The poor a half of the population are as poor today as they were in the past, with barely 5% of total wealth in 2010, just as in 1910.
But total wealth today is vastly greater than it was in 1910, so if the poor a half own the same proportion, they are far richer, not as poor.
It's generous of Pinker to acknowledge that Piketty, the world-leading economist on the subject of inequality, might actually know what he's talking about and just be falling prey to rhetorical zeal.
Piketty's book documents the process of economic growth leading to increased wealth over time, approvingly and in detail, painful detail.
It is literally impossible to miss, unless your view is based on a quote from an article criticizing the book.
Here are some other Piketty quotes.
The material conditions of life have clearly improved dramatically since the Industrial Revolution, allowing people around the world to eat better, dress better, travel, learn, obtain medical care and so on.
Hence there is no doubt that economic growth led to a significant improvement in standard of living over the long run.
The only way to accurately gauge the spectacular increase in standards of living since the Industrial Revolution is...
He talks about the measurements we've just covered.
Even the quote Pinker uses is part of a section warning not to underestimate the absolute gains by the middle class just because inequality is high.
To sum up, although Piketty is clearly concerned about inequality, he doesn't commit the so-called lump fallacy for any reason.
Piketty just doesn't like the social consequences of uneven growth and favours redistribution, most notably with a wealth tax. We'll return to that later.
When he is not misrepresenting people, Pinker makes the case that inequality basically doesn't matter.
The starting point for understanding inequality in the context of human progress is to recognise that income inequality is not a fundamental component of well-being.
It is not like health, prosperity, knowledge, safety, peace and the other areas of progress I examine in these chapters.
The reason is captured in an old joke from the Soviet Union.
Igor and Boris are dirt-poor peasants, barely scratching enough crops from their small plots of land to feed their families.
The only difference between them is that Boris owns a scrawny goat.
One day, a fairy appears to Igor and grants him a wish.
Igor says, I wish that Boris's goat should die.
The point of the joke, of course, is that the two peasants have become more equal but that neither is better off, aside from Igor's indulging his spiteful envy.
Of course, it's a fantastic joke and Pinker's rendition does it full justice, but it's quite distracting because it doesn't get at the reasons people are concerned about inequality.
Something Pinker subtly concedes as the chapter goes on and he has to acknowledge the real arguments against his position.
Specifically, what if some of the things Pinker values, like health, have a relationship with inequality?
To this end, he meanders through a critique of a famous book known as The Spirit Level, which linked a variety of societal ills to inequality including obesity, crime, mental health and bullying.
I am of the view that the original Spirit Level made a limited case for its conclusions and that the authors are too zealous in their quest to link inequality to all social ills.
Despite that, there's definitely more here than Pinker lets on.
His treatment is brief and one-sided, mostly accepting the conclusions of a book written shortly after the Spirit Level called The Spirit Level Delusion.
No prizes for guessing which side of the debate that author came down on.
Pinker says,
The Spirit Level theory has been called The Left's New Theory of Everything and it is as problematic as any other theory that leaps from a tangle of correlations to a single cause explanation.
I find it hard to process the irony of this coming from a guy who has presented 75 graphs showing things improving over time and attributed them all to enlightenment ideas, a literal theory of everything from correlations.
I mean, at least inequality is actually a measurable independent variable.
The major emission by Pinker here is a follow-up book by the same authors called The Inner Level, which I found more convincing than its predecessor because it identified status anxiety as a key mechanism for the link between inequality and social problems.
This graph shows data from around 30 rich countries on the degree of agreement with the statement,
Some people look down on me because of my job situation or income, which is taken as a measure of anxiety about your status on the y-axis.
As the number for status anxiety doesn't have an intuitive interpretation, the authors have just labeled it high and low.
Countries are split into those with high inequality, the solid line, medium inequality, the dot dash line, and low inequality, the dashed line.
The x-axis goes up the income distribution for a given type of country, from the poorest in a country on the left to the richest in a country on the right.
Status anxiety is higher for the poorest within each country, but it is also higher at every income desal for less equal countries.
You are more likely to suffer from status anxiety if you are in a low income group or if you are in the same income group in a less equal country.
The general idea here is that inequality and relative poverty get under the skin and cause various types of psychological and physiological distress.
Status anxiety has been shown to increase the levels of cortisol in the blood, a widely used biological measure of stress.
Through this mechanism and others, it seems that those who are lower on the socioeconomic ladder face additional health problems.
The relationship between inequality and health outcomes enjoys quite a lot of support in public health, as the biologist Robert Sapolsky has summarized.
Thus, unequal cultures make people less kind. Inequality also makes people less healthy.
This helps explain a hugely important phenomenon in public health, namely the socioeconomic status or SES and health gradient.
As noted, in culture after culture, the poorer you are, the worse your health, the higher the incidence and impact of numerous diseases and the shorter your life expectancy.
Extensive research has examined the SES health gradient. Four quick rule-outs.
A. The gradient isn't due to poor health driving down people's SES. Instead, low SES, beginning in childhood, predicts subsequent poor health in adulthood.
It's not that the poor have lousy health and everyone else is equally healthy. Instead, for every step down the SES ladder, starting from the top, average health worsens.
The gradient isn't due to less health care access for the poor. It occurs in countries with universal health care, is unrelated to utilization of health care systems, and occurs for diseases unrelated to health care access.
Only about a third of the gradient is explained by lower SES equaling more health risk factors, such as lead in your water, nearby toxic waste dumps, more smoking and drinking, or fewer protective factors, everything from better mattresses for overworked backs to health club memberships.
All together, this is comprehensive evidence that inequality and relative poverty create problems for people's health through mechanisms such as stress and anxiety.
With research ruling out alternative explanations, such as reverse causality or lifestyle choices.
So Polsky also points out that basically the same argument that applies to health can be applied to crime. Here is Pinker's intellectual dark web buddy, Jordan Peterson, acknowledging this fact.
Now, one question is, where is the crime? And you might think, well, the crime is where the absolute poverty is high, right, or the absolute wealth is low. That's where the crime is.
That's wrong. If things are relatively distributed in an egalitarian manner, the male on male crime, especially homicide, is low. And it's also the case where everyone is rich.
But if you go into places where there's some rich people, but not very many, and there's a lot of people who are comparatively poor, then the male homicide rates and violent crime rates amp up substantially.
And it's a consequence of male on male competition.
None of this is certain, of course, but it's a much more credible hypothesis than Pinker gives it credit for.
Instead of engaging with this work, Pinker chooses to focus on inequality and happiness, which is besides the point because happiness makes up a small part of the spirit level.
Anyway, here he relies on a cross-country study showing inequality has no effect on self-reported happiness. But the study is a bit of an outlier.
There is a large literature I'm familiar with and Pinker ignores, which asks whether people's happiness depends on comparisons of their income with others.
A 2008 review by Clark et al lists a few papers.
Germans engage in comparisons to those richer than them. People in the US compare themselves to others in the same state.
People in rural China are happier when they are above the average income within their village.
Job satisfaction in the UK depends on comparison with the pay of colleagues.
Life satisfaction in Latin America depends on comparisons in local areas.
A socially acceptable standard of living is likely to depend on the average income of a society.
Those who are unable to attain this standard may face shame, anxiety, and be shut out of social interaction.
This dynamic was noticed by Adam Smith, an Enlightenment thinker if there ever was one.
By necessaries, I understand not only the commodities which are indispensably necessary for the support of life,
but whatever the custom of the country renders it indecent for creditable people, even of the lowest order, to be without.
A linen shirt, for example, is, strictly speaking, not a necessary of life.
But in the present times, through the greater part of Europe, a creditable day labourer would be ashamed to appear in public without a linen shirt.
Custom, in the same manner, has rendered leather shoes a necessary of life in England.
The poorest creditable person of either sex would be ashamed to appear in public without them.
Under necessaries, therefore, I comprehend not only those things which nature,
but those things which the established rules of decency have rendered necessary to the lowest rank of people.
Pinker is more than aware that social interaction is a human need.
At one point, he describes social isolation as torture, but he fails to link this to economic inequality.
It is fair to say that abstract notions of income and wealth inequality can fail to get people's attention,
possibly because we struggle to comprehend the magnitudes involved, or to link them to reality.
Some people have done a fairly good job of trying to bridge this gap in our understanding.
I think it's often people forget the difference between a millionaire and a billionaire.
Counting the numbers to a million would take you 12 days. Counting the numbers to a billion would take you 31 years.
The scale of a billion dollars is really crazy, so let's say one grain of rice is equivalent to 100k,
and 10 grains of rice would be then a million. Well, how much is a billion?
That is a billion dollars, where each grain of rice is worth 100k.
For me at least, regional inequality makes this the most vivid.
In my own country of the UK, London and the South East have pulled ahead while the North, Wales and Scotland have faced relative decline.
By any reasonable measure, almost everyone in these areas remains well above absolute poverty.
The median income in the northwest city of Blackpool puts it at a multiple of even the highest proposed international poverty lines.
And yet, the level of deprivation is obvious from a journey through the town centre, where there are empty shops and crumbling infrastructure.
The population has an array of health problems, both physical and mental.
There are a few opportunities that grant a stable income and those that do a hard work with long hours.
Houses are beset by dirt and damp. Health and education systems are subpar. I could go on.
The doctors in Blackpool have taken to calling the condition that ails many of their patients shit life syndrome.
Shit life syndrome is clearly not on the par with the absolute poverty experienced by the world's poorest.
But it is also a condition that most of us understand we wouldn't want any human being to be in.
And the name shows that doctors recognise it's something they can't do much about with a 15 minute meeting because it's caused by broader systemic factors.
Pinker is keen to emphasise that measures of economic progress, like GDP, are actually underestimates of the growth of prosperity
because of the availability and quality of goods which didn't even exist in the past, like fridges or microwaves.
But he misses that despite this growth of consumer goods, day to day existence in rich countries can still be a struggle to meet basic needs.
This graph shows the proportion of their income people in the UK spend on the basics, housing, food and drink, transport, communication, clothing, health and education.
Each bar shows the total spent on the basics in a year and the different categories are represented by the different shades.
Together, basic needs were just under three quarters of consumption in 1988 and just over two thirds of consumption in 2019, a slight decline.
You may own a microwave but be continually faced with the threat of eviction or of the electricity which powers the microwave being cut off.
This is hardly cause for celebration.
Participating meaningfully in a society with a given level of wealth requires access to a certain proportion of that wealth, even for the basics because their price scales with average income.
This also explains why some of the world's most deprived people live in unequal middle income countries like Brazil.
It explains why Piketty is concerned about the proportion of wealth the poor have, not just the absolute amount.
Contrary to what Steven Pinker says, inequality is a fundamental component of human wellbeing.
It is intertwined with social inclusion, which is itself a human need.
Inequality can lead to stress and anxiety, which is why it has been linked to health outcomes, to crime and to self-reported happiness.
As I mentioned earlier, Pinker is not against all social spending and he even makes some recommendations to expand it, some of which I agree with.
His view is probably best summed up by the philosopher Harry Frankfurt, who he quotes,
From the point of view of morality, it is not important everyone should have the same.
What is morally important is that each should have enough.
But in this part of the video, we've seen that enough is often relative to the society you're in and cannot be determined by a high income compared to the past.
If Pinker's review of the effects of inequality is one-sided, his view on its causes is virtually non-existent.
He tends to attribute every change in the modern income distribution to the vagaries of markets and globalization, without discussing specific policies.
In this part of the video, I want to look at how existing inequality has come about and what we might do to reduce it.
As Thomas Piketty and others have documented, inequality within rich countries has generally gotten worse over the past few decades.
One measure of this is the share of income going to labor, as opposed to capital, shown in this graph over time for the US, the dash line, the UK, the dotted line, and the G7, the solid line.
The labor share has declined in all of them since the 1970s.
I'm choosing the labor share rather than other measures of inequality which have also increased, for reasons which will become clear shortly.
Pinker correctly identifies that a reason some people might be concerned about inequality rising is because that inequality is a reflection of unfairness.
People can be incredulous that any one person truly deserves an income hundreds or thousands of times higher than anybody else, as it seems to conflict with basic values about equality.
So why does Pinker think some people get so rich?
Updating a famous thought experiment by the philosopher Robert Nozick, he argues that inequality results from voluntary choices.
Among the world's billionaires is J.K. Rowling, author of the Harry Potter novels, which have sold more than 400 million copies and have been adapted into a series of films seen by a similar number of people.
Suppose that a billion people have handed over 10 dollars each for the pleasure of a Harry Potter paperback or movie ticket, with a tenth of the proceeds going to Rowling.
She has become a billionaire, increasing inequality, but she has made people better off, not worse off, which is not to say that every rich person has made people better off.
This doesn't mean that Rowling's wealth is just desserts for her effort or skill, or a reward for the literacy and happiness she added to the world.
No committee ever judged that she deserved to be that rich.
Her wealth arose as a byproduct of the voluntary decisions of billions of book buyers and moviegoers.
I must confess that I've never found Nozick's thought experiment particularly persuasive, while each individual in the example consents to giving J.K. Rowling their own money, they don't consent to anyone else giving J.K. Rowling money.
Only a tiny part of the resulting distribution can be said to be voluntary for each person, and the thought experiment depends on a switch from individually voluntary to collectively voluntary actions.
Viewed through this lens, inequality is a kind of collective action problem.
Individually, we each make market decisions that result in a situation we may not be happy with when they're aggregated, especially when it results in more rambling and defensive, fantastic beast films.
All of this is a moot point anyway because Pinker's harmonious description of the growth of inequality simply doesn't fit the facts, and he actually makes little attempt to establish that it does, instead opting for these thought experiments.
When we stop engaging in thought experiments and look at actual things that are happening, it's easy to see that the economy is currently designed to funnel money upwards, both globally and within countries.
This is a result of deliberate legal, economic, social and institutional changes.
As a simple example, both the 2008 and coronavirus crisis saw billions of dollars poured into companies which have paid huge bonuses to their executives while neglecting or even shedding workers.
To get more detailed on the political choices that have led to existing inequality, let's have a look at membership of unions, which is known to have declined over the past few decades.
These graphs show union membership and the share of output going to the top 10% of earners over time, in the UK on the left and the US on the right.
It's clear that for both countries, union membership is inversely correlated with the income of the top 10%. Correlations can only take us so far, of course, but these are pretty striking.
A recent paper by Anna Stansbury and Larry Summers investigates this question in more detail and finds that the bargaining power of labour is the biggest factor in explaining the rise of inequality in the USA.
Their paper is technically complex, but there are a few graphs which illustrate their point nicely.
They find that the wage bonus of being in a union has fallen by about 29%. More generally, what they call labour rents, which you can think of as labour's share of the surplus of corporations, fell from about 11% in 1985 to about 6% in 2015, as shown by this graph.
I encourage you to take these numbers, as with all numbers, with a pinch of salt. But there was an especially interesting part of the paper which I think gets at the crucial question of whether globalisation intensified competition and therefore destroyed the income available to workers.
In this view, workers lost out simply because their industries had to tighten their belts in the face of international competition, and globalisation is what caused the decline in the domestic middle class.
The first graph shows a measure of profitability against a measure of import penetration.
It's not funny. It's not even funny.
So what does import penetration mean?
It measures the exposure of an industry to international trade. The higher it is, the more likely an industry is to face competition from abroad.
In this case, the x-axis shows the change in import penetration specifically from low-wage countries.
This should capture the rise in the type of international competition which has undercut industries and workers in rich countries.
Each dot on the graph is a particular industry, like textiles or furniture.
The y-axis shows the industry's change in profitability over the same period.
As we'd expect, this graph shows that more competition for an industry, as shown by the change in low-wage import penetration, is correlated with a lower change in profits for that industry, with many industries experiencing declining profitability over the period.
But what does this mean for labour?
Conventional wisdom would have it that exposure to trade intensifies competition and therefore that there is less to go around for both labour and for capital, but this isn't obviously the case.
The x-axis in this graph once again measures the change in low-wage import penetration, but the y-axis now has the change in the wage premium in an industry, one measure of labour's rents.
This is actually higher, the more exposed the industry is to international trade, so labour enjoyed higher rents in the industry's most affected by imports coming from low-wage countries.
Finally, this graph keeps the change in the wage premium on the y-axis, but now the x-axis shows the change in unionisation.
A higher wage premium in an industry is correlated with more unionisation in that industry.
Together, these graphs show that globalisation does not appear to be associated with a destruction of labour rents, because industries with high competition from low-wage countries still had high wage premiums for their workers.
However, the graphs do show that industries with more unions have higher labour incomes.
Inequality is all about the bargaining power of labour, whether your industry is facing competition from abroad or not.
A recent and thorough report by the Economic Policy Institute investigates the drivers of inequality in more depth for the USA.
Reasons they give for the decline in labour share of income over the past few decades include
the decline of unions, high unemployment engineered by central bank policy, reduced labour rights, for instance wage theft, lower minimum wages and the rise of subcontracting,
concentration of monopoly power, buoyed by deregulation, especially lax antitrust, legal changes that have favoured companies and undercut workers such as non-compete agreements which limit employment options.
These all have in common that they are deliberate policy choices rather than mystical trends which supposedly underlie everything.
Pinker just doesn't engage with this type of evidence on inequality, even the widely discussed stuff like unions and the rise of monopolies.
This is a reflection of how shallow his economic analysis is in general and why you should never get your opinions from libertarians.
Understanding this also leads naturally to ways of reducing inequality by increasing wages.
We could simply reverse or change these policy decisions without having to design any fancy new policies.
Redistribution could also involve higher taxes and transfers to give money from the richer to the poorer.
I know that's a point so obvious that it's barely worth mentioning, but Pinker doesn't seriously consider it.
Arguably the most disingenuous part of the book is where he observes that historically, reductions in inequality have been caused by the four horsemen of war, epidemics, revolution and state collapse,
and therefore concludes that reductions in inequality are bad.
Or is it when he blames Bernie Sanders supporters for Trump? So much competition.
This just muddies the waters given the numerous sensible policy options available.
As this graph shows, there are a wide range of countries that use taxes and transfers to reduce inequality effectively without going to war.
The x-axis shows countries while the y-axis shows their Gini index, a measure of inequality.
For each country, you can see a flat horizontal line, below which is a dotted vertical line that leads down to a diamond.
The flat line is the income distribution before taxes and transfers, and the diamond is the distribution afterwards.
With the vertical dotted line measuring the difference between the two.
There are a lot of interesting things about this graph.
Clearly, every tax system shown is somewhat redistributive.
The diamond is below the horizontal line for every country.
However, the richer countries on the left have much longer dotted lines, while countries on the right, like Indira and Mexico, barely redistribute at all.
Also interesting is that Germany and Finland, both known for being relatively egalitarian countries,
actually have similar pre-tax inequality to countries like the UK and US, who are known for being less equal.
I just emphasised the use of institutional changes to reduce inequality before taxes,
but clearly, direct redistribution must also play a role in reducing inequality for market economies.
Despite his red herring of the four horsemen, Pinker later implicitly concedes taxes and transfers can reduce inequality like this.
But he has a habit of straw-manning inequality reduction as only taking from the rich, rather than also giving to the poor.
We saw this with his weird Boris and Igor joke earlier, but he repeats it throughout the book and also in the Mehdi Hassan interview.
When Push comes to shove, Pinker is keen to draw the emphasis away from all this,
in favour of the glistening of the world's most important economic and economic development.
The question is, what is the most important economic and economic development in the world?
The most important economic development in the world is the economic and economic development.
When Pinker comes to shove, Pinker is keen to draw the emphasis away from all this, in favour of the global distribution of wealth,
which he argues has become more equal.
As globalization and technology have lifted billions out of poverty and created a global middle class,
international and global inequality have decreased, at the same time that they enrich elites whose analytical, creative or financial impact has global reach.
The fortunes of the lower classes in developed countries have not improved nearly as much, but they have improved,
often because their members rise into the upper classes.
The improvements are enhanced by social spending and by the falling cost and rising quality of the things people want.
In some ways, the world has become less equal, but in more ways, the world's people have become better off.
He gets this view from the so-called elephant graph from Lakhnar and Milanovic,
depicting the growth in incomes across the global income distribution from the fall of the Berlin Wall up until the global financial crisis.
The elephant shape comes because the gains at the very bottom of the global distribution on the left hand of the graph have been low.
Moving right along the x-axis, we can see they are much higher for the global middle class, are low again for the middle class of rich countries,
and are high again for the very rich.
This paints a picture of globalization as a largely positive, albeit flawed process,
compressing the global income distribution by creating a much larger global middle class while neglecting the middle classes of the rich world,
which have seen high and possibly rising income inequality within their borders.
But the elephant graph hides an assumption which is pervasive in these debates.
These are relative changes, expressed in percentages.
If you look at the raw changes in income, shown on this graph, the income gains are largely flattened at the bottom of the distribution
and the graph takes the familiar hockey stick shape, albeit with a slight bump in the middle due to the impressive growth of China and other southeast Asian countries.
This is also in Lakhnar and Milanovic's original paper, though the elephant version has been shared more widely.
Although incomes rose by 60% for both the top 1% and those in the middle of the global income distribution,
this was an absolute increase of $23,000 for the top 1%, but just $800 for the middle.
The rich gained the same in relative terms, but 30 times as much in absolute terms.
The elephant shows the former measurement, while the hockey stick shows the latter.
Remember this animation showing the global income distribution has become more equal?
It has the same problem. It has been transformed to show relative changes,
so moving along the x-axis on the left-hand side increases the amount by less than moving along the x-axis on the right-hand side.
The implication of this is pretty clear.
Almost all of the growth in the global economy was captured by those at the top of the distribution, failing to go to those who need it most.
Jason Hickel has calculated it will take 100 years to eliminate even the most extreme level of poverty by sticking to the current growth model and 200 years for his higher poverty line.
In fact, recent progress in poverty amounts to the poorest gaining two cents a year.
This is meager and easily reversible, as we've seen during the pandemic.
One paper by the World Bank estimated that reducing inequality within countries would be a more effective way of eliminating absolute poverty than relying on economic growth.
Everything is... wait... no.
I have focused on rich countries, particularly the USA, in my discussion of inequality.
But as within countries, globalisation in practice has been characterised by deliberate policy decisions which have redistributed income upwards.
One example is intellectual property law, which has been thrust into the spotlight during the pandemic.
The economist Dean Baker has written that extensions in the length and scope of intellectual property have cost the US population more than $1 trillion annually,
money which mostly goes to wealthy individuals.
This is the home of Lars Ulrich, the drummer from Metallica.
Look, there's Lars now sitting by his pool.
What's the matter with him?
This month he was hoping to have a gold-plated shark tank bar installed right next to the pool,
but thanks to people downloading his music for free, he must now wait a few months before he can afford it.
IP has also been forced onto poorer countries via trade deals and has been estimated to cost poor countries $60 billion per year.
Beyond this pure economic cost, IP prevents the use of technologies which would help the countries to grow,
and high prices due to patents kill, being a huge factor in the AIDS crisis.
International organisations such as the World Bank, IMF and World Trade Organisation are generally slanted towards rich countries,
which practice protectionism at home while enforcing low trade barriers abroad.
The US and EU have significant tariffs and subsidies for their agricultural sectors, while poor countries are not allowed to do the same.
This is a reflection of the fact that such organisations are hugely undemocratic.
Votes are proportional to GDP so that non-OECD countries have under half the total votes at the World Bank, while the US has effective veto power at the IMF.
Even though the WTO is more nominally democratic, many poor countries simply lack the resources to engage meaningfully in trade negotiations.
One reason China has achieved such unprecedented growth is that it has managed to protect its economy,
but of course their labour standards and wages have still been low,
and for many countries becoming established in the global economy means taking advantage of low wages and poor labour conditions.
More power to set the agenda could result in better terms of trade for poorer countries, getting more money for what they produce.
Trade deals could favour labour rights and minimum wages, which would naturally distribute income downwards instead of upwards.
There is also the question of direct global redistribution.
We've seen the Biden administration make early motions towards what could be a global corporate tax regime.
A progressive global wealth tax, like that proposed by Thomas Piketty, could raise money and promote greater transparency and understanding of the global income distribution.
By taxing the assets of the wealthy, especially the very wealthy, we could learn more about how much money they really have, whilst also raising money to help the poorest in the world.
These would be radical changes, but so were the domestic income tax and welfare state when they were first proposed, which brings me to my conclusion.
Most of this video has covered the data and research Pinker uses to make his case, but I just have to comment on his writing style, which is atrocious.
Full of cliches, padding, tortured metaphors, unnecessary lists, and pretentious language.
He frequently caricatures those he disagrees with, rarely providing quotes or even citations for his characterisations of their arguments.
He's often been accused of quoting people out of context.
As we've seen, he often seems to filter his opinion of progressives through articles critical of them, raising questions of whether he's read them directly.
A particularly egregious example of all of this is from the beginning of Chapter 4, entitled Progressophobia.
Intellectuals hate progress. Intellectuals who call themselves progressive really hate progress.
It's not that they hate the fruits of progress, mind you.
Most pundits, critics, and their bien-pensants readers use computers rather than quills and inkwells, and they prefer to have their surgery with anesthesia rather than without it.
It's the idea of progress that rankles the chattering class, the enlightenment belief that by understanding the world, we can improve the human condition.
An entire lexicon of abuse has grown up to express their scorn.
If you think knowledge can help solve problems, then you have a blind faith and a quasi-religious belief in the outmoded superstition and false promise of the myth of the onward march of inevitable progress.
You are a cheerleader for vulgar American can-do-ism with the rah-rah spirit of boardroom ideology, Silicon Valley, and the Chamber of Commerce.
You are a practitioner of wig-history, a naive optimist, a Pollyanna, and of course a Pangloss, a modern-day version of the philosopher Involtes Candide, who asserts that all is for the best in the best of all possible worlds.
Wow, Stephen, after reading that, I'm really looking for a citation for who actually said those things. There are none. The citation on the next page doesn't contain them either.
I read two new optimist books in preparation for this video. Stephen Pinker's Enlightenment Now and Factfulness by Hans Rosling, as well as countless articles from sites like Our World in Data.
The third famous book is The Rational Optimist by Matt Ridley, but as it was released in 2010, it feels a bit dated now.
I'm also not going to read a book predicting that the future is bright from the man who was the chairman of Northern Rock when it became the first UK bank to fail in the 2008 financial crisis.
Anyway, to return to Rosling, his narrative is less sweeping and more credible than Pinker's. He chooses to wonder why people are so unaware of the largely positive developments in health, education, and population growth.
Time and time again, he shows that most people's answers to questions about these on multiple-choice tests are worse than random, and the bias towards thinking things are worse than they are.
The fact is that vaccinations, infant mortality, and life expectancy have gone through the roof because of concerted efforts by activists, medical experts, NGOs, governments, and public health campaigns.
Of course, no measure is beyond repute. The growth in vaccines is actually in the number of people with at least one vaccine,
which ignores the fact that Bill Gates' vaccination programs have been criticized for focusing on less deadly but easier-to-cure diseases like polio over bigger killers like malaria.
People may get one vaccine, but it may not be the one they really need.
Rosling is also guilty of a few chart crimes. Like Pinker, he is convinced that we get the world wrong due to various cognitive biases, which he calls instincts.
Chapter 1 is about the Gap Instinct, and in it, Rosling claims that the income distributions of Mexico and the US showed on the right overlap, so therefore, and I quote,
there is no gap. He conflates this with the much more overlapping distributions of men's and women's scores on maths tests to the left.
There's a gap, Hans. Do you see it there? The gap between them? Their income distributions are really, really different. There's a gap.
Rosling also has a page with a load of Things Getting Better, which curiously includes the raw number of films released. If I could pick one candidate to show that more isn't better, it would be films.
Well, or scientific research papers, which Rosling also includes. Most contemporary published research is wrong hands, there's too much of it. Still, overall, Rosling is more balanced than Pinker.
His refrain is that things are bad but better, which acknowledges the challenges we face. Towards the end of the book, he lists the five most pressing threats faced by the world. Top of his list is a global pandemic, pretty prescient,
considering the book was released in 2017. Bill Gates also has a well-circulated 2015 TED Talk warning about pandemics, so credit where credit's due.
Gates argues for the creation of a pandemic response team, as well as investment in health and research to reduce the threat.
The opening of this video, if you remember that far back, identified the pandemic as a reason to reflect on new optimism. And with Gates proposals, I've no doubt the world would have fared better.
But in typical fashion, neither him nor Rosling, let alone Pinker, go very far in thinking about how much of a challenge the pandemic or other crises might be for the existing economic system.
They are, as always, focused on technical and logistical solutions, but don't think about the broader context.
The pandemic has been called a magnifying glass for existing inequalities. It has hit hardest for those in poor countries, for the poorest within countries, for non-white people, and for women, even though the virus itself actually seems to affect men more.
Crises like these highlight the moral significance of inequality, because it's difficult to justify why some people should have a higher likelihood of infection and death than others, just because of their income, place of birth, or role in society.
The pandemic has also been a stark illustration of how the incomes we get through the market economy fail to reflect criteria of fairness and social value, or even to provide a reliable standard of living for the population.
As soon as the pandemic hit, everyone understood which occupations were essential, yet they were often those paid the least and have suffered disproportionately as a result of having to continue work and provide for the rest of us.
As essential work has continued, there have not been sustained shortages of the things we need in many places. It's just been that people can't buy them because market incomes have disappeared.
Every government has rushed to provide financial support to people and businesses simply because they lack the cash to survive.
Global poverty has ticked up, as has food insecurity, even within rich countries like the USA.
We are going to see all this play out again with increasing frequency and magnitude as the climate crisis worsens.
As I was writing this, Vice reported that migrant fruit pickers in the USA, some as young as 12, have been subjected to extreme temperatures and oppressive working conditions, with many suffering from severe heat stroke as a result.
Being pessimistic about the existing system would have better prepared us for the pandemic, not just with a nifty response team, but by reducing inequalities and designing ways of alleviating and sharing the burden economically.
And this is the failure of new optimism. It's not because the data and research they present is one-sided. It's not because the narratives they attach to that evidence are too sweeping for the evidence to bear.
It's because they miss that progress often means questioning the existing system, so a significant dose of pessimism is warranted.
In the 19th century, liberals were the ones who critiqued the old mercantilist system, where a nation's wealth was fought to derive from its gold and silver, rather than its ability to produce goods and services.
The mercantilist system had delivered improvements over time, until radical reforms accelerated those improvements and led to modern capitalism.
Saying we need radical changes actually has little to do with denying the advances we have already made. It just means that the system which got us here isn't the same as the one we need for the future.
To equate the critics of the existing system and the view that there has been no progress at all, Pinkler is forced to create huge strawmen like the one about progressives hating progress that we just saw.
True, he cautions against complacency and says things like past performance is no guarantee of future success.
He says he wants to identify the causes of progress so that we can continue to improve.
But in this video, we've seen that Pinker has failed to identify the key drivers of the economy, relying on the mysterious forces of markets and globalization,
instead of engaging with the specific policies that have led to the level and distribution of wealth that we see today.
He doesn't acknowledge the people and societies that are neglected by existing capitalism and the measures he uses, spending little time on capitalism's undeniable historical atrocities.
The growth which he loves has been the most significant in China and other Southeast Asian economies, which rejected his model of globalization to the extent that he has one.
He doesn't understand either the drivers or the consequences of inequality.
He refuses to grapple with the failure of the economic system to deliver significant and sustained poverty reduction in the face of unprecedented wealth.
Pinker makes some worthwhile proposals, but crucially, nothing he proposes ever really challenges those with wealth or power or elevates those who do.
By failing to critically interrogate inequalities in the economy and in society, Pinker's vision becomes an obstacle to progress.
Only by being critical of the present can we solve problems like poverty and inequality.
Only by being critical about the future can we prepare for events like pandemics and the climate crisis.
New optimism isn't optimistic at all.
If you think that the current system is not far from the ideal one, you have a deeply pessimistic view of what humanity can achieve.
If you have a pessimistic view of the existing system, you have an optimistic view of what humanity can achieve.
Progress comes from skepticism, from asking not if poverty has declined but why it still exists.
As Jared Lanier put it, the critics are the true optimists, because they believe things could be better.
Thanks for listening everybody, and thank you to my patrons as usual for supporting me.
This video is obviously very long and took longer to make than any of my other videos for that reason.
When I first started it, I was going to cover not just poverty and inequality, but Pinker on violence, the environment,
and also I was going to talk about mental health, loneliness and stress.
As you can see, it's good that I didn't do those things because otherwise the video would have been about three hours long and taken six months to make.
I also recommend that you watch Sam's video, which is much more on the philosophy of optimism and how it's used.
I think it fits quite nicely with my video, because we both have a similar perspective that pessimism can actually pave the way for optimism and for things being better.
I'm also going to do a stream with Sam and his friend Chill Goblin on YouTube pretty soon, and we'll be discussing Pinker as well as other things.
So I recommend you check that out. I'll probably post that on my feed.
I think I've rambled on for long enough now, so thanks again everybody.
I'll see you next time for a much shorter video on Worker Democracy.
Don't forget to like and subscribe.
Don't forget to like and subscribe.
Thank you for watching.
