Another frequent guest on my channel the means of destruction our audience member. It's another good name. Yeah
These are all great band names. I know there's another one chimbrazo. We'll get to that
He asked our stars alive. I'm gonna change that too
You know, what's the minimum? You know kind of astrophysical entity that you could say
It is alive or features life. Could you have a dark cloud like Arthur C. Clark or you know, what what's the minimum?
Common ancestry a plant into you know stellar astrophysical
prerequisite
Yeah, so so this is not the way I would ask that question. So I'm gonna answer
Yeah, so because it's kind of like what is life question and then what are other examples of life?
This is what we would canonically think and I just don't think that's the right way of framing it
What I would think is clearly we exist in the universe as life
Which means that the laws of physics are structured for life to exist and I'm interested in those laws that
Specifically explain life which my claim is are not the laws of physics as we know them now
They're different kind of law of physics and they have very different the laws of physics that explain life have very different properties
For example, they're not cast in this kind of initial state fixed law of motion kind of framework
Which we need to talk about but like that's an aside
But anyway, just imagine, you know, there there is some structure to the universe causal structure
The universe is a causal graph so to speak and assemble the space
Then everything has that property just like everything
Has the property of existing in space and time in in gravity, right?
Like there's a space-time manifold that defines the properties of the universe and then some
Physical systems like us are very high assembly and you could think of them like in the gravitational analogy as
Being objects that have very strong
Gravitational potential wells like planetary systems galaxies or black holes are good examples to study gravitational physics
Things that are good examples to say got causal structure in the universe or this kind of feature of information being causal or whatever
You want to call it or living things?
Now is that apparent and in other examples like stars or other kinds of systems?
We could study of course it should be because it's a sure of our universe
But the question is to what degree and so I wouldn't really call things alive
Unless they're very high assembly objects like the kind that we talk about in terms of molecular assembly
Theory, but assembly supposed to be general applied anything
And so I don't think stars have crossed that threshold, but I think that stars have
You know like you can think about the contingency in stellar generations and the kind of elemental distributions
They have they do have a clear this population of stars had to come before this population of stars
Otherwise there's no reason for this elemental distribution, so they have a causal structure associated to them
