This course is part of the superstar teacher's series.
The series is produced by the teaching company.
This course is titled, The American Dream.
The lecturer for this course is Dr. John K. Roth.
Dr. Roth is the Russell K. Pitzer Professor of Philosophy and Chair of the Department
of Philosophy and Religion at Claremont McKenna College in Claremont, California.
Roth received his bachelor's degree from Pomona College in 1962, graduating magna cum laude
and with honors in philosophy as a member of Phi Beta Kappa.
He joined the Claremont McKenna faculty in 1966 after taking his master's in Ph.D. in
philosophy at Yale University.
Number 1, The American Dream, from its past to its future.
Well good morning and welcome to the series, which I hope will be an enjoyable experience
for all of us, even in these distressing times in which we're living.
I like to begin each lecture with an epigraph, a kind of motto, a quotation from a thinker
that I'll be referring to as we go, and I'll try to signal those to you at the outset of
each part so that you can use them as kind of cues to keep track about where we are.
The first epigraph comes from a speech of Abraham Lincoln that I'll be referring to,
a speech in which he said, Fellow citizens, we cannot escape history.
And that is the epigraph for what I'm calling, I hope not too presumptuously, the preamble
to my series of lectures on the American Dream, borrowing a phrase from the Constitution
of the United States.
At first glance, a series of lectures on the American Dream may seem to be incredibly
far removed from the painful dilemmas of contemporary politics, but I submit that war in the Persian
Gulf and all the other difficulties we Americans face can neither be understood nor coped with
adequately apart from reflection on who we Americans are and what we stand for as a people.
Engaging in reflection of that kind, moreover, can surely make us ask, what about the American
Dream?
Replacing as it is, the present joins with the past and the future to make it especially
fitting now that we encounter the challenges and conflicts the pitfalls and promises contained
in that question.
While preparing and then rewriting these opening words as changing events required, I listened
not only to newscasts but also to music by Aaron Copeland, that well-loved American composer
who died at the age of 90 in 1990.
The son of Russian Jewish immigrants who fled anti-Semitism and pogroms, Copeland took
musical training in France, but it was American song and story that inspired him best.
His well-known fanfare was for the common man.
His Appalachian spring, perhaps the hallmark of American classical music, drew from folk
songs and the lovely shaker hymn called The Gift to Be Simple.
Those tunes and words, the memories and hopes they contain, are able to keep moving us all
the more because of Copeland's distinctive ways of evoking them.
Less familiar than those two pieces is another by Copeland that I especially love.
Maybe you know it too.
It is his 1942 Lincoln portrait.
Among its rich echoes of Stephen Foster melodies and American life are some of Abraham Lincoln's
words themselves.
Copeland's text takes many of its quotations from Lincoln's second annual message to Congress,
which was delivered on December 1, 1862, just a month before the Emancipation Proclamation
would declare freedom for all slaves in the areas still in rebellion to federal authority.
Copeland's portrait paints Lincoln as a quiet and melancholy man, and yet it stresses that
this is what Abe Lincoln said.
The dogmas of the quiet past Lincoln said are inadequate to the stormy present.
The occasion is piled high with difficulty, and we must rise to the occasion.
As our case is new, so we must think anew and act anew.
We must disenthrall ourselves, and then we shall save our country.
Fellow citizens said, Lincoln, we cannot escape history.
We of this Congress and this administration will be remembered in spite of ourselves.
No personal significance or insignificance can spare one or another of us.
The fiery trial through which we pass will light us down in honor or dishonor to the
latest generation.
We, even we here, hold the power and bear the responsibility.
In giving freedom to the slaves, said Lincoln, we assure freedom to the free, honorable alike
in what we give and what we preserve.
We shall nobly save or meanly lose the last best hope of earth.
When Abraham Lincoln wrote and spoke words like those, words as we shall see that are
so much a part of the American dream, he more than fulfilled the mandate set forth well
over a century later by Annie Dillard, one of our best contemporary authors.
Her 1990 book, one I recommend heartily to you, called The Writing Life, is about much
more than writing.
What she has to say is about thinking, acting, and even dreaming.
Her writing life, in short, is about life.
And here is what Annie Dillard says, write, she says, as if you were dying.
At the same time, assume you write for an audience consisting solely of terminal patience.
That is, after all, the case.
What would you begin writing, she asks, if you knew you would die soon?
What could you say to a dying person that would not enrage by its triviality?
What follows, your thoughts and mine, can hardly be expected to match the eloquence
of Abraham Lincoln or Annie Dillard.
Nonetheless, and especially in this stormy present, I hope that those thoughts will be
a response worthy of the best in the American dream by being worthy of Annie Dillard's questions
and Abraham Lincoln's insistence that we cannot escape history.
With that introduction or preamble then, we turn to the first lecture proper, a consideration
of the American dream from its past to its future.
And here the epigraph, following on the one that I cited from Abraham Lincoln, comes from
a person less well known, I'm sure, an American historian whose name was James Truslow Adams.
He is a distant relation of the famous Adams family from earlier in American history.
And the statement that I have uplifted from one of Adams' books called The Epic of America
is simply this.
He says, the epic loses all its glory without the dream.
The epic loses all its glory without the dream.
In 1971, a countercultural writer named Hunter S. Thompson published a novel called Fear
and Loathing in Las Vegas.
It details the surrealistic romp of a Dr. Duke as the character is called and his attorney.
Blasting through the desert in a huge Chevy convertible rented off a lot on the sunset
strip, they eventually find themselves somewhere on the northeast outskirts of Las Vegas, zooming
along Paradise Road.
Headed toward Boulder City, they stop at Terry's Taco Stand, USA, to find their way.
Let me explain it to you, Dr. Duke's attorney tells the waitress, let me run it down just
briefly if I can.
We're looking for the American dream and we were told it was somewhere in this area.
We were sent out here from San Francisco to look for the American dream by a magazine
to cover it.
The directions they get from the Taco Stand's waitress and cook whose name is Lou are none
too clear, but it seems that in one of its manifestations, the American dream may once
have been a discotheque known as the Old Psychiatrists Club.
Using those leads, Dr. Duke and his attorney finally locate what's left of the place.
A huge slab of cracked, scorched concrete in a vacant lot full of tall weeds, writes Thompson.
The owner of a gas station across the road said the place had burned down about three
years ago.
If we look for the American dream, what will we find?
Is the dream somewhere in this area?
Can anybody cover it?
Is it cracked, scorched, full of tall weeds burned down about three years ago?
Such questions began to concern me about the same time that Thompson's savage journey to
the heart of the American dream as he subtitled Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas got underway.
In particular, I had been sent from California to Austria where I spent an interesting year
interpreting American literature and philosophy, history and religion, to students at the University
of Innsbruck.
This was a real hardship assignment, as you can imagine.
To organize my teaching there, I began to reflect upon and study about the American dream's
diverse ingredients and variations, which make it appropriate to speak not only about
the American dream, but also about American dream's plural.
As fascinating as they are elusive, those ideas have held my attention ever since.
If you look for the American dream, or American dreams as ideas, if not for the dream itself,
you will find those concepts suggesting many themes in many places.
It is hard to cover them all, but instructive to try as I want to illustrate at the beginning
of this series of lectures.
My illustrations come from a collection I keep.
The collection consists of references to or uses of the American dream idea in popular
culture.
Some years ago, for instance, I was at the bar atop one of Tokyo's largest hotels.
That evening, the featured drink, which contained large portions of Kentucky bourbon, was called
the American dream.
More recently, our refrigerator's freezer at home contains ice cream called American
dream.
Maybe some of you have seen this.
This product comes in nine not-so-delicious flavors, none of them containing Kentucky
bourbon.
But it is healthier than the drink in the Tokyo hotel.
The promotion for this product claims that dreams do come true, because this ice cream,
if one can really call it that, is cholesterol and 99% fat-free.
Why would a potent alcoholic drink and fat-free ice cream get linked with the American dream?
If there is not sufficient food for thought in those relationships, consider a few more.
There is a new restaurant outside Atlanta, Georgia called the American dream diner.
I know about this because I have a network of friends who send me things about the American
dream and a friend in Atlanta sent me a newspaper story about this new restaurant in Atlanta
called the American dream diner.
It's a 50s style eatery featuring nostalgia, a soda fountain for Micah booze and tables,
neon jukeboxes, black and white tiled floors, a mural of classic 50s automobiles and a menu
to match.
Meanwhile, a grocery store chain in Southern California designed its paper bags with an
anniversary proclamation that said, celebrating 50 years of the American dream.
Nostalgia trips and anniversary celebrations, particularly one involving a grocery bag that
can be empty as well as full.
These artifacts communicate something more significant about Americans and their dreams
than meets the eye at first glance?
Keeping that question in mind, consider some other items from my American dream collection.
Many of them come from popular music.
Bruce Springsteen's song, Born to Run, speaks about a runaway American dream.
Jackson Brown's lyrics in a song called For America refer to the nation's shining dream
and call for waking her up this time.
For Crosby Still's Nash and Young, one song was not enough.
They produced an album called American Dream.
Its title track repeats a chorus, American dream, American dream, don't know where things
went wrong, might have been when you were young and strong.
Tracy Chapman echoes that sentiment in Across the Lines, which speaks of race riots that
kill the dream of America.
More upbeat are the Oak Ridge Boys, whose fans include President George Bush.
Apparently inspired by his January 1989 presidential inaugural, they matched Crosby Still's Nash
and Young by producing a record called American Dreams.
Bruce Jacket notes that the music expresses gratitude to a country where if you follow
your dreams and work hard, the opportunities to succeed in life are there for you, no matter
who you are.
The Oak Ridge Boys' rendition of a song they call the American Dream starts back in 1952
when you could take a walk downtown without being afraid.
Their song goes on to acknowledge trouble on the other side of town because everybody
wants their share of the American Dream.
But then the chorus urges optimistically, dream on children, dream on, don't let anybody
tell you the dream is gone.
Keep on dreamin' the American Dream.
Voicing dissent, another group called the Indigo Girls, a duo whose star is rising American
Dream style, find the sentiments of the Oak Ridge Boys too sentimental.
One of their recent songs sounds ironic tones about true believers in the American Dream.
I hope it's getting clear that references to the American Dream and popular culture
are not one thing, but many.
Television and film reflect that pattern too.
Back in 1981, the American Broadcasting Company made the American Dream into a weekly television
drama focused on a fictional family in Chicago.
This season NBC got into the act.
Its comedy series, American Dreamer, set in a rural Wisconsin town, takes up the life
of newspaper columnist Tom Nash.
Meanwhile, Tom Brokaw presided over a late 1990s series of American Dream vignettes
on NBC's Nightly News.
Dealing with problems that contradict many versions of the Dream, those vignettes were
hardly comic but reflected instead what a late 1980s movie, ironically titled Promised
Land, called Life on the Edge of the American Dream.
Book titles carry a similar array of themes.
To name just a few, there are American Dream, Global Nightmare, American Dreams, a study
of American Utopias, American Dreams Lost and Found, the American Dream in the Great
Depression, in search of the American Dream, the American Dream and the National Game,
which is a book about baseball, Mexican Voices, American Dreams, Restoring the American Dream.
One title I discovered recently I like a lot called The Gospel and the American Dream,
Advertising the American Dream, and Songs of the Doomed, More Notes on the Death of
the American Dream, which is Hunter Thompson's latest follow-up to Fear and Loathing in
Las Vegas.
The American humorist Will Rogers once quipped that all I know is what I read in the papers.
Much may also be learned about the American Dream by watching the press, for newspapers
and magazines especially keep the term in print.
A decade ago, when the American team pulled a huge upset to win the ice hockey competition
at the Winter Olympics, the Los Angeles Times led off its story with big headlines which
said, The American Dream Turns to Gold.
Some time later, the same paper gave Dr. Jerry Bus, who owns the Lakers and the Kings out
west, a dream headline that read, The owner of a world championship team lives an American
Dream. He parties at Heff's Place, dines at great restaurants, and dates beautiful
young women.
Not only the Times, but Time, the magazine, knows when to draw on the Dream, too. Its
November 5, 1990 issue featured excerpts from Ronald Reagan's book, An American Life.
The two-page headline for the article simply said, American Dreamer.
As Advertising the American Dream, one of the previously mentioned book titles suggests
advertising capitalizes on the idea, too. Indeed, as nearly as I have been able to determine,
the words American Dream, as we see them these days, originated in the early 20th century
worlds of advertising and public relations. So it's not surprising that Las Vegas promoters
some years ago named a musical review The Great American Dream, billing it as the show
that can make you rich. A while back, another ad campaign announced that the American Dream
can happen for you. All you had to do was invest with prudential base. If you did, then, among
other things, you could have that dream house you always wanted. Real estate agencies and
banks with mortgage loans to make those institutions appeal to the American Dream probably more
than any others. But the biggest print size in which I have ever seen the American Dream
came from a different source. For some time, the Wall Street Journal hailed itself by contending
that if the American Dream has a diary, this is it.
Songs, books, magazines, advertisements, they frequently use the American Dream in ways that
should make us think. But no item in my collection is more potent in that regard than the American
Dream game. The American Dream as a game, that is an idea worth pondering, although Milton
Bradley's 1979 version is dated in more ways than one. The game's goal, for example, is
probably too modest. Becoming a millionaire might not be sufficient to win the American
Dream game today. Deca-millionaire, if not billionaire status, would be more like it.
To get there, a different game board would be needed as well. The old game's strategies
of investing in American Express, United States Steel, Ford Motor Company, and Kentucky Fried
Chicken would not be an adequate portfolio. Today's industry leaders are Toyota and Honda,
not General Motors and Ford, NEC and Toshiba, not Texas Instruments and Motorola, not RCA
and GE, but Sony and Panasonic.
Along with other rock artists, Madonna, reported by a recent poll to be the woman American
young people admire most, is one of the nation's best exports. The American Dream game did
not anticipate that either. Nor did it provide opportunities for leveraged buyouts and junk
bonds any more than its pitfalls included the bank failures, SNL scandals, and declining
rates of productivity that are so dismally commonplace in American life as the 1990s
began.
The world has changed a lot since the American Dream game appeared. When the 1980s began,
for example, the United States was an exporting nation. Now we are an importing nation. We
were the world's largest creditor nation. We have become the world's largest debtor
nation. We had the highest rate of productivity growth. We have among the lowest now. The
world's largest financial institutions were largely American. Presently, they are largely
Japanese. Not only were the Japanese not so strong back then, there were two German
states, not one.
As its accompanying success book, a kind of instruction manual, testifies, the American
Dream game is a salute to our American free enterprise system, which affords us all opportunity.
Apparently, however, this salute was received less well than the folks at Milton Bradley
hoped. I must own one of the few existing copies for almost as soon as it appeared,
the American Dream game disappeared from the market.
If a different fate lies in store for the American economy, which is so important to
the dream, Americans in the early 1990s have plenty of reasons to be concerned that they
might lose their next turn, which is what happens in the American Dream game when a
roll of the dice makes you land on squares marked worry, doubt, or fear.
The United States may not be in many respects nearly so exceptional as it has at times believed
itself to be. Nevertheless, literary critic Lionel Trilling's remark is worth contemplating.
The United States, he once observed, is the only nation that prides itself upon a dream
and gives its name to one.
So watch for more examples of the sort I have been sharing with you, and please send them
along for my collection if you locate any. If you do so, you will almost certainly find
what my illustrations have been indicating, namely that few terms are used more ambiguously
and teasingly, few terms are bandied about more loosely, defined or undefined in so many
different ways than the American Dream.
To some people, the Dream is part of an ideology that snares and deludes, deceptively tantalizing
the have-nots with hope, while legitimating the haves with self-congratulation for their
self-reliant initiative.
In this view, the Dream, riddled with irony, becomes, if not a joke, an object of criticism,
satire, derision, or even contempt. At times it gets portrayed as a made-in-America label
for a conjuries of chauvinistic cliches, mouthed by jingoists like the orator in a 1926 poem
by E. E. Cummings, which begins, next to, of course, God, America, I love you, land
of the pilgrims, and so forth.
To others, the American Dream merely signifies self-determined success, wealth, acquisition
and consumption of the latest things touted by Madison Avenue, in a word the good life
of gentlemen's quarterly and house-beautiful, Forbes' fortune and vanity fair. And to still
others, less scornful, disillusioned or frivolous, it denotes a distinctive set of social and
moral ideals.
Perhaps the American Dream means all of these things at once, and they collide and clash
within our psyche's individual and collective. A game board and a Springsteen song snatches
from Crosby Still's Nash and Young in a grocery sack, critical reminders from Tracy Chapman
and the indigo girls to go with optimistic choruses from the Oak Ridge Boy's prudential
beige and the Wall Street Journal. In some samples from popular culture, we have glimpsed
a few images of the American Dream. All of them might make us wonder about its past, present
and future. Now add to those images some reflections of a different but related kind.
No people and no dream would have become American without a place of their own, nor would any
place have become American without people who dreamed the vistas of a nation in land
that is now the United States. Persons, dreams and places conceive each other.
Today we know that national borders slice the globe. Typically we take such boundaries
for granted, forgetting how recently they have become dominant within our planet's
landscape. Although men and women are territorial creatures, human life is itself a newcomer
on the cosmic scene. Today people think of themselves as Chinese or French, Russian,
Mexican or American, but there was a time when such distinctions were non-existent.
Many a past before those identities and their distinctive political loyalties evolved, nor
have those identities and loyalties stayed the same. Becoming is inescapable and constant.
Dust to dust, ashes to ashes, once born each of us will perish. In time most of us disappear
without a trace, but what of the life we share by having a nation that we call our own? Abraham
Lincoln thought that a nation may be said to consist of its territory, its people and
its laws. Much political rhetoric, though Lincoln's rarely if at all, tries to reassure
us that our nation will surely thrive indefinitely, perhaps even forever. Those promises resonate
because so much that we hold dear does depend on the national life of which we are apart.
In closer inspection, however, such hopes may be ill-founded. Think about what has happened
recently in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. Current events around the world drive
home the point. Nations, too, come and go. Usually they are victims of conflict produced
by their own particularity. That particularity can pit nation against nation. It can also
intensify internal civil strife by pitting group against group in ways that break bonds
to re-establish old ones or to bring new ones into existence.
History, some contend, demonstrates that national pride wastes life. We must concentrate, they
say, on transcending national differences. Such advice seems apt in the 1990s when xenophobic
nationalism reasserts itself in many quarters. Destructive differences do need to be overcome,
especially now that more and more governments have nuclear capabilities. But at least in
the foreseeable future, is it realistic to think that nations will wither away or even
surrender their sovereignty to some higher power?
Contingent though they may be, national identities and characteristics are facts of life. Even
if we can transcend their destructive features, we ought not to assume that national loyalties
will dissolve of their own accord. For assuming such an outcome were possible, its desirability
would be questionable. Cultural diversity nurtured through the world's many national
traditions can be of great value. What is needed is a less utopian, more sober and yet
profoundly idealistic view. It would seek to build warranted pride in national identities
that not only serve one's own people, but also help to meet the needs all persons share
because they are human.
Although nationhood, nationality and nationalism can all be immensely dangerous and may all
be destined ultimately for oblivion too, their future is not ours to know completely in advance.
Being the best of what we have is our lot instead. For millions of persons in the late
20th century, that goal requires coming to terms with the lives they lead on American
ground. How Americans cope with their national identity in turn affects the fate of the earth.
The 19th century novelist Henry James once observed it's a complex fate being an American.
Thomas Christopherson, a contemporary American songwriter, might have had that thought in
mind in his description of an American pilgrim, as he calls it, whom he called a walking contradiction,
partly truth and partly fiction.
And if that great American poet Robert Frost had been asked how an American's fate is
complicated by truth and fiction contained in the nation, he might have answered by quoting
the lines he recited one January day just 30 years ago in 1961.
Nearly 90, Frost favored John Kennedy's inaugural with verse. But when he was about to read
the poem he had prepared for that occasion, the Washington wind gusted the lines from
his view. Instead, Frost presented from memory a poem he had written 20 years before.
The gift outright, as it was called, reminded American people first that the land was ours
before we were the lands.
The American dream is unthinkable without the land. Yet the land is a chief ingredient
that renders an American fate complex because how people think about and use American ground
puts them at odds.
Made by no man or woman, the land was indeed a gift outright. Soon enough, though, it became
a gift of another kind. The land was there for the taking. Taken it was, too.
Long before it was called American, the territory was home for hundreds of varied tribal cultures
that European immigrants came to know indiscriminately as Indian. The land granted visions of promise,
economic, political, religious, but apparently not space enough to satisfy them all.
If this land is your land, this land is my land, as Woody Guthrie's alternative national
anthem puts it, yours and mine have excluded, and in many cases shattered, the ways of those
now called needy Americans.
Robert Frost's words add dissonant notes to Woody Guthrie's chorus, this land was made
for you and me, by remembering that the deed of gift was many deeds of war.
Nonetheless, the land in a word meant possibility. Reality may be frustrating, disappointing,
even crushing, but the lure of possibility seemed able to transcend all of that. So
restless European immigrants, their overseas bags and overland trunks packed with hope,
entered what Frost called the land vaguely realizing westward. Inexurably, they would
occupy the ground, reserving little for the native Americans except a trail of tears.
Even then, the land was not the immigrants. What they found was strange, if not unmapped.
The new space was so distant from what they left behind, its future as uncertain as it
was unknown. Their home remained there, not here. Complicated by the land's problematic
development, it included enslavement as well as equality, oppression as well as opportunity,
destruction as well as democracy. Possibility was a fickle friend, so it is and shall remain.
Frost's poem, The Gift Outright, called the land un-storied, artless, un-enhanced. But
it was hardly that for the native Americans who witnessed the European colonization and
its aftermath. But for those who, comparatively speaking, were newcomers by choice or by compulsion,
and also for the vast majority of us who trace our roots to their arrivals, the land would
be less than our land of living, as Frost called it, until the irony of being in it
was discovered. That irony consisted of the incongruity that grew when people intended
one thing and unintentionally produced another, which still happens as often as not. The newcomers,
many of them, as Frost says, still colonials, would create and tell stories about the land,
enhance it with arts and crafts. While thinking that the United States was such as she was,
Americans old and new would discover that this place was becoming sometimes worse than
we knew, sometimes better than we thought. Such becoming would have much to do and still
does with the American dream. Only as all Americans, newcomers and natives alike, learn
how not to withhold from each other, discovering in the process that American ground has been
storied artful and enhanced in countless ways unnoticed, will the land be truly made for
you and me and become more fully ours as a blessing than as a curse. Yet the complexity
of our fate as Americans is that our capacity to give ourselves outright remains in question.
As it records a renewing relationship between a father and a son, Robert Persig's widely
read 1975 book Zen in the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, illustrates why that hampered
capacity is the case by providing an autobiographical parable about caring. In fact, as Chris and
his dad bike their way toward each other, it is clear that their journey within and
across American ground also involves coming to grips with possibility and irony. Persig
says his concern is less with what's new and more with what's best. His meditations
survey the land and its spirit. Traveling with spare parts and instruction books on
motorcycle repair, he doesn't want to get stranded or caught unprepared if he can help
it, which is not always possible. And yet ironically it occurred to me, writes Persig,
there is no manual that deals with the real business of motorcycle maintenance, the most
important aspect of all. Caring about what you are doing is either considered unimportant
or taken for granted. In that environment motorcycles are hardware, run by fuel, not
by fidelity, sparked by plugs, not by perseverance. Attitudes toward them are inconsequential.
No fiction, of course, could be further from the truth, and that is Persig's point. Turn
the motorcycle into yourself, your country, your world, and the lesson is made the more
vital and the more difficult. Toward the book's end, Chris asks if he can
have his own motorcycle someday. Persig tells the boy he can if he will take care of it.
Chris's questioning continues, what will he have to do? Will his father show him? Will
those things be hard? Chris's father replies, of course he will help and show his son, and
what needs to be done won't be so hard, at least as Persig puts it, not if you have the
right attitudes. It's having the right attitudes that's hard. Chris's father expresses confidence
that his son will have the right attitudes. Indeed, as San Francisco Bay looms ahead Persig
concludes, trials never end, of course. Unhappiness and misfortune are bound to occur as long
as people live, but there is a feeling now that was not here before and is not just on
the surface of things, but penetrates all the way through. We've won it. It's going
to get better now. You can sort of tell these things.
Less than five years after Robert Persig's still popular narrative appeared, the San
Francisco Chronicle carried a story about his family. The 23-year-old son of the author
of Zen and the art of motorcycle maintenance, its lead paragraph announced, was stabbed
to death Saturday night two blocks from the Zen Center where he lived, police said yesterday.
The article continued by noting that the Persig family was scattered. Chris Persig had lived
at the Zen Center since 1975. His mother was in Minneapolis. It was uncertain whether
his father, who was then living on a boat off the English coast and writing about Zen
and the art of sailing, would be able to attend the funeral.
Being an American is a complex fate because trials do have a way of never ending even
when things seem to be getting better. We Americans prefer, of course, to dwell on success stories.
We thrive on hopes for the future, too. Hence, we are partly truth, but we are also partly
fiction insofar as we slight the contradictory character of our nation, which both is and
is not what it wants to be and could become.
American ground is a scene of epic proportions. It has that quality, however, not only because
of optimistic dreams and their accomplishments, but also because adversity and failure identify
us from time to time. Ground-together American style, those realities test our metal. They
reveal our fundamental spirit. Scouting the land, plotting its possibilities, and reckoning
with the irony it contains, visions and revisions of the American dream offer a story to enhance
the appreciation that our complex fate is worth having, artful, a gift to share and
possess with care.
While Thomas Jefferson and the others who signed the Declaration of Independence could
scarcely have foreseen all the implications of what they said, especially as far as women,
African Americans and other marginalized minorities were concerned, they stated many of the dream's
basic assumptions in 1776 when they took it to be self-evident that all men are created
equal, that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights, that among
these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
In his letters from an American farmer, Hector St. John de Krevkur enlarged this vision
in 1782 by describing the New Republic as a place where a man could abandon all his
ancient prejudices and manners, act upon new principles, and be rewarded by ample subsistence.
Indeed to Krevkur, the hopes that the nation to be would constitute a new paradise were
already virtually fulfilled. America, he thought, was the most perfect society now existing
in the world.
As already noted, however, the term American dream is probably of relatively recent coinage.
One of the first writers to popularize it was the historian James Truslow Adams. In
1931 he published his often reprinted and widely read book, The Epic of America. There,
Adams contended that apart from the dream, the glory of America's epic would be lost.
Indeed, he believed this American dream was the greatest contribution the United States
had as yet made to the thought and welfare of the world.
Adams summed up his vision by referring to that dream of a land in which life should
be better and richer and fuller for every person with opportunity for each according
to his or her ability or achievement.
Adams' summation notwithstanding, we have already seen that the contents of the American
dream are not simply identified, let alone easily reconciled. For the dream is and always
has been comprised of many dreams. No single vision has ever totally dominated the American
imagination. Abraham Lincoln knew as much in 1864 when he observed that Americans all
declare for liberty, but in using the same word, we do not all mean the same thing.
Ralph Ellison's 1952 Epic of America, his now classic novel Invisible Man, complements
Lincoln's point. The unnamed narrator, black like Ellison himself, seeks to understand
what it means to be human, American, black, and male all at once. America, he insists,
is woven of many strands. Our fate is to become one and yet many. This is not prophecy, but
description.
Echoing here the national motto, E Pluribus Unum, out of many one, Ellison's Invisible
Man not only expresses both the unity and the diversity of American society, he implicitly
acknowledges the complex, often paradoxical, sometimes contradictory texture of the dream
that that society has reflected and perpetuated. The dream's diversity is undeniable. Nevertheless,
that diversity exhibits major strands whose recurrent interweavings have given the dream
a subtle unity too. None of those strands, I think, is more persistent than a belief
in new beginnings, and we'll hear this theme repeatedly as we go. This belief exemplifies
better than any other the optimism, some might call it the naivete, of Americans, and the
fundamental reason why rhetoric about the dream caught on in the United States. From
their inception, most American self-images have reflected the idea that the past did
not bind one irrevocably. Fresh starts could be made, tomorrow promised to be better than
today, and progress always seemed possible. This strand supports and has been strengthened
by others, including affirmation of the unalienable rights enshrined in the Declaration of Independence,
lost in the Constitution, and a host of other factors, including the belief that the nation
is dedicated to human equality, justice, and freedom of choice. But to speak of the American
dream became one appealing way to sum up the many principles and experiences that reinforced
those hopes in American life. And yet Americans have not always found that it's easy to piece
these ideas together and to give them unity and coherence, and to find a way to reconcile
the various strands. And so sometimes the American dream has been lifted up as a set
of ideals, and at other times it has been made a target for criticism. For although Americans,
whether famous or obscure, extraordinary or ordinary, may cherish and want to believe
in their dreams, they are also frequently skeptical, even cynical, about realizing them. This
has been true all along, probably because it's doubtful that any actuality could fully
achieve all of the things that the American dream has held out as possibilities.
Nonetheless, James Truslow-Adams emphasized that the epic loses all its glory without
the dream. And in this first lecture in the series we have tried to glimpse at least some
of the contents that that dream contains, complicated and problematic as they are promising.
To finish up this first lecture, I want to tell you just about one more item from the
collection of artifacts that I keep. It consists of a photograph which was taken for me last
year by my wife, Lynn, who is an elementary school teacher. One day a student of hers,
a six-year-old boy, came to class in a new jacket. Shiny white, it had the word corvette
emblazoned across the front. On the left sleeve, just below two checkered racing flags to
signify victory, were the words American dream. Obviously proud of his handsome jacket, the
boy in the picture is smiling. His name is Min. He is the son of Vietnamese refugees.
A new white jacket, an American sports car, checkered victory flags, a refugee immigrant
family, a smiling child, the American dream. What will happen to this little boy named
Min and the American dream that brought him to these shores? Will a corvette be his American
dream or something more substantial and victorious than that? Answers to such questions are in
the making. Their quality depends on whether the nation can be what some of the early immigrants
in our history called a commonwealth. As we shall see in the lecture that follows, they
spoke of a new commonwealth. That option may be ours no longer, if it ever was, but to
renew the bonds that can make us one people out of many is still possible and vitally
important. History suggests what some of those bonds need to be, and to that aspect of the
American dream, we will turn next.
