Lecture 2 A New Common Wealth
The title for this second lecture is A New Common Wealth to pick up on the theme with
which we ended and the epigraph this time comes from an American poet named Robert Lowell
and in one of his poems these lines appear, embarking from the netherland of Holland pilgrims
unhousled by Geneva's night, they planted here the serpents seeds of light.
How changed is the land, its spirit and people, because the dreams of restless Europeans were
enlarged by the discovery of a world new to them.
Depending on a belief in new beginnings, those dreams did not originate in America but often
were sustained by a figurative America even before European explorers mapped the coast
and probed the interior.
His backers entranced by Oriental wealth, Christopher Columbus sought a passage to India.
Nonetheless he imagined that a new kingdom of God, a terrestrial paradise, might be established
in the land to which his navigational mistake had led him.
In his imaginings he thus resembled other and later European dreamers who saw their
fountain of youth, their new Atlantis, their El Dorado as existing somewhere in that golden
west which turned out to be America.
The Atlantic was their frontier, somewhere beyond which lay a place where people could
hope to start anew.
The hopes, however, were often dashed, tribal and colonial interests collided, tensions
streamed the transplanted European groups as aspirations for personal gain conflicted
with visions of communal association, and if those tensions were lacking the threats
of disease and starvation in a supposed land of plenty were never far away.
Such gaps between dreams and realities persist, the promised land of the free, now poignantly
storied, still shows the scars of its mocking ironies.
The experiences of Alvar Nunez Cabaza de Vaca provide a fascinating case in point.
He was a Spanish explorer from the 16th century.
In 1527, about eight years after Magellan set out to circumnavigate the earth, Cabaza
de Vaca sailed from the same Spanish port, San Lucar de Barameda, with an expedition
of five ships and 600 men.
It would be ten years until he returned, only one of four survivors from adventures in the
unknown interior of America as the English title of his journal so aptly calls his odyssey.
Hardly by choice, Cabaza de Vaca's attempts to find his way home took him along the west
coast of Florida, across a river not yet known as the Mississippi, on to what is today Galveston
Island and even on to New Mexico.
At one point, his journal contains this remark, I will not prolong this unpleasantness, he
says, but you can imagine what it would be like in a strange remote land, destitute of
means, either to remain or to get out.
Turning south, he eventually got back to Spanish civilization in Mexico and eventually
returned to Spain.
In harsh, though Cabaza de Vaca's experiences had been, his reports and those of other early
explorers intensified interest in that unknown interior of America.
Like Cabaza de Vaca, many of the early voyagers were Spanish.
Others working mainly to the north were French.
Their cultural traditions, Catholic religious practices and their languages not only continued
to mark the American scene, but in some cases versions of them still dominated.
Neither French nor Spanish are really foreign languages in our society, they have been spoken
here as long as English.
Nevertheless, the Protestantism of English-speaking Puritans proved to be a more decisive influence.
Those separatist Puritans, the Pilgrims, who arrived in 1620 were not the first of that
persuasion to immigrate across the sea.
Other English-speaking settlements dotted the seaboard before the Mayflower spied Cape
Cod, a landfall far from her Virginia destination.
Still, much of American history is grounded on Plymouth Rock.
When the Pilgrims landed there, however, they hardly found an earthly paradise.
Siner of the Mayflower Compact, historian of Plymouth Plantation, its governor for more
than thirty years, William Bradford, might have commiserated with Cabeza de Vaca when
he, Bradford, described their Massachusetts home to be as a howling, savage wilderness.
Nevertheless, here the Pilgrims could practice their religion.
Unimpeded by pressures to tolerate or to conform to alien ways, they would try to restore to
Christianity the health which, in the Puritans' opinion, it had lost in the old world.
By the grace of God, the Puritans claimed, American ground offered the human race a chance
to begin anew.
As the Mayflower Compact emphasizes, the Pilgrims' efforts to glorify God and to advance the
Christian faith enjoined practical political planning, sound economic practice, and shared
responsibility for what they called the general good of the colony.
Hence the Compact, a covenant, a voluntary agreement that established a community.
But that covenant depended on another, initiated and sustained by God, as the Puritans sought.
Revealed in Scripture this prior covenant between God and humankind insisted that the
purpose of human life is to glorify God.
Real violation of God's expectations, which divine revelation and human reflection made
clear, could not occur with impunity.
For those chosen ones who were faithfully obedient, however, God's promise of salvation
would not be broken.
Puritanism was not a single fixed ideology.
It was instead a far-reaching reform movement with diverse and even conflicting tendencies.
But if the Pilgrim Separatists, who established Plymouth Plantation, did not see eye to eye
with their less radical and more powerful cousins at Massachusetts Bay, in every Puritan
community the sense of covenant expressed in the Mayflower Compact carried substantial
weight.
As the Puritans' conscience usually understood it, their charge was to combine ourselves
together into a civil-body politic that would serve God by being an example for the rest
of the world, a charge that many Americans have taken seriously if not successfully
ever since.
No one embodied the Puritan conscience better than John Winthrop, who in 1630 led a group
of colonists across the Atlantic in a ship called the Arbella and then went on to govern
the Massachusetts Bay Colony for nearly 20 years.
Winthrop's dream was to establish God's new Israel in the new world.
Massachusetts Bay, he hoped, would become a true commonwealth, a community where civility,
economic prosperity and religious purity sustained one another.
During God, this community would provide a fulfilling life for its members.
As a model of Christian charity, which is what Winthrop called it, it was to be a city
upon a hill that would influence human destiny.
While still aboard the Arbella, Winthrop gathered his followers together and spoke about these
possibilities.
Stressing the bond of brotherly affection, he reminded them that they had undertaken
a task by mutual consent.
Progress toward their goals entailed a due form of government, both civil and ecclesiastical.
The details of such a government, Winthrop believed, having been entrusted to Puritan
men by God.
Somewhat later, Winthrop's colleague John Cotton, for many years the most important teacher
in the Massachusetts Bay Colony, supplemented Puritan idealism with a realistic warning.
Let all the world learn to give mortal men no greater power than they are content they
shall use, he admonished, for use it they will.
Rooted in a profound recognition of the human propensity to sin, that principle stood at
the core of Cotton's political philosophy.
Without government, individuals will destroy each other, but the remedy had to be watched
to Cotton's thought lest it would become deadly.
For the same qualities that make government necessary, narrow self-interest, power-grabbing,
unchecked desires that produce enslavement, these things do not disappear in the politically
powerful.
A proper covenant, therefore, involves a contract between the people and their governors, one
that finds the balance between authority and liberty, which the public good requires.
Reality fell short of these Puritan dreams.
One reason was that Winthrop and Cotton could not sustain a consensus rooted in biblical
principles.
Their plan failed, partly because not everyone read God's word exactly alike, but also because
many of the early arrivals did not read God's word at all.
Only a minority of the colonial settlers dreamed of spiritual renewal, let alone of Christian
charity.
Hence, their understandings of the public good were varied if they thought of it at all.
A covenant is only as real as the shared understanding of its terms.
A community exists just to the degree that people share values, memories, and hopes.
Puritan ways did not prevail, ironically, partly because they helped to encourage the
belief in new beginnings, a conviction that has been widely shared by Americans, yet one
that keeps them at odds as much as it brings them together.
The United States was born, after all, of a bloody revolution.
Despite recurrent attempts to maintain or later to reinstate the Christian vision through
great awakenings of one sort or another, the Puritan's dream of new beginnings was eventually
transformed into more secular hopes of social, political, economic, psychological, and even
sexual rebirth.
Benjamin Franklin's thinking is a representative early example of the process.
Franklin was perhaps the best known and best loved American in the 18th century world.
He demonstrated unusual business skills, helped to pull a United States out of the fires
of revolution and constitutional construction, and carried out diplomatic missions with flair
and distinction.
Inventions and scientific discoveries are also to his credit.
He sustained libraries, schools, and philosophical societies as well.
Throughout the 18th century, popular opinion was influenced by his writing and printing, too.
While paying lip service to God and virtue, Franklin clearly had his eye on success.
As far as one's fortune is concerned, he says in his autobiography that nothing so much
as virtue is likely to make it, but virtue is the means, fortune, the end.
Furthermore, Franklin advised, changing from poor Richard to rich Richard depends primarily
not on divine grace, but on determination to help oneself.
Thomas Paine was equally disinclined to turn over to God the responsibility for creating
a new order.
Illustrating the evolution of religious Protestantism into the political rebelliousness that culminated
in the American Revolution, Paine asserted in 1776 that we have it in our power to begin
the world over again.
His efforts as a writer did much to build the revolutionary spirit that one independence,
thus giving Americans a greater chance, at least economically, to practice what Benjamin
Franklin preached.
Paine, however, saw the American cause not simply as a matter of economic growth.
His passion to revive flagging spirits in the harsh winter of 1776-77—these are the
times that try men's souls—was based on his conviction that the revolutionary cause
was virtuous.
Paine's not only had the right to rebel, as a symbol of promise it was their duty to
do so, Paine argued.
He saw the trying time of revolution not merely as an American struggle, but as a human crisis
in which basic questions about freedom and tyranny would be decided.
Paine used every argument he could imagine to convince Americans that their revolutionary
cause was favored.
It was expedient in accord with divine will and geographically logical.
It was above all just and righteous because of the hope that would emerge if people could
break the shackles of hereditary rule to form a new society based on a democratic compact
honoring reason and conscience.
In stating that the cause of America is in a great measure the cause of all mankind,
Paine saw the American struggle for independence as a fight to vindicate universal human rights.
It is the pride of King's pain, once said, which throws mankind into confusion.
What he did not count on is that the American dream he helped to spawn has a similar potential.
Their justifiable pride in early American new beginnings has often twisted into the
attitude that whatever is good for the United States or thought to be so is good for everyone
else.
It is hard for Americans to think of their national interest as misplaced or mistaken
just because they so often present it to the world and to each other under the guise
of virtue.
Everything, however, guarantees a neat automatic fit between virtue and American policy.
Not every American, then or now, would endorse all the optimism that Thomas Paine injected
into the American dream.
For example, writing his fiction several generations later, a descendant of New England Puritans
named Nathaniel Hawthorne battled unrelentingly against the assumption that there could be
a new world totally separable from the old.
Rather, as Hawthorne, one of our greatest American writers, showed, persons, places
and peoples always have a past.
Indeed, their identity dissolves unless they recognize that they are embedded in history.
Hawthorne concurred that the revolution was necessary and right, but has his brilliant
short story, my kinsman major Malinu, bears witness, Hawthorne also urged Americans to
remember that their nation grew in soil enriched by British blood.
America's rebellious new beginnings required a form of parasite, Hawthorne believed.
Having fractured the temporal continuity upon which identity, personal or national, is so
heavily dependent, Americans would struggle ever after to cope with who they are.
In the mean, Hawthorne's point would have been granted by Thomas Jefferson, despite
his defense of what he called the sovereignty of the present.
For he opened the Declaration of Independence by arguing that the dissolution of long-standing
political bonds must not be taken lightly.
At the very least, the causes that impel the separation must be stated publicly.
In other ways, however, Jefferson's declaration carries forward the legacy of turmoil that
Hawthorne took to be the price of rupture from the past.
That legacy appears in the fact that the Declaration of Independence epitomizes a philosophy not
originally American, but inspired by a European-based enlightenment.
The heart of this philosophy is a series of fundamental concepts.
For example, self-evident truth, unalienable rights, the laws of nature, equality and happiness.
Jefferson banked on a shared understanding of the meaning of those terms.
Although enough agreement existed that his declaration still informs American self-understanding,
the interpretation of those terms repeatedly divides us.
American ground, then, is an arena in which the definitions of governing ideas are repeatedly
in question.
If that is as it should be, the nation's life, fortune and honor depend on the quality
of that debate.
Jefferson rightly holds a place second only to George Washington as the best-remembered
figure of the nation's founding.
For if Washington is rightly called the father of our country, no one has better claim than
Jefferson to be called the father of its dream.
Jefferson's fatherhood, like Washington's, produced mixed results.
In Jefferson's case, that outcome still has much to do with a not-so-self-evident truth,
namely, all men are created equal.
Here I think that a person write five more troublesome words.
About three months before he signed the declaration that contained those words by Jefferson, John
Adams, who would later become President of the United States, was away from his Massachusetts
home on political business.
One day he received a letter from his wife Abigail.
I long to hear that you have declared an independency, she wrote him on March 31, 1776.
And by the way, in the new Code of Laws, which I suppose it will be necessary for you to
make, she went on, I desire you would remember the ladies and be more generous and favorable
to them than your ancestors.
Do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands, she said.
For all men would be tyrants if they could.
If particular care and attention are not paid to the ladies, we are determined to foment
a rebellion and will not hold ourselves bound by any laws in which we have no voice, no
representation.
John Adams found Abigail saucy, as he said in his letter back to her.
He made plain to her that the men in charge knew better than to repeal our masculine system.
Jefferson's all men are created equal would stand.
As Mary P. Ryan sums it up in her 1979 study, Womanhood in America, women found no larger
a place in the politics of the new nation than they had had under the British Empire.
Their names still remained absent from the ledger of voters and the lists of office holders.
Neither the Declaration of Independence nor the Constitution of the United States elevated
women to the status of political beings.
Yet as Abigail Adams knew, women were not absent from the land and its possibilities,
nor were black slaves.
Echoing Jefferson's phrasing, even if they were not allowed to learn to read it, the
slaves' legitimate hope of being free, as the escaped slave and abolitionist leader
Frederick Douglass called it, led Jefferson to see the tragic conflict slavery caused.
The irony as well as the hope in Jefferson's words would keep freedom ringing in American
years, but huge difficulties and opportunities were created because Jefferson's claim about
equality remains full of ambiguities.
Under the most optimal conditions, there might still be disagreement concerning the meaning
of crucial terms such as men and equal.
But conditions in America then or now are not optimal.
The status of women would come to the fore, but more immediately slavery was a massive
obstacle, compounded by the fact that a physiological condition of the slaves, black skin color,
provided grounds specious though they were for arguing that blacks should not be included
under the provisions of Jefferson's statement.
On the other hand, some white Americans, not to mention the slaves themselves, did think
of blacks as fully human.
Jefferson himself equivocated, though sensing that slavery was wrong because it violated
natural rights and thereby equality itself, he continued ownership of blacks even while
advocating emancipation.
We have the wolf by the ears, he wrote in 1820, and we can neither hold him nor safely
let him go.
This is in one scale and self-preservation in the other.
Nothing could be more certain, Jefferson believed, than that the slaves would one day go free.
It was no less certain, he thought, that the two races could never find peace in the same
government.
White prejudice and black memory would produce new provocations without ceasing.
It remains to be seen whether the results will turn out better than Jefferson's forecast,
but he remains correct that racial prejudice, hatred and suspicion divide Americans.
Unnecessary to resolve prior to 18th century unification shelved and compromised in order
to make the original union possible, the issue of slavery and equality could not be dodged
forever.
It eventually turned into trial by fire that did not end with Robert E. Lee's surrender
to Ulysses S. Grant at Appomattox Courthouse in 1865.
Education was at the top of Jefferson's list of priorities.
No other sure foundation can be devised, he said, for the preservation of freedom and
happiness.
Ignorance is enslavement.
The right to liberty and the pursuit of happiness make crucial the possibility of obtaining all
the education that is commensurate with individual interests and abilities and with society's
capacity to provide.
This important aspect of the American Dream, also part of Jefferson's legacy, suggests
a basic equality, not necessarily of ability or achievement, but at least of opportunity.
However, what constitutes that equality, indeed whether it can be achieved even if we agree
on its essence, is another dynamite issue.
In spite of the diligence present at the formation of the United States, ideals that Americans
accepted and the subsequent interpretations of them have been anything but crystal clear.
Perhaps Americans thought that they meant the same thing when they did not, or maybe
they recognized differences, setting them aside long enough to accomplish a new aim only
to have old problems surprise them at a later date.
The variations are endless.
In any case, the clock cannot be turned back to edit out all the conflict-ridden references
to equality in America's political heritage.
Even if that could be done, it would surely be a questionable gain to do so.
But I often think how simple it would have been if Jefferson had never written the words
all men are created equal.
As an element of the dream, equality leaves Americans in a briar patch.
Strange to think that the pursuit of happiness leads or even ends there.
But after all these tempestuous years, it should come as no surprise that Americans
are destined to find their happiness only in the midst of a struggle over ideals whose
status and significance become clarified only by restless encounters among people who
are changing themselves.
E pluribus unum, out of many, one, is the motto of the United States.
Following the revolution, however, serious problems remained about the best ways to create
order from confusion as the 18th century poet Philip Furno put the point.
Politically, opinion clashed over the distribution of power, how much authority should be centralized,
how much reserved to the several states, and in either case, what rights would remain to
individuals alone.
The Constitution drafted at Philadelphia in 1787 represented the culmination of the founder's
thinking on those issues and still enshrines common attitudes toward government.
But it was no foregone conclusion that 18th century Americans would credit the Constitution's
promise to ensure domestic tranquility, as the words in the preamble put it.
A series of arguments by Alexander Hamilton, John Jay and James Madison, pseudonymously
signed by Publius and collectively titled The Federalist, were especially influential
in winning ratification for the new Constitution.
One remains of greater importance than Federalist No. 10, which James Madison authored.
Within reasons' boundaries, the founders collectively stressed, human beings could go far to make
what they wanted of themselves, their surroundings and institutions, for the God in whom Thomas
Jefferson and his comrades believed was benevolent.
Only more insistently than most of those leaders, Madison also realistically underscored that
human reason remains fallible, that humankind's self-love and unfriendly passions, as he called
them, may wreck the public good by what he also called the violence of faction.
But the causes of factional rivalry, argued Madison, are inseparable from human liberty.
A remedy that destroyed them, therefore, would be worse than the disease itself.
A sound government, contended Madison, would limit the effects of factious spirits while
maintaining individual liberty.
Through its division of powers, its system of checks and balances, its ability to provide
representation for a large and diverse populace, the new Constitution seemed eminently structured
to control those effects.
Indeed Madison argued it would be the best prevention against the formation of the worst
threat of all, namely a majority faction whose pursuit of happiness would tyrannize those
outside its ranks.
However realistic Madison's analysis, it also asserted a basic American optimism.
Madison assumed an affirmative answer to what remains a question where the one and
the many are concerned, and the question could be put like this, will a plurality of factions
in fact serve the good of all?
The Constitution that James Madison defended came largely from his own hand.
The version approved by the Philadelphia Convention on September 17, 1787 prohibited the enactment
of ex-post facto laws, guaranteed trial by jury for criminal offenses, and provided for
other basic liberties.
Significantly, however, it did not contain what is now referred to as the Bill of Rights,
which contains the first ten amendments to the Constitution.
The recently formed Congress did not approve the amendments and send them to the states
for ratification until September 25, 1789, and they were ratified only on December 15,
1791.
During the Constitutional Convention, relatively little had been said about such a Bill of
Rights mainly because the Framers took so seriously the idea that the Constitution spelled
out only those powers that belonged explicitly to the federal government.
Those powers, moreover, were regarded as quite limited.
It was clear, at least inferentially, that unless the federal government had a specific
mandate to act, it could not do so.
Madison himself reasoned that an attempt to specify rights would cause more mischief
than it prevented.
Thus, in September 1787, the Constitutional Convention had voted down a proposed Bill
of Rights before approving the Constitution itself.
Opposed by the so-called anti-federalists, the lack of a Bill of Rights jeopardized
ratification and full support for the new Constitution.
Writing from Paris, where he served as the nation's ambassador to France, Thomas Jefferson
expressed his skepticism about the omission and urged his friend Madison to back a Bill
of Rights.
Such a Bill, argued Jefferson, is what the people are entitled to against every government
on earth, general or particular, and what no just government should refuse or rest
on inference.
Although less than enthusiastic at first, Madison was persuaded, not least because
he came to see that embracing a Bill of Rights would eliminate serious opposition to the
new central government.
Eventually, Madison headed the committee that drafted the amendments, whose ideas and
language strategically chosen to soften anti-federalist resistance came mainly from the constitutions
of various states.
When most Americans think of the Constitution today, the Bill of Rights is probably what
first comes to mind.
They agree with Jefferson's argument that silence about rights leaves too much to inference
and that it is better to spell out, more definitely, the boundaries between the one central government
and its many citizens.
But the Jeffersonian solution brings another round of problems with it, because so much
depends now on how fundamental concepts, freedom of speech, for example, or cruel and unusual
punishment are interpreted.
On American ground, their meaning is not eternally fixed.
If that outcome precludes stagnation, it also entrenched the paradox we have noted before.
Americans are kept at odds by the very things on which they agree.
Having led his troops to victory beyond the despair of Valley Forge, George Washington
served the first two terms of the American presidency.
His farewell address is a plea for American unity, revealing now as well as then how elusive
unity can be.
Urging his contemporaries to esteem the immense value of your national union to your collective
and individual happiness, he emphasized how the term American referred to a single people.
They had worked and fought together, Washington stressed, with only slight shades of difference,
he added, you have the same religion, manners, habits, and political principles.
To enhance the good already achieved, Washington urged Americans to avoid the baneful effects
of partisan passions and of entangling affairs with foreign powers.
Washington's advice was well conceived, not least because it was occasioned by the very
threats he warned against.
Whether his recommendations have been followed, however, is another issue.
At the bottom of that issue is the fact that the course of human events has denied the
United States the luxury of isolation.
Washington, moreover, not only underestimated the nation's shades of difference, but could
scarcely have imagined the variety they would come to contain.
Unity has never been a dominant American characteristic, nor is it likely to be.
Unity will always be a rhetorical theme for American presidents arriving, departing, or
in between, because its depth and quality cannot be easily presumed.
The first United States census was taken shortly after Washington became president.
This simple count included only free white males aged 16 or more, free white males under
16, to calculate how many men might be available for military duty, free white females, all
other free persons, including Native Americans who paid taxes, and slaves.
The census of 1790 placed the American population at about 3.9 million, including about 750,000
slaves, nearly 20% of the total.
The 1990 figures are contested, particularly by municipal and state officials who argue
that the latest census skipped people in urban areas, the poor and minorities.
Although the count may be off by a figure larger than the one for the 1790 census, Americans
in 1990 nonetheless numbered about 250 million.
Nor is there any question about the fact that ours is a multicultural or culturally pluralistic
society.
Take your pick on those terms as to which is politically correct these days.
In any case, that variety severely tests, if it has not already poured over, the melting
pot that once was supposed to make diversity manageable.
Significantly, the country's population is aging.
In 1990, one in five Americans is at least 55, and one in eight is at least 65.
By the year 2000, many more of us will be over age 65.
As we speak, the Association for American Retired People may well be among the largest,
if not the most powerful, lobby in Washington.
No less significant, the 1990 census showed that about 12% of the nation's people are
African American, 8% are Latino, and about 3.5% are Asian.
The percentage of whites in the population dropped to about 76% from a figure of 79%
a decade ago.
Furthermore, by the year 2000, it will be likely that more than 50 major cities in the
United States will have a majority population of minorities.
By the middle of the 21st century, when someone born in 1991 will be in his or her sixties,
the typical resident of the United States will not trace ancestry to white Europe, but
to almost anywhere else, Africa, Asia, the Hispanic world, the Pacific Islands, Arabia.
Language and religion tell a similar tale.
The number of people in the United States whose usual language or mother tongue is other
than English rose from 28 million in 1976 to almost 35 million in 1990 and will likely
reach 39 million by the year 2000.
In Los Angeles, which is much more a sociological microcosm for the nation than the Muncie Indiana
that used to be preferred by sociologists, no less than 90 foreign languages can be heard
in the public schools.
In no one surprise, Spanish will be increasingly important in the United States, but the presence
of Asian languages is rising as well.
Religiously, the same thing would be the case.
The diversity is just immense and staggering.
Outside observers often understand the United States better than Americans do themselves.
A salient example is provided by the French statesman and philosopher, Alexis de Tocqueville,
whose tour of the country resulted in a classic called Democracy in America.
Tocqueville, as you know, toured the United States in the 1830s and 1840s and wrote a
still widely read study about us Americans.
One of the things that Tocqueville was struck about was that in the United States, people
had this wide diversity of points of view.
Yet at the same time, he was worried about this for another reason, namely that it seemed
to him that the American principle was that everybody should kind of figure things out
for themselves and think for themselves.
But at the same time, he thought people really do like to have some kind of support for their
beliefs.
They don't entirely like to be out there all by themselves alone in what they think.
What he saw going on in the country was that there was something that he called public
opinion that seemed to be the thing that Americans turned to, a kind of anonymous opinion of
some kind, that Tocqueville found was producing not this great diversity and freedom that
was so much apparent on the surface, but rather what it produced was a kind of conformity
that he took to be rather dangerous to the liberty and freedom that Americans stressed.
In another way, in a kind of ironic way, Tocqueville uncovered something about American diversity
that also gave him pause for concern, although it was not exactly the same point that I was
stressing earlier when I was just talking about the sheer diversity that was present.
Tocqueville found a kind of diversity that seemed to him to be shallower than it ought
to be, interestingly enough, and what it produced then was a kind of conformity in belief that
was problematic.
Well, however, all of that worked out.
One of the things about diversity in America and about unity and about a new commonwealth
that became clear was that eventually we, as a people, had to come to terms with the
problem of living as Abraham Lincoln put it, half slave and half free.
Soaring to preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States, Lincoln
paid the price to keep his word about upholding the Union.
Only 85 years after the Declaration of Independence, a savage civil war became necessary to keep
the Union intact and to certify as the 13th Amendment did after the war in Lincoln's
assassination that neither slavery nor involuntary servitude except as a punishment for crime
whereof the party shall have been duly convicted shall exist within the United States or any
place subject to their jurisdiction.
Ken Burns' recent PBS epic on the Civil War brought home to us again how pivotal that
struggle has been in our history and to our identity.
Today the battlefields at Shiloh, Chancellorsville, and Gettysburg are quiet memorials to Confederates
and Yankees who fought to the death because they disagreed over the future of the Union
and the place of slavery within it.
Yet the calm of those places is deceiving, for the violence of faction remains among
us.
This was understood by the 20th Century poet Robert Lowell as he summed up bitterly one
strand of American life in his poem, Children of Light, from which I quoted at the beginning
of this lecture.
The beginnings made by the Resolute Europeans who first called the ground American were
the birthday of a new world, in many ways they created a better one than had ever before
existed.
Still, the beginnings were not so new because, as Lowell says, the serpent seeds were also
planted here.
Reaping what was sown, the children of light stained the land with blood, fencing their
gardens with the red men's bones in the process, as Lowell puts it.
Relatively few Americans can regret without hypocrisy that our fathers, those Puritans
and rebels and people from other places embarked from the Netherland.
Nonetheless, the United States and the American dream also retain a wild and savage hue, leaving
their daughters and sons to wander in the land, wondering how to make a commonwealth
from the one and the many.
Such wandering and wandering leads toward, indeed creates, frontier dreams, the topic
that will be focused in the third lecture of this series.
