Lecture 3 Frontier Dreams
Just a couple of things to keep in mind as we've gone about some themes
maybe that are running through our reflection so far.
One is I hope that as I allude to the different figures from American history
and literature and philosophy and religion and politics
that we can think about these people as friends with whom we engage in conversation.
We may not always agree with friends, they may make life difficult for us at times
but they are also people who can inspire us, who can help us,
who can keep us thinking about important things.
Secondly, I hope that you'll take note of the richness
and in particular the ambiguity and the richness of the American tradition
that we're looking at as we talk about the American dream.
The variety of viewpoints that's present, the clashing, the contradiction, the collision sometimes
but also be keeping an eye out for things on which Americans seem to agree.
But at the same time, and this is the third point, as you note the things that we agree about
listen for ways in which the very things that we agree about
are also often the things that separate us, that divide us, that lead us into disagreements
and problems of one kind or another.
A good example from the previous lecture of that would probably be Jefferson's claims about equality
or our basic understanding about human rights, what those rights are,
how they should be interpreted, what boundaries we place on them and so on.
Now with that as the beginning for the third lecture, let's consider for a time now frontier dreams.
And my epigraph, my little quotation to get us started on this idea comes from an American poet
named Emily Dickinson who has a line in one of her beautiful poems which simply says,
I dwell in possibility.
At the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago, a young American professor named Frederick Jackson Turner
read a paper to a conference of fellow historians.
That paper, called The Significance of the Frontier in American History,
remains one of the most influential interpretations of American life and its dreams.
Put simply, Turner's argument was that the conditions of frontier life were the most significant facts
of the nation's history to that point.
Noting America's succession of westward moving frontiers, Turner claimed that each one afforded settlers
contact with untouched nature, a perennial rebirth, an escape from the bondage of the past,
and above all, the opportunity which he declared had become another name for America.
Frontier existence fostered, he added, the individualism, self-reliance and self-determination,
democracy, faith in humankind and courage to adapt to change that Turner saw as dominant American characteristics.
That the course of American history has been marked by a series of frontiers is, of course, indisputable.
At first it was the eastern seaboard confronted by the Puritans and other early settlers.
Later it was the Alleghenies, the Mississippi, the Missouri, the Great Plains, the Rockies,
or even the Pacific Ocean itself.
Turner has been criticized, however, for exaggerating the influence of the frontier on American ideals
and on the American character.
He has also been accused of confusing actual frontier existence with the romantic myths that have grown up around it.
Even when such criticism is justified, to dismiss Turner's thesis altogether is to take too lightly
the powerful effects that the idea and the myth of the frontier and of the West in general
have had on American imagination.
Those effects have been profound.
They helped to account for the concept of manifest destiny with all the ambiguities and ironies contained in that concept.
They also helped to explain why to so many Americans past and present,
the West, with its temporal as well as spatial connotations, has stood for a condition in which an idealized past
can merge with an idealized future to make anything seem possible.
And they surely account for the fact that the most indigenous American heroes are Western frontiersmen,
historical personages such as Daniel Boone, Davy Crockett, Wyatt Earp, even Andrew Jackson and Abraham Lincoln.
Fictional creations such as James Fenimore Cooper's Leather Stocking
and figures who have appeared countless times in American film,
the likes of Gary Cooper, Henry Fonda, John Wayne, Clint Eastwood,
and more recently, and with some very revealing twists, Kevin Costner in his Dances with Wolves.
This is not to say that the effects of the myths have always been happy ones.
Myths may constitute what the 19th century poet Emily Dickinson called a fairer house than prose,
but not necessarily a sounder one.
The myth of the West may have misled Americans into believing that the future is absolutely open
and unaffected by the past, or that simple physical movement from one place to another
will inevitably improve the quality of one's life,
or that the nation's space and natural resources are inexhaustible.
For good or ill, however, the myth of the West is the ground from which a lot of American dreams
have sprung and continued to spring.
Though not to native Americans, from the time of the first American colonists, if not before,
the land to the West was a symbol of the unknown, of the unexplored, and of future possibilities.
That fact, not always recognized sufficiently, made the West fearsome, as well as alluring.
Cabeza de Vaca, whom we mentioned earlier, found that it was a pretty fearsome thing
to wander into what is now New Mexico, for example.
True, the West was a potential garden of the world, but it was also a place fraught with possible,
and as it turned out, real terrors and hardships.
It was a place where many believed a new atom and eve perhaps might arise,
but it was also a place where men and women might revert to a primal savagery,
not escaping from the bondage of the past at all,
but plunging backward or forward into a barbarism from which civilization had presumably rescued them.
It was a place that promised individuals attempting freedom from social restraints,
but it was also a place that threatened them with the agonies of isolation,
with cultural deprivation, and with a loss of the comfort and security of historical tradition.
Turner had his own uncertainties about the West,
although he believed that frontier life was merely a step toward the development of a higher civilization.
The subtle tone of his essay suggests that a part of him lamented the frontier's passage.
Ambivalence, it is the feeling you get one wag suggested when you see your worst adversary
drive your new BMW or Lexus over a 3,000 foot cliff.
Ambivalence was not something that was foreign to Turner.
And this, by the way, will be another theme that I hope you'll watch for.
I think there's something about American experience that makes us all a little ambivalent from time to time.
We like what is happening, and at the same time we may often be distraught by it,
worried about it, even wanting to protest what is happening.
As we will see, if not feel, before this series of lectures concludes,
American life often has the effect of producing the mutually conflicting thoughts and feelings,
including those of love and hate, of which ambivalence is composed.
Unmistakably, it is discernible in the works of earlier American writers
who sang the praises of untouched nature and yet identified America's glorious destiny
with the settling and the passing of the frontier.
Several such tensions are evident, for example, in Krevkur's Letters from an American Farmer,
which I mentioned in an earlier lecture.
Born in France, Krevkur had immigrated to Canada and subsequently to New York,
where he took up farming and probably in a decade preceding the American Revolution,
which he opposed, wrote most of his letters.
They were first published under his pseudonym, J. Hector St. John.
In some respects, Krevkur's account smacks of pastoral romance.
Describing agrarian life on a relatively early frontier along the eastern seaboard,
he speaks sentimentally about the morally uplifting aspects and effects
of the farmer's direct contact with the land.
Like Turner after him, Krevkur asserts that frontier life encourages democracy,
and he stresses the opportunity intellectual as well as economic,
which the simple fact of space affords Americans.
Yet in this sunny romantic picture of Krevkur's, there are some darker hues as well.
Even if a mild government makes Krevkur think that American society
is the most perfect society now existing in the world,
he is nevertheless appalled by the horrors of slavery he witnesses on a trip that takes him to Carolina.
Especially disturbing to him is the sight of a caged black man.
Perhaps an involuntary arrival from the middle passage that Charles Johnson
has recently chronicled so powerfully in his 1990 National Book Award-winning novel with that title.
A slave had been put there not by uncivilized persons, but by men,
as Krevkur describes them, in a more improved condition.
Evidently their improvement, which Krevkur observes with an irony less intentional than it might have been,
maybe that improvement consists mainly of an outlook which tells them that the laws of self-preservation
render such executions necessary.
As for nature, Krevkur sees that it can be beneficial,
and life in nature is on the whole preferable to life in a complex society
that fosters such rationalized brutality as slavery.
But nature can also be capriciously cruel,
and while Krevkur believes that contact with nature ought to be benign,
it often has the opposite effect on those pioneers who venture into the wilderness.
So here we have an example I think in an early writer,
an 18th century author of a person who, on the one hand,
wants to praise the frontier as something that produces these noble virtues,
including democracy, and yet he finds as he probes a little deeper into American life
that there are some darker sides and that life on the frontier often has quality
that's not very civilized at all.
And so Krevkur's conclusion, if you can draw one from these ambivalent reports that he gives,
is that the frontier, and indeed all American life in some ways,
needs to be tamed and civilized more than it has been in the experience of it that he has had.
The nation's great 19th century storyteller, Nathaniel Hawthorne, never lived on the frontier.
Yet he shared some of Krevkur's ambivalence and skepticism,
and he was more keenly aware of the ironies of American life and American aspirations.
Always careful in his writings to acknowledge humanity's capacity for goodness
and its need for faith and moral progress,
he was a child of the Puritans and thus acutely conscious of the magnetic chain of evil,
as he called it, and fractious passions linking all the sons and daughters of Adam.
These convictions are all expressed again in Hawthorne's short story called Earth's Holocaust.
Set on one of the broadest prairies of the West,
this sketch depicts the efforts of a group of radical reformers
to burn all vestiges of the past and to make a truly new beginning.
On a blank expanse of seemingly endless and boundless possibilities,
they dream that an earthly paradise can be created.
Hawthorne implies at once in the story that their hope is an illusion.
Whether the scene he says is in time past or time to come is of little or no moment
because dreams of a totally new beginning on the frontier are as doomed to failure
now or in the future as they have always been.
Hawthorne's reforming firebrands act not as the rational enlightened new atoms they seek to be,
but rather as a passionate unruly mob.
Considering everything old to be of little worth, they savagely set fire to good and bad alike.
For a time, but only for a while, the story's narrator defends them.
Although mildly disturbed when great literary and philosophical works are thrown into the fire,
he nevertheless argues that nature is better than a book
and that if we read it a right, it will be to us a volume of eternal truth.
But when even the Bible is consigned to the flames as merely a fable of the world's infancy,
the narrator of this story begins to see that the titan of innovation
at first shaking down only the old and rotten shapes of things
had laid his terrible hand upon the main pillars
which supported the whole edifice of our moral and spiritual state.
A dark stranger who also skeptically observes the supposedly reforming destruction
reminds the narrator that the reformers have neglected, in fact, to destroy the prime source of evil,
namely the human heart.
Hawthorne would seem to agree that the heart is indeed the only truly boundless sphere
wherein existed the original wrong of which the crime and misery of this outward world were merely types.
He would also seem to agree that until that foul cavern, as the story calls the human heart,
until that foul cavern is purified, the world will be the old world yet, even in the American West.
It is worth noting, however, that the dark stranger who makes these claims
is described as a satanic figure and as such a purveyor of only half-truths.
Ultimately, Hawthorne suggests that the whole truth lies elsewhere,
on a frontier, so to speak, between a blind optimism and a despairing pessimism.
Admittedly, when one considers the violence and lawlessness that eventuated
the spoiling and pollution of nature, the land speculation that sacrificed human rights to property rights on the frontier,
then one may be tempted to adopt the darker sides of Krav Kurs and Hawthorne's views.
But another feature of frontier life, which some scholars are calling ethnocide, if not genocide,
pushes that possibility even further.
And this, of course, takes us into that chapter of American history on the frontier involving Native Americans.
It is probably no coincidence that Turner's famous essay about the closing of the American frontier
came only a few years after violent Indian resistance to what was called the March of Civilization
came to an end on December 29, 1890, in the battle many say the mass murder of Wounded Knee Creek.
It took the lives of several hundred Lakotas, Sioux in South Dakota, women and children as well as men, and most of them unarmed.
Turner makes no reference to Wounded Knee, whose story still wounds the nation a century later.
But his famous essay about the frontier did observe that at the Atlantic frontier one can study the germs of processes
repeated at each successive frontier.
The first frontier, Turner went on to say, had to meet its Indian question.
That question was answered with a vengeance.
Note the 17th century victory sermon of Increase Mather, a leading Puritan minister who asked his congregation to thank God
that on this day we have sent 600 heathen Pequot souls to hell.
Ponder the pre-revolutionary observation of Virginia's governor that westward moving colonials looked on the Indians
as but little removed from the brute creation.
Consider the 1851 statement of Secretary of the Interior Alexander Stewart.
The policy of removal, he said, except under peculiar circumstances, must necessarily be abandoned,
and the only alternatives left are to civilize or to exterminate them.
We must adopt one or the other.
Reflect on the 1878 observation of Wachaki, a Soshone chief, that our fathers were steadily driven out or killed.
We, their sons but sorry remnants of tribes once mighty are cornered in little spots of the earth, all ours by right,
cornered like guilty prisoners and watched by men with guns who are more than anxious to kill us off.
This nightmare side of the American dream is one that deserves more than the deep regret
expressed by an October 1990 congressional resolution concerning wounded knee.
Wachakis, little spots of the earth moreover, got smaller still with the passage of the Dawes Act in 1887,
which would set Indian policy for the next half century.
It provided for the dissolution of the tribes as legal entities and the division of tribal lands among individual members,
160 acres for each Indian family head, a homestead intended to encourage the Native Americans to stay in one place and farm.
Hailed in Washington as an Indian Emancipation Proclamation, the more transparent effect of the Dawes Act
was that millions of surplus acres, typically the best land too, could now be sold to white settlers.
Thus it was that in his 1891 report to Congress, President Benjamin Harrison could insist that the Dawes Act and the American Dream went hand in hand.
Since March 4, 1889, Harrison proclaimed, about 23 million acres have been separated from Indian reservations
and added to the public domain for the use of those who desired to secure free homes under our beneficent laws.
It is difficult to estimate, he continued, the increase of wealth which will result from the conversion of these waste lands into farms,
but it is more difficult to estimate the betterment which will result to the families that have found renewed hope and courage
in the ownership of a home and the assurance of a comfortable subsistence under free and healthful conditions.
Hearing words like that a hundred years later helps one to understand that at the very least,
if the West was indeed another name for possibility and opportunity, then the possibilities realized and opportunities exercised
were at best a mixed moral matter.
Although Frederick Jackson Turner was convinced in 1893 that never again will such gifts of free land offer themselves,
he was equally persuaded that he would be a rash prophet who should assert that the expansive character of American life has now entirely ceased.
Turner understood that Americans who dwell in possibility will seek and find what might be called pluralistic frontiers,
for frontiers and the dreams they inspire occupy diverse dimensions of American life.
In a 1966 introduction to Tocqueville's Democracy and America, for example, Max Lerner suggests that during the 1830s and 1840s,
the United States had a triple frontier, geographical, industrial, commercial, and democratic,
the latter personified by Andrew Jackson, the nation's first Western president.
To these, Turner or Lerner, rather, Lerner might have added a fourth frontier, namely a philosophical frontier called transcendentalism,
which opened not in the West, but in the East.
Under the leadership of Ralph Waldo Emerson, a diverse group of New England thinkers and writers centered around the Massachusetts
village of Concord, they included people like Theodore Parker, Margaret Fuller, and Henry David Thoreau.
This group of people set off a kind of second American revolution.
theirs was not a violent revolution, nor even one that sought power for partisan purposes.
It did have political implications, however, for the transcendentalists urged their fellow Americans to consider anew what it means to be alive.
Three targets drew the transcendentalists' fire.
First, we could say they were pretty well opposed to the old Puritan theology that had existed, which Emerson called the mumps and measles of the soul.
They despised this view basically because it seemed to them it had such a dark view of humankind and even of God,
who was so often portrayed as a God of judgment and one who would punish wrongdoers for their sins.
So they were opposed to that point of view.
But another target that they had in mind was that they wanted Americans to cease and desist imitating European culture.
Emerson especially and Thoreau and the others in this group were always agitating for Americans to find their own way of doing things,
particularly where literature and art and poetry were concerned.
They wanted something that was American and not just borrowed from other places.
And then a third thing that they were quite concerned about, one could say, was simply that they felt that Americans too often were kind of asleep at the switch.
They just were failing to live up to their potential.
They weren't probing deeply enough into their own spirits and they were preoccupied on the other side of the ledger too much with material and financial concerns.
So they were critical of those things.
Also in their package of beliefs, there were three kind of basic ideas that they held of a more positive nature, their kind of positive philosophical view.
And these shared convictions might have been summarized by Emerson's something as follows.
First, he would have stressed and the others along with him that the most genuine human life is characterized by moral sensitivity and spiritual awareness.
They referred often to intuition as they called it, which is a kind of combination of reason and feeling and imagination,
which if it were used correctly could lead one beyond the appearances of experience into a discovery of the fundamentals of life,
which for them placed an emphasis on unity, beauty and goodness.
Secondly, they stressed very much that nature was of importance and that it should be studied not simply from a scientific point of view,
but as a kind of place where one could discover moral and spiritual and even political truths that were important.
Nature provided a kind of language, the transcendentalist thought, which read correctly can teach people what they are and how to live.
And since America at its best is like nature, both many and one, the nation, the transcendentalist thought, was also potentially a social manifestation of nature and even of divinity itself.
Thirdly, the transcendentalist stressed that realization of one's relations with others should be coupled with a self-reliance rooted in the development of one's own personal, moral and spiritual qualities.
The true claims of the individual, they thought, can be reconciled with those that are proper to society as a whole if we recognize the existence of a fundamental spiritual quality in reality,
from which all things arise and which permeates everything and everyone.
Through such reconciliation, the spirit of democracy is nourished, but this depended then in turn for the transcendentalists on each person to find out who they are, what their potential is,
and to act upon it and to use it.
So they had a view that stressed very much the spiritual quality of the natural world and of our lives, and this enabled them to envision a combination of unity and diversity,
oneness and manyness that would produce a kind of harmony, which if everyone did their part and understood correctly what nature was revealing to us would produce a society that would truly be one in which human excellence could be achieved.
Emerson's book, Nature, was the first great transcendentalist document. It appeared in 1836.
It was the most through-going expression of his view of the physical world and humanity's relationship to it.
His essay about the American scholar was in turn a classic declaration of America's cultural independence from the courtly muses of Europe, as he called them,
and more generally from the authority of the past, and his famous discussion of self-reliance became the quintessential statement of America's faith in that individualism which, according to Frederick Jackson Turner, was nurtured by the frontier.
In that essay, Emerson urged his countrymen to trust the aboriginal self on which a universal reliance may be grounded, to cultivate the unaffected innocence of the child, which he believed the American society of his day was conspiring to destroy.
While he agreed with his friend, Henry David Thoreau, that as Emerson put it in his essay on politics, the less government we have, the better. There is nothing anarchic or savage about Emerson's ideal individual.
The aboriginal self to which he refers is instead the buried genius within everyone. It is the divine idea which each of us represents, the image of the over-soul, Emerson's word for God, whose primary wisdom, lying in the deep forests of the heart beneath a socially conditioned consciousness, is the best weapon against a stifling conformity.
Henry David Thoreau, Emerson's most famous disciple, was more outspoken about concrete social issues, slavery for example, and labor conditions in the textile mills of Lowell, Massachusetts, and he was more the radical, non-conformist than his mentor Emerson.
As his famous book Walden testifies, he also lived in closer contact with the land and wrote more concretely about the natural world. For all his naturalistic pursuits and descriptions, however, they were not in themselves his principal concerns.
Keenly conscious of what he called the doubleness of all things, Thoreau too, like Emerson, was primarily concerned with nature as a symbol of certain higher laws.
To focus on the physical as physical and nothing more would be to give oneself over entirely to one's animal nature, he thought, and to subordinate one's spiritual faculties. It would correspond to what Thoreau called life without principle.
Thus the rose frontier, like Emerson's, was an interior region. The West, he contemplated, was a country of the soul.
True in his early essay, Walking, he speaks of the West in standard 19th century terms as representing progress, fertility, and the future.
Its physical spaciousness, he indicates, may actually produce an intellectual expansion.
Yet even in this essay, his westward walking principally symbolizes his exploration of the wildness within himself, and one suspects that his advice to young men to go west should be taken unlike Horace Greeley's more symbolically and spiritually than literally.
Thoreau's comments in an essay called Life Without Principle represent his attitudes with special clarity.
Declaring that the ways by which you may get money, almost without exception, lead downward, and lamenting the incessant activity of his money-minded neighbors,
Thoreau also believes that physical movement in itself, westward or otherwise, can be a distraction from that spiritual voyaging that plunged into the profound depths of the soul, which is the really important business of life.
Hence he derides the rush for gold in California that was going on at the time.
Since the most precious metal is the gold within, one need go no farther than the concord woods to mine it.
Once found, it shines like the ever-glorious morning, one of Thoreau's favorite metaphors for the discovery of that primal innocence, which to him as to Emerson is the basis of moral principle.
How to live and what to live for? The answers to those questions were the object of Thoreau's retreat to Walden Pond, a pioneering venture on his own personal frontier.
I went to the woods, Thoreau concluded, because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential facts of life, and to see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not when I came to die, discover that I had not lived.
How to live, what to live for? The essential facts of life.
Such frontier issues were not only on Thoreau's mind at Walden Pond.
In the summer of 1848, about a year after Thoreau left his hut at Walden Pond for good, and about a year before he authored his well-known essay on civil disobedience,
five women, Quakers, and seasoned abolitionists among them, named Jane Hunt, Mary Ann McClintock, Martha Wright, Lucretia Mott, and Elizabeth Katie Stanton, carried forward their own frontier dreams by sending a notice to the Seneca County Courier, the newspaper in Seneca Falls, New York.
The notice announced that a convention to discuss the social, civil, and religious conditions and rights of women will be held on Wednesday and Thursday, the 19th and 20th of July.
As the five women began to plan the agenda for the Seneca Falls Convention, Elizabeth Katie Stanton saw that a careful restating of the Declaration of Independence might provide the best expression of their American dreams.
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men and women are created equal.
In that phrase, Elizabeth Katie Stanton did nothing more than add two words. Those two, however, said a lot.
In other places, her Declaration of Sentiments, as it was called, had more to say.
For example, she wrote,
The history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on the part of man toward woman, having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over her.
To prove this, she added, paraphrasing Jefferson, let facts be submitted to a candid world.
Stanton's facts showed why American women had good reason to feel themselves, as she put it, aggrieved, oppressed, and fraudulently deprived of their most sacred rights.
And the Seneca Falls Declaration insisted that these women should have immediate admission to all the rights and privileges which belong to them as citizens of these United States.
To make those rights and privileges more specific, the Declaration from Seneca Falls offered a series of resolutions.
One of them called for women to have an equal participation with men in the various trades, professions, and commerce.
A view that Supreme Court Justice Joseph Bradley would contest in his 1872 decision in a case called Bradwell versus Illinois.
In that case decision, Bradley wrote that the natural timidity and delicacy of the female sex evidently unfits it for many of the occupations of civil life.
68 women and 32 men signed the Seneca Falls Declaration.
Among the latter, Frederick Douglass, the escaped slave whose voice was so often raised on behalf of abolition and human rights.
Although it passed, the only resolution that was not unanimously adopted by the signers was the ninth one.
It held that it is the duty of the women of this country to secure to themselves their sacred right to the elective franchise.
To the vote, in other words.
As late as 1905, President Grover Cleveland would be on record as saying that sensible and reasonable women do not want to vote.
And American women would not obtain the franchise until the ratification of the 19th Amendment in 1920.
Other resolutions from the Seneca Falls Convention created a legacy of issues about equality that remain unresolved even now.
But the Seneca Falls Declaration contained an influential vision nonetheless.
Perhaps no ingredient in that vision has proved to be more important than the fact that by working on their feminist frontiers,
Elizabeth Katie Stanton and her friends helped to show how the American dream has vital self-corrective and expansive power.
Now, another frontier and what I'm trying to do here is to suggest to you the variety of kind of frontier themes that you can explore when you think about the American dream.
Some of these are geographical, of course, but others have to do with philosophical themes and political questions too.
There seem to be lots of frontiers that Americans have to deal with and these are very much a part of our history and our consciousness.
So let me try to tell you just about one more in the time that's remaining here.
And this one we'll have to do with another American philosopher whose name was William James.
Born six years before the Seneca Falls Convention at the height of the transcendentalist movement and son of a father sympathetic to some aspects of it,
William James became an influential leader in the American philosophical movement known as pragmatism.
James had learned from Emerson and Thoreau, but in contrast to them, he argued for what he called the pluralistic side,
stressing the flux and variety of experience in a world that he called imperfectly unified still and perhaps always to remain so.
Like the transcendentalist, James did believe that reality is in process, but to such an extent that truth itself, far from being eternal,
is in the making as propositions are acted upon and tested in concrete situations.
Human freedom, James affirmed, has much to say in determining what the world and even truth itself will be.
Writing at the turn of the century, James did not disagree with Benjamin Franklin's poor Richard, who said God helps them that help themselves,
but neither did he believe that a world of genuine freedom could be so automatically pro-American as some vociferous nationalists supposed.
No fortunes, James argued, can be told in advance. Choices yet to be made and actions still to be carried out decide what will happen.
By no means, however, are fulfillment and salvation impossible, James thought, and if Americans will do their best, progress toward both can be made.
James loved the United States, but he was no uncritical patriot, referring especially to the squalid cash interpretation that he found Americans putting on it.
He called success the bitch goddess. With that earthy metaphor, James was not attacking individual accomplishment.
He was, however, casting aspersions on the drive toward bigness that he saw at the roots of American business and industrial expansion.
He was also opposed to the nation's imperialistic leanings, of which he regarded the 1898 Spanish-American War as a primary example.
Dangerous lurked, he believed, in growing materialistic hungers spurred on by American accomplishments so that, as he put it, the picture papers of Europe are already drawing Uncle Sam with the hog instead of the eagle for his heraldic emblem.
The scenes of global warfare and international economic chaos were beginning to sprout as James's life came to a close.
They would create a profoundly different situation than he knew, but in his own day, James worked to save Americans from themselves, convinced as he was that the deadliest enemies of nations are not their foreign foes, they always dwell within their own borders.
James's American dream was that Americans would use freedom wisely. Doing so, he thought, involved frontier conditions.
James's accent on the frontiers of an open, evolving universe, on the world as possibility and opportunity, on the virtues of the strenuous mood, as he called it, all of these are compatible enough with the transcendentalists' optimism.
But Emerson's sometimes fuzzy mysticism and the symbolic mode inherent to transcendentalist writing are lacking in James. He is surely more tolerant and less ironic than Thoreau.
Indeed, James's essay on a certain blindness in human beings sounds like a criticism of Thoreau's contempt for people who are apparently concerned only with making a living.
One has no right, James says, to pass hasty judgment on the labor of others, for that labor may have significance to them beyond what we perceive.
It may reward them with a sense of duty fulfilled or of a victory in the face of obstacles.
Thoreau asserts that most men and women are blind to themselves. James says they are more likely to be blind to one another.
The blindness that separates one consciousness from another constitutes a frontier that should be opened, not closed.
In other ways, however, James resembles Emerson and Thoreau more than might be suspected.
A psychologist as well as a philosopher and a student of the varieties of religious experience, as he called one of his great books,
James, too, was vitally concerned with what he called the objective world, the vast world of inner life beyond us, so different from that of outward seeming,
a sense of which can come upon us from nature and from other people alike.
Despite his tolerance, James, too, deplored Americans' obsession with practical interest.
He even went so far as to suggest, like Thoreau, that a person may have to be a loafer to gain insight into the truly significant and thus be able to change the usual standards of human value.
And recalling both Emerson and Thoreau, James asserted the sovereignty of the present, this world, he contended, never did anywhere or at any time contain more of essential divinity or of eternal meaning than it does here and now.
By Frederick Jackson Turner's reckoning, the first period of American history ended four centuries from the discovery of America at the end of 100 years of life under the Constitution with the closing of the frontier.
Yet ideas and language associated with the frontier resound in our national rhetoric.
They do so partly because of the history and legacy of the geographical frontier and partly because of frontier challenges of the kind explored by Emerson and Thoreau, Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton and William James.
As long as it dwells in possibility, American life seems likely to keep frontier dreams alive.
Further evidence along those lines will appear in the next lecture's survey of unalienable rights and rugged individualism.
