Lecture 4, Inalienable Rights and Rugged Individualism
The themes that we've been working on continue. They cut across one lecture to another.
We've talked about the frontier last time, and I hope you'll hear some echoes of the frontier theme coming up again in this lecture, which is on inalienable rights and rugged individualism.
The epigraph to start us off comes from Woody Guthrie, whom I've quoted before.
This land is your land. This land is my land. This land was made for you and me.
When my children were little, we used to play another game by Milton Bradley. You'll think I collect a lot of games. I actually don't have too many, but two of them are relevant to our themes here.
This one was called The Game of Life. Winning, predictably, meant being a millionaire, but unlucky rolls of the dice could make you a loser instead.
In that case, the game board said you retired to the country and became a philosopher.
So I didn't mind losing this game too much when I played.
A few years later, as you know from what we've said earlier, Milton Bradley varied the theme. While millionaire status was still the goal, life's game became the American Dream.
These pursuits of happiness, these games both provided help along the way. You could take a stock market tip, buy insurance, or try a new career.
Failure to make the right move at the right time, however, spelled mediocrity if not misfortune or disaster.
But the game designers neglected to offer assistance that Americans apparently consume as quickly as publishers can put their writers' advice-filled words between covers.
To reflect American life accurately, somewhere, the Game of Life and the American Dream game should have let you land on a square where you could buy, read, and heed a self-help book.
Doing that is part of the American way as old as it has been profitable for those whose trade is books.
Scores of self-help books appear every year. They cover a host of topics.
Some offer to teach us how to enhance business by becoming one-minute managers.
Others prescribe how to improve our looks or personalities, how to achieve better health by adopting a vegetarian diet, or how to expand happiness by doing aerobics or running a marathon.
By reading, you can also learn how to remodel your house, or enjoy better sex, or how to cope with earthquakes, children, and the Internal Revenue Service.
Still, other examples preach the power of positive thinking, or if that's not trendy enough, the latest New Age spirituality.
Principles of success, rules for living well, and the steps always simple, it seems, to put them into practice.
These are the keys to the kingdom of self-help.
Not surprisingly, many of them unlock the secrets of the game of life and the American dream. They map the way to wealth.
Whatever the aim envisioned by self-help books, which are a kind of frontier approach, I suppose, in some ways, their pitch is usually that grasping the goal is within everyone's reach.
Yet the appeal is also that if you take their advice, the wisdom you show in doing so will make you different and better than the mediocre majority who lack the good sense and initiative to improve.
These books, in a word, sell both ways. Anyone can do it, they insist, but their advice is especially for you, the discerning individual who has uncommon determination to try.
But if such appeals want to make us feel good about ourselves twice over, they trade on guilt pangs, too.
Failure to buy, read, and heed its advice warns the typical self-promoting self-help book equals lost opportunity.
The advertising for one recent entry in the self-help field, a book by Mark Fisher called The Instant Millionaire, provides a case in point.
Its hype describes the book as a concise two-hour read by a writer who wants to share generously with others the secrets of a philosophy that did not force him into country retirement but made him a millionaire at 36 instead.
One promotional blurb identifies a few of Fisher's secrets. They include cliches such as, don't be afraid to ask, don't underestimate your own self-worth and aim high.
And then this book tantalizes the prospective buyer, at least in its dust cover blurbs, by asking, for $12.95 who among us can afford not to read this book?
Fisher's advice isn't bad. One could certainly do worse with $12.95 than to buy, read, and heed his book.
However improbable, doing so might even help to make one an instant millionaire.
Less remote to ponder, though, is what the continuing popularity of the self-help genre may tell us about ourselves, the American dream, our unalienable rights, and our so-called rugged individualism.
The American dream depends on the gospel of self-help.
Already in the 18th century, Benjamin Franklin understood and promoted that vision. His witty wisdom for good living, trouble springs from idleness, for example, and early to bed and early to rise makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise.
Saying like that helped to make his poor Richard's almanac an early self-help classic.
He was urged to complete his equally famous autobiography by a friend who judged no one to be better qualified than Franklin to promote a greater spirit of industry and early attention to business, frugality, and temperance with American youth.
It provided more advice, much of it stated with an astonishing simplicity, my favorite one being simply, imitate Jesus and Socrates.
Franklin hoped for the prudent and ethical practice of business, but as we have previously noted, in the next century, the transcendentalist philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson found Americans distracted by materialistic interests.
His corrective entailed an awakening of spirit, yet these advisors shared important traits as well.
Both Franklin and Emerson criticized Americans for being half asleep, for failing to energize their potential.
Each was also highly optimistic about what American life could achieve, but everything hinged on what Emerson called self-reliance.
His 1841 essay on that subject urged the American individual to avoid conformity to understand that a foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds and to trust thyself.
Emerson's self-reliance became a fundamental statement of America's faith in individualism.
Although in some ways the self-help genre is really a form of other reliance, advising us to do what others say, it nevertheless remains quintessentially individualistic too.
Thus it is doubly indebted to Emerson and to Franklin before him.
Much good has come from American individualism and from the self-help initiatives it has produced and encouraged, but dangers lurk within this tradition too.
Insofar as self-help favors self-fulfillment over civic virtue and a publicly responsible patriotism, we may care too much for individual wealth and not enough for our common wealth.
Significantly, when the framers of the Constitution wrote its preamble, they said nothing about instant millionaires or even about winning the game of life.
Their American dream concentrated instead on establishing justice, promoting the general welfare, and securing the blessings of liberty not only for ourselves, but for our posterity.
In short, they wanted a more perfect union.
But how can rugged individuals with unalienable rights best achieve that goal if they can?
In 1962, the American novelist John Steinbeck published a book called Travels with Charlie in Search of America.
For decades he had lived in and written about the United States in works such as his classic Grapes of Wrath, but late in life Steinbeck felt out of touch with his own country.
So after packing a customized van, at least in the style it could have been customized in the late 50s or early 60s, and taking along his dog Charlie,
he set off on a journey of recovery through what he called this monster land.
The voyage involved much more than geography.
Yearning to revitalize contact with the multiple dimensions of American ground, Steinbeck wanted to renew his feeling for the country by reconnecting himself to the human scape as well as the landscape of the nation.
Within both he looked for common ground, for beliefs, attitudes and hopes that Americans could be thought to share.
He sought for foundations and experiences that provide good reasons to think that Americans possess a future worth having.
In his own American style, Steinbeck polished his findings only to have a puzzle remain.
Americans, as I saw them and talked to them, he wrote, were indeed individuals, each one different from the others, but gradually I began to feel that the Americans exist,
that they really do have generalized characteristics regardless of their states, their social and financial status, their education, their religions, and their political convictions.
But if there is indeed an American image built of truth rather than reflecting either hostility or wishful thinking, he added, what is this image?
What does it look like? What does it do?
Steinbeck's quandary has been shared by other Americans before and since his travels with Charlie.
It exists not only because Americans are individuals, but also because they have been deeply touched by the concept of individualism.
Typically, that concept stresses the separateness of one human being from another and the responsibility and initiative that each person must take, the self-help that each person must provide, on his or her own behalf.
Where such convictions lead from one generation to the next is problematical.
Individually or collectively, however, it is unlikely that Americans will set their individualism aside.
Thus, a perennial issue for the corporate possibilities of the nation is to determine critically what individualism at its best does and does not mean.
Fortunately, that task is not entirely one of new discoveries, for some Americans have thoughtfully explored the paths of individualism before.
And in addition, some observers who are not Americans but who have been especially interested in us as a people have done so as well.
An example of the latter kind is the astute French explorer whom we've met before in this series, Alexis de Tocqueville, who surveyed American ground in the 1830s and 40s.
He reckoned that among the lucky circumstances that favored the establishment and assured the maintenance of a democratic republic in the United States, the most important was the choice of the land itself in which the Americans live.
A limitless continent, Tocqueville believed, promised the opportunity and general prosperity that could blend with the Americans' love of equality and liberty to yield favorable outcomes for the pursuit of happiness.
Tocqueville envisioned Americans preparing the triumphal progress of civilization across the wilderness, but on other occasions he had second thoughts. They often focused on individualism.
Among the first to use that concept, Tocqueville understood individualism to be of democratic origin, as he put it, and early on he questioned a basic American belief, namely that individualism is a virtue.
Democracy fosters equality, Tocqueville believed, and in so doing disposes each citizen to isolate himself from the mass of his fellows and withdraw into the circle of family and friends.
Damning the spring of public virtues, Tocqueville went on to say, leaving the greater society to look after itself, individualism does not have far to go before it results in egoism or narcissism.
A passionate and exaggerated love of self, Tocqueville called it, which leads a man to think of all things in terms of himself and to prefer himself to all.
Tocqueville's worries about individualism centered on the negative implications it had for a healthy society.
He knew, of course, that individualism did include many assets, self-reliance, personal initiative, and self-help to name but three.
He even believed that Americans had succeeded in mitigating the worst effects of individualism by using their liberty to cultivate political institutions and voluntary associations so that, as he said, there should be an infinite number of occasions for the citizens to act together and so that every day they should feel that they depended on one another.
But Tocqueville never completely quieted his uneasiness that American individualism might eventually prove to be an ironic asset that would turn American ground into wasteland.
The second half of Democracy in America began with a chapter entitled, Concerning the Philosophical Approach of the Americans.
Less attention, Tocqueville observed in that chapter, is paid to philosophy in the United States than in any other country of the civilized world.
Nevertheless, praising individualism so much, he explained, Americans follow the approach of the French philosopher Descartes by displaying what Tocqueville called a general distaste for accepting any man's word as proof of anything.
Instead, they rely on individual effort and judgment to determine what they believe.
As with most of the American qualities he discussed, Tocqueville found the philosophical approach of the Americans to possess both strengths and weaknesses.
Skepticism might nurture a praiseworthy critical attitude. Self-reliance could produce desirable innovation.
But another consequence of those assets was the undermining of authority and tradition. That result in turn could lead to other mischief.
For where reliance on authority and tradition are severely undermined, people still seek confirmation of their views in the judgments of others, and their determined efforts at self-help may lead them to try the latest fad that comes along.
The despotism of unthinking conformity, which stands at a far removed from the public spirit that ensures real freedom, may not be far behind.
Evidence for the accuracy of Tocqueville's fears can be found in the Sociological Survey of American Ground conducted in the mid-1980s by Robert Bella and his associates.
Borrowing one of Tocqueville's phrases to title his study, Bella and his colleagues took the pulse of Habits of the Heart in the American middle class, and that was the title of the book, Habits of the Heart, which perhaps you know.
There Bella found individualism may have grown cancerous, that it may be destroying those social integuments that Tocqueville saw as moderating its more destructive potentialities, that it may be threatening the survival of freedom itself.
In short, Bella surmised, many Americans tend to be so obsessed with personal self-fulfillment that the capacity for commitment to the basic institutions of marriage, family, politics and religion is dangerously impaired.
Tocqueville, of course, would have found none of this surprising. His ambivalence toward democracy was considerable precisely because he feared it would unleash a sense of self-interest so badly understood as to numb senses of civic obligation and wither concerns about what is best for the community as a whole.
Sensing that radical is more apt than rugged to describe America's contemporary individualism, Bella has been skeptical that an adequate social ethic can be built on its foundations.
Nor is he very optimistic that altogether different foundations can be secured on American ground.
Once more, following Tocqueville, however, Bella and his colleagues think that biblical religion might provide a cause for hope.
Biblical religion, of course, is not one thing. Thus it often has divisive effects in America.
What Bella banks on, however, is the power of religion to make people concerned for persons and causes beyond the confines of individualistic self-fulfillment.
Religion can have this effect, at least in part, because it points to a moral order that stands beyond the vicissitudes of historical relativity and thereby can inspire individuals to pursue what is good for the community.
Bella's hopes include some ironic twists. While religious leaders and church folk are often increasingly drawn to the social and psychological sciences for solutions to problems of religious life,
Bella and his colleagues are social scientists who think that religion contains vital solutions for social and psychological maladies in our culture.
They do not suppose, however, that religion provides a sufficient resource to accomplish all that is needed if American ground is to support public beliefs and institutions that sustain democracy and freedom.
The requirement is to locate and create a variety of resources to drive home the importance of pursuing the common good.
Fortunately, the land still contains such possibilities.
Tocqueville wrote that the Americans have no school of philosophy peculiar to themselves and they pay very little attention to the rival European schools.
Indeed, they hardly know their names.
Like many of his judgments, that one was not infallible then and is even less accurate now.
American thinkers have developed a distinctive philosophical set of perspectives and in one way or another, issues about individualism and community have often been their focal point.
And so I would like to speak a little bit about how in American philosophy some of these issues about individualism have been addressed.
One who addressed the issues that we're concerned about in this lecture was the poet-philosopher Walt Whitman.
In a book called Democratic Vistas, which he published in 1871, he said that he liked to think of the words America and democracy as convertible terms.
That same work, however, displays Whitman's philosophical concern about the validity of his hopes.
Specifically, he worried that there were too few persons with some definite instinct why and for what America has arisen.
Lacking that instinct, he added, the United States might prove to be the most tremendous failure of time.
In any case, he contended America would have to count for her justification and success almost entirely on the future.
While Whitman himself did not state all that the requisite instinct involved, he linked it to his version of individualism, which he called personalism.
Democracy American-style thought Whitman insists on an equality of individuals.
That equality means nothing, however, unless it entails a two-fold recognition.
First, wherever the difference is, people are one in being persons, and second, being persons entitles all to dignity and enjoins each to respect others.
In short, if America and democracy deserve to be convertible terms, one fundamental reason for America's existence is to encourage an individualism that esteems persons.
Whitman saw another crucial element. Much depends on how to answer the question, what is a person?
But he was not the one who best spelled out an American philosophical response to that question.
That honor might be shared by Josiah Royce, America's great philosopher of community, and by thinkers such as George Santiana, John Dewey, and Reinhold Niebuhr, who were influenced by him.
Royce understood a person to be relational, stretched out into a past and a future, as well as existing in the present.
He argued that a community exists just to the degree that persons share memories and hopes, which include ethical commitments and collective loyalties.
He held further that my idea of myself is an interpretation of my past, linked also with an interpretation of my hopes and intentions as to my future.
His point to sum it up simply was that a coherent individualism requires caring relations that reach far and wide.
Such relations found in a expression on May 20, 1927.
Opening the throttle of the spirit of St. Louis that Friday morning, Charles Lindberg taxied down a long island runway to begin his solo flight across the Atlantic to Paris, France.
Nearly 34 hours later, Lucky Lindy and his plane emerged from the darkness to touch ground again.
A world had journeyed with the lone eagle, and his flight significance was not lost on American ministers who preached to their Christian congregations the next day.
A typical example of that Sunday's rhetoric was the sermon given by the Reverend Dr. Russell Bowie of Grace Episcopal Church in New York City.
In his sermon called The Lure of the Impossible, Bowie remarked that Lindberg manifested that indomitable heroism, which whether in victory or defeat, has made possible the progress of the human race toward the mastery of its world.
There is a fund of moral heroism, he continued, as well as a fund of physical heroism among men which thrills to the challenge of the impossible.
That seemed Sunday morning, far to the west of Paris in New York, another Christian pastor preached to his congregation.
The record does not show what Reinhold Niebuhr told those predominantly blue-collar workers in Detroit, but it is doubtful that his sermon was as glowing as Russell Bowie's.
For during this period, one of the entries in Niebuhr's diary included these words.
I wish that some of our romanticists and sentimentalists could sit through a series of meetings, wrote Niebuhr, where the real social problems of a city are discussed.
They would be cured of their optimism.
A city which is built around a productive process and which gives only casual thought and incidental attention to human problems is really a kind of hell.
Thousands in this town are really living in torment while the rest of us eat, drink, and make merry. What a civilization.
Niebuhr's comments would probably be equally critical today, if not more so.
For according to the National Planning Data Corporation, there are now nearly 20 American cities with populations over 250,000 and per capita incomes of less than 12,000.
Detroit is among them. So are Newark, Cleveland, St. Louis, and New Orleans.
Basing its findings on data and estimates from the Congressional Budget Office, the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities reported that in 1990 the gap between rich and poor in the United States is greater than at any time during the past 40 years.
The combined incomes of the richest 2.5 million Americans are almost the same as that of the combined incomes of the poorest 100 million Americans.
Meanwhile, the 1990 report of the National Commission to Prevent Infant Mortality showed that the United States has fallen to 20th place among developed nations in the effort to reduce infant deaths.
Our nation's capital, Washington, D.C., was found to have an infant mortality rate rivaling those of many third world countries.
Rugged individualism, unalienable rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, facts are often unfriendly to the American dream.
The world right-hold Niebuhr saw and would see today was certainly this side of paradise to borrow the title of one of F. Scott Fitzgerald's early novels.
Moreover, Niebuhr struggled within it quite differently from Fitzgerald's character Amory Blaine, an American who honestly admitted that I detest poor people.
As a young pastor in Detroit and later as one of the most perceptive thinkers the United States has yet produced, Niebuhr worked to develop a religious perspective relevant to the broad social and political questions that faced the nation and the world in the 20th century.
During the period from 1930 to 1960, he was to theology in America what John Dewey was to philosophy.
Together with George Santiana, another observer of American life who addresses the concerns of this lecture, they can still contribute greatly to a much needed public philosophy that recovers insight about why and for what America exists and that also tells us some important things about individualism.
Inside the former Nazi concentration camp at Dachau, the following words have been inscribed, those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.
That often quoted warning comes from a book called The Life of Reason, a beautifully written essay by George Santiana.
He was born in Madrid and remained a Spanish citizen throughout his life, but his university training was at Harvard where his teachers included William James and Josiah Royce.
Between 1889 and 1912 he taught philosophy at Harvard and wrote many books, but upon his resignation from the university, Santiana left the United States never to return.
England was home for a while and then Rome. He died there leaving behind a long list of literary credits.
He described himself as an American only by long association, but he nevertheless acknowledged the important contributions that American culture and American friends had made upon him.
So he affirmed that it is as an American writer that I must be counted if I am counted at all.
In 1920, Santiana published a series of essays which are still wonderful reading called Character and Opinion in the United States.
For its epigraph, he might have taken one of F. Scott Fitzgerald's comments in the novel This Side of Paradise, which was published in the same year.
Describing his character, Emery Blaine, Fitzgerald wrote, it was always the becoming he dreamed of, never the being.
Santiana would have thought that such a trait was not only quite characteristic of Emery Blaine, but of Americans in general.
As Santiana proceeded, he found first that every American is an exile, either voluntary or involuntary.
Pilgrim voyages, pioneer treks, the violence of forced relocations or just changed jobs.
These things, Santiana thought, produced what he called the moral emptiness of a settlement where men and even houses are easily moved about and no one almost lives where he was born or believes what he has been taught.
But exile status is even more complicated than that.
American uprootedness, if not rootlessness, combined with the spirit of youth that Santiana underscored repeatedly, and this was something that he found that led Americans to think very little about the past.
Ignoring or forgetting the past, putting things behind them out of sight, out of mind, is a quality matched only by romantic nostalgia when Americans do choose to recollect, as Santiana saw it.
As a people, he believed, Americans are fascinated by the future.
He also detected overwhelming optimism about what lies ahead, often supported by religion or by industrious trust in nature's bounty.
Blend and clash of idealism and materialism, though it may be, Americans, Santiana thought, have a tendency to think that all things do and shall work together for good.
According to Santiana, these attitudes supported a rough and ready individualism.
He emphasized, for example, that Americans expect every man to stand on his own legs, and when American has given his neighbor a chance, Santiana added, he thinks he has done enough for him.
Santiana thought that what he called coddling socialism did not stand much of a chance in the United States.
But Santiana also saw something more.
He found very little mean-spiritedness among the Americans he described.
On the contrary, there was a fundamentally shared commitment to the individual's pursuit of happiness.
If that commitment meant that people had to stand on their own legs, it also enjoined them, as Santiana said, to be helpful in their turn.
While Americans might disagree about what the nature of the help should be, Santiana felt that there nevertheless was substantial agreement about a basic sense of responsibility to help one another.
Acting to make that feeling reliable is still crucial for American life.
Born in Vermont, that bastion of Yankee individualism, John Dewey spent most of his life in the collective hustle of Chicago and New York.
His experiences led him to a book called Individualism Old and New, which he wrote in 1929 and 1930.
We live in times when the R-word, recession, has even been read on George Bush's lips, but when John Dewey wrote, the D-word, depression, named a devastating reality.
Dewey saw that the long-standing American emphasis on individualism provided a pivotal issue for the nation and the world.
Always somewhat mythological, old-style American individualism contended Dewey had been modeled after the image of self-reliant, self-made pioneers.
They saw opportunities for personal fortunes and set out to win them on their own.
But Dewey thought that we lived in a different time and place.
We lived in a world that was becoming increasingly incorporated.
And he felt that that should require us to rethink what individualism might mean.
Dewey advocated no return to a pre-industrial, pre-corporate America.
Assuming such a reversal had been possible, he would not have favored it.
Even in the midst of an economic slump, he saw vast increases in knowledge and technological power as vindicating the potential for good that use of scientific method can bring to life.
His point was rather that human intelligence must be used more extensively and rigorously than ever to harness that potential and to channel it toward humanizing benefits.
Instead of encouraging the practical rationality of cost-effectiveness to become the tale that wags the dog, Dewey thought that Americans must rally ingenuity to discern a revised and renewed understanding of what the initiatives of individualism ought to entail.
The basic problem facing Americans, Dewey contended, was that of forming a new psychological and moral type.
Here we get the new beginning theme coming in again.
Although that order seems more than can be accomplished, fortunately it may also be true that such an order is unnecessary to recover and act upon the purposes for which America has arisen.
What Dewey talked about was essentially something quite close to the core of an already existing American sensitivity that is alive, if muted even now.
Robert Bella observed, for example, in his study, Habits of the Heart, that contemporary Americans do not always practice the radical individualism they preach.
Functionally, he noted, their lives are given meaning by familial, communal, public ties that transcend the individualistic calculus of self-fulfillment at which the culture has become so verbally adept.
If they need more experiences of social commitments that sustain, nevertheless Americans do sense that those relationships of memory and hope are the substance of essential life.
Anticipating what Bella has confirmed, Reinhold Niebuhr shared Dewey's ethical and pragmatic concerns, but his sense of tragedy in human life was more profound, thus giving him affinities with Santiana as well as a perspective for criticizing some of the excesses to which national life is prone.
The difference between Santiana and Niebuhr was also significant, however, for Santiana saw religion mainly as something aesthetic, while Niebuhr was fundamentally committed to the notion that history is not simply a drama involving men and women, but also one that includes God.
He kept confidence in what he called a divine power whose resources are greater than those of men and whose suffering love can overcome the corruptions of man's achievements without negating the significance of our striving.
That confidence backed up a famous prayer which is known to many people, but not always credited as it should be to Reinhold Niebuhr.
God give us grace to accept with serenity the things that cannot be changed, courage to change the things that should be changed, and the wisdom to distinguish the one from the other.
Niebuhr, however, never counted on religion to be the unifying element in American life.
Not only did he recognize that the varieties of our religious and non-religious experience were too extensive for that outcome to occur, he also harbored skepticism about so-called civil religion, suspecting that it typically legitimated established ways undeserving of the favor.
In that respect Niebuhr had learned from Karl Marx, but he also drew the line where Marx's influence was concerned.
Though Niebuhr agreed that religion could be the opium of the people, he stressed that its role could and must be very different.
Religion, he believed, was properly prophetic, a critic of culture.
Within the United States, he affirmed, one of religion's tasks was to keep attention focused on the heart of democratic individualism.
One of Niebuhr's best remembered lines, and he was a little bit like Franklin and some others, he could get off very nice kind of aphoristic sayings about things, but one of his most memorable lines I think is this one.
He said on one occasion, man's capacity for justice makes democracy possible, but man's inclination to injustice makes democracy necessary.
Niebuhr attested that the best insights of Western religious and democratic political theory converged to affirm the preciousness of individual personhood.
The religious sensitivity of Americans could provide much needed energy, he added, to make that belief a resource for the highest forms of social realization.
For to the extent that any individual or group takes seriously the individual personhood of others, the recognition that respect is owed them receives a boost.
Thus Niebuhr insisted that religion, though it cannot unify the country, remains a vital ingredient in any sound understanding of why and for what America exists.
Niebuhr's instinct about America suggested to him a creed that combined competition and cooperation.
The energy encouraged by individual freedom, he thought, could result in common purposes.
Quarrelsome differences among American brothers and sisters might keep driving home the fact that they are one people after all, if not a family.
By communally ensuring each other basic rights to go personal ways, they might stay together on the same way.
Still seeking the covenant so rarely found, America, Niebuhr urged, needs to use the irony within its history as a prod to discover the twists of biblical paradox that Niebuhr himself loved so much to employ.
Those twists include insights like these.
People who try to secure their own ways alone are far more likely to lose themselves than those who take the risks of giving their lives for others.
A coherent individualism requires caring to understand that interdependence makes independence possible.
Personal initiative that does not serve others impoverishes the communal spirit necessary to give that initiative life and vitality.
Each in his own way, Santiana, Dewey and Niebuhr urged that through ability and effort, individual Americans could achieve success and thereby reveal the depth of our potential to create and share a true Commonwealth,
one that would extend well beyond the borders of the United States.
Yet hopeful those these thinkers were about American individualism and its future, their optimism also remained rightly guarded by critical and even skeptical questions.
Santiana wondered what the mix of idealism and materialism in American life would be.
Dewey pondered whether Americans would use their vast scientific and technological skill for rational moral ends.
Niebuhr tried to find the needed ways to make relevant the messages contained in the ancient traditions of Passover and Easter.
They all might have affirmed not only for themselves, but also for the nation, what Walt Whitman, Josiah Royce and F. Scott Fitzgerald would also have found convincing.
Namely that if this land is truly made for you and me, that prospect requires understanding that the highest forms of social realization depend on cooperative dependence as well as on individual independence.
Discovering why and for what America exists entails that more than the becoming should make up the American dream.
The being, the substance of what America has been and is, which includes the best in our tradition of individualism, needs to grip people equally.
As we shall see again in the next lecture, it will concentrate on dreams of success, disenchantment and depression.
As we will see in that lecture, the being informs and even determines what a becoming individualism can possibly be.
