Lecture 7 The American Dream and Holocaust Questions
The topic for this lecture I'm calling American Dreams and Holocaust Questions.
The opening quotation that I'd like to start with comes from one of our distinguished
American citizens, a man named Elie Wiesel, who happens to be a survivor of Auschwitz,
and also in 1986 received the Nobel Peace Prize.
In one of his essays he makes this statement, the Holocaust, he says, demands interrogation
and calls everything into question.
Traditional ideas and acquired values, philosophical systems and social theories all must be revised
in the shadow of Birkenau.
I'll come back to that statement in just a little bit, but I want to begin by mentioning
a phrase from a book that is a very interesting study of the Holocaust.
It's called Into That Darkness, and it was written by a journalist scholar by the name
of Gita Sereni.
In this book she carried on a series of interviews with a fascinating and very problematic man
by the name of Franz Stengel.
Franz Stengel had the dubious distinction of being the commandant of not one, but two
of the Nazi death camps in Poland.
He was the chief administrator for a time at a camp called Sobobor, and later at a camp
called Treblinka.
He had escaped to South America, but was found there and eventually extradited back to West
Germany at the time, and he stood trial there as a war criminal, was convicted and given
a life sentence in prison.
Gita Sereni was present at the trial of Franz Stengel in Germany, and as a journalist she
got the idea that there really was a very important story to track down in more detail
than her journalistic assignment would permit.
And so she set herself the task of trying to interview him more extensively and then
to write a book about him and his experiences.
In the process she interviewed a lot of his family, his associates, and a lot of other
people who were involved in some of the activities that he engaged in.
In this book, as she sums up what she found, she stresses the following kind of general
points.
Individuals remain responsible for their action and its consequences, but persons are and
must be responsible for each other too.
What we do as individuals, she contends at the end, is deeply vulnerable and profoundly
dependent on a climate of life that reflects the fatal interdependence of all human actions
and that last is the phrase, the fatal interdependence of all human actions.
I first read that book and that phrase nearly 20 years ago and it stuck with me and it has
served as a kind of principle that governs a lot of my thinking, the fatal interdependence
of all human actions.
If Gita Sarene was correct to speak about that relationship, the fatal interdependence
of all human actions, and I think that she was correct, then how might American dreams
and holocaust questions be related?
That's a question that keeps moving me.
One reason is illustrated by Stingo, the young American dreamer whose voyage of discovery
as William Styron describes, it fills the pages of his controversial novel called Sophie's
Choice.
Initiated by Sophie Zalastowska, a fictional Polish Catholic who like thousands of her
actual Polish sisters and brothers experienced Auschwitz, Stingo in 1947 learns about a world
very different from his own.
As Sophie's story unfolds, Stingo undergoes shocks of recognition, including as he relates
the incident, the absurd fact that on that afternoon as Sophie first set foot on the
railroad platform in Auschwitz, it was a lovely spring morning in Raleigh, North Carolina
where I was gorging myself on bananas.
On that day, Styron says it was April Fool's Day, 1943, Stingo was 17.
He was desperately trying to make the weight requirement for enlistment into the United
States Marines.
He squeaked by.
He had never heard of Auschwitz.
American dreams and holocaust questions.
In some ways these dimensions of life are as different as the experiences of Sophie and
Stingo in April 1943, and yet those realities intersect and challenge each other in ways
that can make one wonder.
In Styron's novel about Sophie Zalastowska, Stingo meets her in a place as strange as
Brooklyn, but their shared experience climaxes in Washington, D.C.
When we walked through the evening in total silence, Stingo recalls, it was plain that
Sophie and I could appreciate neither the symmetry of the city nor its air of wholesome
and benevolent peace.
Washington suddenly appeared paradigmatically American, sterile, geometrical, unreal.
Auschwitz realized Stingo stalked my soul as well as hers.
Was there no end to this, he wondered?
No end?
What if Auschwitz stalks our souls too?
What would that presence do to American dreams?
The holocaust demands interrogation and calls everything into question.
Traditional ideas and acquired values, philosophical systems and social theories all must be revised
in the shadow of Birkenau.
Birkenau was the killing center at Auschwitz, and those words that I've cited again are
Elie Wiesel's.
Jewish survivor of Auschwitz, distinguished author and humanitarian, Nobel laureate for
peace, Elie Wiesel is also an American.
He seeks understanding, but not too much.
While wanting people to study the holocaust, he alerts them to the dangers of thinking
that they do or can or even should know everything about it.
He stresses as that quote suggests that whatever the traditional ideas and acquired values
that have existed, whatever the philosophical systems and social theories that human minds
have produced, whatever the dreams that have been dreamed, they either help to pave the
way to Auschwitz or proved inadequate to block the way to that place soon enough.
Granted American attention could not have been completely focused on the European situation,
because the United States was waging a massive war against Japan in the Pacific.
Among the shadows of that campaign, however, something closer to home bears remembering
it has been portrayed in a recent film, for example, called Come See the Paradise, authorized
by an executive order signed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt on February 19th, 1942,
just a few weeks after Japan's bombing of Pearl Harbor, the federal government supposedly
to forestall possible attacks by Japanese agents against strategic installations in
the United States, the government took action to relocate about 120,000 ordinary citizens
and immigrants of Japanese descent into 10 concentration camps.
The internment's legality was contested in the courts, but Justice Murphy's comment
that the evacuation bore a melancholy resemblance to the Nazis' treatment of the Jews notwithstanding,
the Supreme Court finally ruled that the military under certain special circumstances has the
legal right to discriminate against certain groups of citizens based on their ethnic background.
Bubbling precedents lurk in that decision, among them the court's silence about the inconsistency
between such a ruling and the 14th Amendment to the Constitution, which guarantees citizens'
equal protection of the laws.
It's important to stress that Manzanar and the other internment camps did not become
an Auschwitz.
American policy was far removed from Nazi genocide.
In addition, a Civil Liberties Act, passed, however, only in 1988, led in October 1990
to the first distribution of $1.5 billion in government reparations, which will provide
checks of about $20,000 and a presidential apology to the more than 60,000 surviving
internees or heirs of those who were still living when the law was enacted.
Yet as John Dunn, the Justice Department official who supervised the redress effort has said,
the injustice of the forced evacuation and detainment of citizens without due process
of the law was a constitutional travesty.
Eventually, American military might brought not only Japanese surrender, but it also proved
essential to bringing the Third Reich to its knees.
Yet even if the history cannot be detailed here, it also bears remembering that David
Wyman, the leading authority on the subject, hits the target when he writes about the abandonment
of the Jews by the United States during the Hitler era.
In the late 1930s, restrictive immigration possibilities meant that the American dream
of Emma Lazarus, the poet whose words give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses
yearning to breathe free, which are words inscribed on the Statue of Liberty.
Restrictive immigration policies in the 1930s meant that people who might have come here
would find that dream tragically deferred in ways that would be deadly.
Negative attitudes toward Jews Wyman shows in his research penetrated all sectors of
wartime America.
Even after public governmental acknowledgement in December 1942 that the Jews were being
slaughtered in mass, the government was not moved to take action specifically directed
at alleviating Jewish plight.
Not least of the reasons for that inaction was American anti-Semitism.
According to Wyman, polls taken from August 1940 until the war's end showed that 15 to
24 percent of the respondents looked upon Jews as a, quote, menace to America.
Such ingredients conspired to yield a record less noble than the American dream might like
to envision.
Nor does Birkenau's shadow on American ground stop there.
A man by the name of Alan Ryan, for example, who headed up investigations carried out by
the United States Department of Justice has written a book about Nazi war criminals who
entered the United States.
And his conclusion about his findings is that the United States government didn't do a particularly
good job in trying to screen out and identify a lot of those people.
Such a report would have saddened but not surprised novelist Ralph Ellison whom we have
heard before.
In 1945 he was working on a different narrative when what he identifies as blue-toned laughter
began to dominate his imagination.
Probably the laughter that he heard in this voice that was running through his imagination
compelled him to give full expression to its voice, which belonged to the invisible man
who had been forged, Ellison noted, in the underground of American experience and yet
managed to emerge less angry than ironic.
The story that Ellison set aside in order to work on the novel that became his classic
invisible man was to be about a pilot who had been downed by the Luftwaffe and interned
in a Nazi POW camp.
This pilot was the highest ranking officer in the group of prisoners that happened to
be in this particular place as Ellison's story plot unfolded.
And so owing to the conventions of war he would be the spokesman for his fellow prisoners.
Like Ellison himself, the pilot that he was writing about was black.
Prisoner of racists and also the leader of prisoners who in normal American circumstances
would not see him as their equal, let alone as their superior, Ellison's pilot would
have to navigate his way between the democratic ideals he affirmed and the prevailing mystique
of race and color.
This dilemma, Ellison went on to say when he was telling about this postponed story,
this dilemma was to be given a further twist of the screw by the pilot's awareness that
once the peace was signed, the German camp commander could immigrate to the United States
and immediately take advantage of freedoms that would be denied to the black pilot.
If Ralph Ellison never finished that story, his pilot's voice like that of invisible man
would seem to echo Langston Hughes' poem, Let America Be America Again.
Oh yes, I say it plain, wrote Hughes, America never was America to me, and yet I swear this
oath, America will be, its dream lies deep in the heart of me.
Ellison's novel, Invisible Man, ends where it begins.
This unnamed character is in the underground hideout where American experience has driven
him.
Ellison is awakening from a state of hibernation, as he calls it, and his awakening entails
writing.
Thus, in the novel's epilogue, which to my mind is one of the most brilliant pieces
of American writing I know, Ellison expresses his character's outlook as follows.
And I think if you'll hear these words, they contain a rather remarkable philosophy.
So why do I write, Ellison has this invisible man think to himself, torturing myself to
put it down?
Because in spite of myself, I've learned some things.
Without the possibility of action, all knowledge comes to one labeled file and forget, and
I can neither file nor forget.
Normal certain ideas forget me.
They keep filing away at my lethargy, my complacency.
All it is that now I denounce and defend or feel prepared to defend, I condemn and affirm,
say no and say yes, say yes and say no.
I denounce because though implicated and partially responsible, I have been hurt to the point
of abysmal pain, hurt to the point of invisibility.
And I defend because in spite of all I find that I love.
In order to get some of it down, I have to love.
I sell you no phony forgiveness.
I'm a desperate man, but too much of your life will be lost.
It's meaning lost unless you approach it as much through love as through hate.
So I approach it through division.
So I denounce and I defend, and I hate and I love.
Ralph Ellison's emphasis on diversity and his approach through division resonate with
Ellie Wiesel's insistence that the shadow of Birkenau warrants against placing too much
confidence in answers.
Typically, however, the human propensity seems to be to quest for certainty.
Wiesel's urging, the questions he contends, the questions must remain questions is to
resist that temptation, especially when it aims to settle things that ought to remain
unsettled and unsettling.
What Wiesel and others, I think, have led us to see is that the Holocaust happened in
a way because Hitler and the minds that he persuaded seem to have confidence that they
understood that one religion had superseded another.
They comprehended that one race was superior to every other.
They saw what nature's laws decreed, namely that there was what in German was called Lebensunverteesleben,
life unworthy of life.
Thus they realized who deserved to live and who deserved to die.
Hitler and his Nazi followers knew they were right, and their knowing made them killers.
Before it was too late, questioning might have redeemed those who became the killers
and their victims.
As Ellison Hughes, Stylin, and others helped to show, destructive qualities of mind, certainly
not identical but still akin to those that took Ellie Wiesel to Auschwitz, also have
scarred American ground from time to time.
They led Ellison's invisible man to remark, and he speaks for more than himself, that
I'd like to hear five recordings of Louis Armstrong playing and singing all at the
same time.
In an empty bed, springs hard as lead, pains in my head, feel like old Ned.
What did I do to be so black and blue?
No joys for me, no company, even the mouse ran from my house.
All my life through I've been so black and blue.
I'm white inside, don't help my case, because I can't hide what is on my face.
I'm so forlorn, life's just a thorn.
My heart is torn.
Why was I born?
What did I do to be so black and blue?
The shadow of Birkenau questions the American dream.
In William Stylin's story about Sophie Zawestowska, an SS doctor gave her a choiceless choice.
She could pick which of her two children, Jan or Eva, should go to the gas.
Ishkan Nisht Veiland, she screamed.
Sophie could not choose, and yet so is not to lose them both.
She let Eva go.
Limited though it was, Sophie's choice was real, so was her sense of guilt.
Set free in 1945, she found her way to the United States.
And as the lyric from Les Miserables so aptly states, there are dreams that cannot be, and
there are storms we cannot weather.
Liberation left Sophie in the shadow of Birkenau.
She found inescapable the conclusion that her own life, even in America, where she hoped
for a new beginning, was not worth living.
In 1947, Sophie let it go too, also by choice.
With Sophie Zawestowska being a Jew, she would have had no choice.
For Hitler's racist anti-Semitism and the power of his Nazi state destined all Jews
for annihilation.
Such facts have prompted another of the nation's eminent Jewish thinkers, Richard Rubenstein,
to write a book called The Cunning of History, The Holocaust and the American Future.
There he wonders about the truths that Thomas Jefferson taught Americans to hold self-evident.
As we have noted before in this lecture series, none of those truths is more crucial to the
American dream than the claim that persons are endowed by their creator with certain
unalienable rights.
Those rights, Jefferson believed, are not merely legal privileges that people grant
to each other as they please, rather his philosophy held reason rightly used shows such rights
are natural.
Part and parcel of what is meant by human existence, they belong equally to all humanity
and presumably cannot be violated with impunity.
Nonetheless, the sense in which rights are unalienable, inviolable, absolute, unassailable,
and inherent, is an elusive part of Jefferson's declaration, which also states that to secure
these rights, governments are instituted among men.
Apparently unalienable rights are not invulnerable, but if they are not invulnerable, then in
what way are they unalienable?
One important answer could be that what is and what ought to be are clearly not the same
and reason can make the distinction.
To speak of unalienable rights, therefore, is to speak of conditions of existence so
basic that they ought never to be abrogated.
Persuasive, though it may be, such reasoning may still give too little comfort.
Rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness are qualified repeatedly, even by
governments that seek to secure them.
More and more radically, Auschwitz questions what we might call the functional status of
unalienable rights.
In Rubenstein's words, for example, the Holocaust, and genocide, and other related instances
of population riddance, suggest that there are absolutely no limits to the degradation
and assault the managers and technicians of violence can inflict upon men and women who
lack the power of effective resistance.
True, many say that certain rights must not be usurped.
Still, if those rights are violated completely and all too often with impunity, and they
are, how can they convincingly be called natural or unalienable?
Is that not one more idealistic illusion, another instance of how the American dream
may obscure reality?
Rubenstein's proposition about these matters is certainly arguable, but he contends that
greater credibility is found when one concludes that rights do not belong to men by nature.
To the extent that men have rights, Rubenstein argues, they have them only as members of
the polis, the political community.
Outside of the polis, there are no inborn restraints on the human exercise of destructive
power.
A man named Hans Meyer knew too well whereof Richard Rubenstein speaks.
Born on October 31, 1912, the only child of a Catholic mother and a Jewish father, more
than anything else, Hans Meyer thought of himself as an Austrian, not least because
his father's family had lived in that country since the 17th century.
Hans Meyer, however, lived in the 20th century, and thus it was that in September 1935 he
studied a newspaper in a Viennese coffee house.
The Nuremberg laws had just been promulgated in Nazi Germany.
Meyer's reading made him see unmistakably the fatal interdependence of all human actions.
Even if he did not think of himself as Jewish, the Nazi's definitions meant that the cunning
of history had nonetheless given him that identity.
Meyer lacked the authority to define social reality in the mid-1930s, but increasingly
the Nazi state did possess such power.
Its laws made Meyer Jewish, even if his own consciousness did not.
As he confronted that reality, the unavoidability of his being Jewish took on another dimension.
By identifying him as a Jew, Meyer would write later on, Nazi power made him a dead man on
leave, someone to be murdered, who only by chance was not yet where he properly belonged.
When Nazi Germany occupied Austria in March 1938, Meyer drew his conclusions.
He fled from his native land and went to Belgium, joined the resistance after Belgium was swept
into the Third Reich in 1940.
He was captured by the Gestapo in 1943, and the Nazis sent him to a series of camps,
including Auschwitz, before he was liberated from a place called Bergen-Belsen in 1945.
Eventually taking the name Jean Amory, by which he is remembered, this philosopher waited
20 years before breaking his silence about the Holocaust.
When Amory did decide to write, the result was a series of remarkable essays about the
Holocaust and his experiences in it.
One of these essays is simply entitled, Torture.
Torture drove Amory to the following observation.
The expectation of help, the certainty of help, he wrote, is indeed one of the fundamental
experiences of human beings.
Thus, the greatest loss produced by the Holocaust Amory went on to suggest was that it destroyed
what he called trust in the world, the certainty that by reason of written or unwritten social
contracts the other person will spare me, more precisely stated that he will respect
my physical and with it also my metaphysical being.
Jean Amory would wonder about the American dream, its affirmations about unalienable
rights and its hopes for new beginnings.
Every morning when I get up, he tells his reader, I can read the Auschwitz number on
my forearm.
Every day anew I lose my trust in the world.
Declarations of human rights, he wrote, democratic constitutions, the free world and the free
press, nothing, he went on to say, nothing can lull me into the slumber of security from
which I awoke in 1935.
Far from scoring the human dignity that those institutions emphasize, Amory yearned for
the right to live, which he equated with dignity itself.
His experience, however, taught him that it is certainly true that dignity can be bestowed
only by society, whether it be the dignity of some office, a professional or very generally
speaking civil dignity, and the merely individual subjective claim he went on to say, I am a
human being and as such I have my dignity no matter what you may say or do, is an empty
academic gain or madness.
Lucidity believed Amory demanded the recognition of this reality, but Lucidity did not end
there.
He thought it also entailed rebellion against power that would make anyone a dead man on
leave.
Unfortunately, it must also be acknowledged that Amory's hopes for such protest were
less than optimistic.
On October 17th, 1978, he also took leave and became a dead man by his own hand.
Amory's testimony tests assumptions that have long been at the heart of the American
dream.
They include beliefs that the most basic human rights are a gift of God and that nature
and reason testify to a universal moral structure which underwrites them.
But what if there is no God?
What if nature is amoral?
Granting that reason can make critical distinctions between what is and what ought to be.
What if reason also insists that the most telling truth of all is that history is what
Hegel, the 19th century German philosopher, called it a slaughter bench, a realm where
unalienable rights are hardly worth the paper they are written on unless political might
ensures them.
Such questions have crossed American minds in the past, but in a post-Holocaust age,
they cross-examine American optimism more severely than before.
For it is no longer clear that anything but human power does secure a person's rights,
and if rights depend on human power alone, then they may well be natural and unalienable
in name only.
In such circumstances, to call rights unalienable may still be a legitimate rhetorical device
to muster consensus that certain privileges and prerogatives must not be taken away.
No doubt the idea of unalienable rights functions and will continue to do so precisely in that
way as an ingredient in the American dream, but ideas do not necessarily correspond to
waking life any more than dreams do.
It appears increasingly that rights are functionally unalienable, which may be what counts most
in the long and short of it, only within a state that will successfully defend and honor
them as such.
Dreams die hard in America.
In Sophie's choice, Stingo, the white Presbyterian Southerner, cannot prevent Sophie's suicide,
but Stingo endures, having learned much about himself and about his own American dream.
Three fragments from a journal he kept in 1947 form the novel's conclusion.
One day I will understand Auschwitz, Stingo had written.
Like many American dreams, that vow Stingo reflects years later is innocently absurd.
Let your love flow out on all living things.
That fragment seems one more worth saving to Stingo as a reminder of some fragile hope.
And finally there is some poetry.
Neath cold sand I dreamed of death, but woke at dawn to see in glory the bright, the morning
star.
Faced with a choice between determination and despair, Stingo the American chooses hope.
If freedom to choose destroyed Sophie, apparently Stingo will try to resist that fate by using
choice against itself in a struggle to make life more worth living, and not less so.
Some years later, Harry Angstrom and his wife Janice, the principal characters in Rabbit
Run, Rabbit Redux, Rabbit is Rich, and Rabbit at Rest, John Updike's four-volume saga about
the ups and downs of American life since World War II.
Some years later, Harry Angstrom and Janice are struggling toward that same destination.
In Rabbit Run, the earliest of the four novels, Harry suffers from a closed-in feeling, as
he calls it.
A former high school basketball star, the Rabbit has since experienced only mediocrity,
and Harry cannot abide mediocrity.
Consequently, like earlier Americans, he runs.
The trouble is, he doesn't know quite where to run to.
Harry has a son, Nelson, and he fathers a daughter, Becky, who drowns while still an
infant.
Harry also takes up with a prostitute named Ruth and gets her pregnant.
Nearly 20 years later, in Rabbit is Rich, Harry thinks he meets his other daughter,
but he never knows for sure.
Meanwhile, the institution's domestic social religious that the younger Harry has been
brought up to believe in, fail to satisfy him.
Yet he can find no adequate replacements, no new frontiers, where he can fan the little
flame inside him.
The second novel, Rabbit Redux, unfolds as America's involvement in Vietnam is being
most strenuously criticized, but Harry is not one of the critics.
Desperate to believe in something, Harry substitutes America for a face of God and stubbornly
defends the Vietnam War.
America he thinks is beyond power, it acts as in a dream.
Wherever America is, there is freedom.
Beneath her patient bombers, paradise is possible.
The America Harry truly believes in, however, is an older America, which, as he nostalgically
remembers it, was epitomized by family solidarity, Sunday morning church, and Sunday afternoon
baseball.
It is not the nation he inhabits.
In the late 1960s, America has penetrated outer space, but to Harry has failed to fill
its spiritual void.
In the course of the novel, Harry struggles to come to terms with his feelings not only
about Vietnam, but also about the sexual revolution, the civil rights movement, the new technology
that has threatened his employment, and a host of other things.
At the end of Rabbit Redux, Harry and Janus, estranged from time to time, are back together,
tenuously reunited.
They are not sure this will make things better, not even for themselves, let alone the country.
If it was better, Harry says of the United States, I'd have to be better.
But Harry and Janus are trying, they are conducting a vigil, they are waiting to see.
How do you think it's going?
Harry asks Janus.
Fair, she replies.
A decade later, Updike affirms that Rabbit is rich.
Now in his mid-40s, Harry manages Springer Motors, his wife's family business, and prospers
by selling Japanese Toyotas to buyers in his hometown, Brewer, Pennsylvania.
Harry has a country club membership and a new house.
His frequently rocky marriage seems to have stabilized.
Harry, who thought God never wanted him to have a daughter, has a new granddaughter too,
but Harry's contentment is not complete.
Rabbit cares, and so he still has reasons to wonder, as he puts it, whether the great
American ride is ending.
At least for Harry, whose votes went to Ronald Reagan and George Bush, the ride is ending
with Rabbit at rest.
Although Harry now spends half of the year in Florida retirement, Updike's title is
ironic because Harry has found very little domestic tranquility.
Springer Motors and his son's family life are both in trouble because Nelson, who in
aptly manages both, is hooked on cocaine.
Overweight and out of shape himself, Harry seems nearly unable to find the flame any
longer, let alone to fan it, for his heart is failing.
Meanwhile, and not exactly to Harry's comfort, Janice has found a new lease on life with
a career in real estate.
Increasingly, Harry seems preoccupied with the ending of his life.
At the fringes of Harry's diminished moods of stirred up, unsatisfied desire, writes
Updike, licks the depressing idea that nothing matters very much, will all soon be dead.
And yet in spite of Harry's flagging energy, in a way even because of it, his dissatisfaction,
his yearnings for something better, do reassert themselves.
Although Harry wonders how many fresh starts for him are left, and despite the fact that
his life has hardly been a paradigm of order and responsibility, he keeps insisting that
we've got to get some order going in this crazy family.
There comes a time when you've got to take responsibility.
Harry's rest does come.
The last words John Updike gives him are a reply to Nelson's cry, don't die, dad, don't.
Well, Nelson, he says, all I can tell you is, it isn't so bad.
To which Updike adds in concluding the novel, Rabbit thinks he should say more.
The kid looks wildly expectant.
But enough.
Maybe enough.
How do you think it's going?
Harry once asked Janice.
Fair, she replied.
Enough?
How do you think it's going?
Does Janice's appraisal fit the American dream today?
Even if the answer is only fair, Americans ought not disclaim it, for if Americans are
no longer so certain that the multifaceted American dream is realizable, that the future
and its possibilities for favorable new beginnings are limitless, it just might be a sign that
they and their American dream have grown up at last.
What Americans are and have been as well as what they dream of becoming is the truth they
must live by.
If that is where we are going, where we have been has its virtues too.
Such a complex fate is worth having.
It is a gift to share and possess with care.
These thoughts weave together themes and texts from two courses I have offered for a long
time.
One of them I call Perspectives on the American Dream, and that's been the main source for
a lot that we've done in this series.
But the other is from a course that has been one of long-standing interests to me which
focuses on the Holocaust.
Most of the students I teach take at least one of them, and some of them are real gluttons
for punishment.
They end up taking them both.
In preparation for this lecture in particular, I asked some of my students how they thought
the strands in these two courses might relate if they do it all.
A common response held that the two courses worked in tandem to make me think or make
me question things and not accept things as they happen.
As for what the courses made the students think about in question, one writer spoke
for several others by asserting that the Holocaust and the history of American experience both
yield remorseful reflection and also hope for the future.
The Holocaust demonstrated the horror that men could inflict upon each other while also
showing the courage and resiliency of the people who were victimized.
The history of the American Dream provides some of these same lessons.
A second commentator observed, like Ellison's invisible man, we started out with our share
of optimism and ended up with a world of infinite possibilities, but we are not back
where we started.
And a third, responding specifically to the Holocaust, said, I don't think that we can
overcome evil.
I don't think that I see it happen, but that doesn't matter.
I feel that I can help to start it.
Such remarks resound a rhythm that I think can be helpful in coming to terms with American
identity and with the American Dream in particular.
Perspectives on the American Dream starts with young Americans who brim with optimism
as perhaps they should.
The counterpart for students who begin to encounter the shadow of Birkenau is shock,
even if they already bring some knowledge of the Holocaust to their study.
This shock, predicated in part on American optimism, evolves toward despair as we trace
the twisted road to Auschwitz that winds through Western civilization.
Meanwhile, perspectives on the American Dream have moved from optimism to some disillusionment
as discoveries multiply about dreams that cannot be and storms we cannot weather.
Heart and despair, however, neither deserve nor get the final word.
Taking to heart, Ellie Wiesel's reminder, and yet, and yet, he says, this is the key
expression in my work.
Taking to heart that reminder, determination emerges to choose life and not to end it.
One student put it this way, there must have been something worthy of love if Ellison's
invisible man was able, through division, to find it.
We cannot love evil and we cannot not love, so we must approach America through division
and through possibility.
Another student spent time doing a detailed study of how the Nazis treated handicapped
Germans in the Third Reich, which is really where the final solution began.
They began to eradicate handicapped people who were German themselves because they weren't
somehow going to contribute to the master race.
This particular student has spent a number of summers working in her hometown of Phoenix,
Arizona, with handicapped people.
As she did the study of what the Nazis had done to their handicapped people, she said
that she'd learned something, that for a time as she worked at her summer job, she'd been
struck by how bureaucratic some of the rules were, that she was instructed that she must
ask people who maybe weren't even capable of replying whether they wanted to do something
or not.
She said her study had led her to see that those bureaucratic rules weren't so bureaucratic
after all, that what they were intended to do was to keep confirming the basic humanity
of people who maybe were incapacitated and could not act as they might have wished to
act.
And so she said, summing up her basic point in a way that I won't soon forget, the simplest
task is suddenly significant.
In equal simplicity, Gene Amary summed up his contemplations on the Holocaust.
What happened happened, he wrote, but that it happened cannot be so easily accepted.
Another student might be echoing him when she responded, study of the Holocaust is both
shocking and powerful.
To begin to understand requires the removal of a veil of naive pay we all carry.
It is not easy, but it is necessary.
The American dream is closer to home for most of us.
It is also less morally debilitating, but there are still flaws.
We are nowhere near perfect and it is sometimes hard to realize this.
Balancing realism and optimism is tough.
New beginnings and the cunning of history, trust and torture, Wally, North Carolina,
Auschwitz, Poland, Washington DC, the right to life and life unworthy of life into that
darkness and the bright, the morning star, loving, hating, saying yes and saying no,
denouncing, defending, dividing, and yet and yet, American dreams, Holocaust questions,
the fatal interdependence of all human actions.
The earth is woven of many strands, frayed and torn, it needs the mending that depends
on resisting with undeceived lucidity, the shadow of Birkenau and its destructive legacy,
stripped of illusions, but not necessarily of American dreams for good, the world still
awaits determination.
