Lecture 8 Where Have We Been Where Are We Going?
I hope you've detected in the tone and in the content of what I've tried to say that
I am deeply engaged in a tradition that exists in this country, which I think can be described
as a lover's quarrel with my own country.
I think that's a healthy relationship to have.
All lovers are in probably a quarrelsome relationship to some degree, and there certainly
is a long tradition of that in the United States.
We've heard a lot of echoes of it, Hawthorne, Whitman, Emerson, Thoreau, Jefferson, Lincoln,
on and on it goes, and that's the tone that I hope you have heard from me, whether you
agree with it or not, I leave to you to decide in good American pluralistic fashion.
We come to the end now, and the title for the end is A Pair of Questions, Where Have
We Been, Where Are We Going?
And my epigraph for this concluding lecture comes from yet another American poet, Lawrence
Furlinghetti, who in a poem called I Am Waiting, says, I am waiting for a rebirth of wonder.
In Sophie's Choice, the novel by William Styron that played an important part in the
previous lecture, among the best moments that Stingo and Sophie enjoyed was an outing to
Coney Island.
Indeed, the novel ends with Stingo waking up there on the Atlantic shore where so much
of the American dream began.
Not long after Stingo pronounced that morning excellent and fair, the poet Lawrence Furlinghetti
penned the 1955 poems that became his book, A Coney Island of the Mind.
Still active today, Furlinghetti was one of the dominant voices in the so-called beat
generation of the 50s and 60s.
Leading a rebellious literary movement from his haunts in San Francisco, he wanted to
free people from the conventions of business as usual, replete with their suburban trappings
and political power plays.
In the poem I Am Waiting, which is arguably the best poem in a Coney Island of the Mind,
Furlinghetti uses irony, wistfully, humorously, sardonically.
He wants to cross the great divide of incongruity between what America is and what it ought
to be.
Anticipating the arrival of what he calls a reconstructed Mayflower, he also watches
for the day that maketh all things clear.
Furlinghetti's expectation is anything but passive non-activity.
Restless and insistent, I Am Waiting is paradoxically a pilgrimage, an odyssey of self-discovery
in verses beating with hope that the atomic tests shall end, willing for things to get
worse if eventually they do get better.
Some would say those desires are futile, like expecting the fleeing lovers on the Grecian
Urn to catch each other up at last and embrace.
Furlinghetti quarrels with such realism.
He concludes by awaiting, perpetually and forever, a renaissance of wonder.
Such wonder can help Americans arrive where his poem begins, looking within for someone
to really discover America and wail, as he puts it.
But to wail Furlinghetti's style is not to yell hysterically, the USA is number one,
nor is it to intone the gaggle of vacuous cliches and pious platitudes that rush so thoughtlessly
from the mouth of E.E. Cummings' 1926 counterpart to Archibald MacLeish's orator, both of whom
we have heard before in this series.
Cummings does not make explicit the occasion for the banalities uttered by his speaker
in next to, of course, God, America, I. Memorial Day or Veterans Day, however, seems more likely
than the Fourth of July, for this poem is an ironic tribute to those who rushed like
lions to the roaring slaughter.
Himself a veteran of World War I, Cummings sets forth the incoherence of a patriotism
that sends a nation's youth to die and then compounds the waste by claiming that nothing
could be more beautiful than these heroic happy dead.
Such blindness is a reason to lament and grieve, and Furlinghetti joins Cummings in doing both.
But that wailing is not the end, unmasking the pretense, herding through the pathos,
tragedy, and irony, yearning, as Furlinghetti puts it, for the American eagle to really
spread its wings and straighten up and fly right, both Furlinghetti and Cummings pair
to wail a jazz duet that soars above the blues.
That yearning can be felt not only through our history, but even now.
However much the American dream may be in question, it still remains alive.
But how much and how well alive depends on where we are going, as well as on where we
have been.
Around ten years before Sophie's choice appeared, William Skyring published another controversial
novel, this time called The Confessions of Matt Turner, which he described as a meditation
on history.
One of the most poignant scenes in that tale of an American slave uprising in 1831 comes
near the end.
That scene features an exchange between Matt Turner and his confessor, a man named Thomas
Gray.
The two men evaluate the rebellion's success and failure.
Gray acknowledges that Matt Turner, the rebellion's religiously driven charismatic leader, scared
the entire South into a condition that may be described as well-nigh shetless, he says.
While he goes on to say, you as a success all right, up to a point, mind you, up to
a point.
As reverent, basically speaking, and in the profoundest sense of the word, you as a flat
assed failure, a total fiasco from beginning to end insofar as any real accomplishment
is concerned.
Matt Turner says little in reply.
His silence, however, is not thoughtless, and Styron fills Matt Turner's mind this way.
Mr. Gray, I found myself wanting to say, what else could you expect from mostly young
men, deaf, dumb, and blind, crippled, shackled, and hamstrung from the moment of their first
baby squall on a bare clay floor?
It was prodigious that we come as far as we did, that we nearly took Jerusalem.
Sue Matt Turner stood trial for his life in Jerusalem, Virginia.
He was found guilty and executed.
By Styron's reckoning, these last days were in November.
That month is of special importance for the American Dream because in that autumn season,
Americans not only honor those who have died in war, but they also hold their major elections.
Later in the same month, they also celebrate Thanksgiving, a national holiday which traces
back to the 17th century pilgrims and which is second only to the 4th of July in the affection
that most Americans have for it.
Those special days give Americans an opportunity to meditate.
How far has the United States come?
How near is it to Jerusalem?
These eight lectures have explored some American myths and some American realities by focusing
on the American Dream.
To be an American, it seems, is to reckon with that dream.
Such is the American's heritage.
If there is truth in that proposition, however, it is crucial to identify assumptions that
could undergird a worthwhile American Dream in the 1990s and beyond.
In the time left in this final lecture of our series, I would like then to summarize
where we have been by examining what some of those assumptions might be.
The qualification sum is important for two reasons.
First, philosophy reveals that one premise invariably leads to another.
Tracking them is an endless process.
Second, my concluding remarks will deal mainly with psychological aspects, we might call
them, of domestic life in the United States.
Far from ignoring international dimensions, though, these reflections all imply that
sound American dreaming must now take place in a global village.
If there ever was a time when Americans could plan their future in isolation, they can no
longer do so with impunity.
That fact, coupled with vast American power, makes it urgent, therefore, to consider the
seven suppositions that follow.
And here's the first one.
At its core, the American Dream will continue to emphasize the possibility of new beginnings,
but no longer can that emphasis rest on any simple optimism about American life.
Set at the turn of the 19th century in Sweetwater, a small town on the Burlington Railroad, out
in the prairie between Omaha and Denver, Willa Cather's brilliant novel, A Lost Lady, is
a story about this first supposition.
This is a truly beautiful novel, if you've never read it, Willa Cather's one of my favorite
American writers, and this novelette, really, A Lost Lady, is one I recommend to you.
Captain Daniel Foster, Cather tells us, was a railroad man, a contractor who had built
hundreds of miles of road for the Burlington over the sagebrush and cattle country, and
on up into the Black Hills.
Later, he and his wife, Miriam, who is 25 years his younger, came to preside over the
Forrester Place, as everyone called it, a house well known for its charm and hospitality
to the railroad aristocracy of that time, and special friends from the little town.
Before time and circumstance conspired to make Miriam Forrester a lost lady, the Forrester
Place was often the scene of gay dinner parties at which the captain always gave the toast,
happy days.
He gave it, Cather says, so that whoever heard him say it once liked to hear him say
it again. Nobody else could utter those two words as he did with such gravity and high
courage.
With his wife's encouragement, Captain Forrester also liked to tell their dinner guests his
philosophy of life, namely that what you think of and plan for day by day you will get, because
a thing that is dreamed of in the way I mean is already an accomplished fact.
All our great west, the captain would continue, has been developed from such dreams. The homesteader
and the prospectors and the contractors. We dreamed the railroads across the mountains,
he said, just as I dreamed my place on the sweet water.
Deep inside the nation's heart, strong beats of hope like those can still be heard, yet
just as something forbidding could come into Captain Forrester's voice, along with his
acknowledgement that there are people who get nothing in this world, I have lived too
much in mining works and construction camps not to know that. The foundations of contemporary
enthusiasm, opportunity, tomorrow better than today, boundless energy, are somewhat shaky
and perhaps in danger of being lost.
Risks are sometimes felt less as challenges to accept and more as threats against which
Americans want protection. Styles of pleasure-seeking may not reveal it, but the United States
is much more conservative than it was in the 1960s and 70s. If the only sure thing about
social attitudes is that they will change, though not necessarily for the better, it
seems clear that the United States has lived through a transition from optimism to a realism
that often borders on disillusionment. Today's Americans are neither a 1920s loss generation
nor a 1950s beat generation, nor even entirely what some sociologists have recently called
a me generation. Their condition is more ambiguous and ambivalent. The rhetoric about American
self-images is still confident, and yet Americans have plenty of reason for uneasiness about
the future.
How did Americans get into this condition? Countless factors emerge, but one place to
start is with some of the earliest American dreams. Puritans and Quakers dreamed of establishing
God's new Israel in the howling wilderness. In some form, the idea of America as a promised
land where chosen people could begin life anew has been part of the dream ever since.
These early settlers, however, had no easy view of human goodness or divine providence.
The Puritans made covenants aimed at righteousness, the Quakers sought brotherly love, but both
groups knew that greed and hatred were ever-present threats to community life and that God's
justice could not be compromised with impunity.
Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Paine were two influential spokesmen who focused awareness
on America's potential to provide an example and leadership for the world. They promoted
dreams that still inspire and haunt. Franklin's autobiography preached a secularized version
of Puritan and Quaker virtue. It canceled people to seek personal improvement, to find
the road to wealth and consequently to power. Franklin's urgings for the individual were
supplemented by Paine's exhortations to the colonies as a whole. Asserting that the cause
of America is indeed the cause of all mankind, Paine made the American Revolution morally
imperative. Later, as Americans prospered materially, expanded geographically, flourished with their
democratic ideals, they were only too happy to preserve and to extend these early visions
of America's especially favored status. In recent times, some American fortunes at least
have turned. Americans have not lost a sense of uniqueness, but there is less certainty
about how to define it, partly because Americans realize better that talk about new beginnings
is easy, but actually to make them is far more difficult than the American dream has
often implied. Without a sense of the possibility of new beginnings, there can be no American
dream. The struggle is to see how they can and cannot be achieved in late 20th century
America, which is still in its peculiar ways a howling wilderness far distant from sweet
water. Second, the American dream rests upon the
Declaration of Independence and the Constitution, but no longer can it be assumed that American
democracy can meet every expectation that may be placed upon it. Americans have always
harbored something of a suspicion of government, if not of each other, but even when suspicious,
most of them have believed that the political institutions of the United States are unrivaled.
These institutions, most Americans are convinced, help to fulfill the promises of human nature
by providing equal opportunity, freedom and justice for all. To many Americans, then,
the Declaration and the Constitution are virtually sacred texts. Specifying independence and
representative democracy to safeguard and extend individual liberty, they seem to bear
well the high expectations placed upon them. In fact, that dream is partly truth and partly
fiction. Hamilton, Madison, Jefferson and the other founders were convinced that the
origin of the United States did constitute a landmark in political achievement. Still,
they had rather few utopian sentiments. A basic point remained clear to them. Life can
be nasty, brutish and short, independence and constitutional democracy notwithstanding.
They saw the Declaration and the Constitution not as guarantees of everyone's happiness,
but only as giving people a chance for fulfillment. Too often, later generations blurred the difference.
In recent times, however, the existence of that difference has become clear again. The
difficulty is to see whether the American dream can orient itself between expectations
that are too much or too little. A third assumption that I think may be worth thinking
about is this. The American dream will still place a premium on the individual's pursuit
of happiness, but no longer can it be easily expected that the communal good will thereby
be enhanced. Emerson believed that he who would be a man must be a non-conformist, and
Thoreau insisted that the only obligation which I have a right to assume is to do at
any time what I think right. These teachers prodded America by teaching self-reliance
and personal integrity. In doing so, they encouraged, unintentionally, as well as intentionally,
the individual pursuit of happiness that is so fundamental to the American dream. They
recognized that a variety of goals and paths toward them would be chosen, and on the whole
they welcomed that variety, for it might forge the original relation to the universe that
they sought for American life. If every person truly pursued his or her own way, they thought,
the result would not be chaos but rather creativity. Calm and serene it might not be, but a rich
harmony of interests could ensue. Granted, Emerson and Thoreau added self-critical cutting
edges to the American dream. They warned against the selfishness, passive acceptance, corruption
and slavery that could wreck their aspirations for the United States. Nonetheless, they may
not have emphasized enough that even if those defects can be removed, there is no assurance
that pluralism and diversity will not be costly, for just as noble aims can be many and virtuous,
so they can clash destructively. Partly because of the prodding of their Emerson's and Thoreau's,
Americans take individualism seriously if not the critique of it offered by those philosophers
from Concord. Thus if Americans hope that individual pursuits of happiness will work
together for the common good, and if they periodically make individual sacrifices so
that public welfare is achieved, too often the top priority goes to a divisive, me first
point of view. Pushed far enough, that disposition can doom the very American dream that grounds
it. Fourth, the American dream will continue to insist that there are open frontiers and
vast opportunities to be seized, but no longer can the future be regarded as unlimited.
Big business helped Americans to think that the sky was the limit. Although Marxists have
said that the profit motives of owner capitalists brutally exploit the vast majority of labor,
those charges never convinced the United States. American industry and business seemed
able to produce wealth enough to make it clear that the path to upward mobility was open
to all. Affluence was a good to be highly prized. Moreover, with hard work or a little
luck and special privilege, it was available to anyone. Humanized by deeper social concerns,
it was thought America's favored position in resources, technology and trade would
enable Americans, at least at home, to shatter the myth of scarcity and to eliminate the
plague of poverty. Americans have always been shrewd and cost-conscious. It is just that
so much success sometimes led to complacency, if not blindness, about the cost factors,
obvious as well as hidden, and social as well as financial, that their transactions carried
with them. Nothing is free. Now that fact hits home with the realization that scarcity
is real and that economic instability, much of it fueled by greed, via road wealth as
fast as many individuals can accumulate it. Today's costly demands for energy make plain
that almost everything Americans want to do is going to cost more, and thus it is going
to be harder and harder to do everything they want to do. That crunch necessitates wrenching
decisions for the cunning of history is conspiring to test the depth of Americans' ability to
sacrifice and the quality of their social concerns.
Fifth, the American dream will still stress both material success and at least the possibility
of moral progress, but no longer can it assume that the two easily nurture each other.
George Santiana wondered whether materialism or idealism was at the heart of American character.
Most Americans might answer both, and in doing so they would press the point that material
success and moral progress can and often do go hand in hand. That perspective is not without
credibility. The United States has used its material prosperity, at least as well as any
other human society, to promote education, to ensure widespread participation in government,
and to make opportunity more than a cliché. To that extent, achievement validates the dream.
Even so, American systems of education and government have obviously not eliminated
inflexibility, unresponsiveness, and inequity. Moreover, whereas American ingenuity, industrial
productivity, and technological expertise have raised standards of living for many people,
an increasingly ravaged environment, both rural and urban, may prove to poisonous a price
to pay. Material success does not guarantee the highest qualities of life, although it
may be impossible to have the latter without a good measure of the former. The connections
between the way to wealth and the way to make life richer in its moral and spiritual dimensions
are subtle and not easily located or controlled. If it is correct to say that both materialistic
and idealistic yearnings can be found at the base of American character, the dilemma of
their relationships and priorities still haunts the American dream.
Sixth, the American dream will continue to proclaim that all persons must be regarded
as fundamentally equal, but no longer can Americans be innocently unaware of the irony
and complexity that are introduced into their lives by that claim.
American ideals promised an open land and millions crossed oceans to seek opportunity.
These ever-new arrivals, huge numbers of them brought here unwillingly as slaves, kept building
the country. But when established, Americans began to see the newcomers as threats, there
was great effort to restrict them. Nonetheless, the nation grew, but not without conflicts
about ethnic and religious groups. As the trilogy filmed, Godfather reveals, moreover, Americans
learned that not every disembarking family was virtuous and civic-minded. And of course,
the problem populations, usually identified by skin color, continued to be an irritating
presence to nativists, even when restricted to reservations or ghettoized in their emancipation
from enslavement. Added to these continuing complexities are ongoing and even intensified
concerns about the elderly, women and children, not to mention the thousands of Mexican citizens
who enter the United States illegally now every year. In some ways, it seems that the
nation's motto ought to be reversed. Out of one, many may be more true today than out
of many, one. Granted, there is little likelihood of secession and civil war of the sort that
bloodied the nation a century ago, but there is also little likelihood that Americans will
all blend together harmoniously. Consider, for example, John Kennedy's 1963 assertion
that every American ought to have the right to be treated as he would wish to be treated
as one would wish his children to be treated. Ironically, all Americans can affirm Kennedy's
principle and in doing so actually make their disagreements greater. Kennedy offered his
principle in defense of civil rights for African Americans, but it is a two-edged sword. It
can cut in the opposite direction depending on how Americans view each other and how they
in fact wish themselves and their children to be treated. On that point, they often profoundly
disagree.
Witness the current issue about abortion in the United States. Americans are divided
at times violently between those who believe that abortion violates an unalienable right
to life and those who believe that to make abortion illegal is to deny a woman her right
to liberty and the pursuit of happiness. The times will keep pushing the times out of
joy unequally unless Americans keep struggling to keep things together. As we reckon with
that fact, it bears remembering that the American dream originated in struggles over human rights
and true to its heritage, the dream keeps that struggle in the forefront. Once separate
but equal was thought sufficient to guarantee the rights of African Americans, the dream
helped prove that clause insufficient to do so. Once women did not have the right to vote,
the dream helped them obtain it and it will continue to promote their quest for opportunity
and equality. True laws do not automatically change attitudes or alter social and economic
realities. The voices protesting the dream deferred attest to that. Paradoxically though,
the very persistence of such voices suggests that the American dream is still alive and
potent.
Booker T. Washington, W. E. B. Du Bois, and Martin Luther King Jr. were all instrumental
in exposing the myth that Americans, black or white, are without deep-seated differences
that can breed animosity and hatred. I have a dream that one day this nation will rise
up and live out the true meaning of its creed. We hold these truths to be self-evident that
all men are created equal. That was King's hope. Washington and Du Bois shared it painfully
before him. They helped to show the multiple ways in which attitudes of superiority, mistrust
and selfishness undermine American proclamations about equality and create division instead.
In doing so, however, their voices did not relinquish the dream. Instead, its inspiration
continues to nourish hope that by sharing and understanding differences, a spirit of
openness, respect and equality can still be found.
Seventh and last, the American dream will still assert that human rights must be real,
but no longer can it assume that the dream, including the value it places on freedom of
choice and human rights, is guaranteed a future, let alone fulfillment in the world.
Speaking about American experience, the historian James Truslow Adams wrote that the epic loses
all its glory without the dream. The dream has placed a premium on the rights to life,
liberty and the pursuit of happiness, and from time to time Americans may have had intimations
of their dreams' immortality. Within human history, however, no nation seems to last
forever, and the threats that engulf the world make us all, Americans included, acutely aware
of how fragile and vulnerable life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness can be.
It was prodigious, said Nat Turner, that we come as far as we did, that we nearly took
Jerusalem. What shall we come of the American dream in the 1990s and perhaps beyond? Power
holds one of the keys to answer that question, but everything depends on who controls it,
what ends it serves, and the means employed to pursue them. Answers to those questions
must be awaited anxiously. Meanwhile, the American dream hangs on. In the wake of the
Great Depression, the American poet Archibald McLeish worked with a set of photographs that
documented devastation of American ground during the 1930s. The original purpose, explained
McLeish, had been to write some sort of text to which these photographs might serve as
commentary. Finding in them vividly what he named a stubborn inward livingness, McLeish
reversed that plan and produced not a book of poems illustrated by photographs, but a
book of photographs illustrated by a poem. McLeish called the book Land of the Free.
This is another one of my recommendations to you. It's a beautiful book. The photographs
were ones that were taken during the Dust Bowl age and during the time of the cutting
of timber in Michigan and Wisconsin. We portray a rather devastated kind of land. McLeish took
these photographs and composed a poem to go with them. He called the poem the soundtrack
for the pictures. The final page of this book called Land of the Free pictures the face
of a wizened old man. Hat torn, his soiled suit worn, he does not have it made, and yet
he's looking squarely at the camera, jaw set, unsmiling, eyes gluting. Apparently he's
asking questions, and they are not without discouragement, but no one would confuse his
expression with despair. It's got too much insistence, too much resistance, too much
wonder and determination for that. Like features of the old man's face, the closing
lines of this poem that McLeish called the soundtrack, wonder if the liberty is done,
the dreaming is finished. We can't say. We aren't sure. We don't know. We're asking.
McLeish's verse does not exude optimism, and yet the yearning and wondering of his lines
finally express neither despair nor lack of courage and morale to continue. McLeish apparently
feels the urge for renewal, for a new beginning if one can be made, and he understands that
such feelings may run deepest not when times are placid and all seems well, but rather
when events have disoriented one's sense of direction. So if McLeish's poem sounds a
somber note, one that should rightly sober all shallow American self-confidence, it may
still be an apt prelude for the rebirth that Americans need.
Having outlined those seven suggestions about assumptions to help govern American dreaming
in the future, our time in this series is nearly at an end. But permit me please just
a few more closing remarks to sum up a little differently the mood I hope these lectures
have engendered, a mood that can perhaps be instructive to recall as we go our various
but interdependent American ways. Ronald Reagan, whose path from small town Midwestern
radio announcer to Hollywood movie star to President of the United States embodied an
American dreamed in itself, Ronald Reagan liked to call up John Winthrop's Puritan image
of America as a city on a hill. He was also fond of Thomas Paine's 18th century dream
that we Americans could begin the world over again. In the 1988 presidential campaign,
although it's a long time back, you may recall Michael Dukakis' Labor Day speech when he
stood in the shadow of the Statue of Liberty and announced that he was a product of the
American dream. And when George Bush sketched his picture of a thousand points of light,
images of the dream were once again not far behind. Contrast rhetoric of that kind with
words whose inspiration is not American but French instead. The song from which they come
is part of the musical version of Victor Hugo's Les Miserables, which I have referred to earlier.
The words are sung fairly early in the production by a woman whom life has not treated kindly.
Her name is Fontaine, and her lament is worth remembering. I had a dream, she sings, my
life would be so different from this hell I'm living, so different now from what it seemed.
Now life has killed the dream I dreamed. Having things go wrong in ways akin to Fontaine's
experience is an American reality too. There are many in our land and in those places affected
by the American dream, who with as much injustice as Fontaine encountered, discover that their
dreams cannot be, that there are storms we cannot weather, and that life kills dreams.
Studs Terkel, whom we have met before, has worried along those lines. His 1988 sequel
to American Dreams Lost and Found is called The Great Divide, Second Thoughts on the American
Dream. Summing up more interviews, he found too many unhealthy whiffs. Races, religions,
the haves and the have-nots, all are split more than they were a decade earlier, he found.
Lamenting an increased collective amnesia, as he called it, a loss of contact with our
past, Terkel also detected a yearning for belief. That yearning, however, does as much
to widen the Great Divide as it does to bridge it.
America may not be blown up, says Terkel, but an equally groomed scenario seems possible.
Polluted air, polluted water, it's going to be death by strangulation, he writes. The
overall detritus of banality will overwhelm us.
And yet, even though aspects of the American Dream are nightmarish, there is considerable
evidence, and rightly so, that we Americans have not abandoned faith in the possibility
of new beginnings or, for that matter, in the American Dream as a whole.
Terkel himself provides an example. Great, though the Divide may be, as he appraised
Second Thoughts about the American Dream at the end of the 1980s, he takes heart in
the fact that there are more grassroots activities today, he says, than ever before in our history.
Assisting that there's got to be a change, he adds, I think it's happening, I hope.
If you could coalesce all those little groups. Goliath has the networks and channels and
certain newspapers, but we got the slingshot.
Terkel has allies. The periodic popularity of books such as Charles Wikes, The Greening
of America, or William Leastheap Moon's Blue Highways, A Journey into America, helped
testify to that. A 1970s version of the myth of America as a new Eden, Wikes' version
predicted that the American consciousness would transform itself into a new openness,
a new honesty, a new awareness of individual worth that is less competitive than cooperative.
Some current trends indicate that many Americans still share Wikes' hopes for a rebirth of
their personal lives, if not for the life of society at large. The body failing, heading
for the gym, a week control program, or the latest thing in cosmetic surgery. The psyche
disintegrating, try a new age religion, see a therapist who will put Humpty Dumpty back
together again, or if you can't afford therapy, buy a self-help book and do the job yourself.
Experiencing dark nights of the soul when, as F. Scott Fitzgerald said it is always three
o'clock in the morning, become a born-again Christian, or a transcendental meditator,
or go out of the now-all-too-much-for-us complexity back to the land on a communal farm.
Less optimistic than Wikes and persuaded that there was no quick or inevitable fix for his
nearly desperate sense of isolation and a growing suspicion that I lived in an alien
land, William Leastheap Noon, chucked his Missouri routine on the last night of winter, took
to the back roads in a van named Ghost Dancing, and looped America from the heartland out
and around.
Searching for clarity and renewal, this half-anglow, half-native American concluded by wondering,
in a season on the blue roads, what had I accomplished?
The log of Heat Moon's journey answers,
In my own country, I had gone out, had met, had shared, I had stood as witness.
The blend of change and permanence he found was far from perfect, yet its hope was enough
to keep him going because, as Heat Moon stresses, I sometimes heard human voices that showed
the power not of visions, but of revision, the power to see again and revise.
America obviously differs in many ways from what it was 200, 150, or even 10 years ago.
Visions of some parts of its dream have indeed been revised, and others still need to be.
In at least one respect, however, the country has not changed much at all, and I think we
should be glad of that.
In spite of ironic disparities between ideals and realities, enough good has happened in
this land for its vistas to empower still a dream that can inspire, challenge, and call
us to account as a people.
That fact confers responsibilities upon us.
At Willie Lohman's funeral near the end of Arthur Miller's play, Death of a Salesman,
Willie's friend Charlie says,
A salesman has got to dream, boy.
It comes with a territory.
The same ought to be said of all of us who still state claims on American ground.
We hope that you have learned from and enjoyed these lectures in the Superstar Teachers series.
It is our hope to bring the best teachers in the world to everyone who wants to learn
from them.
Other subjects in this series are available from the teaching company.
For a copy of our catalog, or to order other audio or video tapes, you may call 1-800-Teach-1-2
or write to the teaching company at PO Box 17524, Arlington, Virginia, 22216.
I am Tom Rollins, the president of the teaching company, and I greatly appreciate your comments
whether they concern these tapes, the way that your order was handled, other subjects
you would like to have us cover, or other professors who should be included in our series.
I read every letter with care, and be delighted to hear from you.
Thank you.
