When the famous actors, musicians, and athletes of the 1980s wished to cement their place
in American pop culture, they turned to celebrity photographer Harry Langdon.
One by one, he would direct their gaze into the camera, with their heads backlit in a glowing halo.
It was a look so many celebrities of the decade saw it, that one could hardly call
themselves a star if they hadn't been photographed by Harry Langdon.
But in 1984, a man named Dr. Frederick Lenz commissioned Langdon for a series of photoshoots.
The glamour shots that resulted began to appear across California, on college campus poster
boards, newspapers, and magazines, frequently filling up the entire printed page, but it
was unclear who Dr. Frederick Lenz was.
Some of his portraits would pose questions, others Dr. Lenz would devote to listing his
past lives, where he'd been a Japanese Zen master and a Tibetan Lama.
But his most widely circulated portrait would feature only his face, along with a simple
call to action, meditate with Rama.
Dr. Lenz seemed to appear out of nowhere, brute forcing his way into the public consciousness.
To the casual observer, his visibility campaign seemed nothing more than an advertisement
for meditation classes.
But to his hundreds of already existing students, his face was meant to reach those who'd
been followers of his for centuries, reminding them of who they really were, and calling
them back to him in order to finish their liberation.
We need to scour the globe for his students and reunite them, because we need to save
the world from some unknown evil, or the evil of the world.
For nearly two decades, Dr. Frederick Lenz would attempt to corral his followers and
lead them across America, away from the critics and away from family and friends who were
desperately trying to find them.
Lenz was a clever liar, he was entertaining, he presented himself as successful, and this
kind of loose Buddhism that he offered was appealing to a lot of young seekers that wanted
to make money and be like him.
In order to complete their liberation, each follower must master not only the disciplines
of the ancient world, but prove their supremacy in the modern world by climbing to the top
of America's most profitable industries, by any means necessary.
Most of them didn't know anything about coding, sometimes they'd get caught, but on
literal blacklist because they were destroying code.
To find out what it was like to be inside, I spoke with a former follower who joined
Lenz's organization when he was 20 years old.
Like if you were to ask like how deep did I go, I looked forward to jumping in front
of a bullet to save him.
I looked forward to that, I was like I can't wait till his life is on the line, and I'm
the one who gets to save him.
And one of Lenz's most committed public detractors who threatened to take it all away from him.
How many followers of Frederick Lenz did you attempt to deprogram?
It had to be at least 25.
How many of those would you say were successful?
I think all but four.
This is the story of Dr. Frederick Lenz, or as he was better known, Zenmaster Rama.
It was a psychological, potentially arguable, physical abusive relationship with this guy.
It was not as it was presented.
I'm a teacher of enlightenment.
That is to say, I'm enlightened.
And I enjoy being a vehicle of the expressions of the universe.
How did you happen to meet Frederick Lenz?
It started in college, where I was in my senior year, and I saw on the walls of my college
these beautiful, shiny posters about learn how to meditate from the Boston Meditation
Society.
So my fiance at the time and I went to one of these classes, and at first they talked
a lot about what, you know, we meditate so we can find enlightenment.
We can be calmer and more connected spiritually, and what historically those who have found
enlightenment like true enlightenment look like in our historical art, this sort of golden
glow in the paintings, right?
And so some of us who are spiritually sensitive enough when you're around one of these enlightened
beings, you can actually see the golden glow.
And I'm kind of nerdy.
So afterwards I would kind of go up and ask him questions and just say, you know, historically,
what was it like with blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
They were like, listen, we can tell that you are sort of, you vibe your aura or whatever
vibrates higher than most people.
You must have studied this in past lives.
Listen, we follow one of these guys that we think we believe is enlightened.
And we'd love you to check him out.
There is going to be a $500 a plate dinner in New York, and they were going to pay for
the whole thing.
We're like, listen, you know, we've got so much from this guy we follow named Dr. Frederick
Lenz or what we call is Rama.
We've gotten so much from we want to give back and we make tons of money.
So we're happy to pay your way and we were like, you know, cause we're like 20.
We all drive down together.
We go to this place and there's like 302 or 300 people there, all in tuxes and a lot
of them are doctors and lawyers and computer programmers and computer programmers and computer
programmers, which I noticed sort of a pattern in all of that.
And then this tall guy who has sort of like blondish curly hair, kind of like this, but
bigger.
At some point I saw him in like a leather jacket and like, you know, Ray Bands and
he did like a five minute monologue standup routine.
Now, in other words, meditation has been turned into a tool of the bourgeoisie.
No, I'm sorry.
Wrong incarnation.
I get, you know, I'm in different ones at different times and I got to bring it around
and get it straight.
Sorry.
So this is the, this is the right America.
And then he said, okay, everybody, let's, we're going to dim the lights and let's meditate
for those who haven't been with me before.
Don't close your eyes like you usually do.
Just like have a soft focus on me and open your eyes a little bit and watch me meditate.
You're not just watching me, the body.
You're watching the energy fields here.
You're relaxing your eyes, not looking too sharply, gazing.
I'm just watching.
You know, he just closed his eyes and he was doing a thing.
I don't remember.
And within 30 seconds or a minute, the whole room glowed gold and I got this wave of euphoria
that I never experienced before.
I was like, oh my God, if this dude can do that as an enlightened being in minutes, I'm
in for life.
This man can turn a room gold in 60 seconds, red one of lenses Bay Area advertisements.
Imagine what he can do to you.
It's a claim that would be echoed for years.
Turns the room gold.
That's all you see is gold light.
Kind of like if you looked into the sun and squirt.
Even decades later, it's difficult to find discussion of Frederick lens without someone
mentioning the golden light.
But not everyone had such a theatrical introduction.
What was it then Annie that made you go, wow?
Well, first of all, I didn't go, wow.
I listened to his presentation.
I thought he was witty.
I thought he was a nice person.
And I resonated with things he said that he said, let's meditate.
And I had a good meditation.
I had a very good meditation.
Dr. Lenz's brand of meditation was not unlike what was already beginning to catch on in
the West with the goal of achieving better focus and control over one's emotions by
quieting the mind.
Our mind is always in motion.
You'll notice you're always thinking something.
You're worried about tomorrow, paying the bills, we're thinking, images are flashing
through our mind, seeing somebody you'd like to see, remembering something that happened
in the past, our desires, our feelings, feeling guilty, feeling expectation.
Meditation is the opposite of that.
The basic technique is learned in seconds.
A student focuses their attention on the rise and fall of their breath or a place on their
body.
Keeping eyes closed is common, although Lenz often asked his students to look in his direction,
a technique he called gazing.
And when random thoughts intrude, the student gently brings their attention back to the
focal point.
I would wake up at like six in the morning, which I'd never done in my entire life.
And I would immediately meditate for 45 minutes.
I was so motivated and focused.
I was a 4.0 student for my last semester out of being a B minus student forever.
I would like to teach you to look into the depths of yourself, and I'm afraid you're
going to be shocked.
You're going to find out that you're much more beautiful than you realize.
I suddenly started loving running.
And so I would go for a run for two or three miles.
I'd come back.
If I didn't have school that day, I would work hard at work at friendly scooping ice
cream, but being super focused and being like the best I can be.
And that you can be happy even in the most adverse circumstances if you can do this one
thing, learn to make your mind quiet, still your thoughts.
Oh, and a lot of times I would meditate late at night and find that I really didn't need
a lot of sleep, so I'd be working extra hard reading books that he suggested I read on
top of all of my homework.
Because then it's as if a curtain opens, and behind that curtain is light, ecstasy, perfection,
beauty, and reality.
There's nothing to be afraid of.
There's only life.
And we all live forever.
So it's hard for someone to go, I think you're in something destructive because it doesn't
look that way in the beginning.
But in 1989, a computer programmer from Oregon named Brenda Kerber, who'd been a meditation
student of lenses for the past three years, went missing.
Others would disappear soon after, as well as students cutting off contact with their
families after they began attending lenses workshops.
This even surfaced of students giving up custody of their children in order to follow
the meditation group across the country.
My fiance and I, we lived together.
We went to Boston to meet with one of the inner circle.
And we had a dinner with him, and he talked about relationships and energy and stuff like
that.
And on the way home, we spontaneously, the both of us at the same time, realized we
shouldn't be together, because it's such a drain on our path to enlightenment.
And we talked about with glee, how we were going to split up all the stuff that we owned.
It's like, oh, you can get the CD, those CDs, and these CDs will be mine and those books
and my book.
It's like, do you want the better?
Do you want the couch?
She's like, I'll take the couch.
And then a few days later, and she was like, I don't want to leave, you know, I really
love you and I want to stay together.
And I was like, oh, you're so silly.
It's just going to destroy us.
So who was Dr. Frederick Lenz?
Frederick Lenz dedicated his first book titled Lifetimes, True Accounts of Reincarnation,
to an individual named Sri Chenmue.
In Lenz's second book, Sri Chenmue received not only the dedication, but credit for the
ideas presented in the book itself, disclosing that Lenz had been a student of Chenmue's
for the past 10 years.
Sri Chenmue continues to astound with his Hakeulian feats of strength.
A guru, a genuine guru, really genuine Sri Chenmue.
Sri Chenmue is our next guest on the program, and he is the holder of the United Nations
Medallion for Peace.
In 1970s Queens, New York, there were few local figures that baffled the media quite like
Chenmue Kumar Ghosh, who'd adopted the honorific title of Sri before leaving Bangladesh for
the United States.
After settling into Queens, Chenmue began putting his face on posters around college
campuses, offering free meditation classes to the public.
His following is nearly always described as increasing, and by the mid-70s, reporters
found that he'd accumulated hundreds of students, most of whom were college-aged.
Little by little, as we meditate every day and we see him twice a week, we notice, or
I notice, that I'm so happy and I feel God's presence so much of the time.
Chenmue attempted to be a living example of what a focused mind, conditioned by frequent
meditation, was capable of, and would invite local press to witness and perform endurance
challenges, which he called creative miracles.
The first was a 24-hour writing session where he produced 843 poems.
This works out to about 35 poems per hour, or a poem every 100 seconds.
We just don't know if there is a world's record for the number of paintings done in
the shortest possible time, but on tonight's edition of Bert Haney's People, he made just
a found that man a guru living in Queens.
The pace of his second challenge was more frantic, 16,000 paintings in 24 hours, averaging
now only a few seconds per piece.
I had no preconceived idea as to what I'm going to paint.
I just allow myself to be carried away by a higher force.
It's hard labor as well as an act of love, remarkable.
Through meditation, Chenmue claimed to have achieved what he called a oneness with the
Supreme, a type of psychedelic state he was known to spontaneously slip in and out of at
all times of the day.
I noticed as you were meditating, there was rapid eye movement on your part.
My consciousness was flying from one plane of reality to another.
This facial expression Chenmue adopted became the focal point of his group meditations,
with students staring into the flickering whites of his eyes as they cleared their minds
of thought.
Treat Chenmue as like a visitor from this other world to this world to show his followers
how to reach this other world.
At home, students would substitute with a photograph, as instructed by his 1978 meditation
manual.
Quote, the best type of meditation comes when you enter into my consciousness by looking
at a picture taken of me when I am in a high meditative consciousness, when I am one with
the Supreme.
Do not think of it as a picture of a human being.
Chenmue would soon have enough of a following to pack out event rooms, where he would take
the stage, establish a oneness with the Supreme, and then deliver, to a crowd of thousands,
a new creative miracle.
In a single performance, Chenmue would sometimes cycle through a hundred or more instruments,
improvising melodies with each one just long enough to channel the Supreme, before moving
on to the next.
By the late 1970s, Chenmue's multi-sensory meditation experience had extended far beyond
Queens, New York.
There are over 125 Sri Chim Noi centers around the world.
What goes on in them?
What happens in the centers?
My students all over the world, wherever there are centers, they play and meditate, and they
read my writings, and also, as you know, I have composed thousands of songs.
Much of Chenmue's success was owed to the recruitment efforts of his students, and old
newspaper classified show that Frederick Len spent much of his early career as a traveling
meditation instructor, leading workshops on behalf of the Sri Chenmue centers.
He went by Atmananda, one of the Sanskrit nicknames that Chenmue had given to all of
those in his inner circle.
I decided to study with Sri Chenmue through Atmananda.
He was the number one disciple-bringer for Chenmue around the world.
He was very good at it.
He was a brilliant speaker.
Oh yeah, there's a definite battle between the light and the dark.
The network always wins, though.
We run the galaxy.
What was he a professor of, and where was he professing?
He was a professor of American literature at State University of New York at Stonybrook.
So I can only suggest that you learn to be what my friend Theodor Rutke called a perpetual
beginner, because if you feel that you're knowledgeable, you may be.
But to be a perpetual beginner is the happy part.
Being a student is much more fun than being a teacher.
Len's experience as a professor gave him a natural ease and authority over his college-aged
audience members.
And as he traveled the country gathering recruits, he began to realize an opportunity.
He would give a lecture for Chenmue to recruit people into Chenmue's circles.
At the very end, he'd be up there sitting cross-legged on the table, and he was channeling
the guru's spiritual light.
And he would look at people, and spiritual light would come out of his eyes, he would
say.
Well, that's a big no-no, because that is up for the big kahuna to do, not for the little
tiny atmananda to do.
And by 1980, Len's workshops were no longer associated with the Shri Chenmue centers,
but sponsored by his own organization.
He took off with a handful of other Shri Chenmue followers, convincing them that he was the
one and the master has kind of fallen.
As I grew up spiritually, as I entered into enlightenment, I saw the limitations of my
own teacher who was a very powerful occultist, but who I thought was, to some extent, limiting
others in their spiritual growth.
Come with me, I'm the new enlightened one.
It wouldn't be easy for Len's to rise out of Shri Chenmue's shadow.
Not only did Chenmue have the adoration of thousands, he'd been hosting weekly meditations
at the United Nations headquarters.
Every Tuesday, his students could watch him slip into the supreme in front of some of the
most influential people in the world.
In order to take followers away from Chenmue, Len's would need to establish himself as
a guru of greater merit.
What did Frederick Len say he was offering his students?
So he was offering his students spiritual energy.
At a certain point, I came to learn that we had studied with him specifically for hundreds
or thousands of lifetimes, and we've all grown towards enlightenment because of working
with him.
And so what he was offering his students was spiritual energy.
When I sit with my students and meditate with them, I channel the Kundalini, the energy,
directly into them.
I bring them through plane after plane of consciousness.
What they would do in a hundred years of meditation, I can do in an hour with them.
This was the spiel.
He'd give us spiritual energy.
We would go home with that spiritual energy and meditate better.
And I take the Kundalini and I play against the notes with it.
I kind of do a light show inwardly and outwardly.
With the energy, with vortexes of energy, as you sit there, opening you up, opening up
different parts of you that maybe you haven't felt since you were a child, it's no big deal.
It's just what I do.
And when Lenz announced his separation from Chenmoy, it's reported that he was able
to siphon about 40% of the students in attendance.
But even without his star recruiter, Chenmoy's following only increased throughout the 1980s,
and his students were beginning to perform creative miracles of their own.
In 1986, the world record for most consecutive underwater pogo stick jumps was surpassed.
The new champion used his platform as an opportunity to promote the three Chenmoy centers.
Elsewhere in New York, a student shattered the record for continuous hand clapping with
50 hours of non-stop applause.
And he did so, he said, to honor his guru.
By 1982, Chenmoy claimed to have completed over 140,000 paintings, as well as over 4,000
musical compositions.
Lenz would need his own way of showing the fruits of his enlightenment.
Now, I have written a number of pieces of music to meditate to.
I asked the Zen master, what is dancing?
Dancing.
Dancing.
Dancing.
Lenz was Lenz's rock, new age band.
And he was credited as writing all the songs.
And I would listen to them all the time.
All the time.
I mean all the time.
It is moving to the right.
Lenz was joined by three of his students to form Zazen.
And throughout the 1980s, they produced a number of albums with tracks like
Death is Sexual and Gandalf the Wizard.
I loved listening to it, but I was, you know, controlled to love listening to it.
It was actually fine music.
It was perfectly good.
This music is composed in other dimensions.
That's where I go to compose it.
And then it's brought here into this world from the planes of light.
And it's played by some of my students.
Chenmoy had become well-known for drawing talented musicians into his orbit.
Guitarist Carlos Santana and John McLaughlin both spent much of their early careers making
music dedicated to the Supreme.
Zazen was stacked with talent as well, with Grammy-nominated Joaquin Lievenow providing
lead guitar.
And Lenz would incorporate this music into his live workshops,
often using it as a focal point for group meditations.
And I go through the music that they've played with my aura.
We'll wash out anything impure.
So there's only light in the music.
It's perfect music.
Students were asked to demonstrate their spiritual growth as well.
Lenz required the submission of essays, detailing each student's progress in their twice daily
meditations and several supplementary disciplines such as the reading and re-reading of recommended
books and martial arts taught by Sensei Lenz himself.
Martial arts is an ancient science.
It was codified by Buddhist monks.
He would wear a gi, you know, the karate white gi with a black belt.
And they both looked like they had just come out of the package.
They still had the folds all over them and stuff like that.
I will be extending an invisible energy field that we call the key
that we gain from deep meditation and samadhi.
This has rarely been seen outside of the Orient.
There's nothing she can do.
Is there anything you can do?
His inner circle would run at him and he'd go,
huh, like that with his hands and then they'd fall down.
What I want to do is interfere with their minds.
The mind is the ultimate weapon.
So they're going to come at me and I'm just going to project a wave of energy out of my body
to disable them.
Right?
Good.
Okay.
Come at me.
Come.
Say.
One more time.
Come at me.
Come.
Say.
For a moment, a wave of energy sweeps through their body
and they don't know where they are.
What world they're in, what dimension they're in.
It's embarrassing.
It's cringy.
Right?
How bad it was.
But man, did it look good when I was under mind control.
Holy shit.
That guy could move.
Len seemed to take the strictness of routine from Chen Moy
who frequently enrolled his students in marathons to advertise the center
and was known for waking his students up at 3 a.m. for morning meditations.
But Len's took what he called a Western-oriented approach to enlightenment.
If students weren't progressing in their careers and increasing their salaries,
they weren't making full use of his spiritual energy.
In this modern world, the more money you make,
it's the better meditation you're having.
It's difficult to find a consistent membership price for Len's meditation group.
The introductory seminars are usually advertised as either free or for a small cover charge.
But as attendees became regulars,
tuition could range anywhere from $600 a month to $2,500 a month.
I believe it was $20 a month.
Really?
Yeah.
Is that what you pay?
No.
Since then, my career has advanced significantly
and I pay approximately $1,000 a month now.
For me, it started free and then it was like a sliding scale.
Like if you could pay $100 a month, $500 a month, that would be helpful.
And it got to the point where I might have been paying $3 or $500 a month scrambling.
To cover the ever-increasing tuition, students were encouraged to switch careers.
And at Len's's suggestion, many of them turned to the fledgling field of computer programming.
A person who meditates who becomes a programmer is kind of like a duck in a happy pond.
You're in the right situation for many, many reasons.
He believed or he taught that computer programming was very similar to really good meditation
because of where your brain goes.
Computers are fascinating because the mindset necessary to work with advanced structures
in programming and in design is exactly what we do in advanced meditation.
It's exactly the same mindset.
I had credit cards at age 20, 21 that I was maxing out because of the promise of,
just in a few months, you're going to be making $100,000 a year,
which was an unbelievable amount of money back then.
According to ex-followers, Len's told his students that they'd all been software
developers together in past lives in the lost city of Atlantis.
And he appears to have registered a corporation under the title
High Priest of the First Diocese of the Californian Church of Atlantis.
The computers in Atlantis were infinitely evolved.
All processing was done with light. Electricity's much too slow.
But if his students had known how to code thousands of years ago, they would need a refresher.
If you're not familiar with the world of programming, you might take a simple course in it,
and then there are two ways to plunge into it.
One is to go to a short-term computer school where you go for six months or nine months or a year,
either during the day full-time or in the evening.
He talked a lot about the importance of programming computers and artificial
intelligence and relational databases, which is like a three- or four-D
database instead of like a flat spreadsheet, right?
I'm a nerd, so I kind of understood it, and there were lots of people who were like,
I don't know what he's saying, but they like worked really hard to figure it out.
Was Len's knowledgeable about computer programming?
As far as I know, he was like a Steve Jobs.
He understood the root of mentoring stuff, but he was just trying to inspire people
to go out and make a great deal of money.
Obviously, it's a smart career choice.
It's our country's number one business now, and it will only become more so.
But not every student waited until they knew how to code before entering the field.
A pattern began to form of students packing out their resumes with proficiencies and programming
languages, enlisting one another as previous employers who would vouch for them.
If you don't have experience, come up with the names of some companies.
Then you have somebody say, yes, they worked for me there, a friend.
Most of them didn't know anything about coding, and they would use each other
as references onto their resume and list all of the computer programming jobs they've had,
which they never did.
With the intention that they were going to do the best job they had,
and they had this enlightened being's energy, so they should be able to persevere.
So what normally would take four or eight hours at their work, they would work
12, 14, 16 hours looking at books, copying code, doing all of this stuff that they could
until they actually started understanding it usually.
The girl that I worked with at City Corp, who was doing this, was on the phone all the time
with her, with the other people in the cult, and she would use me as a source of information.
She would ask me questions that were totally unrelated to her specific job.
They were obviously, she was trying to help these other people.
So basically, it would be the blind leading the blind.
Sometimes they'd get caught, put on a literal blacklist because they were destroying code.
As one newsletter that circulated among the industry's hiring managers stated,
lenses followers were, quote, inserting themselves virus-like on accounts in the
tri-state area where they proceeded to wreak havoc.
But not all who lied their way into these companies were exposed.
Many learned the software languages quickly enough to begin rising the ranks into high
income positions, and they were advised to use this money to reinvest in their enlightenment.
You get more money, which tells you how more enlightened you are.
And since we're simple monks, we give this money back to him as a gesture of thank you.
And then he takes the money as the gesture, and then he gives us more spiritual energy,
which lets us meditate better, to program code better, and then give him more money.
To study enlightenment requires a commitment.
And part of that commitment is a person's willingness to go out and work to make the
money to pay for their own way.
How much money do you think you spent involved with Zen Master Rama?
In cash layouts, for the five-month involvement from January to May 1985,
I gave out a little over $30,000 in cash.
And an exceptional person, of course, will pay even more, will give even more,
because they not only want to just pay for their own way,
but they wish to make enlightenment more available to others.
Because you were a spiritual student of his, and you'd come to him and go,
I have this great idea for a computer program or, you know, a database program.
He would become CEO of every single one, like dozens of these companies.
Lenz credited himself with developing software through the 1980s and 90s that he claimed was
used by hundreds of American companies, both commercial and military.
And it's reported that some of his more successful programmers were providing
Lenz with upwards of $5,000 per month each.
If I were to keep on going and had a full-time job out of college,
I would have been paying as much as I could, $1,000 a month, which was a lot, $2,000 a month,
and living with a number of other Lenz followers by sleeping on floors or packing into rooms.
So we didn't have much overhead in eating ramen or just vegetables or whatever,
and then giving him essentially all of our money.
Did he ever, in any of his seminars, you know, verbally justify how he could ask that much?
Lenz would say that at his level, and the amount of energy he had,
there are so many people who want him dead, maybe from the government or these unknown
evil people, or they just wanted to steal his energy.
He needs to hide himself out and in planes fight protecting himself in impeccable locations
that sat on like vortexes or energy centers that the earth naturally gives,
and also surround himself with other high-class things that energetically
contain his energy and protect him from this dangerous world.
By 1988, Lenz was purchasing million-dollar homes across the United States
in order to bring enlightenment to a wider audience.
I can work anywhere I want in the world. I can do what I want to,
when I want to, buy or not buy what I want to, and I have a good understanding of art,
literature, mathematics, geography, computer science, and the world.
I know a lot about people. I'm not a bigot, and I try and help people out whenever I can,
but I'm also street smart. I know the street real well.
By the end of the 1980s, Lenz had begun to elicit a fair amount of attention from journalists.
LA Weekly published a several thousand-word expose,
making it the centerpiece of the January 28th, 1988 issue with this illustration as the cover.
There's a newspaper in Los Angeles called the LA Weekly that ran a story called Busting Rama.
I didn't know that there was anything to but. I mean, I don't understand what the problem is.
I teach seminars. They're very mainstream. I do them at Lincoln Center and every
talk about me. The authors interviewed several ex-followers for the expose,
marking one of the first times Lenz was publicly confronted with the more extraordinary claims
he had convinced his students to believe. I want to see if some, any things are correct.
Followers say that you make rooms glow with golden light. You can make the moon change colors,
the star spin, the wind stop. We should all be so lucky. Sounds like they're talking about Jesus
Christ here today. It does to me. Are you denied having ever climbed any of this? Of course not.
If you meet an enlightened person, you will see, if you have the ability to see on a subtle
physical level, a beautiful golden light around them. Oh, you may see many other things.
You claim to be one of the 12 fully enlightened beings on this planet? No, of course not.
In my estimation, at this time, there are 12 fully enlightened teachers in this world of which I am one.
Lenz claimed to be one of the 12 enlightened beings on earth. Do you know what he meant by that?
Yeah, people who have evolved for like, come, uh, incarnated for thousands of incarnations
who have studied Buddhism at a certain point, you get to a point like a,
like a Buddhist or a Jesus state, right? Where you're so enlightened and connected to the universe
that you're at the top. Are you one of the 12 enlightened beings on earth? I am an enlightened
teacher and it would take about an hour to explain what that means. Who are the other 11?
Well, there's a very well-known gentleman in India called Satya Sai Baba and so on and so
forth, names you wouldn't even know. It was almost a threat if you think about it. If it's not him,
there's a good chance you're not going to find the other ones. You really lucked out or you were
meant to find him. Other claims include Lenz telling his followers that he could stop breathing while
in deep meditation. When you go into Samadhi, very often you won't breathe for half an hour,
an hour. There's no breath at all. And something called blisses, this line of puppets that Lenz
had imbued with spiritual energy. What does this have to do with Zen master Rama? Anyone want to
just jump in here? It's fun. I can guess it's called a bliss and you've got them in your
apartment and part of the things they do is get rid of demons. Question. Hold on, hold on.
But the most alarming revelation in the busting Rama expose was what Lenz did to many of the
women in the group. We're not really having sex at all. It's an exchange of energy.
As a young man in Lenz's circle, did he treat you any differently from the women in the group?
I wasn't aware of it at the time, but the answer is yes. So what was happening behind the scenes
was that he would pick out some woman or young woman and convince them that if they had sex with
him, it's actually like a tantric way of him viewing them with spiritual energy. The greatest
transfer, karmic transfer, occurs in aside from meditating with someone, in sex with someone.
He said that he had sex with many of his women students. It was strictly a spiritual exercise
designed to energize me and raise my awareness level up to a higher realm. I actually heard that
some of his inner circle were convincing new people to do the same thing because they were higher
than everybody else. I talked to one guy after the fact after we were both out and his girlfriend was
one of those people and they broke up because of it and he left the group not because he didn't
believe that he was unenlightened and he was a fraud. He actually left because this feels
unequal because there's no option for him to have sex or some equivalent with this guy.
Throughout the 1980s, much of Lenz's advertising campaign appeared to be aimed exclusively toward
women. He has somewhat of a radical, very pro-women liberation point of view. It's days for him to
tell us as women how we can attain greater enlightenment. Good morning, welcome to our show.
From a point of view of meditation, let's say that women have an inner power that men don't. We
know that women's bodies are stronger than men. They can endure greater temperature changes,
heat, cold. There are physiological differences, but from a psychic point of view, women just have
a stronger energy. They can bear more and endure more. By the end of the decade, Lenz had accumulated
over a thousand followers with a high tuition inner circle of nearly 400 dedicated members.
The group had spread over the country with meditation bases in Palo Alto, Malibu, New York,
and Boston. You originally started in New York. You moved to San Diego. You had you
asked people to follow you from New York to San Diego. You asked some of those people to follow
you from San Diego to Malibu. Now, I had a meditation center in San Diego, Los Angeles,
and San Francisco. That's true. I've never asked anyone to move anywhere. Did Lenz ever ask his
followers to move or relocate with him? Yes. There would be rumblings for a few weeks or a
month or two like the Exodus is coming up. My first Exodus was when we went from Boston to
Los Angeles or to Chicago. I can't remember the places. You would leave all your friends and
family and everyone you ever knew like they were old clothes that don't fit anymore. When you show
up to this new place, you're finally free of the past. You get to reinvent yourself.
Instead of talking to your family members, you can give them their beeper number. So,
you're like connected, but you never respond to the beeper number. I was preparing for mine
and saving money by living in my parents' house while I was working full-time to disappear to New
York and just disappear, not even say goodbye. Gone. There are certain places. We call them places
of power on the earth. These are fabulous places. These are places where there's more energy available.
For some reason, when you meditate in these places, it's easier to stop your thoughts. There was a
time limit hidden from the concerned family and friends who might be considering an intervention.
If they didn't act quickly, they might lose the opportunity for good. But without an understanding
of what these students were experiencing, many interventions went nowhere. He asked,
so, Mark, are you getting involved in a cult? And I said, no, Rabbi, I'm studying spiritual
mysticism. And he sort of looked at me and he said, well, Judaism is a set of laws and we don't
deal with that stuff. What the students of Frederick Lenz really needed was expert intervention.
Would you mind introducing yourself and giving it a description of what it is that you do?
Yeah, hello. My name is Joe Simhart. I'm known as a cult information specialist. Since 1980,
I've helped people, families, the media understand the cult problem. I've done interventions that
were called the programings or exit counselings, approximately 500 or more. I also have a career
in the fight arts. Joe Simhart was a recurring voice of opposition throughout Frederick Lenz's
career. In the late 80s, he publicly confronted Lenz on the talk show A Current Affair.
What does he do that creates such loyalty? Well, for one thing, he sets himself up as
something that he is not. A Zen master, an enlightened being, a person who can traverse
in the occult world at will. I do two night a month seminars that a person attends and may or
may not attend again. I don't see how this race is occult. Joe's interest in this field came
organically. Throughout the 1970s, he'd been a member of the Apocalyptic Church Universal and
Triumphant, led by the charismatic Guru Ma, who claimed to be, quote, God incarnate.
In unraveling that whole thing and deconstructing what I had been involved in, I became kind of an
expert in the field of fundamentalist Christianity, New Age cult, Strait Buddhism, self-help groups,
all kinds of things that are related to this sort of activity. The programmers and exit counselors
got to know about me and asked me to go on cases with them. So I got, I guess, good at it at doing
conflict resolution with families that were impacted by this. And quite a few people would
leave these cults after talking to me, sometimes for several hours, sometimes for a week.
When did Frederick Lenz first appear on your radar?
In 1986, a family called me from California complaining that their daughter had just got
home and she was a mess and had been living with Frederick Lenz Rama for three months at his place
in Long Island. They flew me out and I spent a week with their daughter and she filled me in on
Lenz's behavior. He had her take LSD and she said during the first trip she ever did on LSD,
he began to scream and yell at her for failing him, for not being respecting him as an enlightened
person and she was devastated and suicidal, he left her alone in the house. Sadie's used as a
woman, you know her? Sure do. She says she was seduced by you, you made her a mistress, she says
you encouraged her to use LSD, try to make her believe she was possessed by demons, told her she
was the only one who could save her from the dark. She called a friend that came to pick her up and
called her family and they got her on a plane and sent her home and so I helped her to deconstruct
or debrief her about what happened to her, you know, what cults are about, what narcissistic
leaders are about, the fact that Lenz didn't appear to be enlightened and his claim to be in
light was just a claim to be entitled. Well she ran away, that's true, that's bad, this is someone
I spent some time with, a young woman, a very beautiful young woman who I went out with and
we traveled together for a while and had a great time together, she seemed to have an obsession
as some people do with demons, it was unfortunate, I liked her very very much, I thought she was just
super. That started my career with him, one of his mistresses and subsequently I had Exit Council
of about five other mistresses of his and about 20 other members. What were the greatest challenges
in deprogramming a devoted follower of Lenz? Yeah so the difficulty is just getting the whole
conversation started and once a person realizes that it's all about their choice, you know,
they can stay in the group forever if they wish to for every reincarnation or they could even
talk it out and see what I had to say or what the ex-member I had with me had to say, you know,
over time in most of those cases on the third day the person was ready to defect from the group.
Joe was often joined in these interventions by former students of Lenz,
many of whom Joe had Exit Counciled himself and when they weren't assisting in deprogrammings,
these ex-followers could be found protesting outside of Lenz's seminars. Could you describe
some of the common characteristics of a Rama student? Most of them were quite attractive,
young, intelligent, they could have been successful in business, you know, higher than
average IQ, lower than average IQ about comparative religions and another understanding
what Buddhism was really about so he could fool them as far as that aspect of spirituality and
you know, hungry for either spiritual enlightenment or success. The unenlightened can only take you
to the beach because they can't bring you across the ocean. God can do that directly if that's the
will of eternity or God will do that through the voice and the guidance of what we call an enlightened
person. It's this exchange between the narcissist and the hero-hungry person. The narcissist becomes
a foil like a movie that they can watch and feel part of and they join that guru on this stage.
You get kind of caught up in it, it becomes a self-ceiling social system and anything that's
critical of that self-ceiling social system is considered ignorant or evil or some other
thought-terminating cliche that prevents the person from thinking about the criticism.
During television appearances, Joe was often captioned as being affiliated with an organization
called the Colt Awareness Network. You know, this guy's not the head of the Colt Awareness Network.
Our eyes is a programmer who's hired to do kidnappings for $50,000 a hit. Can, as it would be
called, formed following the Jonestown massacre of 1978 when spiritual leader Jim Jones coerced over
900 followers to ingest cyanide in what he called a revolutionary suicide.
We cannot afford to forget what happened in Jonestown, said Cann's initial director.
They had annual conferences. The basic function was to disseminate information about controversial
groups. There was a time if you were worried about your son or daughter being an occult,
you could get help from a small non-profit organization called the Colt Awareness Network,
one follower of Lenz described the Colt Awareness Network as, quote,
utterly vicious people who prey on others religious freedom. Lenz himself told Newsday that, quote,
Cann is to small religious groups what the KKK is to black people.
If anything is a cult, it's the Colt Awareness Network, and I will tell you that. That is a cult.
I think Lenz is an individual who craves power. I think Lenz is an individual who has found how
to manipulate people to satisfy his craving for power. There's an organization that calls itself
the Colt Awareness Network, and they put families in touch with kidnappers who go out and grab these
people, sometimes 25 to 50 grand a shot is paid by wealthy parents. There were only two cases that
I can recall regarding Lenz, two young ladies that began coercively where the family had kidnapped
them and flew me in after securing them to try to talk them to leave Lenz. And both of those
cases didn't work, unfortunately, but all the voluntary cases I did with his followers did work.
One of those women was Jennifer Jacobs. Yes. I had me locked in this hotel for 11 days until
I ring out my police system. Okay, I am 22 years old. I'm a legal adult. They have no right. They
can be concerned all the while, but they have no man right to kidnap me. In the September 18, 1992
issue of the Philadelphia Enquirer, a woman named Jennifer Jacobs published a letter to the editor
in response to an exposé the Enquirer had published the previous week called,
As Guru's Disciples Hit Town Critics Cry Beware, the author of the exposé interviewed Jennifer's
parents and they were quoted saying that since joining Lenz's meditation group,
their daughter had stopped speaking to them and quote, no longer has a sense of humor and has
stopped playing the piano, a passion she had since childhood. Jennifer had written to tell her side
of the story, quote, in 1987, my parents paid $25,000 to have me brutally kidnapped, locked in
captivity, terrorized and abused for 11 days in a filthy motel in what was euphemistically called
an involuntary deprogramming, end quote. She used similar language in our affidavit, naming her
parents as complicit in the kidnapping and Joe as among the two deprogrammers. I read the affidavit
she accused can of kidnapping her and holding her against her will in a hotel room for 11 days
in an effort to deprogram her. Is there truth to that? Well, can of the call to awareness network
had nothing to do with it. Number one, they didn't hire the programmers and they didn't
manage them even though people that did interventions attended can conferences and would do some
networking but can didn't approve of kidnapping programming. So that was wrong. I'm trying to
think of a, I don't remember if it went 11 days, I think it probably went like a week.
She went to a rehab center afterwards, you know, agreeing to go and which was for ex-called members
and she escaped from there or left it because you could, it was voluntary and she went back
to the group and after that we heard all this negative stuff about the experience.
That is a potent self-righteous man and that is the attitude of the whole call to awareness network.
She was quite angry, her family ended me. I've since met with her after she broke away from
lens and we've reconciled all of that. In 1992, Joe was quoted saying, I don't recommend coercive
situations anymore because there's too much trauma involved for everyone.
Hello power lovers. I'm here today on top of the continental divide.
11,500 feet up above the earth. I'm parked by the side of the road. It's around 745
in the evening on August 7th. Occasionally a car or truck will roar by.
I'm facing some distant power mountains, a suitable place to discuss with you the end of the world.
By the 1990s, Frederick Lenz's career had entered a precarious phase. On the surface,
things seemed to be trending in his favor. He published his first novel titled,
Surfing the Himalayas, the story of a young spiritual aspirant and a zen master named
Flop who set out to snowboard their way to enlightenment. Now, your book is about a lot
more than snowboarding. I mean, in this case, the perfect ride is really about spiritual
enlightenment, isn't it? Well, snowboarding is spiritual enlightenment. Snowboarding is the
fastest growing sport in the world and in five years there are going to be more people on snowboards
than on skis. But yes, you're absolutely right. Snowboarding is about balance. The novel sold
90,000 copies. It was even publicly endorsed by Chicago Bull's head coach, Phil Jackson,
who quickly whiffed through the blurb after backlash from the Chicago Tribune.
The sequel, Snowboarding to Nirvana, also sold well. Enrolling stone after reading the latest
coverage of Pearl Jam's battle with Ticketmaster and flipping past all the ads for CD subscription
services, readers would find Lenz's face with two full-printed pages dedicated to
promoting the new Zazen album. There's also what must have seemed a reassuring amount of
web-hosted fan pages that appeared around this time, but Lenz's reputation at large
only continued to plummet. In 1993, ex-follower Mark Laxer released a memoir called Take Me for
a Ride. The book details how Lenz convinced his students that Sri Chenmoy couldn't actually
achieve Samadhi, the deepest state of meditation in which union with the Supreme is reached,
and had only been faking it for clout. And how Mark and other male students were
dissuaded from even speaking to the women in the group for fear of bringing down their energy
while Lenz himself was privately pursuing them. Laxer's impetus for leaving the group was the
passing of a student named Donald Cole, who'd named Lenz in the note he left behind. Cole had
been among the 400th students purged by Lenz for, quote, maintaining an abysmal level of consciousness.
There were times where he, irrationally, I mean, these were people, three or five hundred people,
who'd be giving him tens of thousands of dollars, like constantly, and he would just get rid of half
of everyone. He would just, like, wipe everybody out. Sometimes a spiritual teacher will literally
kick out some of their best students because it's time for them to go out and experience for a while
in the world. Sometimes a student just isn't doing well. They're knocking their head against the wall.
Well, if you're a good teacher, you don't let them keep knocking their head against the wall.
They hurt themselves. You send them out for a while. People would be sobbing. Lenz was
simultaneously threatening to use his spiritual energy against students who left the group of
their own accord. It is possible that he could give me cancer or, as I'm driving late at night,
alone. My card is my flip. Do you know how Lenz would dissuade his followers from leaving his group?
Well, there was a lot of dark forces out there, according to him, and that without his protection,
you will fall into insanity. Your life will collapse. You won't have a chance for enlightenment for
many lifetimes. Now that you're sort of connected with his energy spiritually, if you were to leave
your body is so kind of addicted or connected that you would quickly fall into the lower levels,
kind of the hell levels of existence, in which case you'd go crazy. You'd get cancer. You'd get
into a car accident. About three years out of the group, I still believe he could do that. He could
stop my heart. He could cause a car accident. But the 1990s saw Lenz's opposition ramping up as well.
X students managed to get his novels dropped from Barnes & Noble promotional events,
and reports surfaced of a group of parents called LenzWatch, who worked synergistically with the
Cult Awareness Network in order to find students and connect them with exit counselors. For more
information about Lenz and his followers, you can contact the Cult Awareness Network or a group
called LenzWatch. I had told my mother, whatever you do, if the Cult Awareness Network gives you
a call and tries to convince you that I'm in a cult, just hang up on them. They're going to try
to deprogram me and try to get tons of money out of you. And then I walked away and she said,
the Cult Awareness Network, that sounds legit. So she called them and it turns out one of the top
cult interventionists or exit counselors lived just three towns away or five times away. And
I still thought that they were going to be full of shit, but I was like, I might as well listen
to what they have to say. My friends are there, my family is there, this guy who's the cult expert,
and a few ex-members are all there. And they show me videotapes of Scientology, the boonies,
and stuff like that. And I want to say three or four hours into just talking and learning about
mind control and other cults. I had the sensation of popping out of it. It was like, pop. And I
looked around and I was like, oh my God, you have no idea the shit I believed. Oh my God,
it was like waking up from a year, year and a half long dream and having the memories of a
totally different person. I actually had my stepfather drive down to where my ex-fiancé,
and she was still in it, drove down after the first day, picked her up, brought her down,
and I shared the intervention with her. And so she would pop out of it. She was not as dedicated
as I was, but there was still the mind control going on with her.
In 1996, Dateline NBC delivered a critical blow to Lenzi's career, a primetime expose,
this time featuring an ex-member of Zazen, who was quick to call Lenzi out for sharing
songwriting credits with the band. I never, in my definition of composition and writing,
saw him write anything. What does he play? He doesn't play anything.
The film crew captured a Zazen jam session, showing what Lenz
psychically cleansing the music looked like in action.
Now let's go in the opposite way down.
Can I get funky?
He was apparently using a lot more drugs. I mean, he used LSD,
uppers and downers, and from one inside person told me he had also been using cocaine.
And he looked, you know, the last time he was on television was on Dateline program.
It was very thin. I got this Caucasian body and it's created all kinds of problems in the
West. I've never had one before. It's a new experience. I mean, it's to being shorter
and being in a land where I am understood. He wasn't as effective as an influencer
the last couple of years, and I think a lot of followers began to break away from him.
The segment also featured a newly defected Jim Piccarello,
who at times seemed stunned by his own story as he recounted it.
I thought that this guy can turn the room into gold. I was pretty much into it at the
beginning of the dinner. By the end of the dinner, I was willing to hang out with that group for
pretty much the rest of my life. Over time, not only did I see him turn the room gold,
which I saw it every single time during a retreat, a desert retreat. I saw him at night
skate on beams of light, you know, over the sand. Oh, I saw him disappear. I've seen him turn into a
woman into a Princeton's weird bug-like creature. I've seen them levitate. In the very beginning,
what did they do? They had us get into a trance state by meditating. And then they would talk about
what the experience is when you're with a enlightened being and you are spiritually sensitive.
A, you want to be spiritually sensitive and want to be better than other people. You're a person.
B, you're interested in being with an enlightened master. Because how cool would that be? You're
a special person who's learning stuff that no one else is learning. You're in a room with
300 people that believe this guy is enlightened. You've got the group dynamics that are shaping
your experience. And then when he comes out and he lowers the lights and gets you into
a state and you have a belief like, I want to be special. I want to follow someone who's special.
Start experiencing what they describe historical enlightened beings are like. And I saw gold.
In the early spring of 1998, Long Island police pulled the body of Frederick Lenz from the bottom
of a bay located behind one of his New York homes. A local reporter described a small crowd of
onlookers who'd gathered to watch the scene and the leading hypothesis that Lenz had been killed
by the parent of a student, someone who'd felt Lenz had, quote, brainwashed their kids.
Adding to this theory was a section of damaged railing along the pier where it was determined
Lenz entered the water. But when the body was recovered, they found Lenz dressed in a Versace
suit with a dog collar buckled around his neck. The Scotty dog had died years before in a volume.
He had that dog collar on his neck. He claimed the buyer was his most enlightened student and
that they had been together many times in past lives. I mean, this is how delusional he was.
Inside Lenz's home were two other Scottish terriers and one student. The dogs were in
critical condition, having eaten volume that was hidden inside their dog food. The student had also
taken lethal amounts of barbiturates and was found staring at a framed photo of Lenz with a note
beside her that read, we all tried to go to the other world last night and only Rama made it.
Please help us make it to the other world. The woman was discovered by the housekeeper
when she came in and she got help and survived this overdose and so did the dogs by the way.
After a toxicology report found that Lenz had ingested 150 tablets of value mixed with Vodka
prior to drowning, his death was deemed self-inflicted.
Beyond this world, beyond other worlds, be they interdimensional worlds or physical worlds,
there is something else which is that vast unknown that we call eternity. It is where we have come
from. It is that which is within us and it is where we eventually return. I can't tell you what that
is like. I have meditated and experienced that. I have tasted it and felt it. Then I went beyond
that to become it. The widespread reactions of followers to Lenz's death have mostly been lost
to time, but archived message boards show students sharing photos of group memorials
and a sudden urgency to reconnect with other members they might not have seen in years.
Oh, I actually found out about his death at my wedding. I was walking around with my friend Bob who
was involved in my intervention and we're walking around he goes oh what did you think about Lenz
dying and I was like what? I was just surprised that he tried to kill other beings which is so
un Buddhist. I was like okay well one less cult leader in the world. I was in my mid 20s. I didn't
have a lot of empathy for incredibly abusive sociopaths. Hi, my name is Rama and today I would
like to teach you how to meditate. Lenz never groomed a successor to lead the meditation group
in his absence. On the contrary, he'd been adamant that none of his students had come close to
achieving a level of consciousness that could be called enlightenment. So when my friends write me
and tell me they're enlightened, it's like someone who's just taken a second year French
course announcing that they've just completed their PhD. So the group continued without a living
figurehead. Today the few remaining and incoming students have virtual meetups to discuss Lenz's
teachings or to watch his favorite movies. Some meditate on framed portraits of him they keep
in their homes. Others simulate his golden light with augmented reality and clips from his VHS tapes
will occasionally appear while scrolling YouTube shorts. When you meditate over a period of time
you'll come to see more and more of the many faces and sides of creation and in this one brief
lifetime you can experience ecstasy thousands and thousands of times. Why do you think someone like
Rama even after all these years still has a loyal fan base? There are other groups that are
selling his halt. One of the ones that's most successful these days is run by a guy they
call himself Sampara who's a lens offshoot or a Rama offshoot. His real name is Jeff Malone,
G-E-O-F-F Malone and his group's called the Buddha Dojo and it was called Awaken Mind at one time.
But it's very lens-like. When people approach that group they don't know that lens is behind it
and they might never know but once you get deeply involved then you get its reveal that lens is the
Guru. You know it's just like in his day the seekers out there that want to believe that there's
people out there that are enlightened and they think that if they come across one they'll recognize
this person you know they all use this line when the the seeker is ready the Buddha will appear.
That's that line that's slow but it's probably gotten more and people into bizarre cults at
least Eastern groups than any other because people in their own narcissism think that they will have
this insight or this psychic power to recognize a real guru when they see one. It was lens's will
that is net worth which included several houses and cars totaling around 18 million dollars be
used to establish a charity in his name with the objective of quote disseminating Zen Buddhist
teachings meditation and yoga in the context of what I have taught as American Buddhism.
The Frederick P. Lenz Foundation for American Buddhism still exists today and claims to give
millions to Buddhist friendly causes across the world. In 2013 a follower named Liz Lewinson
crowdfunded 29,000 dollars in order to write a biography of Frederick Lenz titled Gaze in my
direction. It was New Year's Eve 1998 and he said to me you will be my biographer three months
later he was gone he staged his exit. Lewinson's account of Lenz covers much of the same time period
as Mark Laxer's memoir but the tone couldn't be more different. She describes the change of stage
names as Lenz incarnating into the Hindu god Rama. I don't like calling him Rama it's an insult to
those who actually follow either Hinduism or Buddhism and Lenz's reasons for breaking away
from Chinmoy having largely to do with Chinmoy's strict rule of celibacy. I went through terrible
times I went through times of self-hate thinking how undeveloped spiritually I was everyone else in
the ashram a thousand people nobody had a girlfriend or a boyfriend I did.
Sri Chinmoy never had the reputational downfall that Lenz experienced. Around the time of Lenz's
death the Chinmoy centers around the world were celebrating the completion of seven million bird
drawings. Chinmoy's students continued performing endurance challenges throughout the decades.
By the 1990s powerlifting had become Chinmoy's preferred method of demonstrating the supreme.
Whether he was calf raising a helicopter or an elephant or wrist curling a giant dumbbell
he always kept the cumulative weight prominently displayed for the audience to consider.
Go Guru come on up yes.
Occasionally he would combine his creative miracles for a show stopping finale.
Over close to 1500 books it gives you just a brief idea of how prolific
Guru is. He has written close to 1500 different books.
Chinmoy's sheer quantity of creative output has always been seen as dubious by those outside of
his meditation centers. And some of his more outlandish feats such as this lift listed at over
7,000 pounds were difficult for even his most loyal adherents to believe. But Chinmoy had a
seasoned defense. I don't blame people who suspect my performance he said my own mind suspects it.
When Chinmoy passed away in 2007 at the age of 76 the way he was eulogized in the media
couldn't have been more different from that of Frederick Lenz. Then in 2015 13x followers converged
to form a youtube channel called the Sree Chinmoy Disciple Experience. And you know it's very scary
and very daunting especially when you hear all the horror stories that Guru used to tell Sree
Chinmoy say oh if you leave the center you know you're gonna want them you're gonna get raped
you're gonna get cancer you're gonna the hostile force they're gonna capture. You know that was
like my only family because I had to cut off my real family for 21 years. I just had pretty much
resigned myself that that was it for this life you know just many times Guru said it's just one
incarnation and I thought to myself okay fine I can just give one incarnation for this. Being in
the meditation center was very much about trying not to be human. Certain parts of the being like
between here and here and everything else was meant to be dead. Targeted out by having me sit in
front of him and meditate and then he was like saying are you surrendered and I have my hands full
and I said supreme I bow to thee and then he was like oh are you really surrendered and then he
said take your clothes off. Unconditional surrender to the will of the supreme. The last development
of the story of Frederick Lenz came in 2021 when the remains of Brenda Kerber a programmer and
meditation student who disappeared in 1988 were recovered. Her car had been driven into a reservoir
and act that police ruled intentional. She'd given up custody of her kids before her disappearance
and her diary entries indicate it was so she could move across the country to follow Lenz
who she referred to as golden boy.
So the cult awareness network seems to have dissolved in the late 1990s. Can you talk about
what happened? So uh Scientology was one of the groups that really went after any group that
criticized them and and especially hated the cult awareness network. They sued the can group 50
times. I got hit with 12 suits in one week. I would open the door a process server would give
me a suit. They were suing us all over the country sometimes simultaneously. There was a case in
the early 1990s where the programmer named Rick Ross took on a case in west it was a fundamentalist
Christian group where he takes a counsel teenage sons of a woman out of a group and then she wanted
her then 18 year old son exit counseled also and it didn't work. He had been kidnapped. He went
back to the group. Scientology got a hold of the young man and got him to run a lawsuit against
the cult awareness network based on the fact that Rick Ross had some vague connection to uh can even
though he didn't attend the meetings. Scientology's lawyers were quite adept at this kind of case
where can didn't have good representation because it was poorly funded and they couldn't afford
a good legal team. Scientology won the case. They bankrupted can bankrupt the the bankrupted
group had to sell its assets. The only top bidder was Scientology. So Scientology purchased can in
1996. So whenever you call one of his old cult awareness network numbers in those books you would
end up talking to a Scientologist. What are you going to do when they're trying to destroy you?
Look if you're a Jew if you're if you're a Jew no no Jew is going to cry about the fact that the
Nazi party is gone. If you're an African-American no one's going to cry that the KKK is gone.
I'm not crying because can is gone. Yeah. Deprogramming still happens across the country
although it's rare to find cases labeled as involuntary after the 1990s. I still do cases.
The last case I did intervention case was in India. It was flown over there in September
and that case turned out fine. Many ex-Rama students still appear to be in the computer
programming industry. One former student is quoted as saying I don't agree with how he
treated women. I don't think he was enlightened whatever that is. What I did get from him was a
career. Others have turned their experience into cautionary tales. After leaving lenses
organization I didn't get cancer. I didn't get into a car crash. Since then I've had a number of
companies as an entrepreneur that I started and I moved up here to Maine and I built my own house
with my wife. We just read books on how to build a house and we did it. And in the last 10 years
I've discovered a love for rediscovered a love for filmmaking and screenwriting. I wrote a bunch
including the one I had mentioned before about two people falling in love as they try to save
each other from their respective cults. It's a dark rom-com called the cult of us.
But there may always be a market for the mystique of enlightenment as defined by those who
claim to have achieved it and in a reality where only they can teach it. Someone might say oh yes
Rama wonderful he's an enlightened teacher but gosh you know I just don't feel comfortable with him.
I feel more comfortable with people that someone else whose name we won't mention. Why won't I
mention it? Well you have to do some work. I mean there has to be some adventure here. Part of the
test at least to get in is that you have to find them. It's hype and go see. And then you have to
believe them. I mean I could just be making all of this up. Maybe I'm not enlightened. Maybe it's
an extra double bluff where I'm just saying all this so you'll just think that I am. You see?
Who can tell? You can tell. You can tell and your heart can tell.
A big thanks to Jim Piccarello and Joe Zimhart. I wouldn't have been able to present this story
nearly as comprehensively without their openness to sharing their experiences.
All day long from morning until night I thought about this dude. Check out the links in the
description to find Joe's YouTube channel where he continues the cult monitoring work
he's been doing for decades and Jim's short films which have won many awards in independent
film festivals. I also want to give a shout out to a YouTube channel called Slave Obeyz.
Without their efforts in archiving these talk shows from the 80s and 90s,
important information about these groups would have been lost to time. And this isn't the first
video of mine in which I've used archival clips from this channel so a shout out is long overdue.
Lastly, if you enjoyed this video and would like to support the channel,
my merch can be found at atrocityguide.com or you can support me directly on Patreon
where you'll get access to my Discord server as well as written progress reports on upcoming videos.
