Lecture 16 – Four and Against Method
As we've seen over the last three lectures, Kuhn's work, both the structure of scientific
revolutions and its successors, turned out to be very difficult to interpret.
It was hard to figure out exactly what Kuhn was claiming, and it was hard to figure out
how plausible those claims were.
So for those reasons, Kuhn was widely idolized and widely vilified.
This time we take a look at two of the most interesting responses to Kuhn.
From within the discipline of philosophy, in all the disciplines that paid attention
to science, the Kuhnian aftermath was a time of real sort of ferment and chaos.
It was hard to figure out how disciplines should restructure themselves to take into
account this very new approach to science studies.
Imre Lakatoch, a Hungarian philosopher and for a long while a colleague of Carl Poppers
at the London School of Economics, tried to reconcile Kuhn's historical approach to
the philosophy of science with a much more robust role than Kuhn had allowed for rule-governed
scientific rationality.
That's one of the responses to Kuhn we'll examine.
The other is from the Austrian-born philosopher Paul Feierabend, who spent most of his career
at the University of California at Berkeley.
He comes at Kuhn from the other end of the spectrum.
Feierabend takes Kuhn's political metaphors farther even than Kuhn had, and he argues
that we want epistemological anarchism.
He's against scientific method as such.
Lakatoch has figured in our course, mostly through his most famous quote, where he characterized
Kuhn as reducing science to mob psychology.
That's a strong statement, and as we've seen, it's not by any means obviously a fair thing
to say about Kuhn.
Kuhn thinks science is epistemically special, but we had a hard time seeing how he could
recognize what's epistemically special about science within this framework of a description
that deflates some of science's pretensions to rationality.
Lakatoch utterly refuses to share Kuhn's confidence in science as a social practice.
Kuhn can be assimilated to that steakhouse commercial.
Science is no rules just right.
The balance of confidence, the transmission of belief and doubt across science, is a socially
sanctioned process in which Kuhn places great faith.
Lakatoch, for reasons or perhaps better causes that will become clear in a moment, insists
on placing trust only in methods or rules, not in social practices.
He wants a rule of law rather than of people in science.
Let's see why.
Lakatoch had worked with a Marxist resistance group during the Nazi occupation of Hungary.
After the war, he held a major post in the Hungarian Ministry of Education.
He was close to the minister of higher education as part of the Soviet-backed communist government.
But he was later jailed by that regime for more than three years.
The crime of which he was accused was revisionism, and it's not clear exactly what he had done
or whom he had annoyed, such that he got almost four years in prison a year of time in solitary
confinement.
Upon his release, he was an important figure in the well-known Hungarian uprising of 1956
and had to leave the country after that uprising was put down by the Soviets.
Now, I do not want to reduce philosophy to politics.
We'll worry about that kind of approach in our next lecture.
But one needn't be too reductive in order to see that a passage from Kuhn like the following.
As in political revolutions, so in paradigm choice, there is no standard higher than the
ascent of the relevant community.
That sounds comforting to Kuhn because of the trust he places in the scientific community.
But for the European philosophers we've seen, for Popper, for the positivists, and especially
for Lakatosz, all of whom were at best driven out of their homelands by relevant communities,
the Nazis or repressive communist regimes.
This idea of trust in the rationality of the relevant community without imposing rules
on what's permitted for such a community is not going to sound nearly as reassuring or
nearly as tempting.
Now, I'm not suggesting that Kuhn can't offer a reasonable reply here.
Surely there's some room for distinguishing the scientific community from the Nazi or
Soviet academic establishment.
My point is one about sort of historical fairness.
The philosophers who insisted on trying to impose rules or methods on science had understandable
and weighty reasons for doing so.
But at this historical remove, they're often presented as kind of old fashioned, unimaginative
fuddy-duddies.
And my point is just that they had real and powerful motivations for thinking that there's
an important role for rules and methods governing a supposedly rational practice.
This was not just sort of control freaks who wanted a rule for everything.
Their life experience bears on this sort of humanly weighty question.
It's not just an abstract question of logic.
Even though the positivists like to impose logical form on ideas, they're not doing
it for its own sake.
And I think it's unfair, of course I'm offering my opinion here, I think it's unfair to treat
them as if there's no motivation behind the sort of heightened sense of rigor they want
to impose.
Following Kuhn then, Lakatoche insists that philosophical views about science need to
be tested against the history of science.
This is one of the ways in which he departs from Kuhn's positivist predecessors.
But Lakatoche follows Popper and the positivists in thinking that a universal, rational method
survives the test of history.
Lakatoche called his view the methodology of scientific research programs.
Against the background that we've developed in this course, it's easiest to see Lakatoche's
approach as a compromise between Popperian and Kuhnian takes on science.
It's a bit of an oversimplification, but for our purposes, a research program is very
much like a paradigm.
It's got an additional layer of structure imposed on it.
Research program includes a hard core, that's Lakatoche's term, of principles that are taken
to be beyond criticism.
This is the analog in Lakatoche of Kuhnian normal science.
The hard core is not itself being tested.
It guides scientific practice without being up for grabs in the course of normal science.
So for instance, Newton's three laws of motion and his law of gravitation comprise the hard
core of Newtonian physics.
The research program also includes a protective belt, also Lakatoche's term, of claims that
can be modified as needed to protect the core from falsification.
This is how Lakatoche allows a research program to face anomalies without thereby counting
as having been falsified.
Popper and Kuhn and everybody cheat a little bit, he thinks, in admitting tacitly that
there's a failure of fit between their theories in the world without having a story about
exactly why that's okay.
For Lakatoche, claims in the protective belt can be modified while the research program
remains intact and in fact thriving.
So in Newton's physics, for instance, the protective belt would include certain claims
about things like optics in the atmosphere, since among the first things a Newtonian would
appeal to in order to explain observations that deviated from the theory's predictions
would be optical distortions through the atmosphere.
So you can change claims about the light bending properties of the atmosphere without threatening
the hard core of Newton's laws of motion.
This protective belt, according to Lakatoche, permits research programs to develop over
time and for Lakatoche, a research program can be evaluated only historically, not at
a time.
They are historical entities, he takes that lesson from Kuhn very seriously.
But one major difference between Lakatoche's research programs and Kuhn's paradigms is
that Lakatoche permits competing research programs all to flourish at the same time.
In fact, he thinks that's the typical case, it's not just permitted, it's how science
generally works.
And at least in some fields, this seems like an important advance and one to which Kuhn
was sort of oddly blind.
So in biology, for instance, we arguably see competition between what's called the classical
synthesis, where evolution and genetics, which for a while had been sort of competitors
in the early 20th century, were brought together in the middle part of the century.
And that's the dominant view in biology.
But some newer approaches, for instance, ones that emphasize the ways in which embryological
development both constrains and permits certain kinds of genetic driven variation compete
with the classical approach.
They're not necessarily incompatible, but they have very different emphases and very
different experimental agendas.
Perhaps more obviously psychology has seen a whole bunch of distinct, if not competing,
probably competing in some reasonably strong sense, methodological approaches like behaviorism,
which thought of psychology as about behavior and behavior alone, cognitive psychology,
which was friendlier to internal notions of thinking, neuroscience, which is about the
brain rather than say about behavior.
So since that does seem to go on in science, there's some reason to think that this is
a respect in which Kuhn exaggerated the dogmatism of normal science.
We can have multiple paradigms or research programs at work in a field at once without
necessarily leading to paralysis.
Now, Lakatos thinks that research programs can be evaluated in an objective way by comparing
them across time.
In order to do so, he borrowed some ideas from Popper about how to deal with apparently
falsifying data.
A progressive research program, a term central to Lakatos' view, modifies the protective
belt in ways that generate new predictions.
We had seen in Popper that the way to deal with apparent problems with your view is to
sometimes modify your auxiliary hypotheses, but only in ways that leave them independently
testable.
This is the part of Popper's view that Lakatos is taking on.
In contrast, a stagnating or degenerating research program is unable to cope with anomalies.
This is Kuhn's term, anomalies, right?
Ways in which the world won't fit into our theories, claims, and compartments.
So a stagnating research program cannot generate new predictions while handling anomalies.
To put it a little spiritually sounding, positive change comes from within, negative
change is imposed from without.
Positive change is driven by a research program as it were internal momentum.
Newton provides Lakatos' favorite example of this.
Newton's model of the solar system begins by treating the planets and the sun as fixed
points and then goes on itself to become more realistic by having the objects move about
the solar system's center of mass, which is affected by not just the sun, but by the
gravitational force of the planets.
And then it starts taking the gravitational forces that hold between the planets into
the theory, and then it starts to treat them as balls with mass distributed all the way
through them rather than as point masses.
All of these problems arise out of the theory's own standards of explanation and problem solving
rather than the theory having its nose rubbed in problems externally.
That's a progressive research program for Lakatos.
And this illustrates Lakatos' solution to the demarcation problem.
A Newtonian, he thinks, is no more capable than a Marxist is of describing conditions
under which the theory will drop its core principles.
The hardcore does not get subjected to falsification.
But the Newtonian program kept changing in ways that generated new predictions, many
of which panned out, while the Marxist program couldn't use the Russian Revolution to predict
where the next one would take place.
It can accommodate the data, but it can't accommodate the data and, at the same time,
generate novel predictions.
Now, Lakatos' view has a certain peculiarity in that the fact that the predictions panned
out, that the Newtonian theory is what he called empirically progressive, is less important
to Lakatos than the fact that it's what he calls heuristically progressive, that it's
finding ways to integrate problems into its research agenda, that it sort of knows where
it's going in problem solving, and that that's driven by the theory itself.
Lakatos' defense of this kind of peculiar claim is that once we get used to the idea
that all theories always face anomalies, actual empirical fit, actual fit of the theory's
claims with observation is less important than the research program's momentum, its
promise for solving problems.
The positivists, as you might imagine, were shocked at the idea that there's something
more important than whether a theory fits the observational data.
Now, Lakatos' view about the role of rules in evaluating science is pretty subtle.
He insists that there are rules that establish that there's a fact of the matter about which
research programs are better and which ones are worse.
That's what saves science from being mob psychology.
But such judgments can only be made after the fact, after programs have progressed or
degenerated for quite a long time.
So Lakatos distinguishes evaluating a research program from giving advice to a scientist
about what to do with respect to a research program.
A scientist can stick with a degenerating research program as long as the scientist
admits that the research program is degenerating, because we can't know at a particular time
whether the research program is going to become more progressive.
Lakatos is against what he calls instant rationality.
So after the fact, we can provide objective judgments about which research programs were
doing well and which ones were doing badly.
But a scientist's choice to stick with a degenerating research program rather than
a progressive one is defensible as long as it's honest.
So he's not trying to tell scientists what to do.
Lakatos' notion of objectivity is not a matter of providing advice to scientists its retrospective
assessment of a research program.
Lakatos thinks that philosophies of science, turning to philosophy from science itself,
are to be judged by the histories of science to which they lead.
This is a very Kunian kind of approach.
The philosophy has to fit the history.
The history of science provides the data, and a philosophical research program is judged
by how progressively, in the same way that research programs in science are supposed
to be progressive, the philosophical research program handles the data over time.
So claims about scientific methodology are supported when they can make episodes in the
history of science look rational.
The problem, according to Lakatos, with Popper's approach to the history of science is it makes
too much science look irrational.
Scientists have bipoparian standards held on to theories that look to be falsified for
much longer than they should.
And positivist history of science doesn't look any better because scientists held on
to theories that weren't supported by the positivist sense of an inductive logic in the
way that the theory would predict.
Technically here we mean retro-dict.
It's a prediction about the past.
But it still has the logical status of a prediction.
We can thus see that philosophical history of science, according to Lakatos, is supposed
to be what's sometimes called wiggish or presentist.
It's written from the standpoint of what we now believe.
Lakatos takes it as a given that it was rational for scientists to reject the Newtonian approach
to physics in favor of the Einsteinian approach.
It's a philosopher's job to show why that was a rational decision.
But Lakatos puts rather a peculiar spin on the idea that a philosophy of science is to
be judged by how rational it makes the history of science look.
Because he thinks that philosophers should be writing normative, not descriptive history.
This is that rational reconstruction approach we saw with the positivists with a vengeance.
So let me explain, this is really quite a peculiar view.
A paparian should write the history of science as being full of conjectures and refutations.
This philosophical history is, to a great extent, cheerfully fabricated.
It's a matter of seeing how good a spin job you can do on the history of science given
your philosophical principles.
That's your job.
Spin doctoring is a philosopher's job here, according to Lakatos.
Now he's not licensing dishonesty, you're supposed to point out the ways in which you
fabricate the history, literally in the footnotes of this fabricated history.
For Lakatos, the empirical history matters only because it shows which parts of the actual
history you can't explain philosophically.
And thus have to explain causally.
Now why would Lakatos put forward such a strange view?
The point of the history for Lakatos is logical, not empirical.
You're trying to figure out to what extent your theory of scientific rationality can
make episodes in the history of science look rational.
You're not so much interested in how rational they actually were.
The issue is how rational can your theory make them look?
Because that's your job is to make the history of science look rational.
You're trying to figure out which data can be reconciled with your philosophical research
program and which can't.
And as with scientific research programs, the point is not so much how much the data
conflicts with your story, but your prospects in the future for handling it.
Is your philosophical research program progressive?
Does it look like it will be able to make future episodes of science?
That means unexamined episodes, right?
We're looking at history.
Will it make unexamined episodes look rational?
Now like their scientific counterparts, philosophical or historical research programs are judged
by whether they generate novel predictions about how rational unexamined episodes in
science are.
So the more, say, a positivist historian can handle unexamined cases of theory change by
seeing them as applications of inductive logic rather than, say, falsificationist approaches,
then the more problems the theory is setting itself that it knows how to approach.
And that would make a positivist or inductivist, in Lakatosha's term, approach to the history
of science look attractive.
It looks like it's getting somewhere.
Maybe it hasn't handled the actual cases all that well, but you're evaluating it in
terms of its promise.
But the more it has to explain scientific behavior without appealing to its central hard core,
its inductive logic, the more the research program is on its heels.
It's reacting rather than extending itself.
So Lakatosha offers us an odd mix of Popper and Kuhn, of dogmatism and criticism, of rules,
but rules that don't provide advice.
Now later in the course, we're not going to need to keep this whole picture in mind,
but one of the valuable things about Lakatosha at this point is it shows how you can combine
some of the resources, draw on positivism for part of your view, on Popper for part of your
view, and on Kuhn for part of your view.
And Lakatosha's view was quite influential.
It influenced Paul Fireobin, but mostly negatively.
Fireobin and Lakatosha were friends, and they had been working on a dialogue they were going
to publish together called for and against method.
But Lakatosha died in 1974 at the age of 51.
Fireobin then published his part of the exchange as against method, which is his best known
and most influential work.
That title sums up Fireobin's view quite nicely.
His central claim across everything he did is if you insist on a scientific method,
on a rule governing scientific practice, as Lakatosha had insisted, there's only one
rule that will do, and that rule is anything goes.
Now, it's sometimes hard to tell when Fireobin is being serious and when he's just making
fun of us or some more traditional philosopher.
Early in the book Against Method, he warns the reader that his arguments don't necessarily
reflect his own convictions.
What they do is show how easy it is to lead people by the nose in a rational way.
A very memorable phrase.
At various times in his career, Fireobin pursued singing, stage management, history, and physics,
as well as philosophy.
He really didn't like to be called a philosopher.
If you asked him what he did, he would say he was an entertainer, and he writes very
entertaining philosophy.
Though he sometimes likes to challenge orthodox opinion just for the fun of doing so, most
philosophers think we can piece together a kind of positive philosophical project out
of Fireobin's kind of mocking and provocative work.
Fireobin's most influential argument derives from historical cases, and in that sense,
it's recognizably Kunian in spirit.
He says to philosophers, you come up with a set of methodological rules, whichever ones
you are inclined to defend, and I'll show you cases in which, if scientists had followed
those rules, it would have been disastrous.
Some important scientific advance would have been prevented.
And so Fireobin's resting on the idea that we should reject any rule, the consistent application
of which would have impoverished science.
His favorite example concerns Galileo's arguments for the Copernican hypothesis that the earth
orbits the sun rather than the sun orbiting the earth.
And Fireobin is anxious to point out that observations seem to oppose Copernicus here.
We've already seen the problem with the parallax, with the fact that the angle from which we
view the distant stars doesn't seem to change, and we've seen the problem with the fact
that if you drop a stone from a tower, it does not land away from the foot of the tower,
but act the foot of the tower.
Which Galileo could solve, but Copernicus couldn't.
Most people thought that since the earth was moving, the stone should fall away from the
tower.
Galileo's genius, as Fireobin reads matters, involved overcoming observation, not, as everybody
else seems to have thought, yielding to observation.
Fireobin has this quote from Galileo that he absolutely loves, where Galileo, excuse
me, is praising Copernicus, and similar thinkers who, through sheer force of intellect, have
done such violence to their own senses as to prefer what reason told them over that which
sensible experience plainly showed them to the contrary.
It's a very different picture of what's valuable about science.
This is a very different case of hero worship than the one we started with, which concerned
Einstein's special relativity.
In that case, which we chose because it was the case of heroic science for the positivists,
Einstein had to overcome theory for the sake of, according with observation.
As Fireobin reads the Galileo case, he had to overcome observation for the sake of saving
a good theory.
So Fireobin maintains that an empiricist methodology, according to which we should accommodate sensory
experience primarily, gives bad advice in the Galileo case.
And he draws a typically provocative lesson from this, and from some incommensurability
arguments that we don't really need to go into, they really are coon with a vengeance.
Fireobin gives priority to theory over observation, where the positivists had insisted that meaning
flows upward from observation into our theory, Fireobin goes beyond coon and says, our theories
tell us what we can see, almost entirely.
It is theory, Fireobin says, that makes observation intelligible, not vice versa.
And good scientific work, often, according to Fireobin, involves correcting observation
in the light of theory.
These are, most philosophers think, overstated.
It's not clear whether Fireobin even quite believes what he's saying here.
He's putting them forward at least as correctives and antidotes to the dogma of the day, which
was more or less positivist.
We can recognize them as being somewhat overstated, insights into something valuable, namely that
theory does have some effect on observation.
We talked about that issue last time.
Notice that coonian respect for normal science also gives the wrong verdict in the Galileo
case, since a massively supported and reasonably successful theory, the whole Aristotelian
approach to physics, also opposed Copernicus.
So, according to Fireobin, both theory and observation stood against Galileo and Copernicus,
but Galileo and Copernicus were right.
Furthermore, in overcoming these formidable obstacles, according to Fireobin, Galileo
used propaganda and unfair rhetoric and mocked his opponents and used intentionally bad arguments
in the service of his worldview.
And Fireobin thinks it's quite a good thing that Galileo did so.
So notions of logic and fair play also provide bad methodological advice in this context.
Now, in true Fireobendian style, the argument is designed to sort of get philosophers goats.
We don't have to endorse every point of it in order to see what stands behind it.
The idea is that any methodology of science has resources for trying to get this case
right.
When you reflect on the number of cases of scientific advance and the extent of the
tension between the philosopher's methodological rules and what it took to get any given advance
across, you'll be uncomfortable with the idea of scientific method.
That's Fireobin's central point.
So, whereas Kuhn minimizes method because he trusts the social practice of science,
Fireobin minimizes method because he trusts and indeed celebrates individual creative
scientific geniuses.
He thinks that losing comforting methodological advice and rigor of the sort that was important
to Lakatoche is a very small price to pay for liberating creative thinkers from the tyranny
of method.
And in fact, Fireobin reads Kuhn as glorifying all that is worst about science, especially
in normal science.
It's dogmatic, it's highly sort of professional and regimented, and it stifles creativity.
So where Lakatoche saw Kuhn as unleashing anarchy, remember his comment about mob psychology,
Fireobin reads Kuhn as the great defender of drudgery.
And where Popper objected to Kuhnian normal science on epistemic grounds, he objected
that it's too dogmatic, Fireobin objects to it as immoral and ugly.
We'll circle back to this point in a moment.
I want to show you that Fireobin tries, maybe seriously, it's hard to tell with him, to
link the standard concerns that the positivists in Popper had about testability and evidence
to his celebration of scientific creativity.
Like Popper and Lakatoche, Fireobin thinks that theories can and should be tested against
each other rather than just against the world or experience.
Kuhn, because only one paradigm is at work at a particular time, has a problem with this.
But Fireobin's idea is, since we want our theories to be subjected to severe tests,
great Popperian notion, we should develop and defend as great a variety of theories
as we can, because competition between theories can reveal strengths and weaknesses in our
current theories that wouldn't otherwise become apparent.
And he says, even theories that seem quite implausible can help us test our current theories,
so we should try to shrug off our sense of what's plausible and reasonable and just generate
all kinds of creative scientific theories and treat that as rigorous scientific testing.
It's a very peculiar argument.
Fireobin is combining the Galileo story with this peculiar argument about testability and
evidence, and his conclusion is that to do science is to think up really creative theories
all the time.
He's not much interested in what we might call the white noise problem, which is what
are we supposed to do with all of these creative theories, all of these possibilities?
How do we sort through them and figure out which ones to take seriously?
We saw this problem in our discussion of creationism and the problem of demarcation.
One could make a good case that we don't have a good enough demarcation criterion to
exclude, say, creationism from science.
But as we saw, it doesn't follow that creationism, because it's not non-science, should then
be taught in the schools or funded.
Too many things qualify as not being non-science, and we don't have time or resources to give
them all attention.
From Fireobin's view, too many things count as valuable theories that could test current
dogma, and we don't have any way of sorting through them and figuring out which ones to
give attention to.
With his mischievous manner and his emphasis on unbridled creativity, Fireobin is often
taken to be anti-science.
And this, I think, is quite unfair.
Fireobin's great heroes are scientists like Galileo, and he thinks that back in Galileo's
day, science opposed dogmatism and stood with creativity and humanness.
But Fireobin believes that this is actually no longer the case.
He thinks that science these days resembles the Catholic Church of Galileo's day, not
Galileo.
He thinks it stifles the spirit and the imagination of those who are involved in it, especially
Cuny and Normal Science, and it bullies those who don't understand it.
We have a scientific monopoly on legitimate intellectual authority in our culture, he
thinks, and he calls science a threat to democracy.
Because you and I don't have a clear understanding of what research our society performs and
encourages, and we shouldn't trust the sort of Orwellian guardians of Normal Science who
want funding for whatever they tell us is important.
We don't understand their claims, and we're being pushed around by these people.
So Normal Science, he thinks, supports its own continuation, not human well-being.
In his later years, Fireobin argued that the ideas of reason and truth have their role
in our culture as a result of the power plays of various scientific and other elites.
And he tried to defend a version of relativism that would deny science any special epistemic
status.
He moderated his view a little bit quite late in his life by sort of getting over the idea
that there was any such thing as science.
The way he could get less afraid of science was in thinking that science is many things,
not one big monolithic enterprise.
As always, it's hard to tell when Fireobin is telling us what he thinks, and when he's
telling us just what he thinks we need to hear.
But, philosophy of science needed a provocateur, a gadfly, and I think it misses the freshness
of his perspective.
Next time we will start looking at what we might think of as post-Fireobindian views,
or radical critiques of the idea that science has a special epistemic status.
