Lecture 5 Classical Empiricism
Einstein and Bridgman were philosophically inclined physicists, but the problem with
which they were wrestling, that of how concepts have to be connected to experience in order
to be legitimate, has a long philosophical history.
And an examination of the major landmarks of this history will help us see the background
philosophers had available to them when physicists made these problems newly urgent.
Now, many people from the Greeks on had claimed that all knowledge derives from experience,
or had given advice about how to obtain knowledge from experience.
But systematic philosophical reflection about experience as a source of and constraint on
our knowledge really begins with the great English philosopher of the late 17th century,
John Locke.
Locke is thus often, though not universally, considered the first of the empiricists.
Empiricism is the view that sensory experience is the ultimate source of our concepts and
of our knowledge.
Empiricism is generally contrasted with rationalism, which insists that reason, apart from experience,
can be a source of ideas and of knowledge.
In a philosophy of science course, we will almost exclusively be concerned with the pros
and cons of empiricism.
Rationalism has its stronghold in areas like mathematics, where it seems to be the case
that reason, rather than experience, or independently of experience, tells me that the sum of the
interior angles of a triangle is 180 degrees.
But in science, most thinkers have inclined towards empiricism.
Locke's project most directly concerns knowledge.
He wants to determine the boundaries of human knowledge.
He wants to explore what we can hope to know, and how well we can hope to know it.
The reason for this is connected to Locke's political philosophy.
His investigation is supposed to give us the confidence needed to solve the problems we
can solve.
It's supposed to help us reconcile ourselves to unavoidable ignorance, and perhaps most
importantly, to help us avoid disputes that can't be settled.
His major work, The Essay Concerning Human Understanding, didn't appear until 1690.
But at that point, Locke had been working on it for 30 years.
It is a big book.
Now, Locke is also known as an important political philosopher, both his political thinking which
won't concern us, at least not directly, and his epistemology which will, were much
admired by the people who wrote the U.S. Constitution and Declaration of Independence
and all that.
He's almost the official philosopher of the American Revolution.
Locke investigates the scope of our knowledge by investigating its sources.
And he claims that experience is the source of all of the material of thought.
Locke's slogan is, nothing is in the mind that was not first in the senses.
Locke calls out for clarification, that's our job.
Locke calls the material of thought ideas.
An idea is what is in the mind when a person thinks.
Now for Locke, ideas are in the mind, in a perhaps surprisingly strong sense.
Ideas are mind dependent.
Strictly speaking, Locke says, I don't hear my dog, I only hear the sound he makes.
I don't see my dog, but rather I have a sensation of him, a visual presentation of
the dog from a particular perspective.
The things that I directly perceive are sights and sounds.
These are the sorts of things Locke means by ideas.
Now we talk in ordinary parlance as if I see my dog, as if physical objects are presented
to me in experience.
But for the classical empiricists, for Locke and his successors, this involves a bit of
cheating.
We do think that physical objects cause our sensations or our perceptions.
But the physical object isn't the perception.
My dog is, as it were, out there, while my idea of the dog, my sensation of the dog is
in here.
It's a mind dependent thing, it's a sensation, speaking somewhat loosely here.
Now Bridgeman had assumed that the unproblematic level of description in which terms can be
clarified, terms like simultaneity, is that of observable physical objects.
We can see that the dial is pointing to a certain number on the machine when we're performing
an operation.
For Locke and his successors, the unproblematic level is not physical objects, it's sensations.
That's the baseline at which you don't need any further explanation.
Now when Locke says that there's nothing in the mind that doesn't come from experience,
he's sometimes misunderstood.
He means that no ideas or beliefs are innate.
He does allow for innate mental powers or operations.
In particular, the operations of combination and abstraction allow us to refine and extend
our simple ideas.
Abstraction lets us focus on part of a presented idea.
The sky is presented to me, abstraction lets me focus on its blueness.
And these parts can then be recombined to form ideas of things that have not, in their
entirety, been presented in experience.
Like a unicorn.
I've never seen one, but I can form an idea of a unicorn by recombining ideas that have
been presented to me in other contexts.
Locke also claims that these operations can lead to abstract ideas like my idea of space
or my idea of matter.
As we will see, this part of Locke's view gets challenged by some of his successors
in the empiricist tradition.
Locke recognizes and in fact emphasizes the limitations of what experience puts us in
a position to know.
So for instance, we can perceive that gold is malleable, that it can be shaped.
But we don't perceive any connection between the gold and the malleability.
Locke doesn't show us, doesn't allow us to understand what it is about gold that makes
it malleable.
And Locke doesn't think we will ever be able to understand this.
He doesn't think our experience will ever reach that far.
Still less will experience let us understand how gold produces the idea of yellow in us.
The difference between malleable and yellow is that in color cases it's some interaction
between our perceptual faculties and the object itself that produces color perceptions
in us.
We think the malleability is as it were in the gold, while yellow is something that
the gold produces in us.
But we have no experience adequate to understand or explain this interaction, it's just
a way that gold pushes our buttons.
And this isn't just a limitation of our knowledge, but rather of our ideas as well.
A clockmaker understands how a clock works.
While those of us who are clockmakers, our very idea of a clock includes only a superficial
acquaintance with its observable features.
We could in principle acquire the clockmaker's conception of a clock.
But Locke doesn't think we'll ever have the analog of the clockmaker's conception with
respect to gold.
We can make some guesses, some indirect hypotheses, we can sort of test them.
But Locke's view seems to be not just that we don't have any real knowledge of how gold
works, but we have no clear idea of how it works, and that we never will.
Now Locke's view was enormously influential.
For generations it approached something like a philosophically sophisticated version of
common sense.
And it represents something of the standard empiricist bargain that we're going to see
over and over.
Empiricism, if it works, offers a nice account of how we know what we know.
It was presented to us as an experience, and it helps us understand what we mean by unpacking
our meanings in experiential terms.
And the lesson of the Einstein case is for us to see how crucial it is to be able to
look to experience to clarify our terms.
But we pay for this clarification by recognizing that our abilities to get beyond or behind
experience are extremely limited.
On Locke's view, we don't get to know as much, or even mean as much, as we might have
thought we did.
Turning to our next empiricist, George Barkley was an Irishman and an Anglican bishop.
He wrote in the first half of the 18th century, and though he's himself an empiricist, he
suggests that the conceptual costs we pay for confining ourselves to what is presented
in experience are much more radical than Locke thought.
Now, Barkley would not have described his position this way.
He didn't think of himself as a radical, but everybody else thought of Barkley as a
radical.
Barkley's most important work is called The Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human
Knowledge.
It's not as big a book as Locke's essay, it's pretty readable as these things go.
But it was terribly misunderstood, and Barkley tried a more accessible presentation four
years later in dialogue form.
That didn't help all that much either.
And the reason is, Barkley's view is just hard to get one's head around.
Barkley denies the existence of matter.
As we'll see, Barkley thought this was the best way to purge empiricist philosophy of
its tendencies towards skepticism and atheism.
He's not a skeptic, though he was almost universally taken to be a skeptic.
The main point for us is that Barkley thinks that a consistent empiricist can claim no
knowledge of matter, and in fact, no idea of matter.
He doesn't think you have any idea of matter.
So like Barkley's contemporaries, we don't need to pay too much attention to Barkley's
defense of empiricism against skepticism and atheism.
That's what was most important to Barkley, but it's not most important to our story.
Let's make sure we understand Barkley's position.
Now a materialist is somebody who thinks that everything in the universe is made of matter.
So for instance, a materialist thinks either there are no souls, or that souls are material
objects.
It's important to see that Barkley isn't just denying materialism.
He isn't just denying that everything is material.
He's denying that anything is material.
So he's not just an anti-materialist, he's an immaterialist.
How does the argument go?
Well, the first step is that we have no direct experience of matter.
What does matter look like, or sound like, or taste like?
Our direct experience is of our ideas, or this is an equivalent way of speaking, of
sensory properties.
So I experience the color of the table, the sound it makes when I tap it, I experience
its resistance to pressure.
But none of these things is the materiality of the table.
The material object itself isn't supposed to be its properties.
It's supposed to be the thing that has the properties.
The next step is Barkley's denial of Locke's position that you can use abstraction to obtain
a legitimate idea of matter by itself, matter apart from its properties.
Barkley's claim is that you can't imagine matter without its properties any more than
you can experience it.
What idea do you have of the table if you take away all of the table's properties?
Barkley's claim is there's nothing left.
Furthermore says Barkley, Locke had already admitted that we don't have any idea how
the material stuff of gold causes us to see it as yellow or as malleable.
So Barkley insists that the hypothesis that there's some hidden nature in gold that explains
all of this, like that gold is made up of unobservable little atoms, that's doing no
work in the first place since Locke didn't think it was going to explain why gold has
the properties it has.
So the function of the hypothesis that there's matter in the world is just giving us some
assurance that there's something out there that's causing the ideas in here.
But it's not a good hypothesis says Barkley.
You can tell by all the scare quotes you're tempted to use to try to state it.
There's a something I know not what out there bringing about ideas in here.
We're desperately searching for some kind of legitimate content and Barkley thinks that's
a sign that we don't mean anything by these terms because they have no proper experiential
credentials.
So Barkley does what he thinks you should do when you have a hypothesis that doesn't
make any sense, and it wouldn't do any work if it did make sense.
You drop the hypothesis.
So Barkley is dropping the hypothesis that there are material objects.
There are only ideas and the minds that hold them.
Obvious problem.
If there's no material table in the room, why then do you and I see the same thing?
Well, first of all, we don't quite see the same thing.
You see the table from one angle, I see it from another angle.
So our ideas are different, they're merely lawfully related.
And Barkley's view is that God produces these ideas in us directly.
We don't need this intervening hypothesis of a table.
Why is the God hypothesis supposed to be a better hypothesis than the table hypothesis?
Well, Locke had told us we have no idea how matter produces ideas in us.
The nice thing about God is God's all-powerful.
If God wants to produce ideas in us, God can.
So we're at least not adding a new layer of problems of material to mental causation.
So on Barkley's view, God didn't, as it were, write the universe down in matter as
if matter was paper.
And then we experience the copy of the universe in material form.
In Barkley's view, God gives us the experiences directly.
There's no intervening paper, there's no place where they're written down called matter.
So when we say that the table remains here, even when you and I aren't looking at it,
what we mean is that God has the table in mind, because to be real is to be thought of by God.
An idea has to be in a mind to be real.
And so God keeps the idea of the table in its lawful place with other ideas.
As some of you probably have realized, Barkley is the, if a tree falls in the woods and there's
nobody around, does it make a sound?
I'm not going to pursue that right here.
There's lots of weird stuff about Barkley's view, but let's make sure we have some of
the basics.
Better than Barkley's contemporary, Dr. Samuel Johnson, the noted man of letters and author
of the famous dictionary, who said, while kicking a rock, I refute Barkley thus.
The idea being, I have encountered something physical by kicking the rock.
Of course, that's no refutation of Barkley at all.
The rock is an idea that interacts with other ideas in a lawfully related way set up by
God, so Johnson's refutation of Barkley fails.
The main moral of the story for our purposes is that you might lose more than you think
you will if you try to constrain what you can say, think, and know within the bounds
of experience.
You might lose the idea of a material object.
But while we're here, there are other important morals for the philosophy of science that
we should discuss.
Barkley is the first of a long line of empiricists who tries to get over the idea that we need
to get behind or beyond experience.
He wants to take experience as the entirety, not just the surface of reality.
How do my visual and tactile experiences of shape work together if there's no material
object that they're both caused by?
Well, other than God's power and God's goodness, all we need, says Barkley, is patterns in
our experience.
We don't need an unobservable reality of material objects that just creates problems
of the sort we've seen.
Once I learn the pattern of how my visual ideas hook up with my tactile ideas, I know
how to make predictions.
I know that my visual impressions are going to get bigger as I walk towards something
and smaller as I walk away from it, and I know when to expect sensations of touch.
So God sets things up in such a way that I can make predictions based on patterns of
experience.
There's no such thing as space.
If by space you mean something that matter fills, the idea is just there are patterns
in my experience so that if I seem to see an edge, then I will reach out and have certain
feelings like a tactile impression of a corner.
So, Barkley's view is plenty weird, but he thinks it's much friendlier to real scientific
knowledge than Locke's view is.
Why?
Because for Locke, we're permanently cut off from the way things really are, and we only
have patterns in our experience to go on.
For Barkley, the patterns in our experience are the world itself.
God has set things up so that if we formulate and apply Newton's laws of motion, we can
predict what experiences we will have, and that's what science is.
All science can or should be, developing rules for predicting what experiences we will have,
and it's this idea of trying to get behind or beyond experience that drives empiricist
philosophers crazy.
Barkley dispenses with it.
Our third and final classical empiricist is David Hume, a Scotsman of the generation
beyond Barkley, and he shows just how devastating the consequences of a resolutely pursued
empiricism can be.
He's going to show us what it costs if you really constrain your ideas within experiential
terms.
Hume's most important book is called The Treatise of Human Nature.
It was published in 1739 before Hume had even turned 30, though it is an enormous book.
It's much admired today, though it wasn't then.
Hume said painfully that it fell deadborn from the press.
Hume's project is not itself skeptical.
For centuries, people thought of Hume just as a skeptic, but that's not what he's trying
to do.
Maybe that's where he ends up, but it's not what he's trying to do.
What he's trying to do is bring the experimental method to philosophy.
He's trying to bring what Newton brought to physics to the study of the human mind.
He wanted to find the laws that govern human nature in something like the way Newton had
discovered the laws that govern the motion of bodies.
But along the way, Hume rigorously exposes the lack of any corresponding experience for
many of our most crucial notions.
A corresponding experience, Hume calls it an impression, an impression of a shade or
a touch or something like that.
So to take Hume's best known case, we have no impression of causation.
What does it look like for one event to cause another?
If you're at a pool table, you can see the cue ball move from point A to point B.
You can see the eight ball move from point B to point C, and you can hear a sound.
That's what experience gives you, where you would say you saw the cue ball cause the eight
ball to move.
But what's missing in our experience is this idea of necessary connection, of the one event
making the other event happen.
You saw the cue ball move, you saw the eight ball move.
You didn't see the cue ball make the eight ball move.
We have no experience of necessary connection.
And not only do we have no impression or experience of material substance, as Barkley showed,
Hume says we have no impression or experience of enduring things at all.
My experience is constantly changing.
The sensations I have change as I look at things from a different angle.
What's presented to me in experience is not enduring tables and chairs or cameras.
What's presented to me in experience is something fleeting and changeable.
And it goes away whenever I close my eyes.
That's what's directly presented to me in experience.
Furthermore, we don't have impressions of ourselves as things that endure through time.
If I ask myself, in what way I am presented to myself in experience, it's not as some
kind of thinking thing, some kind of soul or mental stuff, it's a bundle of impressions.
If I look within, what I find is a bunch of sensations.
So we don't experience, we don't at least directly experience, mental substances like
selves any more than we did material substances like tables.
In both cases, all we experience are momentary properties.
So experience by itself does not license the idea, much less the belief, that there are
enduring things.
Experience provides me with no clear concept of, and nothing worth calling evidence for,
the existence of anything not currently perceived by me.
That's what experience shows me.
So if I'm strictly applying what experience shows me, reason and experience together lead
to what's sometimes called solipsism of the present moment, the belief that only what
I currently perceive exists.
And this is a very deep skepticism indeed, which explains why Hume was commonly understood
to be a skeptic.
So if Hume's right, many of our common terms are either meaningless, or at best they have
very different meanings than we thought.
So in the case of causation for instance, there is a connection between the motion of
the cue ball and the motion of the eight ball, but it's not out there, it's in here.
The idea of making happens because my idea of the cue ball striking the eight ball makes
me think of the eight ball as moving.
So the connection is psychological rather than physical.
Similarly says Hume, we cobble together ideas that strictly speaking are illegitimate of
ourselves and of enduring objects.
We impose more order on our experience than we find in our experience.
So Hume says it's the imagination, not reason or experience that forms these ideas.
Just as I imagine that the connection in my mind between the motion of the cue ball and
the motion of the eight ball is out in the world, I imagine that I experience things
that endure a great deal more than experience shows them to endure.
Our experience itself systematically misrepresents what we think the world to be like.
So our ideas misrepresent our evidence and they lead to conceptual confusion because
I tell myself causation's out there when it's really in here.
Now Hume is not saying that we should give up these strictly speaking illegitimate ideas.
If we were as governed by reason as we like to think we are, we'd be goners.
Hume thinks we manage to think and act as if we have much better evidence for our beliefs
than we in fact have and that this is a very good thing.
It doesn't render the beliefs justified though.
If we were more reasonable we'd be dead so we should be glad we're not more reasonable
than we are.
But that doesn't make us any more reasonable than we are.
We're dumb animals and we should be pleased about that, seems to be Hume's view.
So again we find here a more extreme version of the classic empiricist bargain.
We have the clarification of our intellectual resources in experiential terms but we have
enormous costs in terms of what we're justified in saying or believing.
So Hume thinks we can and should talk as if the fictions of the imagination were more
solid than they are except when we're writing philosophy books.
But you might think if empiricism leads to solipsism of the present moment the thing
to do is rethink the empiricism.
One final point about Hume concerns a philosophical problem about philosophy that Hume faced more
squarely than his empiricist predecessors did.
So one question is where does philosophy fit into this experiential framework?
For Hume all meaningful statements must concern either what he calls relations of ideas as
in logic and mathematics.
Relations of ideas are at bottom formal, verbal, definitional, they're about how we talk about
the world rather than about the world itself.
The other kinds of statements are or concern matters of fact.
And we find these in the empirical sciences.
So every meaningful statement is either going to concern relations of ideas or matters of
fact.
This influential dichotomy is usually called Hume's fork.
I'm going to read you Hume's statement of it because the guy can write and this will
help us appreciate his point.
When we run over libraries persuaded of these principles what havoc must we make?
If we take in our hand any volume of divinity or school metaphysics for instance let us
ask does it contain any abstract reasoning concerning quantity or number?
No.
Does it contain any experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence?
No.
Get it then to the flames for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion.
Now this is a great passage to teach in a room full of undergrads because you ask them
to read along with you, you have them pick up the reading for the day, which is Hume's
and great concerning human understanding.
And so you say to them, look at this book in your hand.
Does it contain abstract reasoning concerning quantity or number?
Not obviously.
Does it contain experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence?
Not obviously.
So by Hume's principles it appears that Hume's inquiry should be committed to the flames
for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion.
Hume does not address this matter having brought it up so beautifully.
He does not address it about his own work as explicitly as we might like.
It's reasonably clear, however, that Hume thinks he's doing a kind of psychology.
As we noted earlier, he sees himself as seeking the laws that govern the mind in the way that
Newton had sought and found the laws governing matter.
But is Hume really doing psychology?
We haven't done even a whole half hour on Hume.
We haven't examined his arguments in detail.
But it's rather an armchair attempt at a science of the human mind.
Hume's not going out and doing interviews, he's not dissecting brains, he's sitting
in his chair trying to figure out the laws that govern the human mind.
If this is psychology, this is not perhaps the most impressive version of a science of
the human mind that we could imagine.
But if philosophy isn't going to be armchair psychology or armchair physics, science without
the experiments, what might it believably be?
So as we leave the 17th and 18th centuries, and return to our narrative at the beginning
of the 20th century, we leave with two challenges facing later empiricists.
First, is there a way to reconcile the core empiricist idea that experience is the source
of our conceptual and evidential resources?
Can that be reconciled with the apparent need to go beyond what is presented in experience
if we're going to do science or philosophy?
This is the problem we saw with Bridgeman's operationalism.
If we link our ideas too tightly to experience, they won't do the work we need them to.
If we cut them loose, they don't seem experientially legitimate.
On the other hand, we have to ask, does philosophy connect to experience in the right sort of
way for empiricists to regard it as a legitimate discipline?
Is philosophy just science with low evidential standards?
Next time, we will see what these questions look like from the beginning of our time period.
