Lecture 23 Reduction and Progress
We turn in this lecture to the issue of scientific reduction, which we'll draw on some of the
ideas we've been discussing, especially ideas concerning explanation and scientific progress.
Reduction, speaking loosely anyway, takes place when something is shown to be nothing
but something else, in which case, of course, we in some sense have one thing, not two.
This as it suggests is a hint of some complexity to come when we discuss this issue.
Reduction can be applied to stuff, salt reduces to sodium chloride, to theories, Kepler's
laws of planetary motion reduce to Newton's general laws of motion, or to whole disciplines.
Some have thought that ethics reduces to biology, or that biology reduces to physics.
Most of us, at least initially, hear such talk as ontological.
We take the major issues to concern what sorts of things exist.
Water, which is some stuff, just is, or reduces to H2O, which is the same stuff, differently
characterized.
Now, the positivists tended to be suspicious of this way of speaking.
It seemed to them to invite metaphysical questions about how many things or kinds of
things there are in the universe.
And indeed, metaphysical issues have loomed large in the surprisingly long history of
reduction.
It's often claimed that what we now recognize as science, and also what we now recognize
as philosophy, began with attempts by thinkers like Thales to reduce everything to, in Thales's
case, water, fire, and other ancient elements got their turn eventually in this process.
These reductive projects were not supposed to make any difference to the course of experience.
Thales thought everything would pretty much behave as it always had.
His point was to explain at the behavior as, flowing from, pardon the pun, the watery nature
of everything.
Since there's no clear empirical difference made by the alleged fact that everything is
composed of water, the logical positivists pronounced such hypotheses, empirically meaningless
or meaningless metaphysics.
So for the positivists, the question of reduction concerns characterizations or formulations.
It's talk of water that's supposed to reduce to talk of H2O.
That to them seemed much clearer than ontological formulations.
And this accords with the positivist sense that any questions about what exists that
can't be answered by science must end up being linguistic questions.
Science can tell us whether an egg-laying marsupial exists, but it's not clear to what
extent science can address this feeling that physics is the basic science, and that all
the other sciences study things that are made up of physical ingredients.
If that's not a scientific question, it must be a linguistic question for the positivists.
So a positivist like Rudolf Karnapp thinks these issues are best approached not by asking
whether everything is physical, but rather by asking whether science is unified.
Thus the question that many people would pose by asking whether physical stuff is all the
stuff there is gets translated by the positivists into the question of whether there are any
special sciences, where a special science is one whose central terms or concepts don't
connect up.
We'll have to unpack that notion of connecting up with those of other sciences and ultimately
with basic physics.
So our general question is, under what conditions do certain theories, statements, or terms
reduce to other theories, statements, or terms?
This is the positivist way of putting the question, and we will focus primarily on the case of
theories.
Note though that if Quine's position, as we discussed in lecture 8, is right, the distinction
on which the positivists are relying between deciding how to talk and deciding what there
is won't hold water, pardon the pun again, we can't maintain a sharp distinction between
deciding what language to use and deciding what we think the world is like.
So there's not as much of a difference for somebody like Quine as there was for somebody
like Karnapp between the question of whether science is unified versus the question of
whether the world is ultimately made up of one or a few kinds of stuff.
Now we've already touched on a couple of reductive projects in this course.
We've seen Barclay's attempt to reduce talk of objects to talk of ideas or experiences.
For Barclay, an object is just a kind of idea.
We've also seen the positivist's attempt to reduce talk of unobservable reality to
talk of observable reality.
What a scientific theory says is what it says about observable reality.
Everything a theory seems to say about quarks or genes must ultimately get cashed out in
terms of talk of observations.
These are philosophical more than scientific reductions.
They're motivated by philosophers' concerns about what is basic, fundamental, directly
knowable, the right sort of epistemic order to impose on our theories.
Philosophical reductions are also distinctive in that issues of meaning tend to loom large
in such reductions.
For the positivists, all that talk of physical objects can mean is to be unpacked more clearly
in terms of ideas and minds.
I don't mean the positivists, I mean George Barclay.
The meaning for the positivists of something like, there is a charm quark, is supposed
to get explained in terms of observation.
This is a claim about meaning.
As the statement gets more connections to experience, it comes to mean more than it had.
Such semantic reductions, reductions of meaning, do take place in science, but when they take
place in science, they are generally philosophically motivated.
So we saw Percy Bridgeman's attempt to reduce talk of length to talk of length-measuring
operations.
And perhaps most famously, some versions of behaviorism in the discipline of psychology
try to reduce talk of mental states, like belief and desire, to talk of behavior.
For scientific purposes, a behaviorist like B. F. Skinner says we don't mean anything
more by saying that a creature wants something than that it will behave in certain specifiable
ways in specifiable circumstances.
These are claims about the meaning of different kinds of statements.
Our main concern is the reduction of one scientific theory to another, and our main concern is
scientific rather than philosophical discussions, though there's a bit of a continuum here.
Scientific reductions are less concerned with issues of meaning and more concerned with
notions like explanation and progress.
Scientists simply tend not to worry about meaning to the extent that philosophers do.
Even the positivists recognize that there are epistemic and metaphysical stakes involved
in reduction, though they insist on approaching reduction through issues about language.
The more unified, the more structured our theories are, the better we understand, the
positivists think, what explains what, and the fewer different kinds of things our theory
at least sounds like it's committed to, keeping in mind that they don't think we're really
committed in adopting a theory to believing what it says about unobservable reality.
The positivists and their fellow travelers, as you might recall, favor an instrumentalist
conception of scientific theories, which treats a theory as essentially machinery for generating
predictions.
On such a view, we're not supposed to take what the theory seems to say about unobservable
reality too seriously.
The model for this is Andres Ossiander's preface to Copernicus's theory of the solar
system.
It's just a way of picturing the solar system, of visualizing it.
It's not to be taken as a claim about how unobservable reality really goes.
Nevertheless, even the positivists will grant that it's nice if your theory doesn't seem
to commit you to more claims about unobservable reality than necessary.
But back to the distinctively scientific norms of explanation and progress.
Reductions, if we can get them, seem to constitute clear instances of scientific progress.
They're central to the picture of science that was famously challenged by Coon and his
followers, according to which science is a distinctively cumulative enterprise.
Reduction would be a kind of theory change that isn't, as Coon tended to think of theory
change, mostly a matter of a change of subject matter.
The old theory isn't discarded as false, but is instead preserved within a richer or deeper
theory.
So at least in cases of reduction, we won't have any of these difficult Coonian worries
about theory choice.
We're unifying two theories into one, so we don't have to choose between them.
We get, as it were, what's best about both theories.
Coon is a case of theory choice or theory change that's as commensurable as these things
get.
We have to commensurate two theories in order to reduce one to the other.
This sense of scientific progress in cases of reduction manifests itself in things like
explanatory power.
The reducing theory is now supposed to be able to explain the facts and laws of the
reduced theory.
If classical thermodynamics, which is the science of heat and related notions like
entropy, entropy is an inverse measure of the amount of heat energy that's available
for doing work.
If thermodynamics is to reduce to statistical mechanics, that's the science roughly of
molecules in motion, then facts about temperature just are a special case of facts about molecular
motion.
So temperature is average molecular motion, oversimplifying ever so slightly.
As we briefly noted a few lectures ago, this would be a powerful and distinctive kind
of explanation.
We noticed it making mischief for the causal theory of explanation, since it seems plausible
that nothing can cause itself.
And yet it does appear that average molecular motion does explain temperature, even though
there's a sense in which they're the same thing.
We can explain something about why an object or a gas has the temperature it does by identifying
temperature with mean molecular motion.
Similarly, the reduction of water to H2O allows us to explain why water, unlike most
liquids, expands when it freezes.
This has something to do with how the hydrogen bonds work in water.
This relationship doesn't so much look causal as constitutive.
We don't have one thing causing another thing.
We have the nature of a thing explaining its properties.
Now, the classical positive as conception of reduction treats it, unsurprisingly, as
a deductive relationship.
We've seen that the positivists try to get logic to do as much as possible.
Observation and deduction are the main tools of the positivist approach.
One theory for the positivist reduces to another if the former can be logically derived from
the latter.
So reduces to gets construed by the positivist as something like is contained in, though
here we're using the logical, not the physical, sense of containment.
But as the conclusion of a deductive argument is virtually present within the premises,
the humanity of Socrates, along with the mortality of humanity, contains the idea that Socrates
is mortal.
It's that sense of containment to which we're appealing.
So, the reduced theory is within the reducing theory just waiting to be brought out explicitly.
That's the picture of reduction that the positivists have in mind.
This was supposed to be another advantage of what we saw in lecture seven as the received
view of theories.
It's a lot of trouble to try to formalize a serious scientific theory into some kind
of axiomatic system, but there are supposed to be some payoffs.
A rational reconstruction of this sort makes the deductive relationships maximally clear.
We've seen this within theories.
The basic laws of the theory are the axioms from which less basic laws derive, and now
we're putting this picture to inter-theoretic use.
We can see what follows from a theory if we've arranged it in this deductive axiomatic way.
But what does it take for one theory to be derived from another?
In some cases, this is pretty straightforward.
If the reduction is homogeneous, the case is relatively uninteresting and unproblematic.
A reduction is homogeneous when the terms of the reduced theory are present in or can
be defined just using standard logical operations like and and or using the terms of the reducing
theory.
An example will make this clear.
The reduction of Galileo's laws of free fall in the Earth's atmosphere and Kepler's
laws of planetary motion to Newton's more general laws of motion is the classic case
of a homogeneous reduction.
Terms like velocity appear with the same meaning in all of these theories, in Kepler's, in
Galileo's, and in Newton's theory.
So Newton is essentially just unifying terrestrial and celestial motion.
It's relatively unproblematic because the language in which all three of these theories
is posed is homogeneous.
The more interesting and the more problematic cases are cases of heterogeneous reductions.
These require bridge principles or bridge laws.
Let's talk about why.
Typically, the reduced theory uses terms that are foreign to the reducing theory.
A term like heat or a term like temperature or entropy does not figure in statistical
mechanics, does not figure in discussion of molecules in motion.
But since the theory we're hoping to reduce contains vocabulary that isn't in the reducing
theory and which can't be built out of the reducing theory, otherwise we'd have a case
of homogeneous reduction.
It's not clear how thermodynamics can be derived from statistical mechanics.
Without some kind of conceptual enrichment, we won't be able to derive any claims about
heat from claims about molecules in motion, because you won't get new language out of
pure derivational relationships, and we don't have the language of heat within statistical
mechanics.
So principles connecting the terms of the reduced theory and the reducing theory have to be
added to the reducing theory.
You need a statement like temperature is mean molecular kinetic energy.
That links the two vocabularies, and that would be a bridge principle or a bridge law.
The reduced theory thus follows not from the reducing theory, but from the reducing theory
along with bridge principles.
Now, what kind of claim is a bridge principle?
A natural first thought is that bridge principles are definitions.
We are stipulating that temperature means average molecular kinetic energy, and stipulations
are fairly cheap.
But a little reflection suggests that bridge principles are not, in general, plausibly
considered definitions.
Temperature doesn't seem to mean the same thing as mean molecular kinetic energy.
Lots of people use the term temperature quite correctly in quite a broad range of contexts
without knowing that temperature has anything to do with mean molecular motion.
So the two terms don't seem to have the same meaning in the ordinary sense of meaning.
And since empirical meaningfulness, this is a more rigorous philosophical sense of meaning,
is a matter of a term's role in the theory in which it figures, according to the positivists,
then identifying the meaning of the two terms is deeply problematic because they figure
in different theories.
It is for this reason that the reduction, although characterized in terms of logical
and linguistic relationships between the reducing and the reduced theories, is not a semantic
reduction.
That's part of why this is a scientific rather than a philosophical reduction.
We're not reducing the meaning of one theory to that of another.
So we should probably consider the relationship between them the next tightest kind of connection
rather than definitional identification.
We can think of a bridge law as an empirical hypothesis which identifies two objects or
processes, not the meaning, but the stuff.
Being a donor of a single electron, which is a property described in the language of
physics, is necessary and sufficient, is identified with the property of having a valence of
plus one, which is a property in the language of chemistry.
We're not saying those two properties mean the same thing, we're saying they refer to
the same as it were stuff.
Some philosophers have thought that something less than a full identification could do the
trick.
So, for instance, if you have a sufficient condition for the reduced term in the language
of the reducing theory, so you might think that having a certain neurochemical condition
is sufficient for having a particular kind of mental illness, that would leave the door
open to ways in which the disorder could be otherwise caused or otherwise instantiated.
So a sufficient condition rather than an identification will do some work for you.
But identification is the simplest case, and it's not clear that anything less than identification
will do at least for some of the grander aspirations of reductionists.
It's clear that you've reduced talk of genes to talk of DNA if you can identify a given
gene with a given bit of DNA.
Less tight connections will do some work for you, but then the relationships between your
theories look rather messy, as we'll see in more detail a little later.
So for now, we're going to assume that bridge laws are identity statements.
They identify two kinds of objects or processes, although really it's one thing described in
two different kinds of language.
But again, we're only talking about the necessary and sufficient condition sense of identity,
not the has the same meaning sense of identity.
So this is the classical positivist approach to reduction.
Logically clean, but it faces several challenges.
And these challenges combine worries from the history of science with more purely philosophical
points.
The first thing to note is nothing inconsistent with a theory can be derived from it.
You will never be able, using deductive logic, to derive anything inconsistent with Socrates
humanity from a theory which includes the statement that Socrates is a man.
That is, provided the theory is internally consistent.
If your theory contradicts itself, then strictly speaking everything follows from it, but that's
not a useful sense of derivation.
Since that's the case, statements of the reduced and the reducing theories have to be
logically consistent, otherwise the reduced theory could never be derived from the reducing
theory.
But even in the most straightforward cases of reduction, the reducing theory generally
corrects the reduced theory.
That's part of what makes reductions seem like instances of scientific progress.
Galileo's law of free fall attributes constant acceleration to falling bodies near the Earth's
surface.
While Newton correctly has the acceleration vary with the body's distance from the Earth's
center of mass.
So Galileo's theory is incompatible with Newton's, and that hence cannot be derived
from Newton's theory.
Another way of making the very same point is to say that since Galileo's law is false,
if Newton's theory, together with Brigh's laws, really implied Galileo's law, then
Newton's theory would be false.
Or at least the Brigh's laws would be.
Either way, the reduction would be a disaster.
We're trying to show scientific progress.
Having falsehoods spread from our old theories to our new theories is not progress.
No consistent set of truths can imply a falsehood.
So when your new and improved theory corrects your old theory, that is a sufficient basis
for denying that your old theory follows from your new theory.
The classic response to this is that an approximation of Galileo's law can be derived from new
Newton's theory.
This is plausible, but it's not unproblematic.
The first thing is a point about honesty.
We have not reduced the theory that we might describe ourselves as having reduced.
We've only reduced a suitably corrected version of Galileo's law of free fall.
Not Galileo's actual law, and we should admit that.
But this raises the issue of how different reducing a theory is from replacing the theory
with a new and improved theory.
Fireobin, for instance, as we saw, thought that the goal of reduction, with its insistence
that new theories must be able to imply the old ones, or at least close approximations
to the old theories, found this sort of maddening and stultifying philosophical rule.
It's one of those things that drove him to say, the only good rule is no rules.
Such a principle, Fireobin thinks, loads the dice in favor of the status quo and insists
that our new theories must closely resemble our old theories.
In addition to those somewhat exaggerated Fireobendian worries, this talk of approximation
can sweep some problems under the rug.
It turns out to be very difficult to give a clear and rigorous sense to any notion of
approximation that could cover the range of reductions that seem to take place in science.
The math involved in correcting Newtonian mechanics so that it approximates Einstein's
is actually pretty significant.
Unlike in the Galileo case, Newton's theory approximates Einstein's within a certain
range but not outside that range.
It's hard to give a general theory of what sorts of transformations will get you approximations,
and on the other hand, it's hard to do without such a theory because you're resting with
just a mere sense of, well, what we've derived is close enough to the old theory so that
we call it a reduction.
Another problem for this positive model of reduction derives from Holism, which we saw
in Quine and was really emphasized by Kuhn and Fireobend.
The meanings of key terms in scientific theories, according to Holists, rarely if ever remain
constant across significant theory change.
Now we've seen that we don't need meanings of terms to be the same in order to derive
one theory from another.
An identification of two properties or objects will allow the derivation to go through, and
something weaker than that, say a sufficient condition, will allow some derivations to
go through.
Even though temperature doesn't have the same meaning as mean molecular kinetic energy,
we can substitute the one expression for the other in scientific laws, like the law that
says keeping volume constant, mean molecular kinetic energy increases with pressure.
Fireobend and Kuhn, however, are not all that impressed by such reflections, because they
want to say it's not just meaning that changes, it's reference that changes.
They want to say that when we move from Newton's theory to Einstein's, it's not just that
the term mass changes its meaning, it refers to something different in each theory.
Reference has different properties in Newton's theory and in Einstein's.
It's like the case in which you use the phrase, the greatest American president, to refer
to Thomas Jefferson, and I use it to refer to Abraham Lincoln.
In that sort of case, we're talking past each other, though we're using the same term,
where the objects of that term have different properties, and there will be no deriving
for sure what one of us says from what the other says.
So if reference doesn't stay constant across theories, reduction is in trouble.
That's why, in Kuhn and Fireobend's view, we virtually always face cases of replacement
of one theory by another, rather than reduction of one theory to another.
And that's part of why their general sense of science is one according to which it is
not generally cumulative and progressive, but rather changes.
It might increase problem-solving ability, but it doesn't get a better theory about
the same stuff across paradigm changes.
Now, we've seen that these incommensurability arguments of Kuhn and Fireobend are not fully persuasive.
It's far from automatic that whenever we have any significant change at the theoretical
level, we now have a theory of a new kind of stuff, rather than a new theory of the
same old stuff.
And we'll soon start trying to address how that can be the case.
But even if one does not adopt so radical a move as Fireobend and Kuhn are inclined
to adopt, problems of meaning and reference arise within the reductionist project.
For instance, it's often thought that genes reduce to sequences of DNA and that this is
what allows classical genetics to reduce to molecular genetics.
But the classical notion of a gene was characterized in three different ways, or at least three
different ways, and each way corresponds to a different DNA segment.
If you want to call a gene the smallest part of a chromosome that can undergo mutation,
that's what's called a muton.
If you want to call a gene the smallest part of a chromosome that can recombine with its
homologous, let's not worry about what homologous means here, chromosome in a process known
as crossing over, then you're talking about recons.
And if you want to get closest to what civilians like you and I probably mean by gene, then
you're talking about the part of a chromosome functionally responsible for a trait.
That's a cisteron.
And cisterons tend to be much larger chunks of DNA than the other two.
So I should acknowledge that this is an example due to the philosophy of biology Kenneth Schaffner.
The bridge law that says genes are segments of DNA looks deeply problematic here.
Are we to say that genes have been reduced to DNA segments but to three different kinds
of DNA segments?
Or are we to say that there never were any such things as genes since three different
kinds of DNA segments answer to the notion of a gene?
Are we to say that one of these kinds of DNA segments gets to count as a gene?
The difference between reducing and replacing starts to look like a serious question.
So this example from biology converges with our earlier examples from physics, the Galilean
and Keplerian reductions to Newton's theory, in that it's a corrected theory that generally
gets reduced, and once we admit that we're correcting the theory that we're reducing,
the difference between reduction and replacement starts to loom large.
Again, it's tempting to appeal to some notion of approximation.
What we're reducing is close enough to the old theory.
But we'd like to have a generally acceptable account of approximation, but the sense of
approximation works differently in different scientific cases.
Issues of identity are tricky in philosophy.
To take a few quick examples, think about the conditions under which something remains
the same nation as more territory gets incorporated, or the same corporation or college or university.
Sustained attention to the notion of identity across time is more appropriate for a metaphysics
course than a philosophy of science course that'll be beyond our scope here.
The problem about distinguishing identity across time or reduction from replacement
is not just a verbal issue.
It connects very deeply to this notion of science as cumulative and progressive, because
if science is to be cumulative, it has to offer us increasingly good theories about
the same old stuff.
At least much of the time it has to do that.
So we need enough flexibility to allow for corrective reductions.
But we don't want to end up being committed to saying that phlegiston has been reduced
to oxygen rather than replaced by it.
We need some notion of replacement, otherwise we'll end up saying that demonic possession
has existed all along but reduced to certain kinds of mental illness.
It seems much cleaner to say there never was any such thing as demonic possession, but
it was all along some kind of mental illness that was misunderstood.
What do we want to say?
There was never any such thing as a gene?
That's a problematic way to go.
Let's note also a connection to one of the deep tensions running through science as it's
being presented in this course anyway.
In general, the direction of reduction is away from that which is epistemically accessible.
A close to observation notion like heat gets explained in terms of far from observation
stuff like gas molecules.
What is epistemically or evidentially basic tends to be at one end, middle-sized dry goods
as the philosopher John Austin called them, along with their observable properties.
That's what's evidentially basic, but what's explanatorily basic tends to be at the other
end, something like microphysics.
So we see this recurring tension between the epistemic modesty emphasized by empiricists
and the explanatory, reductive and metaphysical ambitions that seem to crop up at every turn
as we look at what science tries to do.
So next time we will turn from these modest scientific reductions to more ambitious reductive
projects like the idea that the sciences as a whole are unified and that all the stuff
in the world is, in some important sense, physical stuff.
