Lecture 26 – Scientific Realism
The sorts of considerations we examined last time promised to extend our semantic reach,
the meanings of our terms and theories, beyond observation in a way that the logical positivists
and their successors like Thomas Kuhn had not envisaged.
These ideas, first, that reference can be secured even when we can't use observation
to assign content to a term or statement, and second, the idea that models and analogies
can be used to provide literal meaning for terms and statements at a genuine remove from observation.
These two ideas together formed part of an attack on the importance and even the intelligibility
of the distinction between observational and theoretical language.
Without such a distinction, logical positivism is more or less dead.
The epistemology of empiricism can live on, but it will have to take a deeply different
form if the distinction between observational and theoretical language is surrendered.
A relatively modest version of a point made by Kuhn and Feierabend also contributed to
the new sort of skepticism about the interest and importance of the observational theoretical
distinction.
We saw Kuhn insist that theories shape what we see and how we describe what we see, and
we saw Feierabend take this point and run with it rather farther than Kuhn had, almost
minimizing the role of observation in science.
These theses were more extreme than any that caught on with philosophers, though they did
do well with constructivists and postmodernists outside the discipline of philosophy.
Though most philosophers accepted some version of the theory ladenness of observation, they
did not think that it was so pervasive that we couldn't have theoretical language figuring
in observation statements that nevertheless can exert an epistemic function independently
of the theoretical language in which they are formulated.
So a pre-Cambrian rabbit would make mischief for Darwinian evolution, even though such
an observation is inescapably couched in the language of the theory that it would ultimately
make mischief for.
Philosophers did, however, open up to the idea that whether or not theories in any important
way infect our observations, they do pervasively infect our observation language.
The vast majority of philosophers eventually gave up on the idea that anything worth calling
science could actually be done in a language that was sanitized of reference to unobservable
reality, as the positivists had tried to sanitize science.
Now it had long been understood that science isn't actually done in a language sanitized
of reference to observation.
Scientists talk about unobservable reality all the time.
The issue concerned the logical status, the rational reconstruction of science, not the
actual practice.
And for that very reason, the increasing emphasis on actual scientific practice threatened
the rational reconstruction, according to which theoretical terms have a kind of second-class
semantic status, with irrelevance.
And then problems started to emerge with the reconstruction itself, whatever its importance.
Philosophers started to worry about the intelligibility of the rational reconstruction.
For one thing, we use theoretical terms to talk about observable things.
Radios are observable objects, but describing an object as a radio involves going beyond
the observation language, since you're calling it a receiver of radio waves, and radio waves
are unobservable.
So we can use theoretical language to describe observable things.
Conversely, we can use observation terms to describe or refer to unobservable objects,
as we do when we think of gas molecules as little billiard balls, or when we talk about
a speck of dust that's too tiny to see.
All of that language is observation language, but it refers to an unobservable object.
So the distinction between observable and theoretical discourse does not line up with
the distinction between observable and unobservable objects.
So with this distinction seeming none too clear, and in light of the semantic developments
we looked at last time, theoretical discourse started to be seen as fully, not partially,
meaningful.
We saw that the positivists did not take apparent reference to unobservable reality with full
seriousness.
Saying that the top quark has a certain mass is rather like saying that the average American
family has a certain level of debt.
Just as you haven't committed yourself to the actual existence of an average family,
in the second case, you haven't committed yourself to the actual existence of a top
quark in the first.
All you've done is found a language that's convenient for describing or systematizing
observation.
For the positivists, apparent reference to unobservables has mostly a kind of bookkeeping
function.
But that's the view that starts to get very much on the defensive, starting say in the
1970s or so.
The pervasive role of theoretical discourse in actual scientific practice, even in what
working scientists would think of as observation reports.
Working scientists would count a statement like the pH of the solution was found to be
N as an observation report, even though that's very much clothed in theoretical language.
This pervasiveness of theoretical language in scientific practice made it increasingly
difficult to think of theoretical discourse as somehow semantically inferior to observational
discourse.
So most philosophers eventually gave up on the idea that any interesting distinction
between the parts of our language that get meaning directly from observation, and the
parts of our language that don't, can be sustained.
The way we talk, both in science and in ordinary life, takes theoretical pictures of the world
quite seriously, and if we tried to drop that part of our talk, we would lose too much
of what we'd like to be able to say.
And at this point, the received view of theories starts to get called the once-received view
of theories.
The epistemological virtues that had motivated positivism were starting to seem to carry with
them too great a cost, depriving us of too much semantic reach, impairing our ability
to do too much of what seemed like good science.
That doesn't mean, of course, that reasonably close descendants of the received view of
theories haven't survived.
They are still very much a powerful presence in philosophy of science, in part because
it's difficult to come up with workable alternatives.
But let's say that we've tentatively agreed, for now, to a semantic thesis that would have
seemed heretical to the logical positivists.
Statements about unobservable reality can be true or false in the same way that statements
about observable reality can.
Seems fairly intuitive, but not against the background of positivism.
Such a semantic doctrine makes room for scientific realism, a view that carries with it the idea
that science aims at accurately depicting unobservable as well as observable reality.
Scientific theories aim to get the whole world right.
First, let's look at one of the crucial terms in this formulation.
Though I will continue to talk about the statements of a scientific theory being true or false,
that tends to fit well with the received view of theories, according to which a theory is
a set of statements.
Construing theories as models, the semantic conception of theories, makes a theory more
matter of an analogy.
And my use of depiction in my formulation of scientific realism, that scientific theories
aim to depict the world accurately, tries to make room for the notion that we can get
the world right in ways other than by saying true things about it.
For some philosophical purposes, this distinction matters quite a lot, but I'm mostly going
to soft-pedal it.
Theories can get unobservable reality right, whether that's by accurately picturing it
or by saying true things about it.
This formulation is probably not strong enough, however, since if you thought that science
merely aimed at getting theories that accurately depicted the world, but could never attain
this aim, you wouldn't count as defending something worth calling scientific realism.
So we're going to need more than the semantic claim that science can describe unobservable
reality as well as observable reality correctly, in order to develop something worth calling
scientific realism.
The first additional requirement we're going to need is one of metaphysical modesty.
The world, including the unobservable parts of the world, does not depend on what we
think about it.
The next requirement we're going to need is one of epistemic presumptuousness or immodesty.
We can come to know the world, including the unobservable world, more or less as it is.
While each of these statements is intuitively, at least somewhat appealing, they tend to
work against one another.
The more independent the world is of us and our thought, the more pessimistic it seems
we should be about our prospects for knowing it.
According to metaphysical modesty, much of the world is unobservable by us, but has a
nature that doesn't in any way depend on us.
But epistemic presumptuousness insists that despite our lack of direct access to this world,
at least to big chunks of it, science can manage to form true theories about the world,
or at least correct theories about the world, about unobservable as well as about observable
reality.
Now we've seen in this course two anti-realist positions that reject this claim of metaphysical
modesty.
For the logical positivists, asking questions about the way the world is constitutes an
invitation to metaphysics which should be rejected.
Just as a question like Bertrand Russell's famous five-minute hypothesis, which asks
us to consider the hypothesis that the universe was created by God five minutes ago, complete
with false memories, misleading fossils, nothing in the universe is actually more than
five minutes old, though everything seems like it is.
That's a meaningless metaphysical hypothesis by the standards of positivism, because it
makes no difference to expected experience.
Similarly, any questions about unobservable reality should be rejected, or at least translated
into questions about observable reality.
So the positivists think we should reject the idea that there's a way the world is when
the world there is the notion of an unobservable part of the world.
For semantic reasons, we should consider it metaphysical, not scientific, to raise questions
about the way unobservable reality is.
So they reject metaphysical modesty mostly for semantic reasons.
Thomas Kuhn and some of his constructivist followers reject metaphysical modesty because
they think the way the world is in the only sense we can make of that phrase depends on
what we think about it.
Within a paradigm, questions about the deep nature of reality do make sense, but they
make sense of the world according to the paradigm, and that's as deep or genuine a notion of
reality as we can make sense of.
So Kuhn is in agreement with the positivists that we can't make much sense of a notion
like the way the world is in any extra paradigm sense.
When a paradigm changes for Kuhn, the world itself changes.
And this seems metaphysically immodest to scientific realists, because they think it
gives us too much power to determine the way the world is.
Our paradigms dictate the way the world is, rather than reflect it.
Similarly, as we'll see a little bit later, realists think that the positivists place
too much weight on our sensory capacities, and that seems immodest to them.
It's doing too much metaphysical work to talk about what's observable by little creatures
like us.
The world doesn't respect our epistemic faculties in the way that the positivists thought they
would.
So we can now work in two realist positions, each of which contrasts with these anti-realist
positions on the issue of metaphysical modesty.
But this contrast works out in importantly different ways.
For what we might call hard realists, the way the world is means that some distinctions,
some similarities, some kinds are in a very important and strong sense out there.
The world tells us, at least if we're doing our science right, that gold is one kind of
stuff.
The world's own distinction between gold and other kinds of stuff.
While jade is two kinds of stuff that go by one name, so the idea is all samples of pure
gold share the same real, deep structure.
While samples of jade are samples really of two quite different minerals, I believe they're
called jadeite and nephrite.
And each of these structures counts equally well as jade, so jade is not a real kind,
while gold is a real kind.
Soft realists, in contrast, rest less weight on the notion of a real kind.
So for a soft realist to say that science tells us the way the world is, means only
that given certain interests and aptitudes, for instance given the interests and characteristics
of creatures like us, it makes good sense to categorize things in one way rather than
another.
It's because of what we care to keep track of that we decide to decide to think of gold
as one kind of thing and jade as two.
Our best theories take our interest into account, but they are still responsible to a mind-independent
world.
There's a difference out there between gold and jade, but how important that difference
is, how real it is, how worth marking it is, is itself responsive to our interests.
So hard realists think that the job of science is to find out the way the world truly is,
and that this goal has nothing to do with contingent human limitations.
The goal arises from the nature of inquiry, not from the nature of humanity.
Soft realists think that the aim of science is something more like organizing a mind-independent
world in one of the ways that makes the most sense to creatures like us.
So soft realists are generally sympathetic to the idea that incompatible theories could
be equally good, while hard realists tend to think that there is a single way the world
is, and that science should try to get that way the world is right.
Now there are more sophisticated combinations and versions of these views that can be developed
in order to address the weaknesses that each view at least appears to face.
So hard realism's major problem is that it seems rather restrictive.
It's not clear that nature has many joints that live up to the standards of hard realism.
The periodic table is a great example, but many other distinctions seem to reflect our
needs to keep track of things to make sense of things.
Soft realism, on the other hand, tends to err in the side of being too permissive.
Should we allow the category of reptiles to count as a real kind, even though there is
apparently no species that is ancestral to all reptiles without also being ancestral
to birds?
Can we legitimately keep track of that kind, even though it doesn't answer to ordinary
standards of biological classification?
If we can, then what about the category of cedar trees, which apparently are unified
only by a human interest in a certain kind of wood?
The trees that we call cedar trees are not biologically closely related at all.
It looks like it might permit too many distinctions or classifications to count as thoroughly
real.
Having examined these metaphysical issues and the various flavors of modesty that might
be adopted here, we turn to epistemological issues and the various flavors and levels
of ambition and confidence that might be adopted on that side of the issue about realism.
As we did with the metaphysical issues, we can now add a couple of new positions to our
conceptual geography concerning epistemic presumptuousness.
Anti-realists tend not to adopt epistemic presumptuousness, realists do, though there
are interesting complicated combinations that we won't be able to cover.
I'm just staking out the sort of clear extremes.
For the positivists, knowledge can extend as far as observation and inductive logic will
take us.
We'll see in the next lecture what this thesis about knowledge and evidence looks like once
it gets uncoupled from the positivist theses about meaning.
So there's the epistemological theses of the positivists and their semantic theses.
Realism jettisons the semantic theses that it makes no sense to talk about unobservable
reality.
For now, let's just emphasize the point that one can't, for the positivists, get evidence
that bears on the truth of statements about unobservable reality.
All evidence is observational evidence.
So the positivists reject epistemic presumptuousness.
We shouldn't presume to have knowledge that so thoroughly outruns our evidence.
Karl Popper is an interesting case here.
For Popper, it is possible that we could come to know the world as it really is, but since
there is no usable notion of confirmation, we'll never be in a position to claim knowledge
about the way the world is.
So Popper thinks it's not excessively presumptuous to claim that we can have knowledge of the
way the world is.
This distinguishes him from the positivists and from Kuhn, but he does think it's excessively
presumptuous ever to actually claim such knowledge, and that tends to distinguish him from classic
realists.
For Kuhn and other constructivists who also reject epistemic presumptuousness, knowledge
of the way the world really is would require stepping out of our intellectual and perceptual
skins.
So even if the project made metaphysical and semantic sense, it would be epistemically
presumptuous to think that we can shed our biases and the historical ways in which our
theories are shaped by preceding theories.
So both the positivists and Kuhn reject epistemic presumptuousness, which is central to scientific
realism.
For optimistic scientific realists, our best scientific theories, mature, well-tested theories,
really provide knowledge of the way the world is.
Our current best theories are at least approximately true, and almost all of the things these theories
refer to, quarks, genes, that sort of stuff, actually exist.
This is to adopt a view that's reasonably epistemically presumptuous, but it's not
crazy or uncommon to think that our best scientific theories get the world right.
The idea is that science not only can provide knowledge of the world, it has done so, and
that we can pretty much tell in which cases it has done so.
A belief in the truth of our best theories is a major motivation for scientists and philosophers
towards realism.
On the other hand, if we build this level of epistemic presumptuousness into our notion
of scientific realism, then if our current best theories are false, scientific realism
is false.
And that seems like a mistake.
We'd like to allow for the view that science can get the world right, and can reasonably
aim to get the world right, without committing ourselves to the view that it has gotten the
world right.
And so modest realists will say something like, that it's currently reasonable to hope that
science can, and sometimes does, provide knowledge of the way the world is.
We need some reason to think that science has at least a decent shot, this distinguishes
such a view from Popper.
Of succeeding in order for this aim to be reasonable, it's hard for Popper to explain
why we should try to get the world right, given that we can never get any evidence that
we're doing so.
Now within philosophy of science, the most important debates among realists, and between
realists and their opponents, have concerned the epistemic issues.
How confident should we be that science does, or at least can, provide us with knowledge
of unobservable reality?
There are two major styles of arguments that present impediments to realism, one of which
we've already encountered.
That's the underdetermination of theory by data, which made its first appearance for
us in Quine's work.
When we first encountered Quine, however, we hadn't yet looked at notions of confirmation
and evidence, it was just a matter of a semantic thesis.
And as we saw back then, it's often the case that all of the currently available evidence
fails to decide between two competing theories.
Scientists then try to design experiments that will provide data that bear favorably
on one theory and unfavorably on the other.
Now Quine and Coon have emphasized how complicated this process is, given the diversity of scientific
values and the room to modify various auxiliary hypotheses within one's web of belief.
So the new evidence doesn't decisively favor one theory or the other.
The work of Quine and Coon thus suggests that no matter what data we have obtained, there
will always be a theory that fits the data equally well.
That's awkward for a scientific realist, because a scientific realist wants to claim
that at least under certain circumstances, one of the good theories is likely to be true.
But if the data are equally compatible with each theory, how on earth could we claim to
be in a position to decide which of these theories is the true one?
A couple of replies are available to the realist.
One is to deny that one can always find a genuine theory that competes with a given theory.
As a matter of logic, we can always generate nominally incompatible theories that fit the data.
But in many cases, that looks like a logical trick rather than a genuine scientific theory.
The example I'll use is a little bit excessively simple, but it gets the idea across.
Let's say I am demanding a Nobel Prize for my brilliant new theory in physics.
What I do is I switch, in current physics, every use of the term negative charge for
positive charge and vice versa.
So my theory is different from the current theories, but it's every bit as predictively accurate.
And we know it's different because I say electrons have positive charge, where the
current theory says they have negative charge.
So it's a new theory, and it's very well tested.
So where's my Nobel Prize?
It's not really a new theory, it's the same theory in a verbally incompatible form.
So it's an open question to what extent we'll always be able to generate serious theories
that fit the data as well as any given theory.
The other move open to the realist is to appeal to principles governing the way to run a web
of belief, and to claim that, of two theories that fit the data equally well, one might
nevertheless get more support from the very same data, that there's more to being supported
by data than merely fitting the data.
This is a broadly Popperian notion.
One of the theories might have been more thoroughly tested than the other, one might
be part of a more progressive research program in Lakatosha's sense.
Whatever virtue the realist wants to invoke here had better be a mark of truth, because
the realist wants to say that the better theory has a reasonable shot of being true.
While empiricists are going to say the only marks of truth are observational data, and
unless you can make the data favor one theory over the other, you're not in a position to
claim that one of these theories is likelier to be true than the other one is.
The other major obstacle to scientific realism is an important historical argument, so it's
in the broadly Kunian tradition, called the pessimistic induction.
It's been most cogently and most famously put forward by the American philosopher of
science Larry Loudon.
We can find cases from the history of science of theories that did as well or better than
current theories are doing, judged by the best evidential standards of their day.
But many of those theories are now known to be false, so we should not think that our
best theories are any likelier to be true than the best theories of say the 19th century
were likely to be true.
Loudon is following Kun in thinking that our best guide to how science should be done is
how science has been done.
But Loudon thinks that history shows that realism is unwarranted, since the best standards
of actual science permit false theories to thrive.
So the inference from the success of a theory to its truth is blocked by this pessimistic
induction.
As Kun and his successors have shown, theories like the Phlegiston theory of combustion were
predictively and explanatorily successful for a long time.
They generated normal science, they did all the things that good scientific theories are
supposed to do.
But right now we're pretty sure those theories are wrong.
So what theory in the history of science has been as successful for as long as Newton's
physics was?
But it turned out to be wrong.
The hugely successful wave theory of light, which was adopted by almost all competent
physicists in the 19th century, is now thought to be wrong.
So the idea is, from the mere fact that a theory looks really good to us, we are in
no position to claim that it gets the world right.
In part, this objection can be met by defending some approximation of the traditional view
of scientific reduction.
If we can show that, at least in many cases, the superseded theory is preserved, gets reduced
into the superseding theory, then the history of science no longer looks like a matter of
wrong turns and changes of subject.
It looks like something that accumulates and makes progress.
So the induction looks less pessimistic to the extent that we can make such a move, but
that involves defending the problematic classical conception of reduction, as we saw a couple
of lectures ago.
Now we'll see this in more detail next time as we try to develop scientific realism.
But some promising options for the realist remain.
One can narrow one's ambitions and claim that only parts of our best theories are likely
to be true, or that only some of our best theories are likely to be true.
Only to impose more stringent standards before we make the inference from scientific success
to truth.
So for instance, it could be the case that we have less reason to think our more fundamental
theories are basic physics, quantum mechanics, string theory, that sort of stuff.
We might have less reason to think those theories likely to be true than we have reason to think
our less fundamental theories are likely to be true.
Take plate tectonics as a theory in geology.
It's plausible to claim that we have more and better kinds of access to the objects
posited by less fundamental theories than we do to the objects posited by more fundamental
theories.
So maybe geology is a more secure science, is a safer bet to infer from success to truth
than physics is.
On the other hand, one might think that the lack of solidity at the fundamental level
threatens to reverberate throughout science.
If physics is wobbly, then everything is wobbly, one might think.
It's far from obvious how these arguments should play out.
Arguably, even if quantum mechanics is wildly wrong, whatever replaces it had better make
room for plate tectonics in molecular biology.
Maybe those theories are solid even if the theories, in some intuitive sense, under them
are wobbly.
A somewhat different approach would claim that it's not the entities posited by our
best theories, about which we should be realists, but something like the mathematical structures
involved in the theories.
The idea is that the structures of theories change less than the stuff posited by the
theories.
So for instance, in the early 19th century, a Frenchman named Saadi Carnot worked out
many of the basic ideas of thermodynamics, despite the fact that he mistakenly thought
of heat as a kind of fluid, a kind of stuff in things.
The way in which kinetic energy gets transmitted between molecules ends up being close enough
to the flow of a fluid that the laws of thermodynamics that he formulated are pretty accurate.
So we might be realists about the laws, about the mathematical structures behind the theory
without being realists about what the theory says there is.
The anti-realist will claim that an example like this shows that success is not good evidence
of truth, even in good scientific theories.
While realists will try to locate the kind of success that leads to truth.
We'll distinguish the ontology, the stuff, from the structural features, for instance.
The notion of a structure and how a structure can be accurate, despite being a structure
of the wrong stuff, is a tricky problem, however, for realists.
So we've articulated scientific realism.
We've paid special attention to this tension within the very notion between metaphysical
modesty, that the world is out there and has a nature, and epistemic presumptuousness,
the idea that despite not getting much direct observational evidence about it, we can get
it right.
So next time we're going to look at the main arguments in favor of this kind of odd position
that tends to have an internal tension within it, we'll try to see what the strong reasons
for adopting scientific realism might be, and we'll look at its most serious empiricist
competitor, the constructive empiricism of Basvan Frasen.
