Lecture 24 Reduction and Physicalism
We saw in our last lecture that the reduction of one scientific theory to another tends
to be a good bit messier than the classical model had suggested.
Nevertheless, it's at least plausible to claim that such reductions sometimes happen
at least approximately.
We should admit, however, that we don't have a terribly principled sense of the notion
of approximation that's at work in such reductions.
But let's assume that such reductions count as successful.
We turn now to more ambitious versions of the issue of reduction.
Let's grant, at least for the sake of argument, that one scientific theory sometimes successfully
reduces to another.
What are the prospects then for the Unity of Science program?
This program requires that virtually every scientific theory reduce ultimately to basic
physics.
So it's enormously more ambitious than the single reduction of one theory to another.
The most common version of the picture goes like this, a science like sociology or economics
reduces to psychology.
Psychology reduces to biology, which reduces to chemistry, which reduces to physics, and
all physics reduces to fundamental physics.
So we're switching here from looking at actual scientific reductions to the philosophical
program of reductionism, and we're not talking about reductions currently performable so
much as what's in principle possible.
We're granting for the sake of argument that some impressive, at least approximate reductions
have been successfully pulled off, but nobody is in any danger of unifying science any
time soon.
A major idea behind this Unity of Science picture, and I'll put it a little more ontologically
than the positivists would have, is that nature is at bottom homogeneous.
Everything there is came out of the Big Bang and is made up of the same basic kinds of
stuff.
Whatever exactly that stuff turns out to be, tiny weird vibrating strings or whatever.
So in principle, our understanding of the universe should be able to integrate every
successful science into one package.
This picture takes more or less successful instances of scientific reduction as the model
for such integration.
The price of non-integration, according to the Unity of Science picture, is a kind of
tear in the fabric of the cosmos.
Our conception of nature would then have a kind of radical discontinuity in it if such
reductions were impossible.
There being non-actual, of course, just means our science is incomplete.
On the other hand, there seems to be a lot of stuff in the world characterized by what
philosophers sometimes call emergence.
The properties of table salt are not very much like the properties of sodium or of chlorine.
Many holes seem to be more than, or deeply different than, the sums of their parts.
Whatever exactly that cliché about the sum of the parts is taken to mean.
Scientific reductions are supposed to explain away the apparent magic of emergence.
Though we've seen that actual particular reductions often involve a significant amount
of fudging.
So we're going to look at this balance between the apparent emergence of phenomena and the
ambitions of the Unity of Science program.
Functional properties present a major challenge to any ambitious, reductive program.
Some objects are picked out by their functional properties, by what they do rather than what
they're made of.
Thermometers provide an example of functionally defined objects.
Such objects need not have any scientifically interesting material properties in common.
Philosophers capture this idea by saying that thermometers are multiply-realizable in material
terms.
This just means that there are many ways a thermometer can be physically embodied.
A thermometer can be made of a column of alcohol sealed in a glass tube, or it can be a system
that sends and receives a laser beam.
Laser not interchangeable at the functional level, the laser thermometer is better for
measuring surface temperatures and the glass one is better for measuring interior temperatures,
but they are equally thermometers, even though they don't seem to have any interesting physical
properties in common.
But this makes the reduction of the notion of a thermometer to the physical level problematic.
Thermometers form a class or kind at the level of function talk, but when you try to
map this kind onto any kind at the level of the physical, you just get a mess.
To be a thermometer at the level of the physical is to be either alcohol in a glass tube or
a laser system with a digital readout, or this or that, there are a whole bunch of different
ways physically to be a thermometer.
There don't seem to be any necessary conditions specifiable in material terms for being a thermometer.
It's not necessary that you be a glass tube with alcohol, it's not necessary that you
be a laser system.
We can specify sufficient conditions for being a thermometer by describing an actual
thermometer in material terms.
We take a thermometer, describe what it's made of, and that's a sufficient condition
for being a thermometer, but we don't seem to have any necessary conditions.
Without necessary conditions, it's hard to see how we're in a position to offer bridge
principles, linking thermometer talk to material talk.
Intuitively, we can't say what it takes to be a thermometer in the language of material
objects.
We can only offer a huge, messy disjunctive, that's a fancy philosopher's word for or,
a disjunctive claim, being a glass tube with alcohol in it or a laser or this or that.
But that disjunctive claim isn't exhaustive, and it's such that its components don't
seem to have anything at all interesting in common when described in material object
talk.
Having examined a trivial case, let's look at a more serious case to see how reductive
aspirations might get defended.
The part of psychology called computational psychology concerns the brain's ability to
perform things like deductive inferences, for instance, addition.
What are the prospects for reducing computational psychology to the level of the physical?
It seems clear that computational properties are multi-realizable.
The property of being the sort of thing that can add numbers can be realized in variously
constructed computers, it can be realized in our brains, it can be realized presumably
in brains rather different from ours, maybe dolphins can do it, maybe there are extraterrestrials
out there that can do it, maybe God or disembodied souls can perform addition without a brain.
The ability to add is more of a software kind of property than a hardware kind of property.
What makes something that ability is characterized by what the inputs and outputs to the ability
are, not the material that gets used to run the program, it's not the material stuff that
constitutes something as a computational system.
For this reason, it looks unlikely that computational properties can reduce to or be identified with
such physical properties as having a particular arrangement of neurons.
Having an adder, not the snake kind of adder, the performing arithmetic kind of adder, involves
either being a certain kind of processing chip, or one of a certain range of assemblages
of human neurons, or one of a range of assemblages of dolphin or extraterrestrial neurons, or
whatever the extraterrestrials have in place of neurons, etc.
And those extraterrestrial brains could for all we know be, say, silicon based instead
of carbon based.
The material stuff doesn't seem to have much role in constituting the property.
Now one way the reductionists can try to minimize this problem is to take certain liberties
with the idea of a property.
On this view, computational properties reduce to physical properties, just to very complicated
physical properties.
For instance, the single property of either being a certain system of neurons, or being
a certain kind of microprocessor, or a certain kind of extraterrestrial brain, etc.
That's one giant disjunctive property.
So speaking very loosely, mental properties, or at least computational ones, reduce still
to physical properties, just not to simple physical properties.
The idea is that having one property on the list would be necessary for having the computational
properties.
You have to have one of these things in order to add.
This is assuming that we can list all of the possible ways, not all of the actual ways,
of embodying the property.
And having one of the properties, whichever it is, is sufficient.
So the bridge principle does provide necessary and sufficient conditions, they're just
messy.
Now there's nothing intrinsically untoward about disjunctive properties.
The property of being a member of Congress, arguably, is a genuine property, and it's
the property of either being a member of the House of Representatives, or being a member
of the Senate.
And there might be cases within science in which appeal to disjunctive properties makes
some sense in a reductive context.
Appealing to an example from last time, we might want to say that the property of being
a gene reduces to the property of being one of the three strands of DNA we talked about
last time.
So we might say that genes reduced to being either mutans, or reconns, or cisterns.
Maybe that's motivated.
The strategy raises some issues we've looked at before about what counts as a real property.
Do objects that share a property need to be similar in any interesting or deep respect
when described at the level of the reducing theory?
Do they need to share some kind of causal powers?
The problem is that described in material terms, computational properties, or thermometer
properties, look way crazier and more disjunctive than grew, which you might recall is the property
of being green if first observed before January 1st, 3000, or blue if first observed after
January 1st, 3000.
We were wondering about whether that's a real property or not.
The material properties that constitute being a computational system or a thermometer look
like my example from earlier of the Braco-Saxodile being either made of broccoli or being a saxophone
or a crocodile.
It's an ununified seeming disjunction.
The kind seems to have its only reality at the level of the theory to be reduced, not
at the level of the reducing theory.
Thermometers have something in common at the instrument or function level, but not at the
material level, at least intuitively speaking.
It goes beyond the scope of our course to tackle directly the issue of what it takes
to be a real property.
For our purposes, let's just note that a giant disjunctive property like this is not
one that science seems to much recognize or care about.
So even if we wanted to say that computational properties can get reduced to physical or
material properties, this is at best a philosopher's reduction, not a scientist's.
So we might have the unity of science in a kind of thin philosophical sense, but not
in a kind of scientifically rich sense unless we can solve this problem.
The other main strategy involves an appeal to narrowing the reduced properties rather
than widening the reducing ones.
The idea is what we would reduce to the physical is not the computational property of being
able to add, but the computational property as realized in human beings of being able
to add.
If we narrow what we're trying to reduce, we might be able to find a more unified reduction
base at the level of the reducing theory.
If we go this route, we have to face the fact that we aren't reducing computing to
the level of the physical, but only the narrower property, computing as realized in humans.
So to a certain extent, we've replaced computing with a different property rather than reducing
it.
But it's arguable, at least, that this is the kind of property that some scientists,
for instance, neuroscientists, would be genuinely interested in reducing.
Seems like the kind of property that might well figure in science.
So we've gotten accomplishment if we've reduced the narrower property.
Unfortunately, the same kind of worry reasserts itself.
It is very far from clear that computational properties are physically realized in the
same way in all human brains.
Just as in computers, there are many ways of running certain software in hardware.
Brains seem to be able to implement programs in multiple ways.
And it's plausible that the ability to add might well be embodied in my brain differently
than in yours, might be embodied in more than one place in each of our brains because there's
noteworthy hemispheric redundancy within the brain.
The left and the right hemisphere have overlapping abilities to some extent.
As this process of narrowing the property being reduced continues, we're moving towards
losing what was supposed to make the reduction interesting in the first place.
The brain is characterized by a lot of plasticity.
Circumstances and learning can change which neurons fire together and how little networks
get set up.
So the danger is that the only sustainable reduction to the physical will be of something
like how my brain is set up to run addition today.
And that's not a scientific property at the level to be reduced that's worth caring about.
Similar considerations apply to lots of other properties that figure in science.
Let's turn to economics for a moment.
Think about trying to reduce the property of being money to physical terms.
Certain pieces of metal count as money, so do certain pieces of paper.
Shells and beads have served as money in various contexts.
Money can be stored and moved around electronically and this is just the beginnings of what could
be a very long list of physical realizations of money.
And that's to go the complicated disjunction route.
The property of being money is the property of being one of this long disjunct.
The alternative strategy, as we've seen, involves trying to reduce a narrower property.
So we could try to reduce the property of being U.S. currency to physical terms.
But of course we're going to face the same problem.
The property of being a quarter is pretty disjunctive because there are lots of different
versions of the American Quarter out there.
Though perhaps they can be unified in an only moderately disjunctive way.
The property of being made this way or that way or another way.
By this stage, of course, we started losing sight of the monetary properties of the quarter.
There are lots of ways of being 25 cents that are different from being a quarter.
And so we're no longer reducing money, we're reducing a coin and its monetary properties
are starting to disappear from our reduction.
Someone who bulks at the idea that economics is a science can remind him or herself that
it'll be difficult to characterize, say, the notion of an ecological niche or that of
a scavenger in terms at the physical level.
So in almost any science, we are going to run into a problem about multiple realizability.
The point of these multiple realizability cases is not merely that there's a many-to-one
relationship between the physical properties and those of the higher level science.
That at the higher level you can have the same property embodied many different ways.
That's only the beginning of the problem.
The point is that the physical properties that figure in the bridge laws don't seem
to be real scientific properties.
They don't look like they can figure in laws or in explanations.
No matter what one's theory of explanation is, these properties don't look like they're
going to do that kind of scientific work.
The property of being one of the ways in which an adding program can be realized doesn't
seem to have much in the way of causal powers.
Each of the disjunctive properties that figures in this big OR property might have some causal
powers.
But the big disjunctive property wouldn't figure in a causal explanation, nor would
it seem to figure in a law.
What kind of law would contain the property of being a neural network or a microchip
or a certain arrangement of paper and pen?
All copper conducts electricity isn't merely true.
The idea is we think the copper part has something to do with the conducting electricity part,
though we struggle to figure out what it has to do with that.
Empiruses continue to struggle with how we gain access to that sort of connection.
But these big disjunctive properties don't seem to unify, to explain, to figure in laws.
They don't seem to belong to science.
Again, intuitively speaking.
And similar problems once again arise if we go the route of narrowing the property to
be reduced.
A characterization of the physical realization of the property of being a nickel, rather than
the property of being five cents, will contribute to some explanations, like how soda machines
and candy machines work.
They turn on some of the physical properties of being a nickel, but it's not going to
figure in any wider science.
Now none of this is to close the door on the idea that the reductions of one science to
another, as required by the Unity of Science program in its classic form, can constitute
a certain kind of progress.
The partial, at least, maybe it's complete, reduction of chemistry to physics certainly
seems to enrich the explanatory power, but we shouldn't assume that a reduction involves
pure gains without losses at the level of explanation.
There's a danger that when we have even a successful reduction, we lose explanatory
power rather than always gaining it.
To a certain extent, scientific explanations find their own level rather than trickling
down to the basic level.
Not all explanation is in terms of what's basic.
Even when we confine our attention to cases in which there can be genuine explanations,
both at the reducing and at the reduced level, and that's to rule out all of these problems
about the weird disjunctive properties, we still risk loss of explanatory power, even
waving all of these powerful objections we were just talking about.
The example I'll discuss is due to the philosopher of science, Alan Garfinkel.
Suppose that an ecologist is tracking a rabbit population, which varies more or less inversely
with a fox population.
More foxes mean fewer rabbits.
And we have what looks like a legitimate explanation at the ecological level.
We say rabbit X died because of a high fox population.
Now that's only a gesture in the direction of a real explanation, but you can unpack
this if you feel like reviewing in more detail using the deductive, nomological, or covering
law approach to explanation.
You can use the causal model.
You can use the unification model.
We can sort of see how the explanation will go on any of these models.
Here's another explanation at the lower level that we're going to grant is equally legitimate.
That explanation will go along the following lines.
The rabbit's death was due to entering a certain fox containing space at a certain time.
A more directly physical explanation.
This explanation also will have to be fleshed out if it's to be a full explanation, but
we more or less know how those explanations will go.
Now someone sympathetic to the reductionist project will claim that explanations of the
higher level can be replaced by explanations at the lower level.
Ecological explanations and facts ultimately are supposed to reduce to lower level biological
and ultimately to physical facts.
The lower level explanation is supposed to be more fundamental than the higher level
explanation.
Even though we're granting that both of these explanations are legitimate scientific explanations,
they seem to explain different facts.
The ecological explanation explains why the rabbit was eaten at all, while the more allegedly
fundamental explanation explains why the rabbit was eaten when and where it was eaten and
by which fox, for instance.
So the lower level explanation, at least in this case, provides more detail.
It explains why the rabbit was eaten when and where it was, rather than just why it
was eaten, and that at least initially seems to favor reductionism.
The more basic explanation tells us more, in a certain sense.
But it's also plausible to claim that, for at least some legitimate scientific purposes,
it is precisely the less specific fact that we want explained.
For some purposes, we want to know why the rabbit was eaten at all, not why it was eaten
by that fox in that place at that time.
The lower level explanation focuses on a picture that is too small for some explanatory purposes.
It suggests, for instance, that it was just the rabbit happening to be in this particular
fox's capture space that explains its death.
While the higher level ecological explanation can explain the fact, if it's a fact, that
the rabbit probably would have been eaten even if it had taken a different path in the
last, say, half hour of its life.
In this case, what's hard for the lower level explanation to capture is a kind of causal
or explanatory redundancy.
Given how many foxes there were in that ecosystem, there were lots of different ways that the
rabbit was going to get itself eaten, and this particular more physical explanation
leaves out that redundancy.
This is not an argument that no good explanation for that redundancy can be provided at the
lower level.
But we've seen the problems, all these gigantic, disjunctive properties that don't seem explanatory,
arise when you try to explain a fact at a higher level using only the theory at the
lower level.
So it's reasonably promising to think in terms of reducing ecological things to biological
things and ultimately to physical things, but the prospect of reducing ecological explanations
to lower level biological explanations and ultimately to physical explanations looks
much less promising than the project of reducing stuff from the ecological to the biological
to the physical.
And a weaker version of this problem for reductionism is worth making explicit.
Higher level explanations often seem scientifically satisfactory just the way they are.
There is generally an explanatory gain when we reduce one theory to another, but there
is often an explanatory loss due to the very same process.
And so to a certain extent, Garfinkel says with a kind of coonian trust in scientific
practice that explanations find their own level.
So there's nothing incomplete about the explanation at the ecological level, even though there's
a lower level explanation that can also be given.
There may be an explanation of any given phenomenon in terms of lower level theories
and ultimately in terms of basic physics, but even when that's the case, and we haven't
seen a good argument that it will always be the case, even when it is the case, it doesn't
follow that the more fundamental explanations are the better ones.
Even when there's a good explanation at the lower or more basic level, reducing the higher
level explanation to the lower one generally might well carry with it explanatory losses
as well as explanatory gains.
If this is the case, we're in a bit of a quandary.
On the one hand, the higher level explanations seem good just as they are, they don't seem
to need any help or legitimacy from lower level explanations, and they don't seem likely
in general to get quality help from lower level explanations because of the giant disjunctive
mess that tends to arise.
On the other hand, it's hard not to be moved by this powerful intuition that nature is
unified, that everything is made up of the stuff, in some sense, of fundamental physics.
So the tendency of the discussion in philosophy these days is toward what's called token
physicalism without type physicalism.
If I say yes, yes, there's a sense in which I've said two words, and a sense in which
I've said the same word twice.
I've uttered two tokens of one word type.
The idea is that every token of a thermometer, every token of money, every token of a gene
is a physical object.
But the type thermometer, the type money, the type gene are not physical types.
There is nothing answering to those types, or nothing at least worth taking seriously
when doing science at the physical level.
So each bit of stuff is physical stuff, but each kind of stuff need not be a physical
kind of stuff.
So this allows us to say that in one sense everything is physical while denying that
everything reduces to the physical because the kinds don't reduce to the physical.
The idea is that happenings at the physical level determine happenings at all the higher
levels, but not in such a way that the higher levels reduce to the lower levels.
The most straightforward way to do this is to defend a claim that's called supervenience
physicalism, not a very poetic phrase, according to which any two situations identical in all
physical respects would then have to be identical in all other respects.
So for instance, to say that the mental supervenes on the physical would be to say that there
can be no mental difference between two situations without a physical difference.
If two neural networks were running in exactly the same way, they would have to have all
of the same mental properties.
If one of them was an instance of a searing pain, the other would have to be an instance
of a searing pain.
So any two situations that were physically alike would have to be mentally alike.
Similarly, it is commonly claimed that the moral supervenes on the physical, any two
situations that were physically identical would have to be morally identical.
This makes room for the idea of multiple realizability.
Supervenience allows that there can be a difference in physical properties without,
say, a difference in mental properties.
All it denies is that there can be a difference in mental properties without a difference
in physical properties.
So there can be more than one physical realization of some mental state.
The point is that once the physical state is fixed, the mental state is fixed.
This gives the kind of asymmetry that the physicalist wanted.
The mental depends on the physical in a way that the physical does not depend on the mental.
Now supervenience has been one of the hot notions in philosophy for the last 15 or 20
years.
A variety of different supervenience concepts have been put forward.
They get distinguished by, for instance, the way that the have-to part of the relationship
gets unpacked.
So supervenience says that physically identical situations have to be mentally identical.
Well have-to or else what?
The grounding for this supervenience relationship can be a claim about meaning, it can be in
a law of nature, there are a whole bunch of different ways that we can develop different
supervenience concepts.
With each different concept we have a different way in which the mental or the moral depends
on the physical.
The idea is to use one or more of these supervenience concepts to capture this common intuition
that everything depends on what happens at the physical level and is in some sense nothing
but what happens at the physical level, while simultaneously insisting that it's just not
true that everything can be reduced to or defined in terms of or explained in terms
of the physical.
So supervenience is a much weaker notion than reduction or identity.
Even so, it might be too strong in some cases and I need to return to a sort of difficult
example we used at the end of our discussion of laws of nature.
We wondered whether two situations could be physically identical and yet governed by different
physical laws.
So if there could be laws governing a type of particle interaction that will never happen,
say two very rarely occurring particles that will never interact with each other.
If we want to say there's a law governing what would happen, were these particles to
interact then we're saying that the laws of nature don't supervene on actual physical
events.
We're saying two situations, two universes as it were, could be identical in all of their
physical happenings but governed by different laws.
So it's not automatic that we get a supervenience claim to hold true, we're just trying to articulate
a notion of asymmetric dependence that's much weaker than reduction.
So we've seen that it turns out to be much trickier than one might have thought to articulate
the idea that either the world or our theories of it are in some deep sense unified.
In fact the idea has not yet successfully been worked out.
Some versions of this idea through the notion of supervenience surely remain plausible but
none of them have been successfully pulled off.
Issues of meaning and reference have started to return in our discussion of reduction,
as we've seen that terms needn't have the same meaning but can have the same reference
and that the reductions will go through.
In our next lecture we're going to give these notions of meaning and reference some sustained
attention and thereby we're going to be really bringing together the issues of evidential
modesty on the one hand that we saw when we first looked at logical positivism and the
more recent ideas of explanatory ambition that projects like reductionism exemplify.
And we'll see what happens as we try to balance these two deep goals of science against one
another.
