The lines and circles are the two most fundamental shapes in Euclidean geometry.
In the last lecture, we started looking at lines and the shapes like triangles that they make.
In this lecture, we'll consider the circle.
The circle introduces us to the most famous constant in mathematics, pi.
We'll analyze tangent lines, angles within the circle, and relationships among circles and intersecting lines,
and then conclude the lecture with something called the Apollonian circle,
which uses two fixed locations to determine one circle.
But before we start the mathematics, let's take a moment to recognize the role that the circle plays
in nature and in culture.
Well, the sun and moon appear as circles in the sky,
and when a drop of water hits a still pond, waves propagate out in concentric circles.
The trunks of trees are circular, rainbows look like parts of circles.
Well, nature presents us with many attractive circles.
People, of course, have always noticed that the perfect symmetry and graceful look of a circle makes it so appealing.
So no shape is more ubiquitous or more revered across cultures and across time than the circle.
It's possibly the most common cultural symbol in the world.
In fact, it often has a mystical meaning, frequently representing eternity or infinity, because it has no end.
And sometimes the circle represents fertility, or it represents the sun.
For example, in the Shinto tradition, it can represent the sun as the source of life.
A circle often stands for completion.
For example, the Chinese character Yuan literally means round, but also means complete or perfect.
And in fact, if you noticed in the closing ceremonies of the Olympics of 2008,
they used the circle to have that kind of symbolic meaning.
The famous Yin and Yang image symbolizes how opposing forces complete one another.
Well, the ancients who built Stonehenge clearly revered the circle.
Navajo, Kivas, and Islamic mosques are often circular in shape.
In Buddhism, the wheel represents the endless cycle of reincarnation.
Halos are circular. Wedding rings are circular.
Tibetan mandalas are holy symbols. In Sanskrit, mandala means circle and center.
Mandalas are viewed as holy circles, and were discussed by Carl Jung, who called the magic circles.
It's difficult to find any culture at any time in history that does not or did not use the circle as a significant cultural icon.
Well, let's move on to the mathematics of the circle.
First of all, a circle is the set of points that are of equal distance from a fixed point, and that fixed point is the center of the circle.
Well, the radius of a circle is the distance from the center of a circle to the outer boundary of the circle.
It's a radius, and the straight line across the center of a circle is a diameter of the circle.
So a diameter of a circle is a line segment that is twice as long as the radius.
Well, the circumference of a circle has a fixed relationship to the length of the diameter of the circle.
And in fact, the relationship is that there is exactly pi times the diameter equals the circumference of a circle.
And so let's actually see this physically. So here is a circle, and around the boundary of this circle, you see that we have a ribbon.
And so I'm going to take this ribbon that exactly fits around the diameter and unroll it down here on the ground, creating a length that's exactly the circumference of this circle.
Now, this little stick here is exactly the diameter of the circle, and let's notice how many times the diameter is needed to create the circumference.
So here we have one, two, three, and a little bit.
So the relationship between the length of the diameter and the length of the circumference is a little bit more than three times the diameter.
So in other words, you take the diameter, you multiply it by a little bit more than three to get the length of the circumference.
Well, the exact constant multiple that gives you the distance around the circumference given the diameter is this number pi.
And it's been computed to many decimal digits. It starts out 3.1415926 and goes on and on.
In fact, the decimal digit of pi never ends, and it never falls into an infinitely repeated pattern.
People have now computed pi to more than one trillion digits. One trillion digits.
You have no idea how long that is. You wouldn't be able to write it down in many, many volumes of books.
The way you compute pi to these many, many digits is to use calculus. That's what's used to do it.
You might think that you would just take a very exact ribbon and unroll it and then try to measure it precisely.
In fact, I don't know how precisely you could get pi if you actually did it just physically.
It's sort of an interesting question.
Well, in any case, since the circumference of a circle is always 2 times pi times the radius, we can deduce a startling fact.
Suppose that we took the whole earth. I love this fact.
Take the whole earth and suppose you put a belt just snugly around the equator of the earth and it just fit.
And then we decided, well, the poor earth is a little bit too tightly held.
So let's add 7 feet of length to that belt, just 7 feet.
Now, the earth, by the way, is about 25,000 miles around.
So we add 7 feet to the belt.
And let's ask the question, if we centered that new belt around the earth, how far would it lie off of the earth?
Now, most people, when they think about that, think that the belt, since we've only added 7 feet to 25,000 miles,
it sort of feel that maybe the belt would just be a tiny, tiny bit off the ground of the earth.
Well, surprisingly, the belt would be more than a foot above the ground all the way around the earth.
And to see that this is true, let's look at a related situation, and that has to do with a hula hoop and me.
So this is a hula hoop, and it's not quite 10 feet around, and I'm not quite 3 feet around,
and I'm not actually perfectly round, although maybe closer than I'd like to be.
But in any case, if this two hula hoop were exactly 10 feet around and I were 3 feet around,
look at how far the hula hoop is from me.
It's about a foot off of me.
It turns out that if you do the same thing with the earth, you add 7 feet to a belt around the whole earth,
the distance away from the earth will be the same, exactly the same distance as the distance away from me that that hula hoop was.
Well, let's look at the mathematics involved.
Suppose we have a circle of radius r, then its circumference is 2 pi r.
So if we have a circle of radius r plus 1 foot, it will have circumference 2 pi times r plus 1 foot.
And you see the radius is measuring how far out the distance will be from the earth, because that's the change.
Okay, so 2 pi times r plus 1 foot equals 2 pi r plus 2 pi times 1 foot.
So the longer circumference is exactly 2 pi feet longer than the smaller circumference, and 2 pi feet is just about 6.3 feet.
So if we've added 7 feet, we've added more than a foot of radius.
Well, anyway, I think this is amazing.
In fact, I included it in my calculus course lectures for the teaching company, but I think it's so neat it was worth repeating here.
In any case, let's now pursue the investigation of circles by looking at angles in circles that are related to parts of the circles.
First of all, let's see how we measure an angle.
If we take a circle, and we take a point at the center of the circle, and we make an angle at that center point, then we'll measure the arc around the circle according to the angle in the center of the circle.
In other words, by the degrees of the central angle that, as we say, subtends that arc, that is, contains that arc inside it.
So the whole circumference of a circle we can measure is 360 degrees.
Well, what we're going to talk about now is what happens if we put a point on the boundary of the circle, right, on the circle, not at the center, but on the circle.
And we make an angle in toward the center of the circle, in toward the circle, not toward the center of the circle, just in toward the circle.
We make an angle, and it turns out that that angle is related to the angle that we get starting at the center of the circle that goes to the same two points where the first angle hit the circle.
So you can see the picture here, and the claim is that the angle on the circle is exactly half of the angle at the center.
Well, that's sort of interesting. Why would we think it would be exactly half of that angle?
Well, the reason is that we can do a little bit of a construction here, and the construction is that we'll add a new radius from the center of the circle to the point of the angle on the side of the circle.
And that constructs two isosceles triangles.
Now, these two isosceles triangles split that angle into two angles. Let's call them alpha and beta.
So the top isosceles triangle, because it's isosceles, because it has two radii as sides, then the two angles are going to be alpha and alpha.
And likewise for that bottom triangle, its angles will be beta and beta.
Well, since we know that any triangle has 180 degrees total, we know that the central part of the angle of the top triangle is 180 degrees minus two alpha.
And likewise, that central angle of the bottom triangle is 180 minus two beta.
And therefore, since we know the total angle around the whole circle at the center is 360 degrees, we see that the remaining angle has to be two alpha plus two beta.
But the original angle we were talking about on the circle itself was alpha plus beta.
And therefore, we see that the central angle is exactly two times the angle on the circle.
Well, what's interesting is that that means that if we have angles that meet exactly at the same two points on the circle, if we move that point along the circle, the angle will stay exactly the same.
Well, so this theorem, by the way, has an interesting name.
If you notice the original picture we had of this demonstrating the statement of the theorem, those of you who are Star Trek fans will notice that it looks like the Star Trek insignia in the Star Trek TV show.
And in fact, that's the name that is now associated with or some people associate with this theorem.
It's called the Star Trek theorem.
So I think it's a cute name.
Well, one consequence of this Star Trek theorem is that if you form an angle whose ends, an angle on a point of a circle whose ends come down to the ends of a diameter of the circle, then that angle must be a right angle.
Why? Because the central angle is just a straight angle, which is 180 degrees.
And therefore, we see by the Star Trek theorem that the angle on the circle must be half that, which is 90 degrees.
This theorem was actually a theorem of Thales.
Remember the Thales from the 600 BCE, the first named mathematician.
And he was the one who, for example, measured the heights of the pyramids using similar triangles.
And this was his theorem that, in fact, it will be a right angle if the lines come down to the ends of a diameter.
And in fact, the converse is also true of this theorem.
The converse says that if you have a straight line and you make it the hypotenuse of a right triangle, that is, you create a right angle whose endpoints are the ends of that line,
then, in fact, that point will lie on the circle.
So these are our theorems of Thales.
And in fact, we're going to use these theorems many times as the lectures go on.
They're basic theorems about geometry.
Well, to understand the circle, let's now move to try to understand how the circle interacts with various lines.
First of all, let's look at the case of a line segment that just goes from one point of a circle to another.
That's called a chord of the circle.
It's just a straight line between two points of the circle.
One fact is that if we look at the perpendicular bisector of that chord, that perpendicular bisector will definitely go through the center of the circle.
And let's understand the reason for that.
Well, we know that the perpendicular bisector of any line segment is exactly all the points that are equidistant to the two endpoints of that segment.
Well, the center of the circle is equally distant to any point on the circle itself.
And so if we have a chord whose endpoints are on the circle, then the distance from the center to the two ends are each a radius of the circle, and consequently are equal.
So the perpendicular bisector goes through the center of the circle.
Well, lines that are tangent to a circle can be related to angles and radii in the circle.
The first statement is that only one line can be tangent to a circle at a given point, and that that tangent is perpendicular to the radius at that point of tangency.
So suppose that we draw a line through a point of a circle that doesn't turn out to be perpendicular to the radius that comes from that point where we have the line going through the circle, and it's not perpendicular to the radius.
Then we can draw a perpendicular line from the center of the circle to that line.
It won't be the radius, it'll be some other one.
Well, the perpendicular distance from a point to a line is the shortest distance from that point to the line.
So if the radius is not perpendicular to the line, then the line must contain a point whose distance from the center of the circle is smaller than the length of the radius.
You see, and you see it in the picture.
And thus that point must be inside the circle.
But if you have a point on a line that's inside the circle, the line will intersect the circle at two points, and therefore it can't be a tangent to the circle.
So what have we concluded?
We've concluded that if we draw any radius and we draw the perpendicular line at the point of tangency, then that line will be tangent to the circle because every other point on that line will be further distance away and therefore will be outside the circle.
So what we've learned so far then is that if we have any circle and we take a tangent line to the circle, a tangent line meaning a line that just hits the circle at one point, then it will be perpendicular to the radius at that point.
Well, the next term that we're going to talk about actually turns out to be useful in many theorems, and it is the following fact.
Suppose that we have a circle and we consider a point that's external to the circle, and then we look at the lines that are just tangent to the circle.
They just graze the circle on two sides of the circle.
Then the two distances from that point to the two points of tangency are exactly equal.
And here's why.
This theorem actually makes use of the Pythagorean theorem.
So here's why.
That at the point of tangency of these two lines, we can create the radii that go from those points of tangency to the center of the circle.
And then we can draw a line from the center of the circle to the external point, thereby creating two right triangles.
Well, these two right triangles have two of their sides equal to one another.
Namely, they both contain one side that's a radius, so those are equal, and then they have a common hypotenuse.
But then the Pythagorean theorem says that that third side, the distance between the external point and the point of tangency,
must be, by the Pythagorean theorem, we know that it squared plus the radius squared equals the hypotenuse squared.
So in fact, its length is precisely the square root of the hypotenuse squared minus the radius squared.
So it's a fixed value, therefore those two points are equally distant from the external point to the two points of tangency.
Well, okay, so we have some basic theorems about circles.
Let's look at some information that can determine a circle.
One piece of information would be that if you just take a line segment, then there's exactly one circle that contains that line segment as a diameter.
Why? Because we just take the midpoint and we draw the circle whose radius is half of the length of that segment,
and that, of course, will be a circle of which that segment is a diameter.
So that's simple enough.
But in fact, we can look at that same circle in another way because of Thaley's theorem about right angles.
Namely, that circle is exactly the set of all vertices of right triangles that contain that segment as its hypotenuse.
You see? Because remember in a circle, if you take a right angle, that right angle will be on the circle whose diameter is the hypotenuse.
Okay, well, now another collection of information that determines the circle is if we have three non-colonial points,
any three points in the plane that don't line a straight line, any three points in the plane other than those will determine a unique circle.
And there's, I think, a clever way for finding that circle through those three points.
And here's how we do it.
We just take two of those points and we construct the perpendicular bisector through the segment whose endpoints are those two points.
Well, we know that any circle that contains those two points then, on which those two points lie, the center will be on that perpendicular bisector.
Well, now let's go to the third point and take one of the points we already used and then the third point and take the perpendicular bisector of the segment created by those two points.
Well, notice that those two perpendicular bisectors are going to intersect at some point.
And that point is the center of a circle that will contain all three of our points.
Why? Because the point of intersection will be equally distant to the two points we used creating one of the perpendicular bisectors,
but also it's equally distant just shifting our focus to the other two points to the other two points.
And therefore all three points are equally distant.
Well, so we've seen some methods of characterizing a circle or determining a circle by various features.
And maybe returning now for a moment to the role of a circle and culture, here is a poem that captures some of the information that we've been discussing.
And this is a poem by Christopher Morley, who lived 1890 to 1957.
And Christopher Morley, he's a poet and also, by the way, he's famous for, or actually he's not famous for this, but it's a fact that his father, Frank Morley,
was a mathematician at Haverford College who actually proved an interesting theorem that's known as Morley's Miracle.
And that's a theorem we'll discuss in lecture five. So he's the son of a mathematician, but he wrote the following poem.
He said, a circle is a happy thing to be.
Think how the joyful perpendicular erected at the kiss of tangency must meet my central point, my avatar.
And lovely as I am, yet only three points are needed to determine me.
What a wonderful poem. I think maybe we can hope that Christopher Morley's reputation as a poet may rest on other poems as well, although that is a wonderful one.
Well, one of the mathematical strategies in general is to ask what features of a mathematical object somehow define that object.
And so let's turn to a practical use of a circle, and it brings up this kind of question.
Now, you may have noticed that manhole covers are circular, and you might ask yourself, why are manhole covers circular?
Why couldn't they be, for example, square? Why don't you have square manhole covers?
Well, if you think about it, there's a reason.
The reason is that if you had a square manhole cover and you picked up that manhole cover, you could turn it in such a way that it would fall through itself.
You see, because if you just tilted it and put the width of it, the short width on the diagonal, the manhole cover would fall down.
You'd have your manhole covers all down underneath the ground all the time. That would be a problem.
But so we can ask ourselves, we can see why a circle is used, because you see, no matter how it's situated, it can't fall through.
It has a little lip, and that's sufficient to make it not fall through.
But we can ask ourselves the question, are there other shapes that have constant width and therefore couldn't fall into a hole?
Or is the circular cover the only one that can do this?
Well, possibly surprisingly, the answer is that indeed there are other shapes that have constant width and aren't circles.
They are constant width, but are not circles. Now, this is really rather interesting.
So let me construct for you an example that has this property of constant width, but not being a circle.
All we do is we can start with an equilateral triangle and take one of the vertices of that equilateral triangle and just make a circle segment that goes between the other two points of the equilateral triangle.
And then shift our position to the other vertex of the equilateral triangle and make that same kind of an arc and the same thing for the third one,
so that we've really sort of puffed out the equilateral triangle to have three curved edges.
Now, that shape, interestingly, has a constant width.
And here we can see in this graphic how we can take that shape and rotate it around and that the parallel lines that embrace that object are always at a constant distance.
Namely, the distance of the length of the side of that equilateral triangle.
So what that means is that we could use such a shaped object as a manhole cover.
And I'm sort of hoping that we'll see new shapes of manhole covers come into vogue like this shape. That would be very attractive for our streets.
But anyway, meanwhile, we'll see that having constant width is not a sufficient condition to determine that our object is a circle.
That's interesting. And by the way, there are other shapes with that constant width property.
However, surprisingly, there are alternative methods of determining a circle that are other than just the set of all points that are equally distant from one fixed point.
And in fact, we can make a circle using two points in a very interesting way to create a circle that's known as an Apollonian circle.
And this is the way it works. That we take two fixed points and let's call them P and Q.
And then we take a fixed ratio of distances between those two points.
And so in talking about it, I'll talk about all the points that are twice as far from P as they are from Q.
Twice as far from P as they are from Q.
And let's see what those points make. And I'll tell you the answer is that they form a circle.
So here's how we're going to, first of all, let's see that that is the case.
Okay, so we have points P and Q. First of all, notice that there's got to be one point that is between P and Q that's twice as far from P as from Q.
In other words, it's the point that's two thirds of the way between P and Q.
And there's another point on the line that contains P and Q, namely the point where we go from P to Q and then we go the same distance further.
That's another point that also has the property that it's twice as far from P as it is from Q.
But there are many other points that have that property and we can see some here.
For example, if we move up a little bit and over, we'll see that here's a point that's twice as far to P as it is from Q.
And here's another one twice as far from P as it is from Q and so on.
And in fact, if we just draw all of those points, we see that in fact it does look like a circle.
Now, I haven't shown you why it's a circle yet, but it looks at least like a circle and indeed it is a circle.
Well, let's try to think about why such a thing would actually be a circle.
Well, here's the way to look at it.
Suppose we have a particular point, let's say X, that is twice as far from P as it is from Q.
Then what we're going to do is bisect the angle between P to X and X to Q. Let's bisect that angle.
That bisected angle is going to hit at exactly the point that's two-thirds of the way between P and Q.
And the reason for that is that if you take any triangle whatsoever and you bisect an angle of the triangle,
then the point at which it hits the opposite side divides the opposite side into lengths that are in exactly the same ratio
as the ratio of the two sides coming out from that same point.
So, since the distance from P to X is twice the distance from X to Q,
then the distance of the place where the bisector hits the line will be two to one also.
And therefore, it'll always hit at that exact point.
Now, if we do the same thing, bisect the exterior angle,
it will hit at the point that we also found on the same line that's twice as far, the same reasoning, applies.
Well, if we think about those bisectors, notice that if we think about the bisector of the line from P to X to Q,
and then the extending the line from P through X and bisecting that exterior angle,
notice that we've really bisected the entire straight line angle, the straight angle,
because we bisected half of it and we bisected the other half of it.
And therefore, that's a right angle.
By Faley's theorem, a right angle has to, if you have a right angle whose endpoints are two fixed points,
that right angle point must lie on the circle of which that segment is a diameter.
So that's why this process constructs a perfect circle.
And by the way, it's also true that you can use any proportion at all.
For example, you could use three to one, or you could use half to one.
It doesn't matter.
You can use any proportion as long as the distances from P to Q are in that fixed proportion,
instead of two to one, maybe three to one, we could, in fact, see that we create a perfect circle.
Well, so in this lecture, we were introduced to the circle.
And we saw some basic features of the circle.
We saw its radius, its diameter, and the circumference, and the famous constant pi
that relates the length of the diameter and the circumference of the circle.
And we saw that the distance from an external point to two points of tangency of the circle
are the same distance, and we'll use that fact in a future lecture.
We saw that any three points determine a circle, and we saw this Apollonian circle
that was determined by the ratios of distances to two fixed points.
And on the practical side, we saw that a belt around the earth can be comfortably loosened
and that manhole covers need not be circular.
Well, in the next lecture, we'll learn how to balance a triangle on a pin.
I'll see you then.
