Welcome back.
We've seen how the concept of the Euclidean plane
can be modified to create non-Euclidean geometries.
Well, another way to extend the idea of Euclidean geometry
is to consider the concept of Euclidean space
but in higher dimensions,
higher than the three dimensions which we immediately perceive around us.
I love to talk about the fourth dimension
because the fourth dimension to me illustrates
one of the most potent strategies for mathematical development
and for coming up with new ideas in general.
Namely, we start with what we know
and then we find a pattern in what we know
and then proceed by analogy to create a new idea.
And very often we find that this kind of extensions that we get
although completely abstract,
actually comes to have important applications in the real world.
That certainly is the case with the fourth dimension.
So let's think about the fourth dimension.
First of all, doesn't it sound sort of strange and weird?
People have talked about the fourth dimension in things like mystery,
fantasy stories and so on.
But in fact, it's a place that we can get to in a practical way
and the way we get to it is by thinking about what we actually know.
Thinking about familiar things so well
that we can extend the idea to beyond things that we know.
So let's first of all look around the room
and realize that when we look in the room that we have here,
it looks like it's three-dimensional.
That is our familiar concept of three-dimensional space because
and the way we think of the three comes into this room
in the sense that if we take any point in the room,
like let's say we have a fly flying in the room
and it's someplace and we want to say, where is that fly?
Well, one way we can get to the fly is we can say
if we start at a particular fixed point that we think of as the origin,
we can say, well, how far is it to the right or left?
How far is it front or back?
And how far is it up or down?
And so those three numbers determine a point in the room.
So that's the sense in which we have three,
the dimensionality of the room is three.
We have three degrees of freedom.
We can go this way or this way.
That's one direction we can go.
We can go front to back or we can go up to down.
Well, how about the fourth dimension?
The problem with the fourth dimension
is that there's no other place we can go.
We're sort of filled up already.
So how can we think about the fourth dimension?
Well, one way is to think about time as the fourth dimension.
And in fact, time has been used as a fourth dimension in physics
when we think about the space-time continuum.
But the problem with time is that it has a defect.
Time goes in only one direction.
And so what we're going to be talking about
for most of this lecture is whether we can think about
a geometric four-dimensional space
in which every direction has equal status
with every other dimension.
But let me tell you how it is that time can be viewed
as the fourth dimension.
And in fact, all of us think about the fourth dimension
every single day.
Here's how.
Think about what you have done today.
All the different places that you went.
So in your mind, you have a concept of today.
Well, you were someplace, and then you were someplace else,
and then you were someplace else.
That entire concept is really a four-dimensional idea
because for every point in time, you have an entire world.
And so therefore, you put those worlds together,
one for every moment of time, and you get the fourth dimension.
So the fourth dimension, it's a wonderful place to visit,
and we're going to visit it during this lecture today.
There's one way to think about the fourth dimension
is to imagine starting with an unfamiliar world
but that's simpler instead of an unfamiliar world
that's more complicated.
The fourth dimension is unfamiliar and more complicated.
It's unfamiliar because we're used to three dimensions,
and it's more complicated because they're four instead of three.
But we could instead think about a two-dimensional world,
and a two-dimensional world is a world that is...
it's unfamiliar because we're not used to living
in two-dimensional space,
and yet it's simpler than our three-dimensional world,
and so we can gain some insight
in how to think about an unfamiliar dimension
but at a lower level.
Now, we've actually done some of this
when we were thinking about the Euclidean plane
as a model for the universe
to do it by analogy
and thinking about creating a model for the entire universe,
but this concept of thinking about the two-dimensional world
and what it would be like to be a creature
on the two-dimensional world
was actually explored in a very famous book
by Edwin Abbott,
who in 1884 wrote the book Flatland,
A Romance of Many Dimensions,
and it was written by A-square,
actually a character in the book,
but it explored the idea of what it would be like
if you were only a two-dimensional creature
and you couldn't look up or down
and you had to just live in that two-dimensional world,
and you could find all sorts of interesting things.
For example, suppose that you have a...
here we have an example of something
that would happen in a two-dimensional world.
Suppose that you had a safe
that just consisted of this thick line
around an area in the plane.
Then if you put something inside the square,
there's no way that you could get that piece
of wonderful, valuable property out of the safe
because you'd have to slide it,
you weren't allowed to come out of the plane,
and therefore this is an idea about the...
what would happen in a two-dimensional world,
things would be completely safe
just by putting a little square around them.
So that's an idea of the two-dimensional world.
It's unfamiliar, but it's a little bit different,
and we'll come back to that picture in a few minutes.
Well, how are we going to create
the concept of the fourth dimension?
The best way to do it is to start thinking about
the dimensions that we are familiar with,
and in particular, starting with the simplest dimensions
that we're familiar with.
So we have the three-dimensional space.
What is a two-dimensional world?
Well, a two-dimensional space,
that's what we've been talking about
for most of this course is just the plane,
just a flat, infinitely extended plane.
But we could even go lower than that.
There's a one-dimensional world,
which is just a straight line.
That's a one-dimensional world,
and we can even go lower than that.
We can go down to a zero-dimensional space.
A zero-dimensional space is just a single point
because if a zero-dimensional space has no degrees of freedom,
you don't need any information to know where you are
if you're in zero-dimensional space.
If you lived in zero-dimensional space,
you'd be home by now.
You'd never miss a party because you're there.
There's only one place in zero-dimensional space.
But now we have these different examples of dimensional spaces,
and we can then see the connection
among those different spaces
to transport us up to the fourth dimension.
So here's how we do it.
If we take zero-dimensional space
and we think about putting copies of it,
one copy for every point on the real line,
then those stack up together
to create the one-dimensional real line.
Likewise, if we take a one-dimensional real line
and we stack them up,
we get the plane.
So the plane is one copy for every real number, actually,
of a line.
And notice they don't hit each other.
Each copy doesn't hit any other copy,
but they line up neatly to create the flat plane.
How do we create three-dimensional space?
Well, we create three-dimensional space
by taking a flat plane, a two-dimensional plane,
and stacking copies of this two-dimensional plane
on top of one another.
They don't touch each other,
but they just are one for every real number,
and they fill up this entire room.
So we can think about this familiar room
in perhaps a slightly unfamiliar way,
namely thinking of it as a stack of two-dimensional spaces.
Now, the reason for doing this
is that we are now seeing the connections between 0 to 1,
between 1 to 2, stack them up,
between 2 and 3, we stack them up,
and therefore we know what the pattern is,
and we say, can we extend the pattern?
Well, the pattern is that we said
we just take whatever dimension we're in,
and we take one copy for every real number
and stack them on top of each other
to get the next dimension.
So let's just take three-dimensional space.
That's the room we live in,
and stack and take infinitely many copies
that don't touch each other and stack them up.
Oh, wait a minute.
Wait, there's a problem.
The problem is that when we try to stack
this other copy of the entire room,
the room's already full.
Unlike the case when we had the plane
and we put another copy that was disjoint from it,
didn't touch it.
When we have the whole room here,
it looks like we don't have a place to put it.
But we should not be deterred
by that kind of challenge.
Instead, what we're going to do is just
say, declare it so.
In other words, what we're going to do
is say, in our imaginations,
we can create
what we would get if it were possible
to take infinitely many disjoint copies
of this entire room
and put them next to each other.
The mantra for this lecture
is the word retreat,
because whenever we think about
something that we don't understand,
because it's in the fourth dimension,
we retreat back
to the third dimension and the second dimension
in order to develop the analogy
and to preserve the analogy.
So when we're talking about
this possibility of taking
different copies of this three-dimensional space
and stacking them on top of each other,
we always revert by analogy
to how two-dimensional spaces
relate to one another to create
three-dimensional space.
Okay, so here's what we're going to do.
Let's look
at some objects in the plane
and in three-dimensional space
in this stacking view
to see if we can transport
ourselves to the fourth dimension.
Okay, so let's, first of all,
look at this object.
Here we have parallel lines
drawn on a plane.
Now, I've just drawn five parallel
lines, but those five
are really representing the infinite
number of lines that stack up
to create the flat plane.
You see, I couldn't draw all of them,
so I just drew five representative ones.
And notice that I have some dots
on those lines, so I want you to look
at those dots and answer the question,
what is the object
that those dots are representing
if I had included
every one of the lines in the plane?
Well,
you can see that that object
is really just a circle, right?
It looks like a circle because
there's a point at the top, then two points,
and two points, and two points, and one point at the bottom.
So it really is a circle, although
I just saw how those points
interacted with
the five lines I drew.
Now, let's move on
to a representation of three-dimensional space.
Now, remember, three-dimensional space
we're thinking of it
as a stack of two-dimensional
spaces,
planes, a stack of them.
Now, once again,
I could represent it
because it's a familiar world in some sort of
three-dimensional way using perspective
or something like that, but I want to avoid that
because that's an option
I'm not going to have when I'm talking about
four-dimensional space.
So instead, what I'm going to do
is I'm just going to draw a representative
slice of three-dimensional space.
In other words, I'm thinking in my mind
I'm saying, okay, I'll take a two-dimensional slice
at this level, another two-dimensional
slice at this level, another two-dimensional slice
at this level, another one at this level,
and those
five slices are representative
slices of three-dimensional space.
Now,
in that, I have drawn
a, so we have this
representation that's rather odd
because each one is just represented
individually on the page,
and yet I have
to think in my mind that I'm putting them
on top of each other and they're assembled
to be levels in space.
Okay.
Now, I've drawn a
collection of points
at
each of these levels. So at level one
I have a point that's right there at the origin,
you see it?
And then at this next level, which I think of
as the half level,
I have two points.
And then at the
zero level,
I have two points that are wider apart.
At the minus one half level, I have two
points near together again, and at the minus
one level, I have a single point.
Now, I'm asking you,
what is the object in three-dimensional
space that those points
represent?
Well,
let's see if we can see
how this representation is going.
We're thinking that, in fact, each of these
axes
really refers to a plane
that's on top of one another,
and so we have one point on top, two
points, two points,
two points, one point,
and if we interpolate between them, we
get a circle
again.
So this is an unfamiliar representation
of a circle in
the familiar three-dimensional space.
Okay.
Now, let's go to
four-dimensional space.
Well, let's do exactly the same
thing that we've now done. In other words, represent
four-dimensional space as a stack
of three-dimensional spaces.
We have no problem in drawing that
because we just draw an axis
system that looks like three-dimensional space.
This is representing an entire three-dimensional
space at the one level,
and then we have this entire three-dimensional
space at the half level, and this entire
three-dimensional space at the zero level,
minus one half level, and minus one level.
And we're imagining that we have the same
things in between. For every real
number in between, we have other copies
of the entire space.
But you see, this is an abstraction, and there's
no difficulty in making this abstraction
that by analogy is exactly the same
as having these stacks of two-dimensional
spaces.
Now, here we have the same
challenge for you. We have a point
at the origin, then we have two points
at this level, one
half level, which is
a copy of three-dimensional space, and then two
points wider, two points narrower, and one
point at the bottom. What is that object?
Well, it's
an object in four-dimensional space.
But by analogy
to the way we represented that same circle,
both remember in the plane
where there was one point on each line
when we had five lines representing the plane.
We had one point, two points, two points,
two points, one point. It was a circle.
In the plane, when we had
a plane in three-dimensional space, it was
a plane, a plane, a plane, a plane, a plane.
We have one point, two points, two
points, two points, one point. That represented
a circle.
So now here in four-dimensional space,
we have one point, the point at the origin,
then we have two points, two
points, two points,
one point. It's
a circle because
by analogy we're creating once again
a view of a circle. Let's
look at one more object in
three-dimensional space in an unfamiliar way.
Suppose we have one
point at the origin again,
and then we have a circle,
smaller circle at the half level,
a bigger circle at the zero level,
a smaller circle at the minus
one half level, and a point at the
minus one level.
What is that object?
Well, here's ... Remember, we're trying
to imagine that that top
one level is a plane up here,
the half level is a plane here,
plane at the zero level, plane at the
minus half level, plane at the minus one level,
and so we have a point, a circle,
a bigger circle, a smaller circle,
and a point. So I hope that you guessed that that is a sphere. You could guess that it's
a sphere. Now, of course, by the way, you might even better guess would be to remember
that I'm from the University of Texas at Austin. And because I'm from the University
of Texas at Austin, when you have a point, a circle, a circle, a circle and a point,
that really is a football. So that's really what it is. But a sphere was a pretty good
guess. I say a sphere, you got full credit for a sphere. Okay, so now let's go to four
dimensional space and look at the same kind of a question. Supposed in four dimensional
space, we have a three dimensional space, three dimensional space, three dimensional
space. Suppose we have a point, a circle, a circle, a smaller circle and a point. What
is that? Well, it's by analogy. It's the same thing. It's a football or a sphere. You see,
it doesn't change just because it's in four dimensional space. Okay, so what we've done
is we've gained some familiarity with how to create objects in and view them in four
dimensional space. Well, there are some objects that exist in four dimensional space that
cannot exist in three dimensional space. And so let's undertake to create such an object.
Here's one. Suppose that we think about creating a two dimensional sphere in three dimensional
space. That's the set of points that are equidistant from the origin in three dimensional space.
What would that look like, that familiar object, and looked at from this unfamiliar perspective
of the slices? Well, at the one level, it would look like just a point, the north pole.
At the one half level, we would have a circle, a latitude circle. At the zero level, we'd
have sort of the equator circle of this sphere. At the minus one half level, we'd have a latitude
in the southern hemisphere. And then at the bottom, we'd have a single point. So drawn
in our slice diagram, we see it's a point, a circle, a bigger circle, a smaller circle
and a point. And we saw that before. That's the sphere. Well, what will a sphere in four
dimensional space look like? And this is then called a three sphere. By the way, a sphere
that's this set of points equidistant from the origin in three space is called a two
sphere. You might think it's a three sphere because it's three dimensional and that it
sits in three dimensional space. But it's called a two sphere because just as we talked
about before, if you actually lived right on that surface, you would imagine yourself
to live on something that approximates a Euclidean plane, a two dimensional space. And
so the two refers to the intrinsic dimension of the object rather than where it's sitting.
Okay, so a two sphere is the set of points equidistant from the origin in three dimensional
space. A three sphere is the set of points that are equidistant from the origin in four
dimensional space. So what does it look like? Well, by analogy, we once again look at our
slice diagram. At the top, we have just a single point. But at this half level, instead
of having a circle, remember, in the case of the depiction of this two dimensional sphere,
we had a circle around that center point. Well, then by analogy, in this diagram, we
have this sphere of a small sphere around that origin point at the half level. And
then we have a bigger sphere at the zero level, a smaller sphere at the minus one half level
and a point at the bottom. So this object, which is a point, a sphere, a sphere, a sphere,
a point, that actually has the local character of this room. It looks very much like this
room at every point. And in fact, that object called the three sphere is a good model for
the universe that has positive curvature and it's completely uniform, positive curvature.
That is constant positive curvature. And it could be a good model for the universe. And
in fact, when we talked at the very end of last lecture about how dodecahedrons can fill
up the, the, might be a good model for the, for the universe. Well, it turns out that
you can take dodecahedrons and take 120 of them that are exactly the same size and shape.
They're actually a little sort of puffed up and they will exactly fill this three dimensional
sphere. So that is the way, in fact, that you, you create this dodecahedral space where
you identify the edges together. You fill it up just as in the last lecture, we filled
up Euclidean space with cubes. Well, you can fill up this three sphere with 120 of these
dodecahedrons that just exactly fill it up. Okay, so let's return back to three, to four
dimensional space and see some intriguing things that we can do there that you, you couldn't
do in the regular world here. So here, let's try something else. Remember that we saw in,
in the plane that if we were a two dimensional creature that an, an object like this, which
we can think of as a safe, you see how, how, how much of a barrier it is, it would completely
enclose something inside it. But a three dimensional creature, that's me, I can just reach in and
pick up this valuable thing, which may be, for example, a mathematics book. See, so I
can, I can lift it, I can go into the center of that and just lift it out, lift it out.
And I have stolen this valuable mathematics book from it. And I could, I could pick it
up and then move it out and move it outside. And then it would just disappear from the
point of view of somebody living on this plane, disappear and then reappear outside again.
So this would be a good way to, to take, you could become a thief, you see, in, in a nice,
nice strategy to, to get rich if you wanted a two dimensional mathematics book. But in
fact you can do the same analogous thing in four dimensions. So here's, here's the situation.
Suppose that we have an iron safe right in front of us here. And it's at the zero level
of three, it's the zero three dimensional copy of spaces that are making up four dimensional
space. And inside this locked iron safe, we have a mathematics book, a really three dimensional
one. If you're a four dimensional creature, can you take that book out without breaking
the boundary of the safe? Well, the answer is you do it by analogy. You always think
by analogy. You say to yourself, well, wait a minute, I saw how to do it in the case of
a two dimensional safe containing a two dimensional object inside. That from the perspective of
the three dimensional creature, there's nothing inhibiting me from lifting it straight up
into a different, you see, parallel level. Well, in the same way, if I think of this
four dimensional space here, if this safe only exists at the three dimensional slice,
there is nothing to prevent me from taking the book that's inside and just changing,
so to speak, its fourth coordinate. And when I change just its fourth coordinate, it never
has to break through the boundary of that safe. That safe doesn't hold it at all any
more than this line holds this object inside it. So we could easily steal something and
then bring it back down and put it down outside. It would disappear and then reappear outside.
So this is an example of something you can do in four dimensional space. Here's another
example. So four dimensional space is lots of fun. Here's an example of something you
can do. Here are two rings in four in three dimensional space that are linked together.
You see, they're linked together. You can't possibly pull them apart if you have these
two rings here. And there's no way to pull them apart in three dimensional space. But
suppose that you were a creature in four dimensional space. And these rings just live at the zero
level of four dimensional space. So they're sitting right here in this room. And remember,
the zero level of three dimensional space looks like this room. It's an entire three
dimensional world. And so when we have these two rings here, we can't get them apart in
this space. But what we can do is we can take this blue ring and we can just lift it straight
up into the fourth dimension that unhooks it. Then we can move it over at that higher
level of which is a three dimensional space. We can just slide it over and then slide it
back down. And we will have unlinked these two objects. So that shows that two two circles
like these these things cannot be linked if they just lie in one level of four dimensional
space. Well, but surprisingly, you can have linking in four dimensional space. But we
have to decide what two things will link one another in four dimensional space. Well,
the answer is that the things that are going to link each other in four dimensional space
can't be circles because as we saw, we could just take one up higher. So instead what links
in four dimensional space is really kind of weird. What it is is that you if if you you
have to do this by analogy, have to think by analogy in order to get to the fourth dimension.
So in this case, we saw that two circles link each other in three dimensional space. That
is, we can't get these apart in three dimensional space in two dimensional space. What links?
Well, a circle and two points link. You couldn't move two points and have one inside and one
outside a circle. You couldn't get them apart from each other. How do we get from two points
in the plane one inside and one outside of a circle? How do we move up to create two
linking things in three dimensional space? Well, the answer is that we take one of these
pairs of points and we connect it to make it into a circle. In the same way by analogy,
here's how we create two linking things in the fourth dimension. We have two linking
circles in the third dimension at just the zero level. And what we do is we complete
this circle to make it a two sphere by doing what we did before. We have a circle, smaller
circle, smaller circle point, circle, circle, smaller circle point. So this one becomes
the equator of a two sphere. And this circle then you can't lift it out because it'll
still link the higher latitude circles at the higher at the higher levels. And therefore
what links in four dimensional space surprisingly is a two sphere linking with a circle. And
those are the two linking kinds of objects in four dimensional space. Well, four dimensional
space is very interesting, but there's no reason that we have to stop at four dimensions.
We could create five dimensional spaces, six dimensional spaces, seven dimensional spaces,
and you may think this is just all abstract. But in fact, modern physical descriptions
of the world in modern physics string theory sometimes uses 11 dimensions. And they used
to talk about 23 dimensions. Well, so these abstractions have very definite practical
value. But they also have artistic value. Artists have embraced the idea of the fourth dimension.
And by the way, I don't know if you've watched these Olympics events where they had these
sort of stop motion, like the diving, you'd see the divers at all the different times.
Well that picture of all the different motions during the dive was really an example of a
four dimensional concept, because they were seeing all the different moments all in one
one concept. And artists have used that idea to create some wonderful depictions that capture
a concept of the fourth dimension, both as time and just as geometric things that we've
been talking about. There's a professor at the University of Texas at Austin, Linda Henderson,
who's written an actual book about art in the fourth dimension. And there's an exhibit
about that concept of art in the fourth dimension this fall. And in fact, I have now become
an art commentator. And so I'm supposed to give a tour of this special exhibit on art
that features the fourth dimension. So you'll have to wish me luck on that one. I don't know
if I'll, how that'll go. Well, in any case, in this lecture, we saw how to create a new
idea, starting with familiar objects, and then looking at them in unfamiliar ways, namely
as slices, so that we could propel ourselves beyond the familiar. And so when we started
with these lower dimensional spaces, we created the new idea of the fourth dimension. And
we constantly retreated back to the familiar dimensions in order to keep up their relationships
to one another by the analogy. In the next lecture, we're going to take the familiar
experience of seeing many repeating patterns in various designs on buildings and in architecture,
and we're going to look for patterns within the patterns. I'll see you then.
