Welcome back.
Our sense of beauty is centered on balance and harmony.
But sometimes things affect us through their departure from expected order.
People have lived with regular patterns for centuries, but only recently have we created
a new sort of jumbled pattern that straddles order and chaos.
These new kinds of patterns, without the traditional notion of rigid symmetry, are products of
the imagination with a haunting, unsettling beauty of their own.
The Penrose Tiling and Pinwheel Tiling are examples that help us explore a different
type of symmetry that paradoxically is at once orderly and chaotic.
As often happens, we find that an exploration driven by abstract mathematical intrigue ends
in ideas that have an uncanny ability to describe our real physical world, and also to lead
us to a new aesthetic sense.
In the last lecture, we explored rigid symmetries, but we can well ask whether there might be
a different kind of regularity in patterns, and so in this lecture we're going to identify
a different notion of order.
Let's look at some simple tiling to the plane and try to view them from a perspective that's
different from looking for the symmetries of the pattern.
So let's look at this simple example.
This is a square tiling of the plane.
Well, this tiling has the interesting property that we can group the tiles to create a larger
tile, a collection of larger tiles, you see grouping them like this, where these larger
tiles are each comprised of nine, composed of nine of these sub-tiles, and yet these
larger tiles create the identical pattern that we saw before except at a larger scale.
You see?
So this feature of covering the plane captures a different sense of order, so let's give
it a name.
We'll say that a pattern enjoys a symmetry of scale if collections of the tiles can be
grouped together to create supertiles of the same shape as the original tiles, and they
cover the plane in exactly the same way except that they're larger.
So now we have two concepts of symmetry.
We have the rigid symmetries that we discussed in the last lecture, but now we have this
new concept of a symmetry of scale.
Well, notice that this example of the symmetry of scale that we saw here, these squares, that
the square tiling also has lots of rigid symmetries, of the symmetries we talked about in the last
lecture.
You can take them and rotate them and reflect them and all sorts of things.
So we might ask ourselves the following question.
If is it the case that having a symmetry of scale is a more stringent kind of orderliness
than merely having translational symmetries, or might it, alternatively, might it be possible
that we could have a pattern that has a symmetry of scale and yet doesn't have any rigid symmetry
at all?
Well, this question was posed in the 1960s.
Surprisingly, it is possible to create tiling that have a symmetry of scale so you can group
them and create these bigger tiles and create exactly the same pattern again, and yet they
have no rigid symmetries at all.
And we'll see that when we look at these tiling, they have this sort of bizarre, chaotic kind
of appearance to them.
Well, let's start by developing a technique for creating patterns where we know that if
we create the pattern in this way, they will definitely get something that has a symmetry
of scale.
And so here's how it goes.
The technique is that we start with a particular object of a certain shape, and then we surround
it by copies identical to itself to create a larger object of a similar shape.
So let's go ahead and do this.
Suppose, for example, we start with a square, a little square.
Well, we can surround the little square by eight additional squares of exactly the same
size to create a larger square.
You see, this larger square is now composed of nine sub-squares, okay?
Now since we have a square, we can surround it by eight other squares of this same size.
Now these outside squares, of course, are too big.
We want to know that we can cover the plane of the small squares.
But we know that each of these squares being identical to the center one can be divided
up into nine copies of the original size squares.
So we can break them into these smaller pieces and see that now we have a large square that
is composed of a bunch of the small squares.
In fact, how many?
Well, this one had nine, and this one has nine times nine, 81 little squares.
Well, we could continue this forever, you see?
We could continue it forever, and if we did continue it forever, we could cover up the
entire plane.
So this is a method of taking an object and creating copies of it to make a larger plane.
Well, we actually, if you recall, we actually did this before.
You remember that in the second lecture that we talked about taking a triangle of any shape
at all and that we could surround that triangle by three additional copies of itself to create
a larger but similar triangle, similar in the sense of exactly the definition of similar
that we had in the second lecture, namely the same shape except bigger.
Remember that?
Then we could take that triangle, surround it by three other copies of itself, and divide
each of those into four pieces to create a yet larger, similar triangle that's divided
into 16 exactly equal sub-triangles, and we could repeat this process forever.
So for example, you could tile a bathroom with any shaped triangle, as we said before,
that would scale up.
Notice that what we've actually done here is we've developed a technique for creating
tiles that will definitely have a symmetry of scale.
Now why would this method of starting with a shape and then surrounding it by copies
of the same shape and size to get a bigger version of that same shape, and then carrying
on, why does that pattern definitely have a symmetry of scale?
Well the reason is because we can do exactly as we did with our square tiling.
Namely we can, after taking the first shape and surrounding it to get a larger version,
then we can surround it to get yet a larger version, and then we could just remember that
each of these larger, second-sized pieces could be just, we could ignore everything
inside them, and we would have the exact same pattern continuing, and therefore we'd have
exactly the same tiling of the entire plane, except with bigger tiles.
In other words, we just ignore the first step of our process, the little ones, and just
look at the second size of tiles, and that shows that those are, that this pattern will
have a symmetry of scale.
Okay, well now let's vary this process a little bit, because one, in fact, one of the most
fruitful ways to find new ideas is that we take an existing idea, something we've seen,
and we see whether we can change it just a little bit to create a new idea.
In fact, I often think it'd be great to think of revolutionary brand new ideas all the time,
but in reality, most of our thoughts come very close to thoughts that we've had before,
and I don't know if that's a sad observation, but I think it is something of an observation
about the limitation of our imaginations, but it does give us a chance to deliberately
create new ideas by deliberately setting out to vary an existing idea that we had before.
So let's apply this technique to the creation of tilings of the plane that have a symmetry
of scale, in particular.
Let's construct a tiling that starts with a triangle, but this time we won't start with
just any triangle and surround it by three other identical triangles.
Instead, this time we'll create an identical triangle made of five smaller identical triangles,
and then we'll start our process by starting with a very particular right triangle, and
so here we go.
Let's look at a particular right triangle.
Okay, so this is a right triangle that has particular dimensions to it.
It has sides one, two, and by the Pythagorean theorem, the hypotenuse of that right triangle
is the square root of five.
So this particular shaped triangle has the property that we can divide it into five
congruent triangles, each similar to the big triangle.
Now remember, any triangle could be divided into four sub-triangles that were congruent
to themselves by just connecting the midpoints of each of the three sides of the triangle,
but in this case, it has a very special property, namely, and this is the way we do it.
We say, suppose you go from the right angle of this triangle and you drop a perpendicular
to the hypotenuse, then that creates this little triangle over here, right?
Now this little triangle over here is similar to the whole triangle because it's a right
triangle and it shares an angle, and therefore it has a 90-degree angle and it has the same
angle as the big triangle, and therefore it's a similar triangle because the three angles
are the same.
So this is a similar triangle.
Now likewise, this remaining triangle is a similar triangle, and this remaining triangle
we can divide into four triangles.
If we did it the old-fashioned way, we would divide it into four triangles by taking the
midpoints of each of these sides of this remaining right triangle and just connecting
them up.
Now we make one little modification to that, and instead of connecting this midpoint to
this midpoint, we take this rectangle here and take the other diagonal to it.
So we can see then that each of these four triangles is exactly congruent to one another,
and they fill up this part of the triangle, but then we've got this triangle.
Well these triangles are all congruent to each other if this side is one and this side
is two, and we can see it because this side is the hypotenuse of this right triangle, and
this side here is two hypotenuses of these triangles, and therefore these triangles are
all identical to each other.
Well, then what we can do then is that we can use our technique for creating a tiling
of the plane that has a symmetry of scale, you see, and here's how we do it.
We start with a single triangle, and then we surround a right triangle of exactly these
dimensions, one, two, square root of five, and then what we do is we create this super
tile that we have here.
If we think of this as our original tile, then this is a super tile because it's created
out of exactly five copies of exactly the same size and shape that surround it to create
another similar triangle but of a bigger size.
Now we're ready to go.
We can actually continue the process because remember, we've learned the process.
The process was that if you could ever take a shape, either a triangle or a square, and
surround it by copies of itself to get a bigger version of exactly the same shape except
bigger, then you can go to town and just repeat the process over and over again.
So that's what we do here.
We take our original triangle, we surround it by four others to get a super tile that
has five copies of itself, and then we can surround it by four copies of itself to make
a five bigger tiles, which can be broken up into each one into five of the original size
tiles to make a super, super tile of size 25, 25 made up of exactly 25 of this original
shape tile, and we continue this forever, right?
We just continue growing, growing, growing, and we get a 125 tile, big triangle, and then
five times that, 625 tile, and then we carry on 3,125 tiles in a triangle that's going
to be a right triangle, that's a one, two, square root of five, similar to that triangle,
and it just continues on, okay.
Now, so the first thing that I want to do is to just look at this tiling.
Just look at it.
As we build it, we, of course, increase the number of tilings in it, but you might begin
to notice that as we increase the number of tiles, that what you see is that the tiling
begins to look increasingly chaotic.
It just looks like a jumble, and yet we know that in it, it's been constructed from this
very simple tiling process, started with a single small right triangle, and in fact,
if you look at various highlighted lines in these bigger tiles that we're creating, you
can see the pattern.
You can see how the pattern is actually constructed of smaller pieces.
In other words, you can see that in this big tile, this big triangle, it's made of five
smaller triangles, each of which are themselves made of five smaller triangles, and that grouping
continues until we get to that original little triangle that we had at the very middle.
So this pattern, first of all, just by the look of it, it looks strangely both, it looks
very chaotic when you just look at it, and yet we know that it has this kind of order
to it.
Well, this tiling is called the pinwheel tiling, and the pinwheel tiling, why does it have the
name pinwheel?
Well it has a special feature associated with the way it was constructed, and let me show
you this, that if you remember that it starts with a particular tile, so you put this one
tile down, now we surround it with four other tiles, and let's suppose that the first tile
is just horizontal with the bottom of the page, then notice that the second tile has
tilted a little bit, you see?
And then when we surround that with four more to get our 25 person tiling, we'll see that
it has tilted even more, and so on.
So in fact that it has this sort of spinning effect to it, it has a spinning effect.
Well this tiling, by the way, which is called the pinwheel tiling because of that spinning
effect, was actually invented by two mathematicians.
One is John Conway, whom we've met in the last couple of lectures, and also he's from
Princeton University, and then Charles Raiden, who's a friend of mine from the University
of Texas at Austin, and they created this pinwheel tiling in the 1990s, and it has some
really surprising features, but the basic feature that it has is that it has a symmetry
of scale because of the way that it was built up, but it has no rigid symmetry at all.
So let's see if we can understand that feature of the tiling.
So what we want to do is just make a couple of observations about the basic unit of this
thing, this five unit super tile that surrounds our first basic tile.
Let's just look at what happens and why we might expect that it has no symmetry, that's
a rigid symmetry, where we could take this pattern, shift it, and bring it exactly back
on itself.
So this is the way that we're going to start this analysis.
Suppose we thought about using symmetry as we did in the last lecture, that is we have
a pattern, in this case our, this five tile super tile, it's just this simple pattern,
and of course it's going to be extended over the whole plane, but let's just think of this
part right here.
And let's remember that a symmetry was a symmetry that is, that a symmetry, it consists of picking
up the pattern, moving it somewhere, and putting it down on itself so that everything exactly
coincides.
Well I want to make an observation about this particular pattern, namely suppose that we
look at this original triangle, the sort of center triangle that we started with, and
we imagine that we move it to some other location.
So we picked up the pattern, and we're moving it to some location.
Well the first thing that I want to observe is that when we move it, we have to move it
back to exactly the same one of the five tiles that make up these five tile groups that eventually
cover up the whole plane, because look what happens if I try to move this triangle to one
of the other triangles.
For example suppose that I flip this over, and I try to move it right to this triangle
here.
Well then look, this line is crossing, it doesn't match up.
So the whole pattern would definitely not match up, because right here among these five,
it doesn't match up.
And if you do exactly the same thing for trying to move it to any one of the other four positions,
you'll see that there are some crossings.
Well what does that mean?
That means that if we imagine that there were some shift, some symmetry of our final pinwheel
tiling, then if we think about that original little triangle which sits in a group of five,
you see it sits in a group of five, then it would have to be moved if there were a symmetry,
it would have to move to some other location.
Wherever it moves, it's in a five-unit supertile, because the whole thing has a symmetry of scale.
So they're five-unit supertiles that cover up the whole plane, and that little tile has
to go into some five-unit supertile.
Well it can't go to any location within that five-unit supertile except for its same relative
location.
In other words, it couldn't go to the pointed end, it couldn't go to the other side.
It has to go to that middle triangle, because otherwise we'd already have lines crossing,
the patterns wouldn't match up.
But that simple observation really tells you that you've got no choice about where a five-unit
supertile goes.
It has to go to another five-unit supertile exactly, right?
But now let's go one step higher.
If we look at the 25-unit super supertiles, you see, well the five-unit supertile that's
sort of in the center position has to go to some complete five-unit tile, supertile,
and so it has to go relative to whatever 25-unit super supertile it's in, it has to go to that
same relative position, you see?
So in fact, at every single level, every single supertile, super super tile, super super
super tile, and so on, has to go to the same relative position within the one more super
into the tiles.
So the effect of this is that the argument says that eventually if you thought you had
any symmetry, then the original tile and its destination would both lie within one super
super super super super super tile, and yet then you'd have a motion of that tiling that
would take a super tile not exactly to a super tile, and that can't be.
So the argument then tells us that there can be no rigid symmetries of the pinwheel tiling.
So this tiling then, this construction gives us an aperiodic tiling.
So in this lecture, we're using the A to mean not.
A periodic means not periodic, and it's quite striking because, and in fact, when I just
look at this, it makes me wonder about whether the notion of beauty that we're accustomed
to could be expanded to include a concept of symmetry of scale as having some sort of
an aesthetic appeal.
And in fact, I think that when you look at this grouping, if you just look at a tile,
you can't see the groupings obviously, but you can accentuate them so that you can see
the groupings in an interesting way.
And in fact, sometimes by making these groupings obvious, you can create something that's quite
attractive.
In fact, there's an architect in Australia who's used this pinwheel tiling as part of
a complex of buildings.
And look, you can see this picture.
And I frankly find this really quite attractive.
You can see that the groupings of the triangles are accentuated by the architectural devices
that make them stand out.
And I really do find it beautiful.
And somehow it's an example of melding two concepts of symmetry.
One is a really ancient one, and another one is quite a modern one.
I have to tell you that a few years ago, we were remodeling our house, and so I thought
it would be really neat to have an aperiodic tiling in our bathroom with the pinwheel
tiling.
It was made by my friend and so on.
And so wouldn't that be neat?
Well, it was a little hard to envision of what it would actually look like on the floor,
but fortunately, I have a colleague in the department who had already done exactly the
same thing in his bathroom.
He went there.
So we went over to it and looked at the bathroom, and it was interesting.
It was interesting, but I wouldn't really call it attractive.
So after some reflection, we now have a standard basket we've batted in the bathroom that's
chock full of periodic symmetries that's really very attractive.
But the pinwheel tiling is, anyway, very interesting to look at.
The pinwheel tiling actually isn't the most famous of the non-periodic tiling, the aperiodic
tiling.
In fact, the most famous one, it's a whole collection of tiling that were created by
the mathematical physicist, Sir Roger Penrose.
And they're called the Penrose tiling, and they're constructed a little bit differently
because they use two different shapes of tiles.
So far, we've just talked about tiling that were made of one shape of tile that's duplicated.
But the Penrose tiling are made of two different shapes of tiles, and they fit together to
create wonderful patterns.
Well, the two Penrose tiling, they can be assembled in many different ways to construct
a whole bunch of different patterns, but for any pattern that you construct with these
two tiles, you can prove that there is no rigid motion that takes one to the other.
So these are tiling that, no matter how you put them together, they do not have a rigid
symmetry.
But they do have some form of a symmetry of scale.
It's not the exact symmetry of scale that we saw before, like with the right triangle
where you literally got a right triangle by grouping tiles together.
But it's an abstraction of that concept, and in fact, it's an abstraction very much like
a hexagon pattern.
Because you look at a standard hexagon pattern in the plane, then if you group hexagons,
you can group them so they look almost like big hexagons, but they're a little bumpy on
the edges because they're made of little hexagons.
But nevertheless, morally speaking, they have a symmetry of scale.
So we have to extend our concept of symmetry of scale, and it's in that sense that the
Penrose tiles also have a symmetry of scale.
But the Penrose tiles look a little bit more orderly than the Pinwheel tilings because every
tile in the Penrose tile is in one of only 10 orientations in the plane, while the triangles
of the Pinwheel tilings have infinitely many different orientations.
That's that Pinwheel effect that I was talking about.
But the Penrose tiles have a stronger property than the Pinwheel tilings, namely that the
Penrose tilings have the property that every possible way of assembling them gives you
an aperiodic tiling, whereas you could take two, one, two, square root of five triangles,
right triangles.
It's easy to make a periodic tiling, just make a little brick by putting them together
and then brick up the plane in some very symmetrical way.
So the Penrose tilings and the Pinwheel tiling both have this aperiodicity property.
Well they also have another feature in common, which is that although there's no rigid symmetry
that takes the whole pattern to itself, you can take any finite size region, even a very
large one, and you can shift it and it'll fit exactly into some other large finite region.
Well in the case of the Pinwheel tiling, by the way, it's completely obvious why that's
true if you think about it for just a minute, because remember the Pinwheel tiling is created
of super, super, super tiles, and there are a whole bunch of these super, super, super
tiles all over the place.
So if you wanted to take a big area around, say, the origin point, you could go to a super,
super, super, super, some number of tiles and you'd find a huge tile that it's inside.
Well then, in the distant land, there's another copy of that exact same super, super, super,
super tile, many of them all over the whole plane, and so you could take your original
one and move it to that location.
So they'd all fit up exactly perfectly, but then outside of it, it'd be chaos.
Everything goes haywire.
You've got all sorts of mess outside there.
In any case, the Penwheel tiling are the most famous of all periodic tiling in the plane,
and it's famous both for its mathematical and artistic character, but it also was the
center of a legal controversy about the use of proprietary intellectual property.
And it turns out that the Penwheel tiling made a brief appearance in British bathrooms
when Kleenex quilted toilet paper used the pattern in its design.
However, Sir Roger Penrose was not amused, and he sued Kimberly-Clark for copyright infringement.
On the web, you can find that his spokesman, David Bradley, stated the case in a very firm
way.
He said,
So often we read of very large companies riding roughshod over small businesses or individuals,
but when it comes to the population of Great Britain being invited by a multinational to
wipe their bottoms on what appears to be the work of a knight of the realm without his
permission, then a last stand must be made.
Well, Kimberly-Clark capitulated, and the toilet tissues no longer have the mathematical
intrigue that would bring aperiodic tilings into the everyday lives of British households.
Well, often ideas that are mathematically intriguing are later found to describe nature,
and in the case of aperiodic tilings, that is the case.
There seems to be a connection with a class of materials called quasi-crystals.
In 1984, scientists noticed that there was a similarity between the diffraction pattern
in a quasi-crystal and a picture of the Penrose tiling.
So maybe aperiodic tilings will be another concept in a long line, by the way, of mathematical
ideas that at first appear rare and exotic, and then later are seen to be commonplace
and powerfully descriptive of nature.
And by the way, I should also say that although I describe this as a modern invention, it
may be that aperiodic tilings were discovered by Islamic artists as early as the 12th century.
There are some ancient patterns that appear to use these tessellations on wall decorations
that emphasize a five-fold symmetry.
And remember we saw last time you can't literally have a five-fold symmetry, but the Penrose
tilings have sort of a statistical five or ten-fold symmetry.
Well, there's also no reason we have to restrict ourselves to two dimensions.
We'll close this lecture by looking at an image of a three-dimensional version of the
aperiodic pinwheel tiling.
Doesn't it?
It really looks like a chaotic jumble.
But in fact, it has a symmetry of scale in three dimensions.
Well, the decorative patterns we see on walls, floors, carpets, quilts, and freezes led us
to develop the mathematical ideas of rigid symmetries in the last lecture.
And in this lecture, it led to the idea of symmetry of scale.
The pinwheel tiling and Penrose's tilings are called aperiodic tilings because they
enjoy the regularity of having a symmetry of scale without having any rigid symmetry.
These aperiodic tilings lead to challenges both mathematical and aesthetic.
Well, in the next lecture, we're going to look at images that have infinite complexity,
namely fractals.
I'll see you then.
