Lecture 16 Inferno from Dante's Divine Comedy
This lecture is about Dante's Divine Comedy, which is by virtually universal consensus,
the greatest medieval poem in the Western world.
T.S. Eliot said about it that he said Dante and Shakespeare divide the world between them
and there is no third.
Last time we were in Europe was three to five hundred years ago when we did Beowulf.
Since then a lot has happened in Europe.
Europe had absorbed the Germanic immigration and had created the High Middle Ages, which
has all the familiar things that we know, Gothic cathedrals, St. Thomas Aquinas, the
New Universities, the rise of cities and trade and an emerging money economy.
One of its greatest achievements however still remains this poem, which has engaged some
of the greatest minds in the Western tradition.
Typically some scholar will spend his whole lifetime studying some little facet of this
work and at the end of his lifetime produce a monograph, which explicates one little part
of that poem.
The poem sums up a fantastic amount of medieval learning.
I sometimes tell my students that if they have a divine comedy with a good index or
a concordance you can look up almost anything you want to know about what the Middle Ages
thought about anything, look it up and find what's in Dante's Divine Comedy about it
and have a pretty good idea of what the Middle Ages knew in about the year thirteen hundred.
And then stunningly it was not written in Latin for a learned audience, it was written
in Italian, so it was intended for a popular audience.
The story of the Divine Comedy is relatively simple.
There's a pilgrim who's lost in the woods of error and he can see that there's a hill
off there which if he could get to the top of the hill he could see where the path was
and find his way back.
But he's prevented from getting to the top of that hill by three beasts who keep blocking
his way every time he tries to move they move and keep blocking him so they can't get to
the top of that hill.
He's rescued from this dilemma by the shade of Virgil, the Roman poet whose Aeneid we
looked at back in Lecture 8 and he says he's been assigned to take the pilgrim on a roundabout
way that will restore him to the right path and it does in fact turn out to be a very
roundabout way because his way goes through hell, through purgatory and heaven.
Virgil himself guides the pilgrim through the first two and Beatrice, Dante's visionary
and spiritual lady takes him through heaven.
In the first book, the Inferno which will be our focus in this lecture, Virgil and
the pilgrim descend through the nine circles of hell to the very center of the earth.
In the purgatorio they climb the nine terraces of Mount Purgatory at the top of which is
the Garden of Eden.
There Beatrice joins them and Virgil disappears.
Beatrice leads him through the nine spheres of heaven.
The third book, the Paradiso ends when they enter the Empyrean and the pilgrim is granted
the ultimate bliss of a vision of God.
On this level, the poem describes a fantastic journey like parts of the Odyssey or parts
of the Aeneid and like there is it includes a visit to the underworld.
As a fantastic journey, it's a good story.
Physically, the hell is described in this poem is a series of concentric circles spiraling
down to the very center of the earth.
When they get to the sixth circle in canto 11 of the 34 that make up this first book,
Virgil explains the organization of the place of the pilgrim.
The pilgrim says, tell me how this is organized, what tell me how this is all arranged.
Virgil tells the pilgrim that hell's topography corresponds to the categories of evil as they're
defined by Aristotle, the Greek philosopher in his ethics.
The three main divisions of hell are incontinence, violence and fraud, which probably also correspond
to those three beasts that were blocking the pilgrim's way at the beginning of the poem.
Circles two, three and four which are near the top of hell and hence the relatively less
serious sins are the sins of incontinence.
That is the sins of people who lacked control over their own impulses and this includes
categories like the lustful, the gluttonous, misers and spendthrifts.
Circle seven contains the violent against themselves, against nature, against God and
against their neighbors.
That is, violence is further subdivided into four categories in circle seven.
Circles eight and nine contain the fraudulent.
Fraud is the lowest and worst category of sin in Aristotle's ethics and so it's put
at the very bottom here.
Those who are guilty of this sin are kept in little separate pockets or troughs beginning
with those who deceived others who had no particular reason to trust them, so thieves
and flatterers and hypocrites are here.
There are other categories a little bit worse of those people who betrayed people who did
have special reason to trust them.
Here are people who betrayed kinsmen or hosts or benefactors and then finally at the very
bottom of hell we get down to the icy floor of hell itself which contains, for Dante at
any rate, the three prototypal betrayers of church and state.
Judas Iscariot, the betrayer of Christ and Brutus and Cassius who led the assassination
against Julius Caesar, each one of whom is in one of the three heads of Satan and is
kind of chewed on ruminatively forever and ever and ever.
Satan himself is a gigantic three-headed figure who's buried in ice up to his waist.
So one interesting thing we notice already about this poem that is, although this is
the most Christian of poems, hell's structure is Aristotelian.
There is some little additional philosophical help that Dante got from Cicero and Virgil,
but it is essentially an Aristotelian classification of sins.
We also notice interestingly that in every circle of hell Christians and pagans will
be put together in the same circles, punished for the same sins in the same way.
The only exceptions to this Aristotelian rule are circles one and six.
Circle one contains the virtuous pagans, that is those who led exemplary lives but who were
born before the birth of Christ and thus never had a chance to know Christ.
And the heretics are in circle six.
Particularly in circle six, heretics, people who deny the immortality of the soul.
These are specifically Christian categories.
There's no way that Aristotle could have had categories like a virtuous pagans or heresy.
But otherwise, the scale of judgment in hell is more philosophical and ethical than it
is theological.
You might have expected Dante being the good Catholic Christian that he was, that he would
have organized hell according to the seven deadly sins, but he didn't.
He organized it according to Aristotle.
And that's one reason, of course, why Dante can have as the pilgrim's guide Virgil.
Because for Dante, Virgil was kind of a supreme representative of human reason and in the poem
the nature of evil can be understood by reason without the help of Christian revelation.
Therefore Virgil can make a perfect guide through the nine circles of hell, through
the nine terraces of purgatory, and only when they get to heaven does Beatrice have to take
over his function.
The poem is, as I already suggested, I guess, is intellectually rich, but beyond that it
is also stunningly good poetry.
Dante is going to take us to places that we've never seen before, places that we've
never imagined before.
And what he wants to do is when he takes us to these places, he wants us to see and hear
and taste and touch and smell those landscapes and the figures in them.
And so he uses similes.
Here's another one of those descendants of the great epic similes that were invented
by Homer years and years before.
He uses similes comparing the things that we're seeing to things that we do understand
to help us see and feel and touch and taste what we're looking at.
So in just a couple of examples, in the seventh circle, there are a group of sinners who meet
the pilgrim and Virgil.
The sinners are on a burning plane, and they stare at the visitors, the poet says, the
way people look at each other at dusk under a new moon, squinting the way an old tailor
does at the eye of his needle.
In the seventh pouch of the eighth circle, false counselors are clothed in flames so
that standing above them on the ledge above them and looking down into their circle is
like the poet says, being a peasant on a hillside in summer looking down at a valley
full of fireflies.
Great giants stand in a circle around the first ring in the ninth circle, and looking
up at one, the poet says, is like looking up at a great leaning tower of Bologna, which
leans toward you, and if the clouds are going the other direction, it makes it look as though
the tower is falling in on one.
And that impression is enhanced when one giant really bends down to pick them up and sets
them down on the floor of the next circle.
A pair of lovers in the second circle is world round and round in a dark wind, and when the
pilgrim asks to speak to two of them, they come floating down, the poet says, like doves
with their wings outspread coming toward their nests.
In the fifth pocket of the eighth circle, those in public office who embezzled and got
rich through graft are put in a river of boiling pitch, and we're told that every so often
they try to arc out of the pitch just to give themselves a moment's relief from the
heat, and they look, the poet says, like dolphins arching up out of the water.
The sound of lamentation in Hell's anti-chamber is the sound of sand caught in a whirlwind.
The suicide souls in the seventh circle are trapped within trees, and they can only speak
when someone tears off a branch, and then their voice as the poet says sounds like the
sap that fizzes out of a green log when you throw it into a fire.
There are hundreds or maybe even thousands of these similes in the poem, which is one
reason why artists, so many artists have had to go at painting or drawing Dante's Hell.
Gustav de Reyes are simply the most famous.
There are many, many other artists who've had a shot at portraying Dante's Hell.
Within these fantastic landscapes, there are some fascinating characters.
Two of the most interesting, and the best known, I suppose, are Paolo and Francesca
in circle two.
Circle two is a circle of the lustful, those people who were carried away by passion into
doing something that they knew they shouldn't be doing.
They're near the top of Hell, so that suggests this is not the worst of sins, and they're
with all the other sinners who showed a lack of self-control.
In this circle, the pilgrim and Virgil find a dark wind whirling the lovers in a huge
circle inside the ledge.
We're reminded that in Dante's Hell, the state of the lost souls isn't mere punishment,
but in some ways every punishment is kind of an expression of the sin itself.
Here those who abandon themselves to passion and life are swept around by a dark wind,
which is of course a symbol of that passion itself.
We recognize some of the characters in this circle from some of our earlier lectures.
Dito is there, Helen of Troy is there, and Paris is there, among others.
The pilgrim watching these lovers whirl around asks if he can speak to any of them, and Virgil
says yes, and he calls out to a pair who come floating down like doves with their wings
outspread in that simile that we mentioned just a moment ago.
They are Paolo and Francesca, lovers from Rimini, whom Dante's first readers would
have remembered because they were historical figures, and their story was fairly recent
when Dante wrote this poem and was of course widely known.
Both were married, Francesca to Paolo's elder brother, and their affair had lasted quite
a few years until they were caught and flagrante by Francesca's husband who immediately killed
them both.
Francesca, once they've landed, Francesca does all the talking.
She thanks the pilgrim for pitying them, and she tells the story about how she and Paolo
became lovers.
They were alone, she said, reading a romance about Lancelot.
When they reach the moment in the story when Lancelot first kisses Guinevere, they both
look up from her book, and as she says their eyes met, and as she famously puts it, that
day we read no further.
It's a really wonderful story in which Francesca presents herself, not as a creature of lust,
but as a kind of warm-hearted woman who really had no choice but to return Paolo's love.
Besides, she says, everything conspired against them.
They were alone, they didn't know the strength of their desire, they didn't know the dangers
of the book they were reading, so how could she help it yield?
The pilgrim is so touched by her story that he faints when she gets to the end of it,
and he wakes up in the next circle, he doesn't even know how he got there.
So this is a rich episode, and after we read this, we ask ourselves the question, is Francesca
a good woman who's damned for one moment of understandable weakness, or is she simply
a woman who can tell a good story, a story which refuses to see a flaw in everybody else
other than herself, and who blames everyone else and everything else for what happened?
She doesn't tell the pilgrim, Dante's readers would have known this, that she and Paolo
were both married, nor does she explain why they were alone, or why they happened to be
reading that of all books.
She isn't in the worst place in hell, and she does note with some satisfaction that
there's a place already being saved for her husband much, much lower down.
He's going to wind up in the ninth circle, or those who are punished, who are treacherous
against relatives, in this case he was treacherous against both a wife and a brother.
But she is in hell, it may be a high place in hell, but she is in hell.
Adulterous love is socially disruptive, and is morally wrong, and it is the result of
passion overcoming reason.
Even though the pilgrim faints in sympathy, and Francesca herself seems to be happy to
have had a heart so gentle that love could live in it.
She and Paolo will be together forever, which is both a triumph of their love, and a bitter
reminder that each one is there because of the other one, it's an amazing performance
by Dante the poet.
And this happens over and over again in the poem.
Many of the characters we meet in hell have stories to tell, and many of them seem to
us, as they do to the pilgrim, admirable, or at least justified in what they did.
If you want some other examples, consider Ulysses' story in Canto XXVI, or Pierre de
Levinia's story in Canto XIII, or Ferenadas' in X for some similar examples.
Some critics, and quite a few of my students over the years, have suggested the kind of
sympathy that Dante manages to evoke for these characters works against the moral or Christian
meanings of the poem, but our sympathy for someone like Paolo and Francesca works against
what should be our theological or moral condemnation of them.
I don't think that's quite right, but in order to explain why it isn't right, we have
to take a closer look at what kind of poem this is.
It's really in effect many kinds of poems rolled into one.
It is a kind of epic, dealing with serious issues, and it does range from heaven to hell.
Insofar as it is an epic, however, it redefines the epic hero, not as a military warrior,
but as a spiritual pilgrim.
It's also a comedy, that's what Dante himself called it, according to a medieval definition,
since it deals with ordinary people, is written in a mixed style, and it has a happy ending.
Mixed style means it's not written in the grand style, but Homer wrote his epics.
It's also a story of a fantastic journey, and as we noted, it's also a kind of poetic
encyclopedia containing much of what the medieval period knew and believed about many things.
Much of this material gets worked into the poem in conversation, the pilgrim with Virgil
or the pilgrim with some of the sinners as they meet along the way, which means that
all that other material is dramatically introduced and it doesn't bog down the narrative.
But in order to get in everything he wanted into this poem, Dante also made the poem
an allegory, which an allegory is really an extended metaphor in which everything inside
the narrative is equated with something outside it.
And from here on out, I'm going to recommend a book that is very good on this subject,
which I'll be following in part in the next few minutes by Thomas Bergen called Dante's
Divine Comedy.
Medieval theologians had become very adept at reading the Bible in allegorical ways in
order to get at all of its meanings.
So that when Jerusalem is mentioned anywhere in the Bible, medieval theologians had come
to understand that it functions only literally as a city in Judah.
On other levels, when Jerusalem is mentioned, it could mean the church, it could mean the
heavenly city of Zion, or it could mean the believing soul.
In Dante's case, as we read the poem, we keep coming across moments when the poet
stops us to say, there's more going on here than meets the eye if the discerning reader
knows how to get at it, reminding us he is writing allegory.
There is something allegorical going on here.
And in a letter he wrote to a patron while he was writing the Divine Comedy, he says
that only the literal level has to do with the state of souls after death.
The poem can mean many other things, including what sin does to the sinner in this life,
which suggests that on one level, we can put ourselves in hell spiritually or psychologically
the moment that we give way to sin, which disrupts not only our relationship with God,
but with the entire universe.
So one of the reasons we suspect why Dante made his hell and purgatory in heaven so concrete
and physical is to give it that kind of literal level that Jerusalem has in the example we
used just a moment ago.
A journey to hell, to purgatory, and to heaven would have been considered literally and factually
possible for a believing Christian like Dante, even though he would have been the first to
admit that he's imaginatively creating what these places look like.
But the poem needs a literal level if the allegory is going to work, and that's I think
why he worked so hard to make us feel and see and touch and smell the places that we
visit with him.
And it's also I think why he peeples his realms with historical figures like Paolo and Francesca
since they have a literal reality that can ground his allegory.
In simple medieval allegory, we get characters who are called shame or loyalty or courage
or faith, and they have to behave exactly like the abstractions that they are.
Because they are purely allegorical, they have no independent life outside the abstractions
they represent.
Dante doesn't use this kind of character in his allegory.
He has no one called lust or heresy or suicide.
Instead we get characters like Francesca Durimini, Ferenata, and Pierre de la Vigne.
Historical figures who make his allegorical point.
And practice can be risky.
A character named Lust can only behave like the abstraction, but Francesca is a real
person with a life of her own outside what she represents, so she can be seen by us as
an innocent victim, as a soul betrayed by circumstance, as a tragic heroine, as an incarnation of
courtly love, all of which might blur just a little bit her theological point.
It also grounds the poem, giving it a literal level more like the historical and physical
city of Jerusalem in the example we used a moment ago, and the characters do make the
poem far richer and more interesting than it would be without them.
Anyway, all of the characters in the book are placed by the topography of hell.
Where an individual sinner is and what's happening to him can show what it's like to be trapped
by an individual sin without the strength or desire to escape from it.
Insofar as we're Christians, or even insofar as we're human beings, we can react to any
particular sinner with horror or repugnance or contempt, reactions which the pilgrim has
to various sinners that he meets along the way.
They get more serious as he gets deeper into hell and the sins get uglier.
But we can also react with compassion or sympathy or pity.
We can understand Francesca's feeling that she has no control over what happens, that
she was simply carried away by love, and we can feel for her.
But the dark wind is always there to remind us of precisely what it was that she gave
into and the consequences for a human soul capitulating in that way.
And just to give you one more example, this is one of my favorites.
In Canto 7, the angry and the sullen who spent their whole lives complaining and moaning
and griping about every single thing.
Everybody was out to get them.
The universe is a bad place.
They hated everything.
They wind up in the bottom of the river Styx.
When the pilgrim crosses the river Styx, he doesn't even see them.
Just he sees these dirty bubbles rising up through the dirty water and he asks what
they are and he finds out those same people who spent their entire life moaning and groaning
and complaining are still down.
They're doing exactly the same things.
They're still doing exactly what they did in life, and so in amazingly precise ways,
the placement in hell is not just a punishment, it's also a perfect expression of the sin.
These people never enjoyed God's creation or any of His gifts, and they spent their
lives in metaphoric mud already.
Now they just get to do it forever.
The point is that once these characters have been placed in hell and their condition is
described, the theological or moral work of the poem is over, and then the sinners
can show us some other facets, some other sides of their personalities.
In circle three, in the circle of gluttons, we come across a Florentine named Chaco.
His place in hell is to wallow in a kind of filthy and evil-smelling sleet that continually
falls from the sky, suggesting the nature of what a glutton does.
A glutton appropriates a larger than his share portion of the world's goods and converts
it into excrement.
We get that from his placement in hell.
We don't need any more than that.
We know what he is and why he's there.
But he also talks to the pilgrim, and when he does, he talks about his city, Florence,
and what's happening there, and for a while we forget about his theological meaning and
we move into history, and Dante has just gotten another topic into his poem, which is I think
why we miss the point a little bit if we see Dante undermining his own theological points
by making so many of the damned souls so interesting.
They are, for the most part, real people, and when they are characters from literature,
like Daito or Odysseus or Paris, they're so well characterized in their own works that
we can still treat them as real people, just the same as if they were historical.
They all show the same contradictions in which we all live.
We're admirable people in some ways, deserving our sympathy and even of our admiration.
But they betrayed their own natures and the purposes of creation by either falling prey
to some sin, which is what happens to those in Upper Hill, or they distorted the image
of God in which they were created by willing themselves into evil, which is what happens
to those in Lower Hill.
And because they're so brilliantly characterized by Dante, they linger on our memories long
after we finish the poem, and in that way, they force about us to think about the meanings
that they carry.
What about the larger meanings of this poem?
Well, there have been so many suggested over the years, so many of them, and I can only
suggest a couple of things to watch for as you read this poem.
The first one is the growth of the pilgrim as he passes through hell and purgatory on
his way to heaven.
He learns in the process what it means to participate in evil.
Going through purgatory, he learns what it means to cleanse oneself of his sinful tendencies,
and then he receives final validation in the light of reality, the image of God himself
in the mystic rose at the very end of the poem.
The pilgrim is himself redeemed in the process of this work, and he passes that experience
along to us in the course of the poem.
There are, of course, in the poem, more conventional allegories.
The monsters that guard each circle of hell symbolize the sin that they guard so that,
for example, Cerberus, the three-headed dog from classical mythology, can be an allegory
symbol, allegorical symbol of gluttony, guarding that circle in hell.
There are also theological allegories.
At the very outset of the poem, the pilgrim learns that Virgil has been sent to help him
by Beatrice, who was tipped off by Santa Lucia, that the Virgin Mary herself was concerned
that the pilgrim was lost in the woods of error.
In this one, the virgin represents divine grace or compassion, Santa Lucia perhaps symbolizes
or allegorizes illumination, Beatrice allegorizes revelation, and Virgil allegorizes human reason,
so that allegorically we can see that reason is alerted by revelation and grace to wake
up, to use his God-given intellect to let it carry him as far as it can, and then to
let revelation take over and take him the rest of the way home.
Virgil himself is a really powerful, rich allegorical figure.
He's human reason who can guide the pilgrim through hell and purgatory.
He is also the classical tradition which Dante loved so much.
He is Dante's guide, and he's the guide in several important ways.
He is, among other things, the one who taught Dante how to write this poem that we're reading.
And in other ways, Dante, Virgil also represents the Roman Empire, which Dante in other works
argued had been a God-created context for the coming of Jesus into the world in order
to facilitate the spread of Christianity.
And since Dante was also extremely interested in politics, there's a whole level of
political allegory in the works as well.
As we've said, as we started out by saying, some of the greatest minds in the history
of the Western world have spent lifetimes working on this poem.
It is incredibly rich, and it probably deserves T.S. Eliot's comment that Dante and Shakespeare
divide the world between them, and there is no third.
The next time, in our next lecture, we will stay in Europe to look at Chaucer's The Canterbury
Teals, which was written about 100 years after Dante's Divine Comedy, but is a very,
very different work.
It too is very much a product of the European Middle Ages, but it has sometimes been called,
in opposed to Dante's Divine Comedy, that is sometimes called the Human Comedy.
And with that lecture, when we get to Chaucer's The Canterbury Teals, we'll begin work on a
topic that we mentioned in Lecture 12, and that is the topic of narrative strategies and
techniques and how stories get told and by whom.
We'll come back to all of those topics that we raised in Lecture 12 about frames and
framing devices and nesting stories and putting stories inside of stories, and how frames
can change the nature of the stories, how they get told, and what they mean.
Once we're onto that topic, as we said, that will be one of our main focuses for the next
two units in this course.
Next time, Chaucer's The Canterbury Teals.
