Lecture 32, Dickinson's Poetry.
In our course we're in the very middle of the realist movement, but today in this lecture
we are going to digress slightly often to lyric poetry.
As we said from time to time, we're going to do this to make sure that we check in every
so often and find out what's happening in the world of lyric poetry.
And today we're going to be talking about one of America's most original lyric poets,
Emily Dickinson.
She's somewhat of an anomaly in American literature.
She doesn't really belong to any school or tradition, although she is frequently included
in a group of poets called early modernists, which includes Walt Whitman and Thomas Hardy
and Gerard Manley Hopkins, for example, as people who in many ways in their practice
anticipated some of the things that were going to become modernism in poetry.
Emily Dickinson came from a very distinguished family, and her grandfather founded Amherst
College and her father served as a U.S. congressman, and then treasurer of Amherst College.
That position was also later on held by her brother.
She received a really good education, but after one year at Mount Holyoke, she withdrew
first from school and then gradually from public life altogether.
Aside from an occasional trip to Philadelphia or Boston or Washington to see some family
member, she spent more and more and more of her time in the family home.
By the end of her life, she saw only members of her immediate family and servants.
The very rare guest who came to see her had to actually sit in the next room, and they
would communicate through a partly open door.
There is a lot of speculation about what happened, about why she chose to live this way, but
we still don't know for sure.
It's still as much speculation as anything else.
She wrote a lot of letters, and a lot of her letters have survived, but even her letters
themselves are almost as reticent about her own personal life as her own personal life
was in Amherst, and so they really don't help as much as we'd like them to.
Her early biographers, most of whom were male, thought that it must have been a thwarted
love affair.
But more recent scholars, both male and female, have suggested that perhaps this might have
been in some ways a deliberate choice, a choice of art over the kind of life that she would
have lived had she done the conventional thing, gotten married, and had children, and done
all the things a woman was expected to do in her time and place.
It's plausible because Jane Austen had made exactly the same choice, and Emily Bronte
had made the same choice, and Christina Rossetti had made the same choice, and later on Virginia
Wolf would articulate this choice as the need to have a room of one's own where one can
write without interference from the rest of the world on the other side of the door.
You'll get to see a sort of extreme example, another extreme example of this when we get
to Marcel Proust, who spent the last 12 or 13 years of his life deliberately choosing
art over life.
Emily Dickinson had started writing poetry already in adolescence, but she seemed to
write more and more as she retreated into deeper and deeper privacy.
In the early 1860s, she wrote a series of letters that were full of love and longing
to someone that she called her master.
But again, we don't know quite what to do with this.
We have only drafts of those letters, so we don't know if they were ever actually sent,
and if they were sent, we don't know who, if anyone, got them, or if anybody ever answered
them, or for that matter, the identity of the master.
We don't even know who that person would have been.
A lot of modern scholars think that at any rate that Emily Dickinson's deepest emotional
attachments may have been to women rather than to men, so this just leaves another huge
question mark in the middle of her life.
Anyway, the time of those letters, those master letters, seems to coincide with a very, very
productive period of writing.
In 1862, she sent four poems to Thomas Higginson, who had written an article in the Atlantic
Monthly with advice for young writers.
She sent the four poems along with a letter asking him to look at them and to tell her
whether he thought that she had any talent.
He seems to have been a really good man, and he and Emily Dickinson kept up a lifelong
correspondence ever thereafter, but he seems to have been puzzled by the poems and advised
her that she wasn't quite ready yet for publication.
Now, we don't know whether his was a deciding vote, or whether she had decided that on her
own already, and he simply affirmed it, but at any rate, for whatever reason, only seven
of her poems were published during her lifetime.
When she died in 1886, her sister found an amazing number of poems in the house.
About 700 of them had been copied and then hand sewn into little tiny packets, and another
thousand or so were written on backs of envelopes and scraps of paper and tucked away in drawers
and cabinets and boxes.
And then what happened to those poems afterwards is unfortunate and interesting.
There were several families with interesting and competing and complicated relationships
to Emily Dickinson who wound up as kind of joint executors, or each family became partially
the executor of those poems.
So some selections were published in 1890, more selections in 1891, there was another
little publication in 1896, but it wasn't until the heirs of these executors had finally
turned the manuscripts over characteristically to two different universities that in 1960,
Thomas Johnson got at all of them and brought out the first complete edition, 1775 poems,
so that in a way we have only had access to this complete body of Emily Dickinson's work
for about 50 years, so we are still in some ways at the initial stages of evaluating everything
about her.
The poems can be considered apart from her life, and even if we just found 1775 poems
like this in a cave somewhere and we had no idea who wrote them or how they got them,
they would still be worth our attention because they are really interesting poems.
But knowing what we do about the life, even though we don't know as much as we'd like
to, makes the poems seem even more startling.
At first glance, Emily Dickinson's poems look like nursery rhymes with odd punctuation.
They're so simple, they're so small, they're so short, they look so little.
But within each one of those poems, we find a really complicated and uncompromising sensibility,
one that asks really hard questions and then refuses to settle for easy answers.
The poems therefore, knowing what we do about the life, in some ways the poems kind of replicate
the amazing anomaly of her life, outwardly uneventful, placid, conventional, in an early
letter she called herself the Bell of Amherst, and that is sort of stuck, so she still called
today sort of fondly the Bell of Amherst.
The Bell of Amherst with her conventional, placid, exterior life with volcanic energies
erupting behind the doorways of her house.
Her poems are just like that.
If we take a look at one of her poems, this one has been declared a kind of position paper
for Emily Dickinson for all of her poetry.
This is number 241 in the Johnson edition, and it tells us a lot about the sensibility
that we meet in these poems.
She writes, I like a look of agony because I know it's true.
Men do not sham convulsion nor simulate a throw.
The eyes glaze once, and that is death, impossible to feign the beads upon the forehead by homely
anguish strung.
It is a position paper in which she declares for truth, however ghastly it might be, vis-a-vis
a polite smoothing over of it.
She seems to have been like that herself, too.
There's a story that's told about her that when she was at Mount Holyoke, there was a
religious revival that was sweeping across the entire east that would produce eventually
the work of Jonathan Edwards and influence the work of Nathaniel Hawthorne.
The headmistress at her college wanted to be sure that every student at school had found
Christ and personal redemption.
So she and the staff identified the recalcitrant students, that is, those who hadn't yet committed
themselves, and they called them to a special meeting to try to convince them.
Emily Dickinson, of course, was one of those students in this special group.
At the end of the meeting, all of these students were asked to stand up if they at least desired
to become Christians.
All of them did except Emily Dickinson.
Later, she said, they thought it queer that I didn't rise.
I thought a lie would be queerer, and that's why in that poem she says she likes a look
of agony because it's true, you can't fake it.
That's at least the truth.
Even if it's not the look you'd want, at least it's a true look, and so truth over
a pretty glossing over was always her way.
Her poetry is like that, too.
It's a refusal to accept an easy answer or expected one, and it's a push to find things
out for herself.
Everyone in her own family had succumbed to the great revival, except Emily, who refused
to join just because everyone else had, and she kept looking for truths that she could
affirm for herself and then commit to.
We notice, going back to that little poem that we looked at just a moment ago, that
number 241, we notice how simple the verse form is.
It's written in a stanza form called Common Meter.
Now, Common Meter are four lines of alternate iambic tetrameter and iambic trimeter, which
usually rhyme A, B, C, B, so that the second and fourth line rhyme.
To make sure that we're all together on this, English is a stressed language so that every
time we look up a word in the dictionary, it comes not just with a pronunciation guide,
but it comes with the proper accent, where you're told where the accent falls.
English metrics is based on the accentual characteristics of language.
In traditional English poetry, we therefore count not just the number of syllables per
line, but how the accents are distributed within that line.
Today, the word today, which is an unaccented syllable followed by an accented syllable
today, is a natural iamb.
That's an iambic foot, is an unaccented syllable followed by an accented one.
Iambic tetrameter, therefore, is a line which has four iams in it, and iambic trimeter would
be a line that has three iams in it.
And so the beat, the meter of a stanza of Common Meter would sound like this.
Da-ta, da-ta, da-ta, da-ta, da-ta, da-ta, da-ta, da-ta, da-ta, da-ta, da-ta.
And that's it.
That's a line of Common Meter.
It's called Common Meter because it's the easiest and most used verse form in our language.
It's very, very easy to write bad Common Meter.
You can check that out for yourself.
Just go the next time you're at a card store.
Just open up some of the cards.
Many of the greeting cards are written in this meter because it's easy to write.
And you can probably make these things up off the top of your head.
We bring you many happy thoughts on this year's special day and wish you every happiness in
each and every way.
You could do that, you know, you could do that line after line after line.
Many nursery rhymes are written in this verse form too.
They're easy to write, but they're difficult to make better than that terrible verse I
just made up.
And when Emily Dickinson chooses this form to work in, she's choosing in some ways to
work in a form that's very easy to write bad poetry in.
Fortunately, Emily Dickinson doesn't do that very often.
It's also called Common Meter because a large number of the hymns in the Protestant hymnal
are written in this form.
And that may have influenced Emily Dickinson as well, who would have been very familiar
with the Protestant hymnal.
In the Protestant hymnal, it's usually identified as C-M, and any time you look up a tune in
the Protestant hymnal and see behind it a C-M, that tells you this is Common Meter.
For example, Belmont, which is one of the tunes that is used as a setting for the Lord's
My Shepherd, is in Common Meter.
And so this is, if you'll excuse me for just one moment, I'm going to try singing at you,
just to show you how this works.
But we can take Belmont, Common Meter, and take that poem number 241 that we just looked
at, and we can sing it.
We can sing, I like a look of agony because I know it's true.
We can go on from there.
I will not inflict any more of my singing upon you.
But there are many, many other melodies, tunes that would work just as well.
We could set Saint Anne, which is one of the tunes that's used for our God, our help in
ages past.
That would work just as well, so would many others.
The point is that Emily Dickinson uses the simplest and most common verse form in our
language.
Common Meter had been revived by the Romantic poets, especially Blake and Wordsworth and
Coleridge, who were trying to make poetry simpler and more accessible, and all those
complicated 18th century poetics had made it.
As we remember when Byron wrote Don Jewin, he went back to the 18th century to find a
more complicated form.
Byron or Wordsworth and Blake and Coleridge used Common Meter a lot to write very simple
poetry, and of course Emily Dickinson would have known their poems.
And so in one way, she knew that it was possible to take this very simple verse form and do
some amazing things with it.
Sometimes the Common Meter, when it's used for ballads, is called Ballad Meter as well,
and that's the meter, for example, of Coleridge as the rhyme of the ancient mariner.
It is an ancient mariner, and he stopeth one of three by the long gray beard and glittering
eye, now wherefore stops thou me?
So she would have known that you can do good things in a verse form that's simple.
Beneath this facade could lurk much deeper matters.
Now Emily Dickinson complicates this verse form in several ways.
One, notice that she doesn't use conventional punctuation, but she usually uses dashes,
and those dashes are as much musical or rhetorical as they are punctuation marks.
They suggest pauses or digressions or qualifications.
So the best way to read an Emily Dickinson poem is to read it out loud and to use those
dashes as pauses, as rhetorical marks.
She also capitalizes words for emphasis, as we might use italics, and so we need always
to pay attention to why certain words are capitalized, what is the meaning of that capitalization.
And finally she tends to compress syntax and grammar in ways that anticipate Ezra Pound's
Images movement about 40 years later.
That is, you squeeze out all the unnecessary words, and you create a sort of dense sentence
structure, which is full of images and pictures.
And finally, most of her poems don't end on a note of certainty, but are left open-ended.
Reading her poems always seems to me a little like being a visitor to her house late in
her life.
We get to talk to her, but only from another room.
We hear what the voice is saying, but we get nothing like complete communication, and
after we leave her house, we say, I wonder what she meant by that.
I wonder really what she was saying when she said this.
And anyway, Dickinson seems to have used poetry for herself as a way of exploring questions
for which there are no final answers, and certainly no easy answers, only really, really
good questions.
So what this means, among other things, is that her poetry always requires some work
from us.
When we did Chinese and Japanese poetry back in Lectures 13 and 14, we quoted Herbert
Giles to the effect that Chinese poets don't like to dot their eyes and cross their tees.
They like to let the reader do that for himself.
And Emily Dickinson's are like that, too.
They require some work for us.
The reward is that if we can follow her, if we pay attention, if we give them our attention,
she will lead us into some places that ask some really, really interesting questions
and can tease us into some really serious thought.
There are 1,775 poems, so if I do a couple of them with you now, you will still have
plenty to discover on your own.
There is God's plenty in Johnson's edition.
So let's do a couple of poems together before we run out of time.
This one is number 214.
It's a very famous one, and it's also a very happy one.
I taste a liquor never brewed from tankards scooped in pearl.
Not all the vats upon the rind yield such an alcohol.
Inebriate of air am I, and debauchee of dew, reeling through endless summer days from inns
of molten blue.
When landlords turn the drunken bee out of the foxglove's door, when butterflies renounce
their drams, I shall but drink the more, till seraphs swing their snowy hats and saints
to windows run to see the little tipler leaning against the sun.
Paula Bennett in her book on Emily Dickinson says that the images from this poem probably
come from Ralph Waldo Emerson, who is one of Dickinson's favorite writers.
In an essay called The Poet, Emerson had argued that people should live in such a way that
common things can delight them, that sunshine and air and water all can make us tipsy if
we pay enough attention to them, if we let ourselves get high, get drunk on nature.
But as Bennett notes, typically Emerson is always interested in looking through these
things in nature because he's looking for the spirit that lives in nature, he's looking
for nature's soul.
Here with Emily Dickinson, we're not looking through but at.
The poet delights in the here and now of the natural world, soaking up these moments of
natural beauty until she gets high or drunk to use her own metaphor.
Dickinson is a very visual poet, but she also frequently metaphorizes what she sees.
Here in stanza three, bees get so sluggish on the flowers on which they've been feeding
that they look like drunkards kicked out of an inn called the foxglove.
These are reaching the end of their very short lives, are imagined here as giving up drinking,
as joining AA.
This is what it feels like, Dickinson is saying, to be drunk on the joy of living, going on
a cosmic spree so grand that it can annihilate time and space.
And the poet can wind up, and I think that last picture is so neat, she can wind up as
a heavenly drunk, leaning against a celestial lamppost so all the saints and angels come
running to their windows to say, who's that?
Who's drunk in our neighborhood?
This Emily Dickinson suggests is as good a heaven as any that exists beyond death, and
the only one, as she says in many of her poems, that we're in fact sure of.
But if nature is one of the great delights of Dickinson, and she writes many, many wonderful,
beautiful poems about the sheer joy of simply participating in the natural order in the
natural world, nature also always reminds Dickinson of transience, of change, and of
death, no matter how beautiful it is.
And this is one of my favorite Dickinson poems, I love this poem, and this is one in which
she talks about some of the meanings of spring to a human being like us.
She says, I dreaded that first robin, so, but he is mastered now.
I've some accustomed to him grown.
He hurts a little, though.
I thought if I could only live till that first shout got by, not all pianos in the woods
had power to mangle me.
I dared not meet the daffodils, for fear their yellow gown would pierce me with a fashion
so foreign to my own.
I wished the grass would hurry, so when it was time to see, he'd be too tall the tallest
one could stretch to look at me.
I could not bear the bees should come, I wish they'd stay away in those dim countries
where they go, what word had they for me?
They're here, though, not a creature failed, no blossom stayed away in gentle deference
to me, the queen of Calvary.
Each one salutes me as he goes, and I, my childish plumes, lift in bereaved acknowledgment
of their unthinking drums.
Ew, that is such a great poem.
What she's saying, of course, is that spring brings perennial renewal to the earth.
But it's always painful for us, because each change in season brings us one season closer
to death.
And the poet, as she says, she never gets over the dread that happens to her every spring.
She doesn't get over it, she just masters it.
She becomes accustomed enough to it to be able to keep going.
And nature's sounds when they come into spring are disturbing sounds.
She says the robin shouts, the woodland sounds are like crashing pianos that mangle us.
Nature's music is always so big that it crushes us that it overwhelms us.
Even the daffodils, now the little tiny gentle daffodils remind us that we're a year older.
She says every year the daffodils have new dresses.
At every year they remind me that my dress is one more year out of date.
And so even the daffodils and all their gentleness and smallness and beauty are a reminder of
all this that hurts her.
The beauty, she says, the beauty of spring pierces her in a way that anticipates her
later image as when she calls herself the queen of Calvary.
Calvary is, of course, the place of skulls where Jesus was crucified.
And the suggestion here is that every living thing, ourselves included, have to be sacrificed
to regenerate the earth.
The thought may be comforting in a general sort of way, but it's not comforting individually.
And the poet wishes the grass were already high enough that she could hide in it.
But as she admits in the last verses, whether we want spring to come or not, it comes.
Not a single creature failed to return.
And the last line heightens all of this.
By the time the poet has gotten used to spring, has accepted it with all its threats, it's
already moved on, making way for summer.
So like the poet, all we can do is wave our plumes at all the creatures of spring as they
pass by and acknowledge the unthinking drums of the great music of nature.
It's a wonderful poem and packed into such a tiny little space in a very simple verse
form as well.
Whether when we die, we have any hope of renewal, whether our lives go on beyond death, whether
we are at least, as Dickinson says in one poem, whether we are at least perennial, is
a recurring question for her.
She always faces the question squarely and she always comes back, not with an answer,
but with a consideration, with something for us to think about, usually just a question.
Here is one famous poem of hers on the subject.
This is number 216 and when you read these yourself, you'll notice that occasionally
there will be a poem that will have two different versions with two different dates on it.
This is one of those poems.
Number 216 exists in a 1861 version and an 1859 version.
I'll be using the 1861 version and here's how number 216 goes in that version.
If in their alabaster chambers, untouched by morning and untouched by noon, why the
meek members of the resurrection, rafter of satan and roof of stone, grand go the years
in the crescent above them, worlds scoop their arcs, and firmaments row, diadems drop, and
doges surrender, soundless as dots on a disk of snow.
Okay, with Emily Dickinson it's good to just figure out how to unpack a poem like this.
The first thing we have to notice is there's a separation between nature on the one hand
and the meek members of the resurrection on the other hand who are safe in their alabaster
coffins untouched by morning or by noon.
Still we ask, is this entombment, this separation from nature, is this a good thing or is this
a bad thing?
Bettina Knapp in her book on Emily Dickinson says that this may very well be Dickinson's
response to Jesus' promise in the Sermon on the Mount that the meek will inherit the
earth.
What they get, says Knapp, is the plot of earth in which they're buried.
But even if that is true, that still doesn't answer any of the really powerful and important
questions.
One itself can be either positive or a negative image.
It's solid and relatively indestructible, but it's also impervious to the biological changes
that affect every other thing.
So when we are locked in our houses, our houses of stone, is this a good thing or is this
a bad thing?
Likewise, the word chamber, chamber can be a place of refuge, but it can also seal one
off hermetically from influence and thought.
So here, while the seasons roll by and the kings and queens come and go, the members
of the resurrection lie fixed in all their certainties.
While the cycles of nature and life go on, they become dots on a disk of snow, dissolving
quietly as the earth turns above them.
So what do we make of this?
Is it hopeful?
Is it pessimistic?
Is it making fun of the members of the resurrection or does it admire them?
The same questions will come up, I think, for us if we start thinking along the lines
that Emily Dickinson takes us in a poem like this.
And the one thing that we always are grateful to Emily Dickinson for, she never backs away
from a tough place or a tough question, but deals with it and then comes back and says,
well, what do you think?
One last poem of Emily Dickinson, and this one is number 449, and this one is a very
famous one too, I think, but it also has that same wondrous ambiguity about it.
I died for beauty, but was scarce adjusted in the tomb when one who died for truth was
lain in an adjoining room.
He questioned softly why I failed, for beauty, I replied, and I for truth, themself are one.
We brethren are, he said.
And so as kinsmen metonite, we talked between the rooms until the moss had reached our lips
and covered up our names.
Again, these are not easy poems.
This one is pretty clearly a response to John Keats' ode on a Grecian urn, which ends with
that really famous line, beauty is truth, truth is beauty.
After all human speculation gets ended and refuted by death and decay and decomposition,
which stops the dialogue between the two corpses almost in mid-sentence, each speaker died
for an abstraction, and each believed that that abstraction would carry on beyond his
or her death, but death and natural process and everything, the moss comes along to cover
up their very names.
Death in line five is called a failure, not an entrance to something else.
Or is it not about that at all?
Is this a poem simply about the impossibility of lasting earthly fame, having nothing to
do with the question of whether we go on in some way after death?
Whatever, and however we decide, however you decide you want to read this poem, the image
is a very Dickinsonian one.
It's a pair of like-minded people who are having a chat from adjoining rooms who have
to stop talking when the moss reaches their lips, we would say, but the surprise here
is the word names, presumably the name on the tombstone.
They have to stop talking when the moss covers up their names.
And so from her house in Amherst, Dickinson allied herself with some of the really great
19th century rebels, with Faust, with Heathcliff and Catherine, with Lord Byron, in that she
weighed very carefully what she was taught, founded inadequate, and then dared in her
own poetry to say things that would have shocked and dismayed her family, her friends, her
fellow citizens in Amherst.
She defied conventions in many ways and dared to look into the abyss.
In one of her poems, she compares standing and steering down into a well with looking
into the deep abyss, the great emptiness, the great nothing, and she wonders how grass
can do it, how grass can manage standing so close to the edge of a well.
As one critic says, she's a romantic in an upstairs bedroom, a rebel in every way that
matters to us.
She's also with Flaubert and Emily Bronte and Ibsen, she's also very much aware of
the constraints on women in the 19th century and a lot of feminists have discovered in
her a kindred spirit in the many poems she wrote on that subject.
Her poems seem to us modern.
She questions conventional beliefs and the form of her poems seems as modern as that
of Hardy.
It isn't malefluous, it isn't melodious, it doesn't sing the way Tennyson does or
the way so much Victorian poetry does and in that respect it's perhaps more like the
poetry of Ezra Pound or T.S. Eliot or H.D. in its compression, in its reliance on metaphors
and images instead of explanation and its mental and formal toughness, meaning that
in some Emily Dickinson is one of the great contributions of America to world literature.
Next time we'll be back to the realist movement which is in full steam in Europe where we'll
take a look at two playwrights who did for theater what Flaubert did for the novel, we'll
look at Ibsen and Chekhov, who between them created modern realist drama and we'll get
a chance to see some of the ways in which drama and fiction share goals and objectives
and values in the realist movement.
Specifically, we will take a look at Ibsen's Adal House and Chekhov's Uncle Vanya in our
next lecture.
