Lecture 24 – Voltaire's Candide
The subject of this lecture is Voltaire's Candide.
And as we mentioned last time, with Molière and Voltaire, we're sort of bracketing the
neoclassical period with one writer who came toward its beginning and another one that
came toward its end.
Voltaire is one of the most important writers of the age of reason, and he worked in so
many different genres.
He wrote drama and history and letters and essays and philosophy, as well as prose fictions
like Candide, and he also wrote a lot.
His collected works run to about 135 volumes.
Many of those works were attacks on the French government and on the Catholic Church, which
kept him on the edge of trouble with the authorities for most of his life, and it kept him on the
move a lot, too.
One critic says that he darted around Europe like a nervous fish in a tank.
At the end of his life, he returned to Paris in triumph and died shortly thereafter, but
when the French Revolution began just a few years after his death, the French Revolution
reburied him in the Pantheon as one of its heroes who had prepared the way for the revolution.
Our concern with Voltaire in this lecture is with Candide, whose subtitle is optimism.
If you look at the title page, it always says Candide or optimism.
Optimism was a popular 18th century philosophy, which derived ultimately from the German philosopher
Gutfried Leibniz, but whose theories had been popularized and simplified throughout
much of the 18th century into a formula that suggested that this is the best of all possible
worlds.
In very oversimplified terms, God is omnipotent and therefore could have made any kind of
world, but he's also benevolent and so he would necessarily have made the best possible
world so that what may strike us as problematic or evil or difficult in creation is really
there to provide some greater good which would have been lost had the apparent evil not been
part of the plan.
To use a very simplistic example, and I'm simplifying now as much as any 18th century popularizer
did, but to take a very simple example, if when we fall off a ladder and break a leg
or a Ming vase falls and breaks into a hundred pieces, we might see gravity as a destructive
part of the universe we live in.
And, since God could have made any kind of world, he could have made one without gravity.
But, so this argument would go, gravity keeps everything in its place and it keeps us from
flying off into space and so the benefits of gravity outweigh its problems.
The best of all possible worlds therefore will necessarily have gravity in it.
And this is true, so this argument goes, this is true for everything in our world.
It's true for earthquakes and floods and famine and disease, all of which are necessary if
we could simply see the larger picture to understand what greater good comes from these
apparent evils.
A lot of 18th century writers had endorsed this idea including notably a German philosopher
named Christian Wolf and Alexander Pope, the English poet.
The theory can be a comfort in times of disaster.
If something really terrible happens to me, I may be able to feel slightly better about
it if I can understand that it's serving some larger good, but it can also lead to
quietism since if all pain and suffering in the world serves some larger purpose, there
is no reason to try to ameliorate it because it's there for a reason.
It's there to do some kind of good.
Voltaire himself was an optimist early in his life.
It was the trendy idea of the age and it could be reconciled with deism which was the
sort of religion of the intelligentsia which saw God as a kind of cosmic watchmaker who
had created the universe, had wound it up and then left it to run by its own natural laws.
As Voltaire got older though, he found it harder to square the sheer amount of misery
and calamity in the world with the confidence that it was leading to some greater good.
A turning point for him was the Lisbon earthquake of November 1st of 1755.
In the Catholic calendar, November 1st is all Saints' Day so many of the inhabitants
of Lisbon were in church when the earthquake struck and it leveled the city and it killed
something like 30 to 40,000 people.
In a letter that Voltaire wrote shortly after the Lisbon earthquake he said this,
Amid ruins from which they could not be dragged, families ruined at the ends of Europe,
the fortunes of 100 traders buried in the ruins of Lisbon,
what a terrible gamble is the game of human life.
If Pope had been at Lisbon, would he have dared to say all is well?
There is a terrible argument against optimism.
The full response of Voltaire to the Lisbon earthquake
and to his abandoning the whole idea of optimism came four years later in his Candide,
which as we started out by saying is subtitled optimism.
If we ask about the genre why we're not calling this a novel,
it isn't really quite a novel by 18th century standards.
It doesn't develop its characters very much.
It's too full of coincidence and implausibility to seem very like the world that we live in.
And as we said from the earliest days, that's partly what the novel was supposed to do,
is to reflect the world around us.
In fact, in this book there are so many disasters, so many terrible things that happened.
And in fact, everything that happens to the little group of protagonists
whom Voltaire brings together for this book,
everything that happens to them has happened to somebody in the course of history,
and some of the events in the book are actual historical events.
There's a British admiral, for example, who's executed for not
getting near enough the French ships he was supposed to be fighting with.
And that was an actual event.
So that everything that's in the book actually happened, or has happened, in history.
What makes it slightly implausible is that all of these disasters
should have happened to this little tiny group of people,
and that they should have survived them all.
One of my students once said that reading Candide was like watching a Roadrunner cartoon,
in which Wiley Coyote is killed about 13 times every six minutes,
and every time he bounces back to skim through his ACME catalog,
coming up with his next plan for catching the Roadrunner.
So this is not quite a novel in the sense that we've been defining that term
throughout our course so far.
It's also been called something of a picaresque story.
A picaresque story was a Spanish invention of the 16th century.
And in a picaresque, a protagonist travels from place to place,
getting in and out of scrap, some of which he causes himself,
and then finishing that one and moving on to a new adventure.
Don Quixote may very well owe something to the picaresque tradition,
and Candide is like the picaresque in being very episodic.
That is, one adventure leads to the next,
without there being necessarily much causal connection between them.
It's also, of course, in part a satire on human efforts to comprehend life in the universe,
and that its satirical mode aligns it with so much else in the 18th century.
As we said last time, satire was one of the favorite methods of the 18th century.
It aligns it specifically with Molière's comedies,
whose purpose, Voltaire's purpose, is to sort of laugh away obstacles
to human progress and happiness.
Finally, it has also been called, and this is a very odd sort of way,
it's also been called an oriental tale.
The 1001 Knights had been translated into French about a half century earlier,
and its stories had provided some new models for storytellers.
A few years earlier, Voltaire had actually written a really literal oriental tale,
one called Zadig.
It's about the travels of a protagonist across the Orient.
This is like an oriental tale that doesn't take place in the Orient.
It has an oriental tale's plot and structure.
It's just that it's set in Europe and the New World rather than the Orient.
About the book itself.
The spokesman for optimism in the book is a philosopher named Dr. Pangloss,
whose name translates something like all talk.
Dr. Pangloss is the tutor of young Candide at the outset of the book.
He teaches a reduced and wonderfully satirical version of Leibniz's theory.
He teaches not only that this in a general way is the best of all possible worlds,
but he actually tries to work out the specific way
in which every single item in this world serves some greater good
and then try to establish what that greater good is.
This is a sort of summary of his teaching, which comes from very early in the story.
Pangloss gave instruction in metaphysical, theological, cosmologology.
He proved admirably that there cannot possibly be an effect without a cause,
and that in this best of all possible worlds, the Baron's castle was the most beautiful of all castles,
and his wife the best of all possible baronesses.
It is clear, said he, that things cannot be otherwise than they are.
For since everything is made to serve an end, everything necessarily serves the best end.
Observe, noses were made to support spectacles, hence we have spectacles.
Legs, as anyone can plainly see, were made to be breached, and so we have breaches.
Stones were made to be shaped and to build castles with,
thus my lord has a fine castle for the greatest baron in the province should have the finest house.
And since pigs were made to be eaten, we eat pork all year round.
Consequently, those who say everything is well are uttering mere stupidities.
They should say everything is for the best.
Candide's name translates as something like innocent or naive, the word candid,
it was a derivative of the French word.
It grows up as a foundling in this castle, this greatest of all possible barons,
in the best of all possible castles in Westphalia in Germany,
along with the barons to children, Kunagand and her brother.
Because he is candid, youthful, trusting,
Candide believes the teaching of Dr. Pangloss with all his heart.
But when he and Kunagand get to be about 17,
Candide is caught kissing her behind a screen by her father,
who kicks Candide out of the castle.
Once on his own, out in the world,
the rest of the book will give Candide a chance to try out Dr. Pangloss's theories
in light of what happens to him.
From here on out, the book has a very tidy structure.
Having been kicked out of his earthly paradise,
as Dr. Pangloss has taught him to see it,
and which Candide really faithfully believes it is,
he will spend the rest of his life trying to recapture it,
as it's represented for him by Ms. Kunagand.
Pangloss will keep showing up every so often to reaffirm the optimist theory,
to keep reminding Candide that this is the best of all possible worlds,
and that everything in it is for the best.
Pangloss will be killed off about two and a half times during the course of the story.
He early contracts syphilis, he's later hanged by the Inquisition,
and then he's sentenced later on to rowing in a galley,
which in those days was tantamount to a death sentence.
But somehow he manages to survive all of this,
to keep coming back every so often at critical moments to declare
that this is the best of all possible worlds.
Partway through the book, Candide will acquire another companion,
a man named Martin, who says that he's a Manichean.
Now, Manicheanism was an early Christian heresy
that believed that the world was a battleground
between two deities, one good and one evil.
St. Augustine had been a Maniche before he converted to Christianity.
Martin says he's a Maniche, but his Manicheanism is of a special sort.
He believes that evil pretty much always triumphs over good,
which makes him really more a pessimist than a Manichean,
and that makes him also a perfect foil for Pangloss.
Pangloss thinks this is the best of all possible worlds,
and Martin thinks that this is pretty close to the worst of all possible worlds.
Candide will listen to both of them and try to square their teachings
with all the horrible things that happen to him.
As we mentioned, it has a very, very tidy structure.
Candide will travel across Germany to Holland and then to Lisbon,
where he will be briefly reunited with Kunagand.
He gets to Lisbon, by the way, exactly in time for the Lisbon earthquake.
He will be briefly reunited with Kunagand,
who has by this time also been killed once.
Then they will escape to the New World,
where he loses Kunagand again and has some truly amazing adventures.
The last part of the book returns to Europe,
and we follow Candide in the little entourage that he's picked up
as they move from France to Venice,
and they wind up at Constantinople,
where he's reunited with Kunagand and Pangloss yet one more time.
The book has 30 chapters.
10 are set in the Old World, 10 in the New World,
and 10 back in the Old World again.
Near the center of the book, in chapters 17 and 18,
Candide and his current companion find,
they stumble across actually El Dorado in South America,
which turns out to be a perfect utopia.
The very tidiness of the book has seemed to most critics to be satirical.
The events in this story are so chaotic and random
that the wonderful symmetry of the book
looks like another human effort to impose order on cosmic chaos.
According to Voltaire, that's precisely what optimism tries to do,
to try to impose some sort of meaning
on the sort of random messiness of human experience.
At the end of the book, the little group,
which by now includes also Martin and a monk named Giroflay,
and a maid from the Baron's castle,
coincidentally the one from whom Dr. Pangloss had caught syphilis in the first place,
a valet named Cacombo,
and an old woman who was once made to Miss Kunagand,
all get together in Constantinople,
and there they use the last bit of the wealth that Candide has brought back
with him from El Dorado to buy a little tiny farm outside Constantinople.
With all the terrible things that have happened to them,
which are all behind them now,
we expect that they will live happily into the future.
But not so.
They wind up, as the narrator tells us,
absolutely bored to death.
As the old woman puts it in summarizing,
she says,
The book has sent Candide through the most harrowing adventures,
so there's no way at the end of the book
that he could possibly think that this is the best of all possible worlds
made for our convenience and for our comfort.
But despite its grim and horrifying content,
the book turns out to be really funny in a dark kind of way.
Everything is so outrageous.
Everything is so over the top that we wind up laughing
at some of the worst things that can befall human beings.
We're back to the idea of the Roadrunner cartoon again,
and my student, I think, was absolutely right about the analogy.
Martin, of course, isn't surprised by the boredom at the end of the story,
the fact that they should all be bored.
He says that man was bound to live either in convulsions of misery
or in the lethargy of boredom.
That is, when nothing happens, we're bored,
and when something happens, it's always terrible.
And so by the end of the story,
the theory of optimism has been pretty much exploded.
But to explode one kind of false theory is only part of what the book does.
The next question is what kind of theory can we put in its place?
What kind of universe, what kind of place is this, really?
Is Martin right?
And if he is, how should we go about trying to survive in this place?
And the very last chapter, that neat, tidy 30th chapter,
addresses all of these questions.
The last chapter has generated a lot of discussion
and a lot of disagreement about what it's really about, what it really says.
And I'm not going to try to select among the alternatives,
but I simply want to point out three things that need to be considered
when you read it, that have to be taken into account
in deciding how you are going to read that last chapter.
The first one is the advice that comes from a dervish
who lives near the refugee's farm near Constantinople.
He has a reputation of being very wise,
and so one day Candide takes his little entourage to visit him
to ask him why such a strange creature as man was invented.
The dervish says, it's none of your business.
But Candide persists in his question, and when Candide persists,
this is the answer he gets.
But reverent father said, Candide,
there's a horrible lot of evil on the face of the earth.
What does it matter, said the dervish, whether there's good or evil?
When his highness sends a ship to Egypt,
does he worry whether the mice on board are comfortable or not?
Pangloss then goes on to press the question even further,
and when Pangloss starts to speak,
the dervish simply slams the door in their faces and of interview.
On their way home, they stop at the house of a Turkish farmer
who, with his wife, or with his two children rather,
seemed content and comfortable.
Candide asks him how he does it, how he can be so happy
and so comfortable and so calm here, and he answers this.
He says, I have only 20 acres, replied the Turk.
I cultivate them with my children,
and the work keeps us from three great evils,
boredom, vice, and poverty.
So when they get back home, Candide decides that they should all go to work,
instead of hiring people to work their farm for them,
they should do it themselves.
And so they all get to work.
As Candide keeps saying, the metaphor he uses toward the end of the book
is we must cultivate our garden, and the book ends this way.
The whole little group entered into this laudable scheme.
Each one began to exercise his talents.
The little plot yielded fine crops.
Kunagand was, to tell the truth, remarkably ugly,
but she became an excellent pastry cook.
Paquette took up embroidery.
The old woman did the laundry.
Everyone, down even to Brother Giroflay, did something useful.
He became a very adequate carpenter and even an honest man.
And Pangloss sometimes used to say to Candide,
all events are linked together in the best of possible worlds.
For, after all, if you had not been driven from a fine castle
by being kicked in the backside for love of Miss Kunagand,
if you hadn't been sent before the Inquisition,
if you hadn't traveled across America on foot,
if you hadn't given a good sword thrust to the Baron,
if you hadn't lost all your sheep from the good land of El Dorado,
you wouldn't be sitting here eating Candide's citron and pistachios.
That is very well put, said Candide,
but we must cultivate our garden.
Now, as I said, there are lots of ways we can understand this,
but several things need to be kept in mind.
The first, I think, is the implication of the Dervishes metaphor
about mice and the galleys.
What he is suggesting with that metaphor is that
the universe was not made for us to our specifications
any more than the galley was made for mice.
Like the mice, we are something like accidental tourists on this planet,
so our speculations about good and evil,
about the purposes of creation,
about our place in it will be as foolish as those of the mice
speculating on the nature of the ship they're on.
The scale, at least, will be entirely wrong.
Secondly, whatever values work there are in work,
it can, as the Turkish farmer says,
it can keep us individually from boredom, vice, and poverty.
That is, if we stay busy, we will be less likely to get entangled
in the pointless speculations of the mice on the galley.
As Martin puts it toward the end,
let's work without speculating, said Martin,
it's the only way of rendering life bearable.
And then finally, there's Candide's image of cultivating our garden.
Whatever he means by garden,
it's clear that if we keep our hands busy,
we won't have time to worry about
whether any particular event is good or evil,
or why we were created in the first place,
or what kind of world this is.
All of this is really, really good stuff.
There's still much to be decided about that last chapter,
which you should look forward to reading it
to see what you make of it for yourself.
But there's one other aspect of the book
that needs to be taken up, which is really interesting.
The world in this book produces earthquakes,
and floods, and diseases, and all manner of things.
It makes it impossible to believe
that it was created for our good and happiness.
This swamp that we live in
cannot possibly have been made to our specifications.
But beyond all of the evil which the universe produces,
there's an immense amount of human cruelty
and indifference that happens in this book.
These are not things that nature does to us,
but things that we do to one another,
just to give you a couple of examples.
One of the most disturbing episodes in this story
happens when Candide tries to hire a passage
on a boat from Suriname to Italy,
along with a couple of rare sheep
he still has left over from El Dorado.
The Dutch merchant with whom he's trying to book a passage
sets a fee, Candide agrees to pay it.
But the ease with which Candide has decided
to pay that fee suggests to the merchant
that he's dealing here with a rich man.
So he goes away and he comes back a little later.
He says, I'm going to have to double that fee.
Candide says, OK.
So the merchant leaves again
and comes back a little bit later,
and he raises the fee again.
Candide says, all right, I'll pay that.
Then the merchant takes the ship
and all of Candide's luggage aboard,
and then he sets sail without Candide.
Candide immediately rushes to the house of a Dutch magistrate,
and there he knocks very loudly on the door.
He is, after all, somewhat upset
at having lost a great fortune to the merchant.
In telling his story,
he perhaps speaks a little louder than he usually does,
and the magistrate finds him a huge fine
for disturbing the peace.
Then he listens, then the magistrate says, OK,
now if you talk quietly, I'll listen to the rest of your story.
Candide tells him the rest of his story,
he charges another exorbitant fee
for listening to the story, promises to look into it,
and then that's the end of the story.
Nothing ever comes of it, end of story.
Candide, in reflecting back on this,
says that while he's endured a lot more painful experiences,
this one really gets to him.
He says the sheer treachery of the merchant
and the kind of mechanical, complacent coldness of the magistrate
make him dwell on what he calls the malice of men
in all its ugliness and throws him into a really deep melancholy.
And so it goes throughout the course of this book.
Just outside Suriname, Candide and his traveling companion
come upon a black man
who's missing a right hand and a left leg.
He tells them that he works in a sugar mill as a slave.
Once he got his finger caught in the machinery
and the punishment for getting your finger caught in the machinery
is to have your hand cut off.
Once he tried to run away,
and the punishment for trying to run away
is to have your leg cut off.
Care reminds us that this is the price of sugar
that's eaten in Europe.
But its point for Candide is that
having listened to this poor man's story,
he tells his companion that he thinks
he's going to have to give up the theory of optimism.
When his companion says what is optimism,
Candide says it's a mania for saying that all is well
when one is in hell.
The point is here that like this
and several other hundred examples in the story
are about suffering that's not caused by earthquakes
or floods or fire or famine.
These are things, all the things that nature does to us
in the best of all possible worlds.
These are things that human beings do to each other,
mechanically, thoughtlessly, carelessly,
cruelly, without a single suggestion
of or whisper of conscience.
The question about all of this is,
is where does this bit of human nature come from?
Why are humans the way they are?
In El Dorado, in chapters 17 and 18
toward the middle of this book,
nature seems more benign than it is elsewhere
and their people are different.
They're contented, they're non-competitive,
they're free of avarice and jealousy and pride.
Significantly, however, Candide and Cacombo,
his current companion, aren't happy there.
They decide that in El Dorado,
they're just like everybody else,
if they're back in Europe loaded down
with the wealth they'll take back with them,
they could be big shots.
And so, the narrator says,
the two happy men resolve to be so no longer.
The question is, has a hostile environment
produced the human character
as it is in Europe, competitive, greedy, prideful, cruel,
so that a more benign environment
would have produced a different kind of human nature
as it seems to do in El Dorado?
Or are we what we are, regardless of where we live,
and can we change our natures,
or are they fixed forever?
Candide once asks Martin,
do you believe that men have always
massacred one another as they do today,
that they have always been liars, traitors,
ingrates, thieves, weaklings,
sneaks, cowards, backbiter's,
glutton's, drunkard's,
misers, climbers, killers,
colluminators, sensualists, fanatics,
hypocrites, and fools?
And Martin says,
what do you think?
Do you think hawks have always
eaten pigeons when they could get them?
That is, for Martin,
human nature is as fixed as hawk nature.
And that's one answer.
But Martin is a pessimist.
So, for us, does the rest of the book
bear out Martin's assessment?
There's a great deal of pain
and suffering in this book that's caused,
not directly by nature, but by people.
Whose fault is this?
Is our nature given to us like a hawk's?
Or do we have enough control to be able to change?
Perhaps by cultivating our gardens,
whatever they are.
Is El Dorado utopia because nature or God
gave them a place where they don't have
to fight for survival?
And what does it mean that Candide and
Cacombo can't be happy there?
Does being either an optimist or a pessimist
help us live in a world not made to our measure?
Or does it simply numb us to what we could do about it
by permitting us to think that everything is
either so good or so bad that nothing
can be done anyway?
And so, this is a very small book
with a lot of big ideas.
Maybe the best description of the book is really
it's a philosophical tale whose ideas
are more important than the characters
or setting or events.
I saw this done in a film once,
film version of Candide,
in which it was set, it was framed
by a puppet show in which you saw Voltaire
manipulating the puppets,
moving them around and making them say things.
Which is a really useful way to think about it.
The point of this
book is really not quite the life likeness
of the characters or the things that
happen, but it's the ideas that the
puppets put forward and illustrate.
And also why this isn't
quite a novel since the characters
and events are really in some ways
more intellectual positions
than they are developed for their own sakes.
This
is the last of our stops in the European
Enlightenment. In our next lecture
we will be back to China to check
on our next step in the history of the novel
and this really will be a novel
in a book that maybe is important
in China as the tale of Genji is
in Japan or Don Quixote is in
the West. Next time the Chinese
novel, The Story of the Stone.
