Lecture 39, Pirandello's Six Characters
In our last three lectures, we've been stressing the fact that this is a period of experimentation
in all of the arts.
Today, we'll talk a little bit about the experimentation that happens in drama.
Our subject today is a figure who didn't actually invent all of the techniques he used,
but who used them so brilliantly and became associated so closely with them
that he kind of spearheaded the movement, and as a consequence, he was the one who won
the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1934. We're talking about Luigi Pirandello.
The new movements in drama are more of those isms that we've been talking about over the last
several programs, expressionism, futurism, dadaism, surrealism, and another host of isms,
all of which had their own separate movements within drama. Collectively, they were sometimes
called theatricalism or anti-illusionism. What they had in common was a rejection of
realist drama and an effort to make drama more expressive or symbolic or dreamlike
anything but the realist plays that had been made normative by playwrights like Ibsen and
Chekhov and Shaw and the young August Strindberg around the turn of the century.
By 1900, realist plays with their proscenium arches and their box sets and their allusion
of the fourth wall were as well established on European and American stages as the well-made
play had been established in the time of Ibsen. A new generation of playwrights chafed under what
they saw as some really severe restrictions or limitations imposed upon them by this kind of
theater. Their chief objections were of two sorts. The first was that in creating realist drama,
they understood that the realists had given up most of the really great tools that had created
drama as an art form down through history. If you think about the plays of just to pick three,
Sophocles and Shakespeare and Mollier, all three of them had written in poetry rather than in prose.
All of them had featured a lot of interaction between actors and audience in the form of
asides and soliloquies and at least in the case of Sophocles and Shakespeare had used
relatively bare stages with a minimum of sets. They suggested that in a way what
realist drama had done is given away some of the best tools a drama had to work with.
They also said that realist drama could treat social problems very well because it uses scientific
standards of truth, objectivity, everyday language, but that a realist play was really too clumsy to
deal with the inner life, that kind of inner life that Proust and Wolfe and Joyce were reinventing
fiction in order to be able to capture. So they wanted something more flexible, perhaps using
poetry and perhaps using symbolic, that is non-representational, stage sets that would be
able to project the inner life and dreams and the non-rational aspects of the life of the characters
on stage. Mordecai Gorlich, a theater critic and producer and director himself, in 1940 wrote a
book called New Theatres for Old and he has an imaginary theatricalist say to an imaginary
realist playwright this. He said, do not bring on the stage your carcass of reality. Do not exhibit
there your vanloads of bric-a-brac, your butcher shops with real meat, your restaurant walls of
cement and tile, your streets paved with real cobblestones. These collections of materials
do not tell us the nature of the world. Rather, they confess your inability to define the nature
of the world. If you really wish to give us an illusion of life, you must seize upon the essence
of life. Forget the body, give us the soul. That was the cry of the theatricalists or the
anti-illusionists in this period. A good example, one that we all probably know because it's done
so often as a high school senior class play is Thornton Wilder's Our Town, which is a theatricalist
play. You remember it is in prose, but it uses a bare stage and its props are just things that
you have around a theater like scaffolds and ladders and folding chairs. It has a stage manager
who speaks to us, the audience, directly through the entire play, and he keeps reminding us that
we're in a theater watching a play. In fact, I think, as I recall, his first line is, this is a
play by Thornton Wilder called Our Town. One scene in that play takes place as a conversation among
people buried in a cemetery, all these people sitting on folding chairs talking to each other,
and one scene takes place when a young girl's spirit is allowed to come back from the dead
to spend a day with the family. Both of those scenes would have been impossible scenes in
realist drama. That movement, the theatricalist movement, the anti-illusionist movement, is
one half of the context for Pirandello. The other half of the context for Pirandello is really
intellectual or thematic. Some of his ideas, some of his influences can be traced back to the ideas
of Henri Bergson, the French philosopher who had influenced Marcel Proust and T.S. Eliot, and here
we're going to run across him again. This is way oversimplified, but what he had suggested at the
time was duration, not something that could be measured by instruments, and that life is a process
that works through time. We'll consider those ideas again when they come up in the work of the
Egyptian novelist Nagib Mufouz, who was also very much influenced by Henri Bergson. We saw in Proust,
Bergson's ideas reflected in the sense, his sense, that not even the self is fixed and stable,
but changes across time. Pirandello will use some of these same ideas in his drama in slightly
different ways. Pirandello started his writing career writing short stories and novels.
The themes of his early work were appearance, reality, the relationship between art and life,
and then in 1904, when very unhappily his wife went insane, he added sanity and insanity to
his collection of themes, and this one is really featured very largely in his other, perhaps his
other most famous play, Henry IV, which was written two years after Six Characters and
Searchman Author. Eventually, all of these themes, all of the things that he had done,
coalesced into a series of questions about the ego or the self or the I, and he came to believe
that the persistent and stable and character or personality that we attribute to ourselves and
to others doesn't really exist. This is a stunning assertion. The idea that I am I and you are you
is a basic common sense assumption of all of our everyday experience. All of our moral and legal
systems are based on the idea that I am I and you are you, because it wouldn't make sense to public
punish someone for a crime committed last year or last week unless the one committing the crime
back then and the one being punished today were in some senses the same person. When we say that
someone does something out of character, that wouldn't make sense either unless there is some
character that you can actually be out of, nor would Polonius's advice to laertes to
thine own self be true make any sense unless there were in some way some kind of sense that one can
be true to. Literature itself likewise has always depended on the belief that there is a continuous
ego. The David Copperfield at the end of the story has to be in some measure the same character
as he was at the beginning even though changed in order for the novel to hold together to make
any sense. And so the idea that I am I and you are you may not be true is a really really startling
assumption. We'll come back to this one and talk about what he means by this. The play itself opens
in a theater with actors on a stage rehearsing a pierandello play that they don't like very much.
When the audience comes in there's just an empty stage and then some actors come in and they start
rehearsing this play and they really don't like to play their rehearsing very much. The rehearsal
is interrupted by six people who claim to be characters created by an author who never finished
the work who simply abandoned them who wrote out who created the characters wrote a couple of scenes
for them and then decided not to write the work. So what they want is they want someone to write
out the parts for them the parts that were already created and then get a playwright to finish their
story. They more or less take over the stage and they enact the two scenes from that have already
been written from a really really complicated story about relations among a man and his wife
from whom he has been separated and four children one of whom is their own child that they had
together and three of whom that she had after she left her husband and moved in with a lover.
Every character in this little complex of six characters is tortured by jealousy,
by love, by hatred, by guilt, by shame and it's a really kind of lured and melodramatic story.
It is a gripping story in a soap opera kind of way but the real point of the play is not
that story within the story but it's rather the relationship between the six fictional characters
who come on to the stage and the real actors who are already on stage when the six characters show
up. The play insists with this interaction between fictional and real characters that human beings
cannot distinguish between appearance and reality and that in fact that distinction may not really
exist. Reality the play suggests is merely what I happen to believe in at this moment,
the appearance to which I commit myself right now. Since Don Quixote we have been reminding ourselves
that what matters really isn't what's out there but what I see, how I interpret it, how I see it.
Henry James and Joseph Conrad and we've been through this in past lectures
reinvented the novel they called it the psychological realist novel because as
impressionist painters had taught us I may never know what's really out there in the world.
All I will know for sure is the way that it looks to me so that every story has to be somebody's
story. All perception is somebody's perception and that subjectivity of perception has to be built
into this novel itself. We've seen Proust reinvent the novel one more time even after Conrad and James
to get that subjectivity into it and Pirandello a few years earlier had written a play called
Right You Are If You Think You Are which suggested that there are as many different realities as
there are perceivers. Six characters, six realities, ten perceivers, ten realities. In six characters
even the distinction between the fictional and the real breaks down when the six fictional characters
enter the same plane of reality that's occupied by the actors and the producers. The father in fact
is going to argue that the fictional characters are more real than living ones since an imagined
character lives in a way that's fixed for all eternity while living ones always change through
time. There's a heated exchange between the father and the producer that I'm going to read to you
now just to suggest what the nature of this debate is. Notice that I'm leaving out all of the stage
directions so we can focus just on what is said. The father says, and I am going to ask you again
in all seriousness, who are you? The producer says, of all a bloody nerve, a fellow who claims he is
only a character comes and asks me who I am. The father says, a character my dear sir can always
ask a man who he is because a character really has a life of his own, a life full of his own
specific qualities, and because of these he is always someone. While a man, I'm not speaking
about you personally of course, but man in general, well he can be an absolute nobody.
The producer says, all right, all right, well since you've asked me I'm the director,
the producer, I'm in charge, do you understand? And the father says, I'm only asking to try to
find out if you really see yourself now in the same way that you saw yourself, for instance,
once upon a time in the past. With all the illusions you had then, with everything inside
and outside yourself as it seemed then, and not only seemed, but really was. Well then,
look back on those illusions, those ideas that you don't have anymore, on all those things that no
longer seem the same to you. Don't you feel that not only this stage is falling away from under
your feet, but so is the earth itself, and that all these realities of today are going to seem
tomorrow as if they had been an illusion? And the producer says, so what does that prove?
And the father says, oh nothing much, I only want to make you see that if we, and by we he means
we six characters, I only want to make you see that if we have no other reality outside our own
illusion, perhaps you ought to distrust your own sense of reality. Because whatever is a reality
today, whatever you touch and believe in, and that seems real for you today, is going to be
like the reality of yesterday, an illusion tomorrow. The producer says, very good. So now you're saying
that you as well as this play you're going to show me here are more real than I am. And the
father says, there's no doubt about that at all. And the producer says, is that so? And the father
said, I thought you'd realize that from the beginning. And the producer says, more real than
I am. And the father says, if your reality can change between today and tomorrow. And the producer
says, interrupts him to say, but everybody knows that it can change, don't they? It's always changing
just like everybody else's. And then the father says, but ours doesn't change. Do you see that's
the difference? Ours doesn't change. It can't change. It can never be different. Never. Because
it is already determined like this forever. That's what's so terrible. We are an eternal reality.
That should make you shudder to come near us. The idea that art is immortal, whereas humans are
transient is not a new idea in literature, of course. Shakespeare's sonnet steel with this
idea, Keats is owed on a Grecian urn, takes up the idea that art is immortal, humans transient,
so that if you want to look for something that lasts, you look to art rather than to humans.
Pirandello seconds this idea in the preface that he writes to six characters and searchmen author,
when he reminds us that every time we open up Dante's inferno, and every time Dante and the
pilgrim and Virgil get to the level where the lustful are, they are in this circle with that
dark wind. And in that dark wind, he sees Paolo and Francesca. And every time someone reads this,
the pilgrim will call out to Francesca, and she and Paolo will come swooping down out of that
dark wind like doves on their way back to the nest. And then the pilgrim will say,
can I ask her to tell a story? And she tells her story, and every time she tells that story,
she tells that story for the very first time. It doesn't matter whether a million people have
read that or 10 million people, it doesn't matter how often someone opens that book.
When she swoops down, she always tells that story for the first time. It's always a new thing,
that's what she does, that's what she is. In this play in Six Characters in Search of an Author,
the mother at one point gives an anguished cry. That's what's written for her in that scene,
and so she will always give that cry, and it will always be for the first time, and it will
always be a pure expression of pure anguish. So it's not a particular, not a brand new idea,
this part of it is not a brand new idea, but Pirandello is going to put it to some new uses here.
Another point that Pirandello makes. Each character in this group of Six Characters sees events and
other characters differently. Each character has a sense of who he or she is, and each also knows
that all of the other characters have a sense of who he or she is, and each becomes aware as their
story is played out, that there's no guarantee that, for example, my sense of who I am is any more
accurate or any more truthful than a vision that someone else has of who I am. Each character is
all of the things that it has been at different times. This is what the father is trying to tell
a producer in the passage we just looked at. Each character is everything that it has been at
different times, and all the things, also all of the things that it has been to other people at
different times. There are the eyes of yesterday, there is the eye of today, there will be the eyes
of tomorrow, and there are the interpretations other people have put on my character of yesterday,
and today, and tomorrow. The characters know something of their story. They know two scenes,
and they know a little bit of their story. They know that when the mother's lover died,
that she was destitute, and so she moved her family back into the town where the husband lives,
without telling him, so he doesn't know that she's back in town. To support the family,
she does needlework at a dress shop owned by a certain Madame Pache. Now, the mother doesn't
know it, but Madame Pache's dress shop is really a front for a brothel. Madame Pache has a back room
in which she gets young girls to do that sort of work while their mothers are usually out doing
needlework out in the front. So she recruits the daughter of this mother to work in her brothel
services. In one of the scenes that's been written out, the father visits the back room at Madame
Pache's and is given his former wife's daughter as his companion for that day. He already has her
in his arms. He has offered to buy her a new bonnet, and he's asked her to take off that little
black dress she's wearing when the mother comes bursting in saying, no, no, no, that's my daughter.
Later on, the father takes his former wife and the three children she has had with her lover
into his house to take care of them, and there are, of course, some agonizingly strained relations
between himself and his wife's daughter. She remembers that when she was a little girl who
used to play in the schoolyard, that he used to come and watch her play in the schoolyard when
she was very tiny. She recognizes him. She remembers him now. So she thinks of him as from the very
outset, he's some sort of pedophile, some sort of child molester, because she thinks
his interest could not have been innocent then, given the experience she's had of him later.
He remembers. He says that he was simply interested in the family that his former wife
and her lover had created, and his interest was purely innocent. So he insists that everything
his stepdaughter believes about him is absolutely wrong, that she misreads him, that he isn't like
that. He says he couldn't possibly have known who she was when he went to Madame Pochets,
and anyway, he says he's not the sort of man who usually goes to Madame Pochets' back room.
That was a kind of aberration. That was what he says out of character for me. He says,
I'm not that kind of man. So what he's insisting is that he insists that he has a character
apart from what he does, that we can do some things that are typical and some things that are
atypical, and that sometimes we can be ourselves and sometimes we're not. The daughter insists
this isn't true. She thinks she knows him. She has an entirely different picture of him,
and what she does is she sees, she adds up all of the things that he's done and says,
that's who you are. And the question the play asks is who's right? What is the self apart from what
it does from moment to moment? And what is the self apart from interpretations that other people
put on that self? And these are some very, very good questions that are raised by the play itself,
which the play debates and discusses throughout the entire course of it.
Perendello is in this play, is interested in ideas and themes which are very, very current
in early 20th century literature. We've already dealt with some of these in past lectures,
and they will come up again in lectures in the future. In 1953, a critic named Joseph
Wood Crutch wrote a book called Modernism in Modern Drama. And what he said in that book
was that the one common denominator of the three great isms that changed our sensibility,
changed our consciousness, changed intellectual history around the turn of the century,
the one common denominator, and the three isms by the way that he's talking about are of course
Darwinism and Marxism and Freudianism, that what all three of these have in common is all three of
them are direct attacks on the self, on the ego, on the eye that we had assumed to be in charge
of our lives for such a long time. He goes on to explain. Darwinism suggests that evolution
is controlled by a process called natural selection, in which species adapt to environmental changes.
So that the trigger mechanism is not individual choice, the trigger mechanism is the environment
itself, and the changes are brought about by adaptations to that environment. So to say it
oversimplistically, a duck-billed platypus didn't choose its bill. The giraffe did not choose its
long neck. Those things are simply products of adaptations to environments, and it's those
environments that make them what they are. That's Darwinism. Marxism, he says, argues that the
individual consciousness is a product of the means of production in a process that he calls
dialectical materialism. Again, what the Marxists argue is that we don't decide how we feel about
things. Our beliefs and our values and our assumptions are given to us by the economic system
in which we live. So that, again, to use a very simplified example, if we live in a feudal world,
we believe in a paradigm of cooperation. If we live in a capitalist society, we believe in a
paradigm of competition and exploitation. You know, these are simply things that come with
the territory. So that, again, our consciousness, as far as a Marxist concern, is to a great measure
given to us not something that we choose for ourselves. And then, of course, Freudianism,
we all know how that one works. Freudianism suggests that most of our decisions are not
the result of free choice or rational deliberation, but are controlled by unconscious motives and
impulses that we aren't even aware of. Most of our consciousness, Freud would say, is like the
part of the iceberg that's underneath the ice, 60% or 80% or however much you want to say it,
but it's the part that's under the ice that determines how the part that shows is going to
move. And our consciousness is like that iceberg, and it's the buried part below the surface that
we don't can't get at, that we don't even recognize, that we don't even know about much of the time
that makes us do what we do. We can rationalize our behavior later. We always do. We always
later on explain why we did what we did, but we aren't in charge. Our unconscious impulses
are what make us move in the way that we do. In 1875, William Henley wrote a very famous poem
called Invictus. The title means unconquered, and what he expresses in that poem is what most
people would have believed in most periods of history from the Greeks on up to the 20th century.
One verse of that poem goes like this. It matters not how straight the gate, how charged with
punishments the scroll, I am the master of my fate, I am the captain of my soul.
Well, the 20th century is a lot less sure of all of this. All of the new isms really
are a tax on the classical and Christian conception of a unified persistent ego,
that soul captain that we have believed for so long that we can train and shape by rational choices.
In all of these new isms, and this is part of Crutch's hypothesis here, in all of the new isms,
we are actually more victims than we are captains. We are made what we are by environment,
by history, by the unconscious. The view is discouraging for us in so far as we have lost
a lot of control over our own destinies. A lot of what we do now is not a matter of rational choice,
we're not in charge of it. It is also soothing in that much of what we do isn't our fault,
but it's the fault of forces that lie outside of us that act upon us and make us do what we do.
In a very, very ironic way, if you think back to a play that we did back in lecture seven,
we talked about Euripides' Medea, and we said that one of the things that Euripides had suggested
was that what the Greeks used the gods for was they took their own strongest and worst impulses,
objectified them, deified them, and then blamed them for what we did, so that we can always blame
somebody else, so that, for example, famously, as Helen of Troy says in Euripides' Hecuba,
when she's attached by Hecuba for causing the Trojan War and all this suffering by running away
with Paris, she can say, it wasn't me, I didn't do it, Aphrodite made me do it.
And in some interesting way, in a way by the time we get back to these
isms that Joseph Wood-Crooch is talking about, we have come full circle, because in some ways,
what those isms have done is a way to validate that vision that Euripides gave us way back in
the time of the Greeks. From now on, once this ego, once the eye is undermined in certain kinds of
ways, then the defense of limited liability or limited responsibility becomes possible in murder
trials. From here, it's possible to say it isn't my fault, I was a product of my environment,
I was a product of bad upbringing, it's always some force that acted on me from outside. And,
as one of my colleagues used to say, that once we get to this point, once we have introduced
these isms into 20th century life, the defense in a murder trial, that the murderer was not to
blame for what he did because he'd eaten too many Twinkies before he committed the murder,
is just around the corner, it is just around the corner from where we are.
What Pirandello gives us is instead of that ego, instead of that eye, we get a series of states
of mind, a series of masks or personae which are worn from moment to moment. The eye is not a fixed
point of reference, but it's an anthology of roles or masks or states of mind. And that was
always a constant concern of Pirandello throughout his entire career. And when he, at the end of
his life, collected his plays, 44 of them in all, and put them into one volume, he called that volume
naked masks as a kind of reminder of this kind of concern. One other implication of this for drama,
the realists had tried to make plays as lifelike as possible. They had tried to say that theater
should imitate life. The theatricalists argued that really, in some ways, life is more like theater
than theater is like life. As in a theater, we spend our lives putting on masks, trying out
characters, rehearsing roles for ourselves, and we have to make up our lives as we go along,
much as an actor does on stage. And the theater actually can teach us how to create our characters,
how to wear our masks, how to play our roles. And if we try out a role, it doesn't work,
we can always go backstage and rehearse a little more and bring it out and try it again.
In Stephen Sondheim's Into the Woods, there is a narrator in the Into the Woods, if you
aren't familiar with the piece, is a group of fairy tales that are all woven together.
For the first half of that play, there's a narrator who tells everyone what he's supposed to do,
and so there's a narrator who keeps them all moving and moves them into the woods and does
all the things they're supposed to. That narrator, however, at the beginning of the second act, is
killed by the wife of the giant whom Jack of Jack and the Beanstalk has killed, and once he's killed,
the character suddenly realizes there's no narrator in their story anymore. They don't
know what their stories are, they don't know what they're supposed to do, there's nobody to tell them.
From this moment on, in that play, those characters are on their own,
they have to improvise their stories. That turns out to be the position of many people in the 20th
century, as perceived by early 20th century thought and literature. The traditional props and
foundations are melted away, and people are asked to define themselves and to define what that
self-definition means, especially when the isms all assure us that we have little control over
the process anyway. Pirandello stands at a really important juncture for these issues,
which remain important for us in the new century. Joseph Wood Crutch ends one of his essays in his
book by reminding us that Aristotle had said that the two most important elements of drama
were plot and character, but he says check off more or less got rid of plot, and Pirandello
now gets rid of character, at least character as we usually understand character, so that Crutch
says the only thing that's certain about the future is there won't be any plays in it because
there can't be any plays if we have no plots or characters left. Of course he's speaking tongue
in cheek and we still do have plays, but our sense of what a character is, of what makes an
eye and eye has certainly changed since the time of Henley, and Pirandello has his finger on all of
this, and that's one of the reasons why I suspect in 1934 the Nobel Prize Committee gave him the
prize for literature. In our next lecture we will be doing another revolutionary dramatist in the
first half of the 20th century. He's another theatricalist who shares many of Pirandello's
ideas of what's wrong with realist theater, but he uses his anti-illusionism in a very different
way and to very different ends than Pirandello does, and he may very well be the most influential
single playwright of the 20th century. We'll be talking about Bertolt Brecht in our next lecture.
