Lecture 9 Bhagavad Gita
We're still in our first major unit of this course in which we're looking primarily at
epic poems.
In our last lecture we looked at Virgil's Aeneid and saw there that while the definition
of what an epic is could remain constant, its transition from the Greeks to the Romans
allowed Virgil to entirely redefine what a hero is, and we had a chance to talk about
some of the distinctions, some of the important differences between Greek and Roman concepts
of heroism.
This time we're going to take a look at another epic from another tradition, this time from
India.
The poem is one of India's two great epic poems, this one the Mahabharata.
This time we're going to spend just a little bit of time on the epic itself, but we want
to focus on that part of the poem that both inside and outside India has been the most
famous, the most influential, the most productive, the Bhagavad Gita, which will allow us also
as to work on one of our sub-themes of this first unit, the relationship between God and
the gods, or the gods and human beings, which we've mentioned is a theme in all of the
epics that we've done so far, and it's a primary focus of such other works in this
first unit as the Old Testament, Greek tragedy, and the New Testament.
It's also the most important focus of the Bhagavad Gita.
The Mahabharata may very well be the longest poem in the world, it's about seven times
longer than the Iliad and the Odyssey combined.
It grew by accretion over about eight centuries, from about the fourth century BCE to about
the fourth century CE.
Its roots are with the Indo-Aryan peoples who came into the Indus River Valley around
1500 BCE.
These peoples were part of the larger Indo-European language group, which includes of course Greek
and Latin and German as well as Sanskrit, and the entire family perhaps having its origins
as linguists tell us in southern Russia somewhere.
So the Mahabharata's amazing similarities to Homer's epic poems may be a result of
common origins rather than of direct influence, but whatever the links are, this Indian epic
shares with Homer's poems a great number of qualities.
It features an epic war that brings an entire age to a close, it includes supernatural machinery
that is gods and goddesses who function in human history, characters who are part human
and part divine, it involves an initial situation involving the loss of a possession that reflects
its personal honor, this is like Achilles' loss of the slave girl in the beginning of
the Iliad, and it features a cosmic war fought over a woman making draupady in the Mahabharata,
the kind of equivalent of Helen of Troy in the Iliad, so that the way we defined an epic
in the lectures on Homer would work very well for this one.
On the other hand, having said that, there are also some important differences between
this epic and Homer's, this epic has almost always had a more nearly scriptural status
than the Greek epics did, this is especially true of the Bhagavad Gita, which as scholars
tell us was a relatively late addition to the poem, perhaps as late as the first century
CE.
The Bhagavad Gita also marks a really important transition in Hindu thought, one which in
many ways revises traditional Hindu theology. It marks a really important stage in the development,
the evolution of Hinduism, which by now, by the time we get to this poem, has been through
its Vedic stage, which is this worldly religion, which is perhaps a little bit like Japanese
Shinto, it's been through its Upanishad stage, which has a more otherworldly orientation,
and it postulates the existence of a universal world soul, Brahman, of which every individual
soul is a part, and by this time, Hinduism had been influenced by Buddhism, which had
sprung up in India in the 6th century BCE, about as much as it could be influenced without
losing its integrity as a separate religion.
The setting for the Bhagavad Gita is the moment before the great cosmic battle is about to
begin, and it features all of the kings of India, plus many other kings from many other
lands. Arjuna is one of the great warriors. His chariot driver is Krishna, who is an incarnation
of the God Vishnu. Vishnu has in fact incarnated himself in part to take part in this great
battle. It's one of his functions, as he tells Arjuna, to incarnate himself when the
balance of good and evil in the world tilts the wrong way, and then he becomes human and
enters into history long enough to restore the proper balance. As he tells Arjuna, and
this is in the Barbara Stolar Miller translation, he says, whenever sacred duty decays and chaos
prevails, then I create myself, Arjuna, to protect men of virtue and destroy men who
do evil, to set the standard of sacred duty, I appear in age after age.
What that tells us is the fact that Vishnu himself is down here taking part of this battle,
is that this battle isn't just about getting to see who rules the Indus Valley, but it's
a kind of cosmic battle between the forces of good and the forces of evil. Arjuna, one
of the great warriors on one side of this war, notices that the enemy's ranks are made
up of relatives, former teachers, and friends. All of the antagonists, in fact, in this great
battle are children of Bharata, as the Hebrews in the same way that the Hebrews consider
themselves all to be children of Israel. In fact, since Israel was chosen as the official
name for the Hebrew state, the official name for India, what we still call India, the name
they chose for themselves in 1947, was Bharata, and that name is in the title of this, too,
Mahabharata. Arjuna has the same kind of difficult choice at this moment, as did the
protagonist in Greek epic and tragedy, like the decisions that had to be made by Orestes
or Antigone. Like Orestes, who had to decide between Apollo and the Furies, or like Antigone,
who had to choose between civil and what she considers to be a higher law, Arjuna at this
moment has to choose between his duty as a warrior and his duty to protect his family
and friends. At this moment in the poem, he makes the opposite choice that Agamemnon did.
We remember that when Agamemnon had to make the choice of whether to sacrifice his daughter
and allow his ships to remain be calmed, or to sacrifice the daughter and allow the ships
to sail for Troy, he chose his public over his private duty and sacrificed his daughter.
Arjuna's dilemma is complicated, however, by the Hindu ideal of karma. Elliot Deutsch,
in his translation of the Gita, says that karma is a law of moral nature which holds
that every single action has necessary effects which have to be acted out, which have to
be the consequences of which have to be lived through, which can't always happen in a single
lifetime, so that the effects of karma may be enacted over many, many lifetimes, over
many births and lives and deaths and rebirths. It's usually understood that an individual's
condition in this life is the result of his actions over many, many past lifetimes, and
the condition of a future life will depend on actions in this one. Now, the goal of Hinduism
is, of course, moksha, or its liberation from this cycle. Arjuna fears that in fighting
this battle and having to kill kinsmen and teachers and friends, he will heap up so much
bad karma that it will take him many lifetimes to work it off, so he lays down his bow and
declares to Krishna that he will not fight. Now, his chariot driver is Krishna, who is
an incarnation of Vishnu, who responds to Arjuna, and the rest of the poem turns out
to be a dialogue between the two, centering on the question of how Arjuna can participate
in this battle without condemning himself to an eternity of rebirths. We're not sure
at this point in the poem whether Arjuna knows initially that he's dealing with Vishnu,
or whether he thinks Krishna is just a very wise man. And we know, in a way that we're
not quite sure that Arjuna is aware of, that there's a much larger context for this battle,
that Vishnu has, in fact, incarnated himself in part to be here. So the question is, how
can Arjuna participate in this battle without condemning himself to countless rebirths?
And in Krishna's teaching, he will redefine the relationship between God and human beings
in Hindu thought. Krishna begins by assuring Arjuna that the soul is immortal, that every
soul is simply a single part of the great eternal Brahman, so that souls have always
existed. And since souls always exist, they are eternal, death is always an illusion.
No one can ever really kill or be killed. As he says to Arjuna, he who thinks this
self a killer, and he who thinks it killed, both fail to understand. It does not kill,
nor is it killed. Well, so far so good, but that's not really Arjuna's concern. Arjuna's
concern is the karma that action will carry with it. And so that's the question that
Krishna addresses next. He turns to the question of karma. He argues that to live is always
to act, and it is action that always involves one potentially in an endless series of births
and rebirths. The goal is to escape from this series, which in the past Krishna says has
always been achieved through what he calls understanding, which is traditionally opposed
to action. That is, one who understands doesn't act, and one who acts doesn't understand.
But he says he's going to explain a new teaching which will allow Arjuna to pass beyond what
he calls the swamp of delusion, after which he says you will be indifferent to all that
is heard in sacred lore. That is, he is going to transcend all of the old ways of thoughts
and in a way redefine the path to moksha in Hinduism.
So he begins, to live is to act, and it's difficult to think of how one could live without
acting. Vishnu says himself, I have no need to act, but I do so. I enter into the world
at intervals to keep it from collapsing. And he said all those who are my disciples also
act because this action is necessary to keep the self, to keep society, to keep the cosmos
healthy. What Krishna says going on from this, one can act in the world without accumulating
karma if one acts from duty rather than from the hope of personal gain. That is free of
what Krishna calls the fruits of action. This is what he says to Arjuna. He says, be intent
on action, not on the fruits of action. Avoid attraction to the fruits and attachment to
inaction. Perform actions firm in discipline, relinquishing attachment. Be impartial to
failure and success. This equanimity is called discipline.
What he tells him that is, is do what has to be done, but not to enhance your honor or
wealth or to make life easier. One has to detach oneself from all personal motives, from
greed, from ambition, from envy, from hatred, from love, all of these things and work purely
from a sense of duty. That is a difficult discipline and Krishna admits that this is
going to be difficult for anyone to do, but it can be done, he says, if you undertake
every single action as a personal sacrifice made directly to God. Again, in his own words,
this is what he says to Arjuna. He says, surrender all actions to me and fix your reason on
your inner self without hope or possessiveness, your fever subdued, fight the battle. Men
who always follow my thought trusting it without finding fault are freed even by their actions.
So that in other words, paradoxically, action can lead to liberation, action itself can
lead to liberation, but only if it's done with discipline. The Hindu word for this, of
course, yoga, that kind of discipline. This is a new teaching because what it does, it
allows anyone from any caste to establish a direct relationship with God. Again, to quote
Krishna on this, no mortal can perform service for me that I value more and no other man
on earth will be more dear to me than he is. This is a new teaching because it does allow
anyone from any caste to establish that direct relationship with God. In the past, in traditional
Hinduism, only a few Brahmins, members of the top caste, could liberate themselves from
the cycle of birth and death in any generation, and usually they did it by becoming hermits
by living on a few grains of rice and a few sips of water a day, and by not acting, by
perfecting knowledge and discipline in what Krishna earlier called understanding. If you're
in the lower caste in traditional Hinduism, you're mired in action that's going to involve
you in consequential action and karma all the time, piling it up minute by minute in
everything that you do. Here, according to Krishna, anyone from any caste can establish
a direct relationship with God by dedicating that action to God and thereby, through action
itself, perfect one's own life. The moment turns out to be extraordinarily important
not only for the future of Hindu religion, but for literature and art as well. This story,
the story of Vishnu's incarnations as Krishna, will get really richly developed and elaborated
in the centuries ahead. And in the fully developed story, Krishna becomes the great lover who
sits in the middle of the forest playing irresistible music on his flute, luring women from miles
around to make ecstatic love with him. That story led to an immense amount of really great
Indian art depicting the loves of Krishna in which the erotic subject was always understood
to be a metaphor for the union of the individual soul with Vishnu. And in literature, there
turns out to be just this stunning and amazing body of beautiful poetry which culminates
between the 13th and the 17th centuries, written in almost all the dialects and the languages
of India as well as Sanskrit. And it were written by all people from all castes and by women
as well as by men in which some of the most erotic poetry in the history of world literature
always serves as a metaphor for the perfect union of Vishnu and the individual human soul.
That movement in Indian art and literature is called bhakti, which connotes a kind of loving,
intimate, passionate relationship between God and a devotee who is called a bhaj,
the root of which means to participate or to share. There's a wonderful book on this whole
subject by W.G. Archer. It's called The Loves of Krishna in Indian Painting and Poetry. And what
Archer says in that book is that if one loves God, not in the abstract, but as a loving person,
and if you love with intensity and singleness of focus, this adoration and relationship
might win for the individual the same release as a vast succession of good lives. That is,
release from this cycle of rebirths and redeths and the problem of the accumulation of karma in
those lives. That is, this moment, this very moment in the middle of this poem bypasses the whole
complicated ritual of traditional Hinduism to make makshas available to anyone in any lifetime.
We will actually get to revisit this story of Krishna as the lover playing the flute in the
middle of the forest. We'll get to revisit this much later in our course with a poem by Rabindranath
Tagore. Well, the question to the next question that Arjuna has is, okay, so assume that you can
do all of this. Assume that you can free yourself from personal motives. You can perform your duty
as a personal sacrifice directly to God with whom you can establish this passionate relationship.
How do you know what your duty is? How do you know what you should be doing?
So how do you know which actions should be performed with this kind of discipline, this yoga?
Krishna then goes on to explain the caste system in Hinduism to Arjuna. Human beings,
he says, are divided into four classes. The top class is the brahmins, that is, the intellectuals
and priests. Below that is the level of the warriors, the rulers, and the statesmen. And then below
that are the businessmen, and below that the very bottom rung are the workers and the servants.
Furthermore, each one of those four castes is divided into four stages of life. The first stage
is that of the student, second stage that of the householder, third stage that of retirement,
and fourth stage that of renunciation. And then each one of those four stages of life has its
appropriate goal. Wealth for the first one, pleasure for the second one, social duty for the third one,
and release or liberation for the fourth one. So what you do to find your duty, what your duty is,
is to take these grids and superimpose them on one another, find your spot on that grid,
and then do whatever is appropriate. Arjuna is in the warrior class whose duty is to fight.
Krishna also reminds him that this is no ordinary war, but one whose purpose is to set the cosmos
right again, at least for a while. Krishna then clinches his argument by revealing himself to
Arjuna in all his glory as Vishnu. And this poem gives us Arjuna's response to the vision,
so we can tell what he sees. It's quite long, but let me just read you one little tiny passage to
suggest part of how Arjuna responds to this vision of the full glory of Vishnu. He says,
I see you blazing through the fiery rays of your crown, mace, and discus. Hard to behold in the
burning light of fire and sun that surrounds your measureless presence. I'm always reminded when I
read that entire passage, that's this one little tiny piece of it, of the story about Moses coming
down from Mount Sinai with having been in the presence of God so long that his face was so shiny
that he had to veil over it, lest it damage or even kill people who looked on his face.
Or remember the story of the Greek story of Simuli, who asked to see as a boon, asked to see
a vision of Zeus in all his glory. Zeus warns her against it, but she insists, and when he does
show himself in all of his glory, she's immediately incinerated. So that many cultures have come up
with the idea that the only way we can take God in is to take him in an mediated form in some kind
of human form. And so after a few moments, Arjuna begs Vishnu to go back to being Krishna again,
and then he picks up his bow and the war begins. Modern Indian commentators have given the Gita
a kind of metaphoric or psychological reading whose advice turns out to be practical rather
than religious. And this would be a sample of that kind of reading, how if you if you want to
divorce it somewhat from all that cosmic or the metaphysical trappings, how this poem still makes
really good sense. At the outset, according to one of these readings, Arjuna decides to renounce
worldly life rather than to kill his kinsmen. But at this moment of crisis, he comes to realize
that those he thinks of as his kinsmen are in fact his enemies and must be destroyed.
In metaphoric ways, he is killing the enemies that make up his lower self, that is his own
illegitimate desires and passions. Krishna's teaching helps Arjuna to reach union with his real,
his supreme self, and with that contact, when you make contact with your own self, your real supreme
self, three realizations happen simultaneously. The first is the realization that the universe
is one and we cannot escape its continuity. The second is the understanding that my own true
interests and those of the universe coincide, that what is done for the supreme self is done
for the universe and vice versa, there is no question of personal profit here anymore.
These awarenesses lead to this third realization which is a kind of union in love
with the supreme self from which it had been divorced in his selfish, separate life, but
which he is now happy to join in its universal aims, so that he can now accept the entire universe
with a kind of enthusiastic delight and with his whole being. This supreme self in this reading
from anthropomorphic habit, the poet still calls his lord, he calls it Krishna, but what he's
really talking about is a kind of psychological development, a kind of psychological moment of
insight in which Arjuna manages to bring all of himself into perfect harmony with himself
and in one critic's summary of this reading that we've just been giving an example of,
he says this, knowing intellectually the universe to be one and seeing unity in diversity,
the yogi will act uninfluenced by the profit motive with his whole being for the universal aim
in his particular sphere of action, whatever it be, and also he will experience emotional delight
in doing so. He reaches a state of self-consciousness, of wholeness, in which his knowledge and experience
have so become a part of himself and his intuition is so awake that he is spontaneously in harmony
with his surroundings. Well, from here on, from here on, once you've reached that state,
then from here on one can act spontaneously because personal and cosmic interests absolutely
coincide. What some of us might be reminded of at this moment is back a few lectures ago,
we heard Confucius saying, that there was a certain stage in his life when instinct and duty
became identical and so he didn't have to choose between them anymore, he could follow his instinct
and it would always be the right thing to do, and we might also be reminded of Plato's assertion
that the life of the just man is many, many times happier than the life of the unjust man,
regardless of what happens to them, since the component parts of a just man
are no longer at war with one another but live in perfect harmony with each other.
This work, in fact, thinking about Plato and Confucius in conjunction with the bug of Agita,
provides a kind of, this work provides a kind of interesting meeting place
for so much that we've done so far in this course. A few years ago, perhaps some of you
might remember this, Steve Allen did a series of programs which he called The Meeting of the
Minds, and what he did was he would have people from different time periods and different cultures
meet around a table to talk to one another, to compare notes, to compare experiences,
so that for example Cleopatra could sit down and talk to Queen Elizabeth I, or
Karl Marx could sit down and talk with Friedrich Hegel, or Thomas Aquinas could sit down and talk
with Thomas Paine. I'm not sure that any of those pairings actually happen, but you get the idea.
By now, by this time, we have several definitions of hero and several different theories that we've
come across in this course of how to live and about how the gods or god interact with human beings.
So this is one of those places where I would love to see a kind of round table discussion with some
of the characters that we've done in this course so far, sitting down and talking to one another.
And some of the questions I think will be interesting to ask, what would Krishna say to Achilles
about his withdrawal from battle, or about his re-entry into battle motivated by personal revenge?
If Arjuna and Achilles could sit at the same table, both of them great warriors, what would they
agree about? What would they disagree about? What would Krishna have to say to Zhuang Zhou or
Confucius about the right way to live? And here's one that I would particularly like to see.
If you could sit down Clytemnestra and Medea and Daito at the same table, what would they say to
one another? What would they say about men? You guys can imagine this conversation being quite
interesting. Clytemnestra saying, yes, well, you know what Agamemnon did is he killed our daughter
on the way to Troy, and then when he returned from Troy, he brought a concubine with him and
carried her right up to the front door. And Daito would say, well, Aeneas deserted me to go
found his precious city in Italy. And Medea would say, you people don't have any real stories to
tell. What Jason did is after I had given up everything for him, cut off all my ties with the
past, lived with him for years, born him two children, he came home one afternoon and told
that he was marrying a Corinthian princess. And so they might have some interesting things. And
then I could imagine the second way of the conversation would be something like this.
They would say, well, what did you do about it? What did you do about this? And Clytemnestra
would say, well, what I did is I took a lover myself. And when Agamemnon came home, I killed
both him and his Trojan concubine the first night he came home. And then Daito would say,
well, what I did is I killed myself. And both of them would maybe have a moment where they'd
look at her thinking this is probably not the most powerful response you can make.
And then Medea would say, again, you people don't have a story to tell, because what I did
is I killed his Corinthian fiance and his future father-in-law, killed our two children,
and then sailed off in a chariot to Athens. I just can't imagine what a great conversation
this would be. And what really makes it interesting is as we have seen in the programs in which we've
considered those three great women, all three of them are Greek-type heroes. All three of them
would share assumptions about what life is about, about shame, about the need for an honorable life,
all of these things they would share. So they would have a lot in common to talk about. That's
one that I would particularly like to see happen. Maybe one of you can write that. Maybe one of
you can make that your project to write this great dialogue between those three great women.
To move on from there, however, that was a bit of a digression. What would Zhuang,
Zhou, or Confucius say to Achilles about withdrawing from war? Or what would they say
when Arjuna lays down his bow? Or when Gilgamesh sets off with Enkidu to kill Humbaba? Or when
he sets off alone to try to find a cure for death? What would Escalus and Euripides contribute to the
discussion if they were in the same room? What would the authors of the Old Testament and those
of the Bhagavad Gita have in common about life and the gods and so on? The Bhagavad Gita invites
this kind of thinking because it has influenced and touched so many people in history, Gerta and
Thomas Carlisle and Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau. Barbara Stolar Miller at the end
of her translation of the Gita actually ends it with an essay called Why Did Henry David Thoreau
Take the Bhagavad Gita to Walden Pond? Which he did, and that's an interesting essay and story in
its own right. If you would like the context for the Bhagavad Gita without reading the entire Mahabharata,
which could take a very long time, let me suggest one little tiny shortcut you can take.
There's a really good film version of the Mahabharata. It was done a few years ago,
it's six hours long, it's as an international cast and it really does the entire Mahabharata
and it does the Bhagavad Gita too as a piece within the Mahabharata and it's a really nice way to see
how the Bhagavad Gita fits into this much larger epic. That film is still available at places where
videotapes or DVDs and it's a really excellent film. The Bhagavad Gita of course does have to be
read and it has been read by a lot of important people down through history. It has been extraordinarily
influential. To pick just one more or less at random, Mahatma Gandhi said that he carried
the Bhagavad Gita with him all the time and it gave him a practical everyday guide to action
because he said it contains a complete code of ethics and he said also that he saw no real
difference between it and the Sermon on the Mount. Well next time we will actually get to
that Sermon on the Mount in the book that we'll be taking up in our next lecture and we will be
able to add Jesus to our imaginary round table discussions since the New Testament will be our
subject. Picking up themes from the epic about the relationship between God and humans but especially
again focusing on those works whose primary focus is the relationship between God and the
gods and human beings like the Old Testament and the Bhagavad Gita and Greek tragedy. Next time the
New Testament.
